Estimating the Maximum Expected Value through Gaussian Approximation
Carlo D’Eramo
Alessandro Nuara
Marcello Restelli
Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci, 32, 20133 Milano

Abstract
This paper is about the estimation of the maximum expected value of a set of independent
random variables. The performance of several
learning algorithms (e.g., Q-learning) is affected
by the accuracy of such estimation. Unfortunately, no unbiased estimator exists. The usual
approach of taking the maximum of the sample
means leads to large overestimates that may significantly harm the performance of the learning
algorithm. Recent works have shown that the
cross validation estimator—which is negatively
biased—outperforms the maximum estimator in
many sequential decision-making scenarios. On
the other hand, the relative performance of the
two estimators is highly problem-dependent. In
this paper, we propose a new estimator for the
maximum expected value, based on a weighted
average of the sample means, where the weights
are computed using Gaussian approximations for
the distributions of the sample means. We compare the proposed estimator with the other stateof-the-art methods both theoretically, by deriving
upper bounds to the bias and the variance of the
estimator, and empirically, by testing the performance on different sequential learning problems.

1. Introduction
In many machine learning problems it is necessary to estimate the maximum expected value (MEV) of a set of
random variables, given samples collected from each variable (van Hasselt, 2013). For instance, in reinforcement
learning, the optimal policy can be found by taking, in each
state, the action that attains the maximum expected cumulative reward. The optimal value of an action in a state, on its
turn, depends on the maximum expected values of the acProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

CARLO . DERAMO @ POLIMI . IT
ALESSANDRO . NUARA @ MAIL . POLIMI . IT
MARCELLO . RESTELLI @ POLIMI . IT

tions available in the reached states. Since errors propagate
through all the state-action pairs, a bad estimator for the
maximum expected value negatively affects the speed of
learning (van Hasselt, 2010). Another example of the importance of producing accurate estimates for the maximum
expected value is provided by sponsored search auctions,
where the search engine needs to select which ad to show
from a pool of candidates. To select the best ad, usually,
one needs to estimate the probability that a random user
will click on it. Since, each time an ad is clicked, the search
engine charges to the advertiser a fee that depends on the
click probabilities of the top two ads, a good estimate of
the maximum expected value is essential to maximize the
revenue of the search engine (Xu et al., 2013).
The most common estimator is the Maximum Estimator
(ME), which consists of taking the maximum of the sample
means. It is well known (Smith & Winkler, 2006; Van den
Steen, 2004; van Hasselt, 2010) that ME overestimates the
maximum expected value. To avoid such positive bias, a
common approach is the Double Estimator (DE), that consists in a cross-validatory approach where the sample set is
split into two sample sets A and B (Stone, 1974). DE results from the average of two estimates. For the first estimate, the sample set A is used to determine which is the
variable with the largest mean, while sample set B is used
to estimate the value of the variable. The second estimate is
obtained by switching the roles of A and B. Although the
absolute bias of CV can be larger than the one of ME (van
Hasselt, 2013), CV is negatively biased and this can be
an advantage in some applications (van Hasselt, 2010; Xu
et al., 2013; van Hasselt et al., 2015). Unfortunately, an unbiased estimator for the maximum expected value does not
exist for many common distributions (e.g., Gaussian, Binomial, and Beta) (Blumenthal & Cohen, 1968; Dhariyal
et al., 1985). On the other hand, having an unbiased estimator does not entail a small expected Mean Squared Error
(MSE), since also the variance of the estimator has to be
considered.
In this paper we propose to estimate the maximum expected value using the Weighted Estimator (WE), that con-

