On the Power and Limits of Distance-Based Learning

Periklis A. Papakonstantinou
MSIS, Business School, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08853, USA

PERIKLIS . RESEARCH @ GMAIL . COM

Jia Xu
J IA .X U @ HUNTER . CUNY. EDU
Department of Computer Science, Hunter College, CUNY, 695 Park Ave, New York, NY 10065, USA
& The Graduate Center, CUNY, 365 5th Ave, New York, NY 10016, USA
Guang Yang
GUANG . RESEARCH @ GMAIL . COM
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China
& Aarhus University, Aaogade 34, DK 8200 Aarhus, Denmark

Abstract
We initiate the study of low-distortion finite metric embeddings in multi-class (and multi-label)
classification where (i) both the space of input
instances and the space of output classes have
combinatorial metric structure, and (ii) the concepts we wish to learn are low-distortion embeddings. We develop new geometric techniques
and prove strong learning lower bounds. These
provable limits hold even when we allow learners and classifiers to get advice by one or more
experts. Our study overwhelmingly indicates
that post-geometry assumptions are necessary in
multi-class classification, as in natural language
processing (NLP). Technically, the mathematical tools we developed in this work could be of
independent interest to NLP. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first work which formally
studies classification problems in combinatorial
spaces and where the concepts are low-distortion
embeddings.

1. Introduction
Multi-class and multi-label classification, especially when
the number of classes is very large, finds important applications in natural language processing, speech recognition,
? Author names alphabetically ordered
(typical in mathematical literature).
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

and image recognition. In machine translation, for example, every translated sentence becomes a distinct class. The
mathematics of such multi-class settings are far less understood compared to binary or moderate-class-size classification. We put things in new context by introducing metric
structure both in the instance space and in the output classes
(label space), and we consider the geometry of the map
(concept) between them. We ask how to effectively combine advice provided by experts in such multi-class tasks.
This is a particularly natural question for multi-class problems. Common, popular machine learning methods —
SVMs, kNN, and their variants — are distance-only based.
Furthermore, the fact that we have many classes, highdimensions in the output, and metric structure allows us
to study interesting geometric properties (contrast this with
binary or low-dimensional spaces of classes).
Can strong geometry help? Let us begin with the following motivating example. Consider the cube, C3 = {0, 1}3 ,
equipped with the Hamming distance – e.g. the distance
dH ((0, 0, 1), (1, 0, 0)) = 2 measures the number of positions the two vectors differ. Now, consider the collection
of concepts (concept class) C = {r : C3 → C3 } such
that every r ∈ C preserves the distances between every
two strings x, y ∈ C3 , i.e. dH (x, y) = dH (r(x), r(y)).
Then, with the strong geometric property (i.e. that distances are preserved) r can be evaluated on every input
by knowing r(0, 0, 0), r(0, 0, 1), r(0, 1, 0), r(1, 0, 0), since
r(x1 , x2 , x3 ) = x1 ·r(1, 0, 0)+x2 ·r(0, 1, 0)+x3 ·r(0, 0, 1)+
(1 − x1 − x2 − x3 ) · r(0, 0, 0), with all operations in GF(2).
More generally, if the cube is of size N , we can fully describe r with 1 + log2 N queries.
In the above example, learning any target concept r is very
efficient despite the high dimension of the space. This
is because r is an isometry (preserves distances exactly),

