A ranking approach to global optimization

Cédric Malherbe
Emile Contal
Nicolas Vayatis
CMLA, ENS Cachan, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay, 94235, Cachan, France

Abstract
We consider the problem of maximizing an unknown function f over a compact and convex set
X ⊂ Rd using as few observations f (x) as possible. We observe that the optimization of the function f essentially relies on learning the induced
bipartite ranking rule of f . Based on this idea,
we relate global optimization to bipartite ranking
which allows to address problems with high dimensional input space, as well as cases of functions with weak regularity properties. The paper introduces novel meta-algorithms for global
optimization which rely on the choice of any bipartite ranking method. Theoretical properties
are provided as well as convergence guarantees
and equivalences between various optimization
methods are obtained as a by-product. Eventually, numerical evidence is given to show that the
main algorithm of the paper which adapts empirically to the underlying ranking structure essentially outperforms existing state-of-the-art global
optimization algorithms in typical benchmarks.

1. Introduction
In many applications such as complex system design or hyperparameter calibration for learning systems, the goal is
to optimize some output value of a non-explicit function
with as few evaluations as possible. Indeed, in such contexts, one has access to the function values only through numerical evaluations by simulation or cross-validation with
significant computational cost. Moreover, the operational
constraints generally impose a sequential exploration of
the solution space with small samples. The generic problem of sequentially optimizing the output of an unknown
and potentially non-convex function is often referred to as
global optimization (Pintér, 1991), black-box optimization
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

MALHERBE @ CMLA . ENS - CACHAN . FR
CONTAL @ CMLA . ENS - CACHAN . FR
VAYATIS @ CMLA . ENS - CACHAN . FR

(Jones et al., 1998) or derivative-free optimization (Rios
& Sahinidis, 2013). There are several algorithms based
on various heuristics which have been introduced in order
to address complicated optimization problems with limited
regularity assumptions, such as genetic algorithms, modelbased algorithms, branch-and-bound methods... (see (Rios
& Sahinidis, 2013) for a recent overview). This paper
follows the line of the approaches recently considered in
the machine learning literature (Bull, 2011; Munos, 2011;
Sergeyev et al., 2013). These approaches extend the seminal work on Lipschitz optimization of (Hansen et al., 1992;
Jones et al., 1993) and they led to significant relaxations
of the conditions required for convergence, e.g. only the
existence of a local smoothness around the optimum is required (Munos, 2011; Grill et al., 2015). More precisely, in
the work of (Bull, 2011; Munos, 2011), specific conditions
have been identified to derive a finite-time analysis of the
algorithms. However, these guarantees do not hold when
the unknown function is not assumed to be locally smooth
around (one of) its optimum.
In the present work, we propose to explore concepts from
ranking theory based on overlaying estimated level sets
(Clémençon et al., 2010) in order to develop global optimization algorithms that do not rely on the smoothness of
the function. The idea behind this approach is simple: even
if the unknown function presents arbitrary large variations,
most of the information required to identify its optimum
may be contained in its induced ranking rule, i.e. how the
level sets of the function are included one in another. To
exploit this idea, we introduce a novel optimization scheme
where the complexity of the function is characterized by the
underlying pairwise ranking which it defines. Our contribution is twofold: first, we introduce two novel global optimization algorithms that learn the ranking rule induced by
the unknown function with a sequential scheme, and second, we provide mathematical results in terms of statistical
consistency and convergence to the optimum. Moreover
the algorithms proposed lead to efficient implementation
and they display good performance on the classical benchmarks for global optimization as shown at the end of the
paper.

