Geometric Mean Metric Learning

Pourya Habib Zadeh
Reshad Hosseini
School of ECE, College of Engineering, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran

SUVRIT @ MIT. EDU

Suvrit Sra
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA

Abstract
We revisit the task of learning a Euclidean metric from data. We approach this problem from
first principles and formulate it as a surprisingly
simple optimization problem. Indeed, our formulation even admits a closed form solution. This
solution possesses several very attractive properties: (i) an innate geometric appeal through
the Riemannian geometry of positive definite
matrices; (ii) ease of interpretability; and (iii)
computational speed several orders of magnitude
faster than the widely used LMNN and ITML
methods. Furthermore, on standard benchmark
datasets, our closed-form solution consistently
attains higher classification accuracy.

1. Introduction
Many machine learning algorithms require computing distances between input data points, be it for clustering, classification, or search. Selecting the distance measure is, therefore, an important concern; though the answer is task specific. When supervised or weakly supervised information
is available, selection of the distance function can itself be
cast as a learning problem called “metric learning” (Kulis,
2012; Weinberger & Saul, 2009).
In its most common form, metric learning seeks to learn
a Euclidean metric. An abstract approach is to take input
data in Rn and learn a linear map Φ : Rn → Rm , so that the
Euclidean distance kΦ(x) − Φ(y)k can be used to measure
the distance between points x, y ∈ Rn . More generally,
the map Φ can also be nonlinear.
The problem of learning linear maps was introduced
in (Xing et al., 2002) as “Mahalanobis metric learning.”
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

P. HABIBZADEH @ UT. AC . IR
RESHAD . HOSSEINI @ UT. AC . IR

Since then metric learning has witnessed a sequence of improvements both in modeling and algorithms (see related
work). More broadly, the idea of linearly transforming
input features is a bigger theme across machine learning
and statistics; encompassing whitening transforms, linear
dimensionality reduction, Euclidean metric learning, and
more (Kulis, 2012; Cunningham & Ghahramani, 2015).
We revisit the task of learning a Euclidean metric. Like
most Euclidean metric learning methods, we also seek to
learn a Mahalanobis distance1
dA (x, x0 ) = (x − x0 )T A(x − x0 ),

(1)

where x, x0 ∈ Rd are input vectors, and A is a d × d real,
symmetric positive definite (SPD) matrix2 . Like other metric learning approaches we also assume weak-supervision,
which is provided through the sets of pairs
S := {(xi , xj ) | xi and xj are in the same class}

D := {(xi , xj ) | xi and xj are in different classes}.
Unlike other Euclidean metric learning methods, however,
we follow a much simpler yet fresh new approach.
Specifically, we make the following main contributions:
– Formulation. We formulate Euclidean metric learning from first principles following intuitive geometric
reasoning; we name our setup “Geometric Mean Metric Learning” (G MML) and cast it as an unconstrained
smooth, strictly convex optimization problem.
– Solution & insights. We show that our formulation admits a closed form solution, which not only also enjoys
connections to the Riemannian geometry of SPD matrices (and thus explains the name G MML) but also has important empirical consequences.
√
This is actually a squared distance. The true metric is dA ;
but in accord with metric learning literature we call (1) a distance.
2
Do not confuse SPD with positive semi-definite matrices.
1

