Training Deep Neural Networks via Direct Loss Minimization

Yang Song
Dept. of Physics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China

SONGYANG 12@ MAILS . TSINGHUA . EDU . CN

Alexander G. Schwing
ASCHWING @ CS . TORONTO . EDU
Richard S. Zemel
ZEMEL @ CS . TORONTO . EDU
Raquel Urtasun
URTASUN @ CS . TORONTO . EDU
Dept. of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 2E4, Canada

Abstract
Supervised training of deep neural nets typically
relies on minimizing cross-entropy. However, in
many domains, we are interested in performing
well on metrics specific to the application. In
this paper we propose a direct loss minimization
approach to train deep neural networks, which
provably minimizes the application-specific loss
function. This is often non-trivial, since these
functions are neither smooth nor decomposable
and thus are not amenable to optimization with
standard gradient-based methods. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in the
context of maximizing average precision for
ranking problems. Towards this goal, we develop
a novel dynamic programming algorithm that can
efficiently compute the weight updates. Our approach proves superior to a variety of baselines in
the context of action classification and object detection, especially in the presence of label noise.

1. Introduction
Standard supervised neural network training involves computing the gradient of the loss function with respect to the
parameters of the model, and therefore requires the loss
function to be differentiable. Many interesting loss functions are, however, non-differentiable with respect to the
output of the network. Notable examples are functions
based on discrete outputs, as is common in labeling and
ranking problems. In many cases these losses are also nondecomposable, in that they cannot be expressed as simple
sums over the output units of the network.
In the context of structured prediction problems, in which
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

the output is multi-dimensional, researchers have developed max-margin training methods that are capable of minimizing an upper bound on non-decomposable loss functions. Standard learning in this paradigm involves changing the parameters such that the model assigns a higher
score to the groundtruth output than to any other output.
This is typically encoded by a constraint, enforcing that the
groundtruth score should be higher than that of a selected,
contrastive output. The latter is defined as the result of inference performed using a modified score function which
combines the model score and the task loss, representing
the metric that we care about for the application. This
modified scoring function encodes the fact that we should
penalize higher scoring configurations that are inferior in
terms of the task loss. Various efficient methods have been
proposed for incorporating complex discrete loss functions
into this max-margin approach (Yue et al., 2007; Volkovs
& Zemel, 2009; Tarlow & Zemel, 2012; Mohapatra et al.,
2014). Importantly, however, this form of learning does not
directly optimize the task loss, but rather an upper bound.
An alternative approach, frequently used in deep neural
networks, is to train with a surrogate loss that can be easily optimized, e.g., cross-entropy (LeCun & Huang, 2005;
Bengio et al., 2015). The problem of this procedure is that
for many application domains the task loss differs significantly from the surrogate loss.
The seminal work of McAllester et al. (2010) showed how
to compute the gradient of complex non-differentiable loss
functions when dealing with linear models. In this paper
we extend their theorem to the non-linear case. This is important in practice as it provides us with a new learning
algorithm to train deep neural networks end-to-end to minimize the application specific loss function. As shown in
our experiments on action classification and object detection, this is very beneficial, particularly when dealing with
noisy labels.

