A Subspace Learning Approach for High Dimensional Matrix Decomposition
with Efficient Column/Row Sampling

Mostafa Rahmani
George Atia
University of Central Florida, 4000 Central Florida Blvd. Orlando, Florida, 32816

Abstract

MOSTAFA @ KNIGHTS . UCF. EDU
G EORGE .ATIA @ UCF. EDU

the convex program

This paper presents a new randomized approach
to high-dimensional low rank (LR) plus sparse
matrix decomposition. For a data matrix D ∈
RN1 ×N2 , the complexity of conventional decomposition methods is O(N1 N2 r), which limits
their usefulness in big data settings (r is the rank
of the LR component). In addition, the existing
randomized approaches rely for the most part on
uniform random sampling, which may be inefficient for many real world data matrices. The proposed subspace learning-based approach recovers the LR component using only a small subset
of the columns/rows of data and reduces complexity to O(max(N1 , N2 )r2 ). Even when the
columns/rows are sampled uniformly at random,
the sufficient number of sampled columns/rows
is shown to be roughly O(rµ), where µ is the
coherency parameter of the LR component. In
addition, efficient sampling algorithms are proposed to address the problem of column/row
sampling from structured data.

min

λkṠk1 + kL̇k∗

L̇,Ṡ

(2)

subject to L̇ + Ṡ = D
yields the exact decomposition, where k.k1 is the `1 -norm
and k.k∗ is the nuclear norm.
For the LR matrix L with rank r and compact SVD L =
UΣVT (where U ∈ RN1 ×r , Σ ∈ Rr×r and V ∈ RN2 ×r ),
the incoherence condition is typically defined through the
requirements (Candès et al., 2011; Chandrasekaran et al.,
2011)
µr
µr
, maxkVT ei k22 ≤
i
N1
N2
r
µr
and kUVT k∞ ≤
N2 N1
maxkUT ei k22 ≤
i

(3)

for some parameter µ that bounds the projection of the standard basis {ei } onto the column and row subspaces. Other
useful measures for the coherency of subspaces are given
in (Candès & Romberg, 2007) as,
p
p
γ(U) = N1 max |U(i, j)|, γ(V) = N2 max |V(i, j)|, (4)
i,j

i,j

1. Introduction
Suppose we are given a data matrix D ∈ RN1 ×N2 , which
can be expressed as
D = L + S,

(1)

where L is a low rank (LR) matrix and S is a sparse matrix
with arbitrary unknown support. In many machine learning
and data analysis applications, the given data can be naturally modeled using (1). It was shown in (Chandrasekaran
et al., 2011) that if the column space (CS) and row space
(RS) of L are sufficiently incoherent with the standard basis and the non-zero elements of S are sufficiently diffused,
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

where γ(U) and γ(V) bound the coherency of the column
space and the row space, respectively. It is not hard to show
√
that max (γ(V), γ(U)) ≤ µ.
In (Candès et al., 2011), the sparsity pattern of the sparse
matrix is selected uniformly at random to ensure that the
sparse matrix is not a LR matrix (the non-zero elements
are sufficiently diffused) with overwhelming probability.
In this model, termed the Bernoulli model, each element
of the sparse matrix can be non-zero independently with
a constant probability. In this paper, we also use the
Bernoulli model for the sparsity pattern of the sparse matrix.
The optimization problem (2) is convex. Similar to the iterative shrinking algorithms for `1 -norm and nuclear norm
minimization, a family of iterative algorithms for solving

