Ensuring Rapid Mixing and Low Bias for Asynchronous Gibbs Sampling

Christopher De Sa
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94309

CDESA @ STANFORD . EDU

Kunle Olukotun
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94309

KUNLE @ STANFORD . EDU

Christopher Ré
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94309

Abstract
Gibbs sampling is a Markov chain Monte
Carlo technique commonly used for estimating
marginal distributions. To speed up Gibbs sampling, there has recently been interest in parallelizing it by executing asynchronously. While
empirical results suggest that many models can
be efficiently sampled asynchronously, traditional Markov chain analysis does not apply to
the asynchronous case, and thus asynchronous
Gibbs sampling is poorly understood. In this paper, we derive a better understanding of the two
main challenges of asynchronous Gibbs: bias
and mixing time. We show experimentally that
our theoretical results match practical outcomes.

1. Introduction
Gibbs sampling is one of the most common Markov chain
Monte Carlo methods used with graphical models (Koller
& Friedman, 2009). In this setting, Gibbs sampling (Algorithm 1) operates iteratively by choosing at random a variable from the model at each timestep, and updating it by
sampling from its conditional distribution given the other
variables in the model. Often, it is applied to inference
problems, in which we are trying to estimate the marginal
probabilities of some query events in a given distribution.
For sparse graphical models, to which Gibbs sampling is
often applied, each of these updates needs to read the values of only a small subset of the variables; therefore each
update can be computed very quickly on modern hardware.
Because of this and other useful properties of Gibbs sampling, many systems use Gibbs sampling to perform inferProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

CHRISMRE @ STANFORD . EDU

Algorithm 1 Gibbs sampling
Require: Variables xi for 1 ≤ i ≤ n, and distribution π.
for t = 1 to T do
Sample s uniformly from {1, . . . , n}.
Re-sample xs uniformly from Pπ (Xs |X{1,...,n}\{s} ).
end for

ence on big data (Lunn et al., 2009; McCallum et al., 2009;
Newman et al., 2007; Smola & Narayanamurthy, 2010;
Theis et al., 2012; Zhang & Ré, 2014).
Since Gibbs sampling is such a ubiquitous algorithm, it is
important to try to optimize its execution speed on modern
hardware. Unfortunately, while modern computer hardware has been trending towards more parallel architectures (Sutter, 2005), traditional Gibbs sampling is an inherently sequential algorithm; that is, the loop in Algorithm 1 is not directly parallelizable. Furthermore, for
sparse models, very little work happens within each iteration, meaning it is difficult to extract much parallelism
from the body of this loop. Since traditional Gibbs sampling parallelizes so poorly, it is interesting to study variants of Gibbs sampling that can be parallelized. Several
such variants have been proposed, including applications
to latent Dirichlet allocation (Newman et al., 2007; Smola
& Narayanamurthy, 2010) and distributed constraint optimization problems (Nguyen et al., 2013).
In one popular variant, multiple threads run the Gibbs
sampling update rule in parallel without locks, a strategy
called asynchronous or H OGWILD ! execution—in this paper, we use these two terms interchangeably. This idea
was proposed, but not analyzed theoretically, in Smola
& Narayanamurthy (2010), and has been shown to give
empirically better results on many models (Zhang & Ré,
2014). But when can we be sure that H OGWILD ! Gibbs
sampling will produce accurate results? Except for the case
of Gaussian random variables (Johnson et al., 2013), there

