Estimating Cosmological Parameters from the Dark Matter Distribution

Siamak Ravanbakhsh?
MRAVANBA @ CS . CMU . EDU
Junier Oliva?
JOLIVA @ CS . CMU . EDU
Sebastien Fromenteau†
SFROMENT @ ANDREW. CMU . EDU
Layne C. Price†
LAYNEP @ ANDREW. CMU . EDU
Shirley Ho†
SHIRLEYH @ ANDREW. CMU . EDU
Jeff Schneider?
JEFF . SCHNEIDER @ CS . CMU . EDU
Barnabás Póczos?
BAPOCZOS @ CS . CMU . EDU
? School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Ave., Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
† McWilliams Center for Cosmology, Department of Physics, Carnegie Mellon University, Carnegie 5000 Forbes Ave.,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA

Abstract
A grand challenge of the 21st century cosmology is to accurately estimate the cosmological
parameters of our Universe. A major approach
in estimating the cosmological parameters is to
use the large scale matter distribution of the Universe. Galaxy surveys provide the means to map
out cosmic large-scale structure in three dimensions. Information about galaxy locations is typically summarized in a “single” function of scale,
such as the galaxy correlation function or powerspectrum. We show that it is possible to estimate
these cosmological parameters directly from the
distribution of matter. This paper presents the
application of deep 3D convolutional networks
to volumetric representation of dark-matter simulations as well as the results obtained using a
recently proposed distribution regression framework, showing that machine learning techniques
are comparable to, and can sometimes outperform, maximum-likelihood point estimates using
“cosmological models”. This opens the way to
estimating the parameters of our Universe with
higher accuracy.

1. Introduction
The 21st century has brought us tools and methods to observe and analyze the Universe in far greater detail than
before, allowing us to deeply probe the fundamental properties of cosmology. We have a suite of cosmological obProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Dark matter distribution in three cubes produced using
different sets of parameters. Each cube is divided into small subcubes for training and prediction. Note that although cubes in
this figure are produced using very different cosmological parameters in our constrained sampled set, the effect is not visually discernible.

servations that allow us to make serious inroads to the understanding of our own universe, including the cosmic microwave background (CMB) (Planck Collaboration et al.,
2015; Hinshaw et al., 2013), supernovae (Perlmutter et al.,
1999; Riess et al., 1998) and the large scale structure of
galaxies and galaxy clusters (Cole et al., 2005; Anderson
et al., 2014; Parkinson et al., 2012). In particular, large
scale structure involves measuring the positions and other
properties of bright sources in great volumes of the sky.
The amount of information is overwhelming, and modern
methods in machine learning and statistics can play an increasingly important role in modern cosmology. For example, the common method to compare large scale structure observation and theory is to compare the compressed

