Generalized Direct Change Estimation in Ising Model Structure

Farideh Fazayeli
Arindam Banerjee
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Minnesota, Twin Cities

Abstract
We consider the problem of estimating change in
the dependency structure of two p-dimensional
Ising models, based on respectively n1 and n2
samples drawn from the models. The change
is assumed to be structured, e.g., sparse, block
sparse, node-perturbed sparse, etc., such that it
can be characterized by a suitable (atomic) norm.
We present and analyze a norm-regularized estimator for directly estimating the change in structure, without having to estimate the structures of
the individual Ising models. The estimator can
work with any norm, and can be generalized to
other graphical models under mild assumptions.
We show that only one set of samples, say n2 ,
needs to satisfy the sample complexity requirement for the estimator to work, and the estima, where c detion error decreases as √ c
min(n1 ,n2 )

pends on the Gaussian width of the unit norm
ball. For example, for `1 norm applied to ssparse change, the change can be accurately estimated with min(n1 , n2 ) = O(s log p) which is
sharper than an existing result n1 = O(s2 log p)
and n2 = O(n21 ). Experimental results illustrating the effectiveness of the proposed estimator
are presented.

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, considerable progress has been made
on estimating the statistical dependency structure of graphical models based on samples drawn from the model. In
particular, such advances have been made for Gaussian
graphical models, Ising models, Gaussian copulas, as well
as certain multi-variate extensions of general exponential
family distributions including multivariate Poisson models (Banerjee et al., 2008; Kanamori et al., 2009; MeinProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

FARIDEH @ CS . UMN . EDU
BANERJEE @ CS . UMN . EDU

shausen & Bühlmann, 2006; Ravikumar et al., 2010; 2011;
Yang et al., 2012).
In this paper, we consider Ising models and focus on the
problem of estimating changes in Ising model structure:
1
and Xn2 2 =
given two sets of samples Xn1 1 = {x1i }ni=1
2 n2
{xi }i=1 respectively drawn from two p-dimensional Ising
models with true parameters θ1∗ and θ2∗ , where θ1∗ , θ2∗ ∈
Rp×p , the goal is to estimate the change δθ∗ = (θ1∗ − θ2∗ ).
In particular, we focus on the situation when the change
δθ∗ has structure, such as sparsity, block sparsity, or nodeperturbed sparsity, which can be characterized by a suitable
(atomic) norm (Chandrasekaran et al., 2012; Mohan et al.,
2014). However, the individual model parameters θ1∗ , θ2∗
need not have any specific structure, and they may both
correspond to dense matrices. The goal is to get an estimate δ θ̂ of the change δθ∗ such that the estimation error
∆ = (δ θ̂ − δθ∗ ) is small. Such change estimation has potentially wide range of applications including identifying
the changes in the neural connectivity networks, the difference between plant trait interactions at different climate
conditions, and the changes in the stock market dependency
structures.
One can consider two broad approaches for solving such
change estimation problems: (i) indirect change estimation, where we estimate θ̂1 and θ̂2 from two sets of samples separately and obtain δ θ̂ = (θ̂1 − θ̂2 ), or (ii) direct
change estimation, where we directly estimate δ θ̂ using the
two sets of samples, without estimating θ1 and θ2 individually. In a high dimensional setting, recent advances (Cai
et al., 2011; Ravikumar et al., 2010; 2011) illustrate that
accurate estimation of the parameter θ∗ of an Ising model
depends on how sparse or otherwise structured the true parameter θ∗ is. For example, if both θ1∗ and θ2∗ are sparse
and the samples n1 , n2 are sufficient to estimate them accurately (Ravikumar et al., 2010), indirect estimation of δ θ̂
should be accurate. However, if the individual parameters
θ1∗ and θ2∗ are somewhat dense, and the change δθ∗ has
considerably more structure, such as block sparsity (only
a small block has changed) or node perturbation sparsity
(only edges from a few nodes have changed) (Mohan et al.,
2014), direct estimation may be considerably more efficient

