Augmenting Supervised Neural Networks with Unsupervised Objectives
for Large-scale Image Classification
Yuting Zhang
YUTINGZH @ UMICH . EDU
Kibok Lee
KIBOK @ UMICH . EDU
Honglak Lee
HONGLAK @ EECS . UMICH . EDU
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Abstract
Unsupervised learning and supervised learning
are key research topics in deep learning. However, as high-capacity supervised neural networks trained with a large amount of labels have
achieved remarkable success in many computer
vision tasks, the availability of large-scale labeled images reduced the significance of unsupervised learning. Inspired by the recent
trend toward revisiting the importance of unsupervised learning, we investigate joint supervised and unsupervised learning in a large-scale
setting by augmenting existing neural networks
with decoding pathways for reconstruction. First,
we demonstrate that the intermediate activations
of pretrained large-scale classification networks
preserve almost all the information of input images except a portion of local spatial details.
Then, by end-to-end training of the entire augmented architecture with the reconstructive objective, we show improvement of the network
performance for supervised tasks. We evaluate several variants of autoencoders, including
the recently proposed “what-where" autoencoder
that uses the encoder pooling switches, to study
the importance of the architecture design. Taking the 16-layer VGGNet trained under the ImageNet ILSVRC 2012 protocol as a strong baseline for image classification, our methods improve the validation-set accuracy by a noticeable
margin.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised and supervised learning have been two associated key topics in deep learning. One important application of deep unsupervised learning over the past decade
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

was to pretrain a deep neural network, which was then
finetuned with supervised tasks (such as classification).
Many deep unsupervised models were proposed, such as
stacked (denoising) autoencoders (Bengio et al., 2007; Vincent et al., 2010), deep belief networks (Hinton et al., 2006;
Lee et al., 2009), sparse encoder-decoders (Ranzato et al.,
2007; Kavukcuoglu et al., 2010), and deep Boltzmann machines (Salakhutdinov & Hinton, 2009). These approaches
significantly improved the performance of neural networks
on supervised tasks when the amount of available labels
were not large.
However, over the past few years, supervised learning without any unsupervised pretraining has achieved even better
performance, and it has become the dominating approach
to train deep neural networks for real-world tasks, such
as image classification (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and object detection (Girshick et al., 2016). Purely supervised
learning allowed more flexibility of network architectures,
e.g., the inception unit (Szegedy et al., 2015) and the residual structure (He et al., 2016), which were not limited by
the modeling assumptions of unsupervised methods. Furthermore, the recently developed batch normalization (BN)
method (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015) has made the neural network learning further easier. As a result, the once popular framework of unsupervised pretraining has become less
significant and even overshadowed (LeCun et al., 2015) in
the field.
Several attempts (e.g., Ranzato & Szummer (2008);
Larochelle & Bengio (2008); Sohn et al. (2013); Goodfellow et al. (2013)) had been made to couple the unsupervised and supervised learning in the same phase, making
unsupervised objectives able to impact the network training after supervised learning took place. These methods
unleashed new potential of unsupervised learning, but they
have not yet been shown to scale to large amounts of labeled and unlabeled data. Rasmus et al. (2015) recently
proposed an architecture that is easy to couple with a classification network by extending the stacked denoising autoencoder with lateral connections, i.e., from encoder to
the same stages of the decoder, and their methods showed

