The Information-Theoretic Requirements of
Subspace Clustering with Missing Data

Daniel L. Pimentel-Alarcón
Robert D. Nowak
University of Wisconsin - Madison, 53706 USA

Abstract
Subspace clustering with missing data (SCMD)
is a useful tool for analyzing incomplete datasets.
Let d be the ambient dimension, and r the dimension of the subspaces. Existing theory shows that
Nk = O(rd) columns per subspace are necessary for SCMD, and Nk = O(min{dlog d , dr+1 })
are sufficient. We close this gap, showing that
Nk = O(rd) is also sufficient. To do this
we derive deterministic sampling conditions for
SCMD, which give precise information-theoretic
requirements and determine sampling regimes.
These results explain the performance of SCMD
algorithms from the literature. Finally, we give
a practical algorithm to certify the output of any
SCMD method deterministically.

PIMENTELALAR @ WISC . EDU
NOWAK @ ECE . WISC . EDU

quired for SCMD. If all entries are observed, Nk = r + 1
is necessary and sufficient (assuming generic columns). If
` = r + 1 (the minimum required), it is easy to see that
Nk = O(rd) is necessary for SCMD, as O(rd) columns
are necessary for low-rank matrix completion (LRMC)
(Candès & Recht, 2009), which is the particular case of
SCMD with only one subspace. Under standard random
sampling schemes, i.e., with ` = O(max{r, log d}), it
is known that Nk = O(min{dlog d , dr+1 }) is sufficient
(Eriksson et al., 2012; Pimentel-Alarcón et al., 2014). This
number of samples can be very large, and it is unusual to
encounter such huge datasets in practice. Recent work has
produced several heuristic algorithms that tend to work reasonably well in practice without these strong requirements.
Yet the sample complexity of SCMD remained an important open question until now (Soltanolkotabi, 2014).
Organization and Main Contributions

1. Introduction
Let U? be a collection of r-dimensional subspaces of Rd ,
and let X be a d × N data matrix whose columns lie in
the union of the subspaces in U? . The goal of subspace
clustering is to infer U? and cluster the columns of X according to the subspaces (Vidal, 2011; Elhamifar & Vidal,
2009; 2013; Liu et al., 2010; 2013; Wang & Xu, 2013;
Soltanolkotabi et al., 2014; Hu et al., 2015; Qu & Xu, 2015;
Peng et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2015). There is growing interest in subspace clustering with missing data (SCMD),
where one aims at the same goal, but only observes a
subset of the entries in X. This scenario arises in many
practical applications, such as computer vision (Kanatani,
2001), network inference and monitoring (Eriksson et al.,
2012; Mateos & Rajawat, 2013), and recommender systems (Rennie & Srebro, 2005; Zhang et al., 2012).
There is a tradeoff between the number of samples per column `, and the number of columns per subspace Nk , reProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

In Section 2 we formally state the problem and our main
result, showing that Nk = O(rd) is the true sample complexity of SCMD. In Section 3 we present deterministic sampling conditions for SCMD, similar to those in
(Pimentel-Alarcón et al., 2015a) for LRMC. These specify
precise information-theoretic requirements and determine
sampling regimes of SCMD. In Section 3 we also present
experiments showing that our theory accurately predicts the
performance of SCMD algorithms from the literature.
The main difficulty of SCMD is that the pattern of missing
data can cause that U? is not the only collection of subspaces that agrees with the observed data. This implies
that in general, even with unlimited computational power,
one could try all possible clusterings, and still be unable to
determine the right one. Existing theory circumvents this
problem by requiring a large number of columns, so that
U? is be the only collection of subspaces that agrees with
the vast number of observations. In Section 4 we discuss
these issues and present an efficient criteria to determine
whether a subspace is indeed one of the subspaces in U? .
In Section 5 we present the main practical implication of
our theory: an efficient algorithm to certify the output of

