Learning to Generate with Memory

Chongxuan Li
LICX 14@ MAILS . TSINGHUA . EDU . CN
Jun Zhu
DCSZJ @ MAIL . TSINGHUA . EDU . CN
Bo Zhang
DCSZB @ MAIL . TSINGHUA . EDU . CN
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., State Key Lab of Intell. Tech. & Sys., TNList Lab,
Center for Bio-Inspired Computing Research, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China

Abstract
Memory units have been widely used to enrich
the capabilities of deep networks on capturing
long-term dependencies in reasoning and prediction tasks, but little investigation exists on
deep generative models (DGMs) which are good
at inferring high-level invariant representations
from unlabeled data. This paper presents a deep
generative model with a possibly large external
memory and an attention mechanism to capture
the local detail information that is often lost in
the bottom-up abstraction process in representation learning. By adopting a smooth attention
model, the whole network is trained end-to-end
by optimizing a variational bound of data likelihood via auto-encoding variational Bayesian
methods, where an asymmetric recognition network is learnt jointly to infer high-level invariant representations. The asymmetric architecture
can reduce the competition between bottom-up
invariant feature extraction and top-down generation of instance details. Our experiments on several datasets demonstrate that memory can significantly boost the performance of DGMs on
various tasks, including density estimation, image generation, and missing value imputation,
and DGMs with memory can achieve state-ofthe-art quantitative results.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models are able to extract abstract representations from low-level inputs by adopting a deep architecture with explicitly designed nonlinear transformations (Bengio et al., 2013a). Among many types of deep
models, deep generative models (DGMs) learn abstract
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

representations from unlabeled data and can perform a
wide range of tasks, including density estimation, data generation and missing value imputation. Depending on the
building blocks, various types of DGMs exist, including
undirected models (Salakhutdinov & Hinton, 2009), directed models (Neal, 1992; Hinton et al., 2006), autoregressive models (Larochelle & Murray, 2011; Gregor et al.,
2014), and Markov chain based models (Bengio et al.,
2014). Recently, DGMs have attracted much attention on
developing efficient and (approximately) accurate learning
algorithms, such as stochastic variational methods (Kingma
& Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014; Bornschein & Bengio, 2015; Burda et al., 2015) and Monte Carlo methods (Adams et al., 2010; Gan et al., 2015; Du et al., 2015).
Although current DGMs are able to extract high-level abstract representations, they may not be sufficient in generating high-quality input samples. This is because more
abstract representations are generally invariant or less sensitive to most specific types of local changes of the input.
This bottom-up abstraction progress is good for identifying predictive patterns, especially when a discriminative
objective is optimized (Li et al., 2015); but it also loses
the detail information that is necessary in the top-down
generating process. It remains a challenge for DGMs to
generate real data, especially for images that have complex structures. Simply increasing the model size is apparently not wise, as it may lead to serious over-fitting without
proper regularization as well as heavy computation burden.
Some recent progress has been made to improve the generation quality. For example, DRAW (Gregor et al., 2015)
iteratively constructs complex images over time through a
recurrent encoder and decoder together with an attention
mechanism and LAPGAN (Denton et al., 2015) employs a
cascade of generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) to generate high quality natural images
through a Laplacian pyramid framework (Burt & Adelson,
1983). However, no efforts have been made on enriching
the capabilities of probabilistic DGMs by designing novel
building blocks in the generative model.

