The Sum-Product Theorem: A Foundation for Learning Tractable Models
Abram L. Friesen
AFRIESEN @ CS . WASHINGTON . EDU
Pedro Domingos
PEDROD @ CS . WASHINGTON . EDU
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195 USA

Abstract
Inference in expressive probabilistic models is
generally intractable, which makes them difficult to learn and limits their applicability. Sumproduct networks are a class of deep models
where, surprisingly, inference remains tractable
even when an arbitrary number of hidden layers
are present. In this paper, we generalize this result to a much broader set of learning problems:
all those where inference consists of summing a
function over a semiring. This includes satisfiability, constraint satisfaction, optimization, integration, and others. In any semiring, for summation to be tractable it suffices that the factors
of every product have disjoint scopes. This unifies and extends many previous results in the literature. Enforcing this condition at learning time
thus ensures that the learned models are tractable.
We illustrate the power and generality of this approach by applying it to a new type of structured
prediction problem: learning a nonconvex function that can be globally optimized in polynomial
time. We show empirically that this greatly outperforms the standard approach of learning without regard to the cost of optimization.

1. Introduction
Graphical models are a compact representation often used
as a target for learning probabilistic models. Unfortunately,
inference in them is exponential in their treewidth (Chandrasekaran et al., 2008), a common measure of complexity. Further, since inference is a subroutine of learning,
graphical models are hard to learn unless restricted to those
with low treewidth (Bach & Jordan, 2001; Chechetka &
Guestrin, 2007), but few real-world problems exhibit this
property. Recent research, however, has shown that probabilistic models can in fact be much more expressive than
this while remaining tractable (Domingos et al., 2014). In
particular, sum-product networks (SPNs) (Gens & DominProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

gos, 2013; Poon & Domingos, 2011) are a class of deep
probabilistic models that consist of many layers of hidden variables and can have unbounded treewidth. Despite
this, inference in SPNs is guaranteed to be tractable, and
their structure and parameters can be effectively and accurately learned from data (Gens & Domingos, 2012; 2013;
Rooshenas & Lowd, 2014).
In this paper, we generalize and extend the ideas behind
SPNs to enable learning tractable high-treewidth representations for a much wider class of problems, including
satisfiability, MAX-SAT, model counting, constraint satisfaction, marginal and MPE inference, integration, nonconvex optimization, database querying, and first-order
probabilistic inference. The class of problems we address can be viewed as generalizing structured prediction
beyond combinatorial optimization (Taskar et al., 2005),
to include optimization for continuous models and others. Instead of approaching each domain individually,
we build on a long line of work showing how, despite
apparent differences, these problems in fact have much
common structure (e.g., Bistarelli et al. (1997); Dechter
(1999); Aji & McEliece (2000); Wilson (2005); Green
et al. (2007); Dechter & Mateescu (2007); Bacchus et al.
(2009)); namely, that each consists of summing a function
over a semiring. For example, in the Boolean semiring the
sum and product operations are disjunction and conjunction, and deciding satisfiability is summing a Boolean formula over all truth assignments. MPE inference is summation over all states in the max-product semiring, etc.
We begin by identifying and proving the sum-product theorem, a unifying principle for tractable inference that states
a simple sufficient condition for summation to be tractable
in any semiring: that the factors of every product have disjoint scopes. In “flat” representations like graphical models
and conjunctive normal form, consisting of a single product of sums, this would allow only trivial models; but in
deep representations like SPNs and negation normal form it
provides remarkable flexibility. Based on the sum-product
theorem, we develop an algorithm for learning representations that satisfy this condition, thus guaranteeing that the
learned functions are tractable yet expressive. We demonstrate the power and generality of our approach by applying
it to a new type of structured prediction problem: learning

