Hierarchical Variational Models
Rajesh Ranganath
Princeton University, 35 Olden St., Princeton, NJ 08540

RAJESHR @ CS . PRINCETON . EDU

Dustin Tran
David M. Blei
Columbia University, 500 W 120th St., New York, NY 10027

DUSTIN @ CS . COLUMBIA . EDU
DAVID . BLEI @ COLUMBIA . EDU

Abstract
Black box variational inference allows researchers to easily prototype and evaluate an array of models. Recent advances allow such algorithms to scale to high dimensions. However, a central question remains: How to specify
an expressive variational distribution that maintains efficient computation? To address this, we
develop hierarchical variational models (HVMs).
HVM s augment a variational approximation with
a prior on its parameters, which allows it to capture complex structure for both discrete and continuous latent variables. The algorithm we develop is black box, can be used for any HVM,
and has the same computational efficiency as
the original approximation. We study HVMs on
a variety of deep discrete latent variable models. HVMs generalize other expressive variational
distributions and maintains higher fidelity to the
posterior.

1. Introduction
Black box variational inference (BBVI) is important to realizing the potential of modern applied Bayesian statistics.
The promise of BBVI is that an investigator can specify any
probabilistic model of hidden and observed variables, and
then efficiently approximate its posterior without additional
effort (Ranganath et al., 2014).

Though it enables efficient inference, the mean-field family
is limited by its strong factorization. It cannot capture posterior dependencies between latent variables, dependencies
which both improve the fidelity of the approximation and
are sometimes of intrinsic interest.
To this end, we develop hierarchical variational models
(HVMs), a class of families that goes beyond the meanfield and, indeed, beyond directly parameterized variational
families in general. The main idea behind our method is to
treat the variational family as a model of the latent variables
and then to expand this model hierarchically. Just as hierarchical Bayesian models induce dependencies between
data, hierarchical variational models induce dependencies
between latent variables.
We develop an algorithm for fitting HVMs in the context
of black box inference. Our algorithm is as general and
computationally efficient as BBVI with the mean-field family, but it finds better approximations to the posterior. We
demonstrate HVMs with a study of approximate posteriors for several variants of deep exponential families (Ranganath et al., 2015); HVMs generally outperform mean-field
variational inference.
Technical summary. Consider a posterior distribution
p(z | x), a distribution on d latent variables z1 , . . . , zd conditioned on a set of observations x. The mean-field family
is a factorized distribution of the latent variables,
qMF (z; λ) =

Qd

i=1 q(zi ; λi ).

(1)

BBVI is a form of variational inference (Jordan et al., 1999).

It sets up a parameterized family of distributions over the
latent variables and then optimizes the parameters to be
close to the posterior. Most applications of variational inference use the mean-field family. Each variable is independent and governed by its own parameters.
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

We fit its parameters λ to find a variational distribution that
is close to the exact posterior.
By positing Eq. 1 as a model of the latent variables, we
can expand it by placing a prior on its parameters. The
result is a hierarchical variational model, a two-level distribution that first draws variational parameters from a prior
q(λ; θ) and then draws latent variables from the corresponding likelihood (Eq. 1). HVMs induce a family that

