Smooth Imitation Learning for Online Sequence Prediction
Hoang M. Le
Andrew Kang
Yisong Yue
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA
Peter Carr
Disney Research, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Abstract
We study the problem of smooth imitation learning for online sequence prediction, where the
goal is to train a policy that can smoothly imitate
demonstrated behavior in a dynamic and continuous environment in response to online, sequential context input. Since the mapping from
context to behavior is often complex, we take
a learning reduction approach to reduce smooth
imitation learning to a regression problem using complex function classes that are regularized to ensure smoothness. We present a learning meta-algorithm that achieves fast and stable
convergence to a good policy. Our approach enjoys several attractive properties, including being fully deterministic, employing an adaptive
learning rate that can provably yield larger policy
improvements compared to previous approaches,
and the ability to ensure stable convergence. Our
empirical results demonstrate significant performance gains over previous approaches.

1. Introduction
In many complex planning and control tasks, it can be very
challenging to explicitly specify a good policy. For such
tasks, the use of machine learning to automatically learn
a good policy from observed expert behavior, also known
as imitation learning or learning from demonstrations, has
proven tremendously useful (Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Ratliff
et al., 2009; Argall et al., 2009; Ross & Bagnell, 2010; Ross
et al., 2011; Jain et al., 2013).

HMLE @ CALTECH . EDU
AKANG @ CALTECH . EDU
YYUE @ CALTECH . EDU

PETER . CARR @ DISNEYRESEARCH . COM

Online sequence prediction is the problem of making online decisions in response to exogenous input from the environment, and is a special case of reinforcement learning
(see Section 2). We are further interested in policies that
make smooth predictions in a continuous action space.
Our motivating example is the problem of learning smooth
policies for automated camera planning (Chen et al., 2016):
determining where a camera should look given environment information (e.g., noisy person detections) and corresponding demonstrations from a human expert.1 It is
widely accepted that a smoothly moving camera is essential for generating aesthetic video (Gaddam et al., 2015).
From a problem formulation standpoint, one key difference
between smooth imitation learning and conventional imitation learning is the use of a “smooth” policy class (which
we formalize in Section 2), and the goal now is to mimic
expert demonstrations by choosing the best smooth policy.
The conventional supervised learning approach to imitation
learning is to train a classifier or regressor to predict the expert’s behavior given training data comprising input/output
pairs of contexts and actions taken by the expert. However, the learned policy’s prediction affects (the distribution of) future states during the policy’s actual execution,
and so violates the crucial i.i.d. assumption made by most
statistical learning approaches. To address this issue, numerous learning reduction approaches have been proposed
(Daumé III et al., 2009; Ross & Bagnell, 2010; Ross et al.,
2011), which iteratively modify the training distribution in
various ways such that any supervised learning guarantees
provably lift to the sequential imitation setting (potentially
at the cost of statistical or computational efficiency).

In this paper, we study the problem of imitation learning for
smooth online sequence prediction in a continuous regime.

We present a learning reduction approach to smooth imitation learning for online sequence prediction, which we
call SIMILE (Smooth IMItation LEarning). Building

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

1
Access data at http://www.disneyresearch.com/
publication/smooth-imitation-learning/
and
code at http://github.com/hoangminhle/SIMILE.

