Mixture Proportion Estimation via Kernel Embedding of Distributions
Harish G. Ramaswamy†
IBM Research, Bangalore, India
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
Clayton Scott
EECS and Statistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA
Ambuj Tewari
Statistics and EECS, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA

Abstract
Mixture proportion estimation (MPE) is the
problem of estimating the weight of a component distribution in a mixture, given samples
from the mixture and component. This problem constitutes a key part in many “weakly supervised learning” problems like learning with
positive and unlabelled samples, learning with label noise, anomaly detection and crowdsourcing.
While there have been several methods proposed
to solve this problem, to the best of our knowledge no efficient algorithm with a proven convergence rate towards the true proportion exists
for this problem. We fill this gap by constructing a provably correct algorithm for MPE, and
derive convergence rates under certain assumptions on the distribution. Our method is based on
embedding distributions onto an RKHS, and implementing it only requires solving a simple convex quadratic programming problem a few times.
We run our algorithm on several standard classification datasets, and demonstrate that it performs
comparably to or better than other algorithms on
most datasets.

1. Introduction
Mixture proportion estimation (MPE) is the problem of estimating the weight of a component distribution in a mixture, given samples from the mixture and component. Solving this problem happens to be a key step in solving several “weakly supervised” learning problems. For example,
†

Part of work done when visiting the University of Michigan.
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

HGRAMASW @ IN . IBM . COM

CLAYSCOT @ UMICH . EDU
TEWARIA @ UMICH . EDU

MPE is a crucial ingredient in solving the weakly supervised learning problem of learning from positive and unlabelled samples (LPUE), in which one has access to unlabelled data and positively labelled data but wishes to construct a classifier distinguishing between positive and negative data (Liu et al., 2002; Denis et al., 2005; Ward et al.,
2009). MPE also arises naturally in the task of learning a
classifier with noisy labels in the training set, i.e., positive
instances have a certain chance of being mislabelled as negative and vice-versa, independent of the observed feature
vector (Lawrence & Scholkopf, 2001; Bouveyron & Girard, 2009; Stempfel & Ralaivola, 2009; Long & Servido,
2010; Natarajan et al., 2013). Natarajan et al. (2013) show
that this problem can be solved by minimizing an appropriate cost sensitive loss. But the cost parameter depends
on the label noise parameters, the computation of which
can be broken into two MPE problems (Scott et al., 2013a).
MPE also has applications in several other problems like
anomaly rejection (Sanderson & Scott, 2014) and crowdsourcing (Raykar et al., 2010).
When no assumptions are made on the mixture and the
components, the problem is ill defined as the mixture proportion is not identifiable (Scott, 2015). While several
methods have been proposed to solve the MPE problem
(Blanchard et al., 2010; Sanderson & Scott, 2014; Scott,
2015; Elkan & Noto, 2008; du Plessis & Sugiyama, 2014;
Jain et al., 2016), to the best of our knowledge no provable
and efficient method is known for solving this problem in
the general non-parametric setting with minimal assumptions. Some papers propose estimators that converge to the
true proportion under certain conditions (Blanchard et al.,
2010; Scott et al., 2013a; Scott, 2015), but they cannot be
efficiently computed. Hence they use a method which is
motivated based on the provable method but has no direct
guarantees of convergence to the true proportion. Some
papers propose an estimator that can be implemented efficiently (Elkan & Noto, 2008; du Plessis & Sugiyama,

