On the Statistical Limits of Convex Relaxations: A Case Study
Zhaoran Wang
Princeton University, NJ 08544 USA

ZHAORAN @ PRINCETON . EDU

Quanquan Gu
University of Virginia, VA 22904 USA

QG 5 W @ VIRGINIA . EDU

Han Liu
Princeton University, NJ 08544 USA

Abstract
Many high dimensional sparse learning problems
are formulated as nonconvex optimization. A popular approach to solve these nonconvex optimization problems is through convex relaxations such
as linear and semidefinite programming. In this
paper, we study the statistical limits of convex
relaxations. Particularly, we consider two problems: Mean estimation for sparse principal submatrix and edge probability estimation for stochastic block model. We exploit the sum-of-squares
relaxation hierarchy to sharply characterize the
limits of a broad class of convex relaxations. Our
result shows statistical optimality needs to be compromised for achieving computational tractability
using convex relaxations. Compared with existing
results on computational lower bounds for statistical problems, which consider general polynomialtime algorithms and rely on computational hardness hypotheses on problems like planted clique
detection, our theory focuses on a broad class of
convex relaxations and does not rely on unproven
hypotheses.

1. Introduction
A broad variety of high dimensional statistical problems are
formulated as nonconvex optimization. For example, sparse
estimation can be formulated as optimization under `0 -norm
constraints, where the `0 -norm is a pseudo-norm defined
as the number of nonzero elements in a vector. To solve
these nonconvex optimization problems, a popular approach
is to resort to convex relaxations. Particularly, for sparse
estimation, significant progress has been made by using
`1 -norm as a convex relaxation for the nonconvex `0 -norm
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume 48.
Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

HANLIU @ PRINCETON . EDU

(see, e.g., (Bühlmann & van de Geer, 2011; Chandrasekaran
et al., 2012) and the references therein).
In this paper, we study the statistical limits of convex relaxations. In particular, we focus on the sum-of-squares (SoS)
hierarchy of convex relaxations (Lasserre, 2001; Parrilo,
2000; 2003), which is made up of a sequence of increasingly
tighter convex relaxations based on semidefinite programming. We study the SoS hierarchy because it attains tighter
approximations than other hierarchies such as the hierarchies proposed by (Sherali & Adams, 1990) and (Lovász &
Schrijver, 1991), as well as their extensions (see (Laurent,
2003) for a comparison). Hence, the estimators in the SoS
hierarchy achieve superior statistical performance than the
estimators within other weaker hierarchies, which suggests
the statistical limits of the SoS hierarchy are also the limits
of weaker hierarchies.
To demonstrate the statistical limits of convex relaxations,
we focus on the examples of sparse principal submatrix estimation and stochastic block model estimation. In detail, for
sparse principal submatrix estimation, we assume there is a
s⇤ ⇥ s⇤ submatrix with elevated mean ⇤ on the diagonal of
a d ⇥ d noisy symmetric matrix. For stochastic block model
estimation, we assume there exists a dense subgraph with
s⇤ nodes planted in an Erdős-Rényi graph with d nodes. We
denote by ⇤ the edge probability of the subgraph. For both
⇤
examples, our goal is ⇥to estimate
⇤under a challenging
p
regime where s⇤ = o (d/ log d)2/3 and log d = o(s⇤ ).
We prove the following information-theoretic lower bound
p
⇤
inf sup EP b
C 1/s⇤ · log(d/s⇤ ), (1.1)
b P2P(s⇤ ,d)

where b denotes any estimator, P(s⇤ , d) is the distribution
family to be specified later and C is an absolute constant.
We prove that a computational intractable estimator bscan
(to be specified later) attains the lower bound in (1.1). In
order to achieve computational tractability, we consider
convex relaxations of bscan that fall within the SoS and
weaker hierarchies, which are denoted by H. Let C 0 be
a positive absolute constant. We prove that under certain

