DCM Bandits: Learning to Rank with Multiple Clicks
Sumeet Katariya
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison

KATARIYA @ WISC . EDU

Branislav Kveton
Adobe Research, San Jose, CA

KVETON @ ADOBE . COM

Csaba Szepesvári
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta
Zheng Wen
Adobe Research, San Jose, CA

Abstract
A search engine recommends to the user a list of
web pages. The user examines this list, from the
first page to the last, and clicks on all attractive
pages until the user is satisfied. This behavior of
the user can be described by the dependent click
model (DCM). We propose DCM bandits, an online learning variant of the DCM where the goal
is to maximize the probability of recommending
satisfactory items, such as web pages. The main
challenge of our learning problem is that we do
not observe which attractive item is satisfactory.
We propose a computationally-efficient learning
algorithm for solving our problem, dcmKL-UCB;
derive gap-dependent upper bounds on its regret
under reasonable assumptions; and also prove a
matching lower bound up to logarithmic factors.
We evaluate our algorithm on synthetic and realworld problems, and show that it performs well
even when our model is misspecified. This work
presents the first practical and regret-optimal online algorithm for learning to rank with multiple
clicks in a cascade-like click model.

1. Introduction
Web pages in search engines are often ranked based on a
model of user behavior, which is learned from click data
(Radlinski & Joachims, 2005; Agichtein et al., 2006; Chuklin et al., 2015). The cascade model (Craswell et al., 2008)
rd

Proceedings of the 33 International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

SZEPESVA @ CS . UALBERTA . CA

ZWEN @ ADOBE . COM

is one of the most popular models of user behavior in web
search. Kveton et al. (2015a) and Combes et al. (2015a) recently proposed regret-optimal online learning algorithms
for the cascade model. The main limitation of the cascade
model is that it cannot model multiple clicks. Although the
model was extended to multiple clicks (Chapelle & Zhang,
2009; Guo et al., 2009a;b), it is unclear if it is possible to
design computationally and sample efficient online learning algorithms for these extensions.
In this work, we propose an online learning variant of the
dependent click model (DCM) (Guo et al., 2009b), which
we call DCM bandits. The DCM is a generalization of the
cascade model where the user may click on multiple items.
At time t, our learning agent recommends to the user a list
of K items. The user examines this list, from the first item
to the last. If the examined item attracts the user, the user
clicks on it. This is observed by the learning agent. After
the user clicks on the item and investigates it, the user may
leave or examine more items. If the user leaves, the DCM
interprets this as that the user is satisfied and our agent receives a reward of one. If the user examines all items and
does not leave on purpose, our agent receives a reward of
zero. The goal of the agent is to maximize its total reward,
or equivalently to minimize its cumulative regret with respect to the most satisfactory list of K items. Our learning
problem is challenging because the agent does not observe
whether the user is satisfied. It only observes clicks. This
differentiates our problem from cascading bandits (Kveton
et al., 2015a), where the user can click on at most one item
and this click is satisfactory.
We make four major contributions. First, we formulate an
online learning variant of the DCM. Second, we propose a
computationally-efficient learning algorithm for our problem under the assumption that the order of the termination

