Scalable Gradient-Based Tuning of
Continuous Regularization Hyperparameters

Jelena Luketina1
Mathias Berglund1
Klaus Greff2
Tapani Raiko1
1
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland
2

JELENA . LUKETINA @ AALTO . FI
MATHIAS . BERGLUND @ AALTO . FI
KLAUS @ IDSIA . CH
TAPANI . RAIKO @ AALTO . FI

IDSIA, Dalle Molle Institute for Artificial Intelligence, USI-SUPSI, Manno-Lugano, Switzerland

Abstract
Hyperparameter selection generally relies on running multiple full training trials, with selection
based on validation set performance. We propose a gradient-based approach for locally adjusting hyperparameters during training of the
model. Hyperparameters are adjusted so as to
make the model parameter gradients, and hence
updates, more advantageous for the validation
cost. We explore the approach for tuning regularization hyperparameters and find that in experiments on MNIST, SVHN and CIFAR-10, the resulting regularization levels are within the optimal
regions. The additional computational cost depends on how frequently the hyperparameters are
trained, but the tested scheme adds only 30% computational overhead regardless of the model size.
Since the method is significantly less computationally demanding compared to similar gradientbased approaches to hyperparameter optimization,
and consistently finds good hyperparameter values, it can be a useful tool for training neural
network models.

1. Introduction
Specifying and training artificial neural networks requires
several design choices that are often not trivial to make.
Many of these design choices boil down to the selection of
hyperparameters. The process of hyperparameter selection
is in practice often based on trial-and-error and grid or random search (Bergstra and Bengio, 2012). There are also a
rd

Proceedings of the 33 International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume 48.
Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

number of automated methods (Bergstra et al., 2011; Snoek
et al., 2012), all of which rely on multiple complete training
runs with varied fixed hyperparameters, with the hyperparameter selection based on the validation set performance.
Although effective, these methods are expensive as the user
needs to run multiple full training runs. In the worst case,
the number of needed runs also increases exponentially
with the number of hyperparameters to tune, if an extensive
exploration is desired. In many practical applications such
an approach is too tedious and time-consuming, and it would
be useful if a method existed that could automatically find
acceptable hyperparameter values in one training run even
if the user did not have a strong intuition regarding good
values to try for the hyperparameters.
In contrast to these methods, we treat hyperparameters similar to elementary1 parameters during training, in that we
simultaneously update both sets of parameters using stochastic gradient descent. The gradient of elementary parameters
is computed as in usual training from the cost of the regularized model on the training set, while the gradient of
hyperparameters (hypergradient) comes from the cost of the
unregularized model on the validation set. For simplicity,
we will refer to the training set as T1 and to the validation
set (or any other data set used exclusively for training the
hyperparameters) as T2 . The method itself will be called
T1 − T2 , referring to the two simultaneous optimization
processes.
Similar approaches have been proposed since the late 1990s;
however, these methods either require computation of the
inverse Hessian (Larsen et al., 1998; Bengio, 2000; Chen
and Hagan, 1999; Foo et al., 2008), or propagating gradients
1
Borrowing the expression from Maclaurin et al. (2015), we
refer to the model parameters customarily trained with backpropagation as elementary parameters, and to all other parameters
as hyperparameters.

