Dueling Network Architectures for Deep Reinforcement Learning

Ziyu Wang
Tom Schaul
Matteo Hessel
Hado van Hasselt
Marc Lanctot
Nando de Freitas
Google DeepMind, London, UK

Abstract
In recent years there have been many successes
of using deep representations in reinforcement
learning. Still, many of these applications use
conventional architectures, such as convolutional
networks, LSTMs, or auto-encoders. In this paper, we present a new neural network architecture for model-free reinforcement learning. Our
dueling network represents two separate estimators: one for the state value function and one for
the state-dependent action advantage function.
The main benefit of this factoring is to generalize learning across actions without imposing any
change to the underlying reinforcement learning
algorithm. Our results show that this architecture leads to better policy evaluation in the presence of many similar-valued actions. Moreover,
the dueling architecture enables our RL agent to
outperform the state-of-the-art on the Atari 2600
domain.

ZIYU @ GOOGLE . COM
SCHAUL @ GOOGLE . COM
MTTHSS @ GOOGLE . COM
HADO @ GOOGLE . COM
LANCTOT @ GOOGLE . COM
NANDODEFREITAS @ GOOGLE . COM

which produced policies matching those of Monte Carlo
tree search programs, and squarely beaten a professional
player when combined with search (Silver et al., 2016).
In spite of this, most of the approaches for RL use standard
neural networks, such as convolutional networks, MLPs,
LSTMs and autoencoders. The focus in these recent advances has been on designing improved control and RL algorithms, or simply on incorporating existing neural network architectures into RL methods. Here, we take an alternative but complementary approach of focusing primarily on innovating a neural network architecture that is better
suited for model-free RL. This approach has the benefit that
the new network can be easily combined with existing and
future algorithms for RL. That is, this paper advances a new
network (Figure 1), but uses already published algorithms.
The proposed network architecture, which we name the dueling architecture, explicitly separates the representation of

1. Introduction
Over the past years, deep learning has contributed to dramatic advances in scalability and performance of machine
learning (LeCun et al., 2015). One exciting application
is the sequential decision-making setting of reinforcement
learning (RL) and control. Notable examples include deep
Q-learning (Mnih et al., 2015), deep visuomotor policies
(Levine et al., 2015), attention with recurrent networks (Ba
et al., 2015), and model predictive control with embeddings
(Watter et al., 2015). Other recent successes include massively parallel frameworks (Nair et al., 2015) and expert
move prediction in the game of Go (Maddison et al., 2015),
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

Figure 1. A popular single stream Q-network (top) and the dueling Q-network (bottom). The dueling network has two streams
to separately estimate (scalar) state-value and the advantages for
each action; the green output module implements equation (9) to
combine them. Both networks output Q-values for each action.

