Fixed Point Quantization of Deep Convolutional Networks

Darryl D. Lin
Qualcomm Research, San Diego, CA 92121, USA

DARRYL . DLIN @ GMAIL . COM

Sachin S. Talathi
Qualcomm Research, San Diego, CA 92121, USA

TALATHI @ GMAIL . COM

V. Sreekanth Annapureddy
NetraDyne Inc., San Diego, CA 92121, USA

Abstract
In recent years increasingly complex architectures for deep convolution networks (DCNs)
have been proposed to boost the performance on
image recognition tasks. However, the gains in
performance have come at a cost of substantial
increase in computation and model storage resources. Fixed point implementation of DCNs
has the potential to alleviate some of these complexities and facilitate potential deployment on
embedded hardware. In this paper, we propose
a quantizer design for fixed point implementation of DCNs. We formulate and solve an optimization problem to identify optimal fixed point
bit-width allocation across DCN layers. Our experiments show that in comparison to equal bitwidth settings, the fixed point DCNs with optimized bit width allocation offer > 20% reduction
in the model size without any loss in accuracy
on CIFAR-10 benchmark. We also demonstrate
that fine-tuning can further enhance the accuracy
of fixed point DCNs beyond that of the original
floating point model. In doing so, we report a
new state-of-the-art fixed point performance of
6.78% error-rate on CIFAR-10 benchmark.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in the development of deep convolution
networks (DCNs) have led to significant progress in solving non-trivial machine learning problems involving image
recognition (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and speech recognition (Deng et al., 2013). Over the last two years several
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

SREEKANTHAV @ GMAIL . COM

advances in the design of DCNs (Zeiler & Fergus, 2014;
Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014; Szegedy et al., 2014; Chatfield et al., 2014; He et al., 2014; Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015)
have not only led to a further boost in achieved accuracy on
image recognition tasks but also have played a crucial role
as a feature generator for other machine learning tasks such
as object detection (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and localization (Sermanet et al., 2013), semantic segmentation (Girshick et al., 2014) and image retrieval (Krizhevsky et al.,
2012; Razavian et al., 2014). These advances have come
with an added cost of computational complexity, resulting
from DCN designs involving any combinations of: increasing the number of layers in the DCN (Szegedy et al., 2014;
Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014; Chatfield et al., 2014), increasing the number of filters per convolution layer (Zeiler
& Fergus, 2014), decreasing stride per convolution layer
(Sermanet et al., 2013; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014)
and hybrid architectures that combine various DCN layers
(Szegedy et al., 2014; He et al., 2014; Ioffe & Szegedy,
2015).
While increasing computational complexity has afforded
improvements in the state-of-the-art performance, the
added burden of training and testing makes these networks
impractical for real world applications that involve real
time processing and for deployment on mobile devices or
embedded hardware with limited power budget. One approach to alleviate this burden is to increase the computational power of the hardware used to deploy these networks. An alternative approach that may be cost efficient
for large scale deployment is to implement DCNs in fixed
point, which may offer advantages in reducing memory
bandwidth, lowering power consumption and computation
time as well as the storage requirements for the DCNs.
In general, there are two approaches to designing a fixed
point DCN: (1) convert a pre-trained floating point DCN
model into a fixed point model without training, and (2)
train a DCN model with fixed point constraint. While

