Analysis of Deep Neural Networks with the Extended Data Jacobian Matrix
Shengjie Wang
Abdel-rahman Mohamed
Rich Caruana
Jeff Bilmes
Matthai Plilipose
Matthew Richardson
Krzysztof Geras
Gregor Urban
Ozlem Aslan

Abstract
Deep neural networks have achieved great success on a variety of machine learning tasks.
There are many fundamental and open questions
yet to be answered, however. We introduce the
Extended Data Jacobian Matrix (EDJM) as an
architecture-independent tool to analyze neural
networks at the manifold of interest. The spectrum of the EDJM is found to be highly correlated with the complexity of the learned functions. After studying the effect of dropout, ensembles, and model distillation using EDJM, we
propose a novel spectral regularization method,
which improves network performance.

1. Introduction

Deep Learning has achieved significant success in the past
few years on many challenging tasks (Krizhevsky et al.,
2012; Hinton et al., 2012; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014;
Bahdanau et al., 2014; Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016;
Sutskever et al., 2014) , but there is still much work needed
to understand why deep architectures are able to learn such
effective representations.
One proposal (Pascanu et al., 2013; Montufar et al., 2014)
argues that deep neural networks with rectified units are
able to separate the input space into exponentially more
linear response regions than shallow networks given the
same number of computational units, thus enabling deep
networks to learn highly complex and structured functions.
Empirical results in (Romero et al., 2014) show that deep
but thin networks can mimic the function learned by shallower (but still deep) and wide networks. Even for deep
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

WANGSJ @ CS . WASHINGTON . EDU
ASAMIR @ MICROSOFT. COM
RCARUANA @ MICROSOFT. COM
BILMES @ UW. EDU
MATTHAIP @ MICROSOFT. COM
MATTRI @ MICROSOFT. COM
K . J . GERAS @ SMS . ED . AC . UK
GURBAN @ UCI . EDU
OZLEM @ CS . UALBERTA . CA

linear networks, (Saxe et al., 2013) found that they exhibit
non-linear training dynamics similar to non-linear deep
neural networks. Although deep linear networks are equivalent to shallow linear networks in representational power,
their training dynamics are rich in mathematical structure
that alter key aspects of the network such as training time,
and the effects of pre-training, random initialization, and
generalization. Better understanding of the trajectory of
the functions learned by different architectures during and
at the end of training is important for understanding why
deep learning is so effective, how different architectures
affect what is learned, and for developing networks with
better regularization and generalization abilities. For
example, in (Neyshabur et al., 2015), understanding
and enforcing scale invariance in ReLU networks led to
developing a more resilient update rule than standard SGD
for networks with unbalanced weights.
We started this work motivated by trying to understand
what qualities deep networks possess that shallow networks do not, and also how convolutional neural networks
differ from feed-forward ones. Recently, model compression and distillation (Ba & Caruana, 2014; Hinton et al.,
2015) show that it is possible to train compact models
to approximate the functions learned by more complex
models. Empirically, on some datasets, shallow networks
can be improved dramatically to the point of even matching
the best deep network by learning from the soft labels
generated by a large and deep model or an ensemble of
such models. Such improvement may result from the extra
information provided by the soft labels which preserves
the relative confidence of different outputs learned by the
bigger model. The distillation results posed yet another
interesting question: in what way does the more complex,
“teacher”, network alter the function learned by the
less complex, “student”, network compared to a similar
network learning without the benefit of a teacher?
In this paper, conditioned on a set of data points that define

