Computationally Efficient Nyström Approximation using Fast Transforms

Si Si?
Cho-Jui Hsieh†
Inderjit S. Dhillon?
?
Department of Computer Science, Unigersity of Texas at Austin
†
Departments of Statistics and Computer Science, University of California at Davis

Abstract
Our goal is to improve the training and prediction time of Nyström method, which is a
widely-used technique for generating low-rank
kernel matrix approximations. When applying
the Nyström approximation for large-scale applications, both training and prediction time is
dominated by computing kernel values between a
data point and all landmark points. With m landmark points, this computation requires Θ(md)
time (flops), where d is the input dimension.
In this paper, we propose the use of a family
of fast transforms to generate structured landmark points for Nyström approximation. By
exploiting fast transforms, e.g., Haar transform
and Hadamard transform, our modified Nyström
method requires only Θ(m) or Θ(m log d) time
to compute the kernel values between a given
data point and m landmark points. This improvement in time complexity can significantly speed
up kernel approximation and benefit prediction
speed in kernel machines. For instance, on the
webspam data (more than 300,000 data points),
our proposed algorithm enables kernel SVM prediction to deliver 98% accuracy and the resulting prediction time is 1000 times faster than LIBSVM and only 10 times slower than linear SVM
prediction (which yields only 91% accuracy).

1. Introduction
In recent years, significant effort has been expended in trying to scale up kernel machines; however, standard kernel
machines such as kernel SVM or kernel ridge regression
suffer from slow training and prediction which prohibits
their use in real-world large-scale applications. One of the
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

SSI @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU
CHOHSIEH @ UCDAVIS . EDU
INDERJIT @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU

key issues is to compute and store the kernel matrix, which
usually takes Θ(n2 d) time and Θ(n2 ) space, where n is
the number of training samples and d is the dimensionality. A widely-used approach to alleviate this problem is
to approximate the kernel matrix by its low-rank approximation, as a result of which kernel methods can be solved
efficiently.
There has been a vast body of work on low-rank approximation methods, among which Nyström method has drawn
considerable attention for very large-scale datasets. It has
been shown in (Williams & Seeger, 2001; Li et al., 2010;
Rudi et al., 2015; Hsieh et al., 2014a) that Nyström based
kernel approximation is efficient for scaling up kernel machines in both training and prediction phases. In Nyström
approximation, both training and prediction time is dominated by the time to compute the kernel values between
a data point and all landmark points. With m landmark
points, assume each kernel evaluation takes Θ(d) time,
then Θ(md) time is needed to compute m kernel values.
There has been substantial work in the literature (Drineas
& Mahoney, 2005; Zhang et al., 2008) towards improving
the approximation for a fixed number of landmark points m
by exploiting different landmark points selection methods.
However, the computational complexity for both training and testing phases has not been taken into consideration when forming landmark points. For a fixed m landmark points, popular Nyström methods need Θ(nmd) to
form the kernel values when forming the low-rank approximation and Θ(md) for prediction on one testing point.
In this paper, we propose the use of fast transforms, e.g.,
fast Haar and Hadamard transforms, to generate structured
landmark points. Based on these new structured landmark
points, the kernel values can be quickly evaluated, which
reduces the time complexity of forming the Nyström approximation and speeds up the prediction. More specially,
to test a new sample, for m landmark points, traditional
Nyström methods take Θ(md) time to make a prediction
and due to the benefit of fast transforms, the time complexity can be reduced to Θ(m log d) or Θ(m) via our method.
Although fast transforms have been widely used in machine

