No-Regret Algorithms for Heavy-Tailed Linear Bandits
Andres Munoz Medina
Google Research, 111 8th Av, New York, NY 10011
Scott Yang
Courant Institute, 251 Mercer Street, New York, NY 10012

Abstract
We analyze the problem of linear bandits under
heavy tailed noise. Most of the work on linear bandits has been based on the assumption of
bounded or sub-Gaussian noise. This assumption
however is often violated in common scenarios
such as financial markets. We present two algorithms to tackle this problem: one based on dynamic truncation and one based on a median of
means estimator. We show that, when the noise
admits only a 1 + ✏ moment, these algorithms
2+✏
e 2(1+✏) ) and
are still able to achieve regret in O(T
e 1+2✏
1+3✏ ) respectively. In particular, they guarO(T
antee sublinear regret as long as the noise has
finite variance. We also present empirical results showing that our algorithms achieve a better
performance than the current state of the art for
bounded noise when the L1 bound on the noise
is large yet the 1+✏ moment of the noise is small.

1. Introduction
Sequential decision-making under limited feedback has
become a classic topic in machine learning. Dating as
far back as the classical work of (Robbins, 1952), “bandit problems” are a prime example of the explorationexploitation trade-off that comes up in machine learning, and they have been analyzed, extended, and applied
in many forms. In particular, bandit algorithms have
been successfully used in tasks such as medical diagnosis,
job scheduling, computational advertising, and repeated
games.
In the original stochastic setting of (Robbins, 1952), at each
time t, the learner selects an action out of a set of K possibilities. Each action i makes the learner incur a loss of li,t
which is a random variable with mean µi . The learner can
only observe the loss for the chosen action and his objecProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

AMMEDINA @ GOOGLE . COM

YANGS @ CIMS . NYU . EDU

tive is to minimize his regret with respect to the best action
i⇤ = argmini µi . That is, the seller minimizes the following
PT
quantity Reg = E[ t=1 µIt µ⇤i ], where It is the action
chosen by the learner.
There have been a plethora of extensions to the stochastic
MAB problem of (Robbins, 1952), including to that of infinite action sets (Auer, 2002; Kleinberg, 2004), adversarial
loss functions (Auer et al., 2003), and various types of additional structure (e.g. switching costs as in (Cesa-Bianchi
et al., 2013) and contexts as in (Auer et al., 2003; Beygelzimer et al., 2011; Agarwal et al., 2014)). We cannot attempt
to do a comprehensive literature review, so we refer the interested reader to the work of (Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi,
2012) for an exposition of many of the latest advances.

Despite the large body of work in this field, one aspect of
bandit problems that has remained largely ignored is the
setting of heavy-tailed loss functions. In nearly all papers
and settings proposed, the authors assume that the losses
incurred by the learner are either bounded or at worst,
sub-Gaussian
(i.e.
0 constant such that 8 2 R,
⇥
⇤ 9C
ln E e (l E[l])  12 C 2 ). The motivation behind this
assumption is largely technical, as it is the most convenient
relaxation of bounded loss functions that still allows the
use of standard concentration of measure techniques (e.g.
Hoeffding’s inequality (Hoeffding, 1963)).
However, many real-life sequential decision-making problems do not exhibit bounded or sub-Gaussian losses. A
prime example is that of financial markets, where heavytailed price fluctuations occur far more frequently than
Gaussian models would predict (see e.g. (Rachev, 2003;
Hull, 2012)). Another example can be found in auctions
run to sell online advertisement where unusually large bids
are seen, albeit with low probability.
Since the standard techniques cannot be directly applied, it
is not clear whether one can attain equivalent regret bounds
for such scenarios, or whether sublinear regret algorithms
of any form are even possible at all.
A remarkable analysis of this scenario was given by
(Bubeck et al., 2013) who consider the classic stochastic
MAB setting with heavy-tailed noise. In their work, the

