Generalization Properties and Implicit Regularization for Multiple Passes SGM

Junhong Lin∗
JHLIN 5@ HOTMAIL . COM
Raffaello Camoriano†,∗,‡
RAFFAELLO . CAMORIANO @ IIT. IT
Lorenzo Rosasco∗,‡
LROSASCO @ MIT. EDU
∗
LCSL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
‡
DIBRIS, Università degli Studi di Genova, Via Dodecaneso 35, Genova, Italy
†
iCub Facility, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Morego 30, Genova, Italy

Abstract
We study the generalization properties of
stochastic gradient methods for learning with
convex loss functions and linearly parameterized
functions. We show that, in the absence of
penalizations or constraints, the stability and
approximation properties of the algorithm can
be controlled by tuning either the step-size or
the number of passes over the data. In this
view, these parameters can be seen to control
a form of implicit regularization. Numerical
results complement the theoretical findings.

1. Introduction
The stochastic gradient method (SGM), often called
stochastic gradient descent, has become an algorithm of
choice in machine learning, because of its simplicity and
small computational cost especially when dealing with big
data sets (Bousquet & Bottou, 2008).
Despite its widespread use, the generalization properties of
the variants of SGM used in practice are relatively little
understood. Most previous works consider generalization
properties of SGM with only one pass over the data,
see e.g. (Nemirovski et al., 2009) or (Orabona, 2014)
and references therein, while in practice multiple passes
are usually considered. The effect of multiple passes
has been studied extensively for the optimization of an
empirical objective (Boyd & Mutapcic, 2007), but the role
for generalization is less clear. In practice, early-stopping
of the number of iterations, for example monitoring a
hold-out set error, is a strategy often used to regularize.
Moreover, the step-size is typically tuned to obtain the best
results. The study in this paper is a step towards grounding
theoretically these commonly used heuristics.
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

Our starting points are a few recent works considering the
generalization properties of different variants of SGM. One
first series of results focus on least squares, either with one
(Ying & Pontil, 2008; Tarres & Yao, 2014; Dieuleveut &
Bach, 2014), or multiple (deterministic) passes over the
data (Rosasco & Villa, 2015). In the former case it is
shown that, in general, if only one pass over the data is
considered, then the step-size needs to be tuned to ensure
optimal results. In (Rosasco & Villa, 2015) it is shown that
a universal step-size choice can be taken, if multiple passes
are considered. In this case, it is the stopping time that
needs to be tuned.
In this paper, we are interested in general, possibly non
smooth, convex loss functions. The analysis for least
squares heavily exploits properties of the loss and does
not generalize to this broader setting. Here, our starting
points are the results in (Lin et al., 2016; Hardt et al.,
2016; Orabona, 2014) considering convex loss functions.
In (Lin et al., 2016), early stopping of a (kernelized)
batch subgradient method is analyzed, whereas in (Hardt
et al., 2016) the stability properties of SGM for smooth
loss functions are considered in a general stochastic
optimization setting and certain convergence results are
derived. In (Orabona, 2014), a more complex variant of
SGM is analyzed and shown to achieve optimal rates.
Since we are interested in analyzing regularization and
generalization properties of SGM, in this paper we consider
a general non-parametric setting. In this latter setting,
the effects of regularization are typically more evident
since it can directly affect the convergence rates. In
this context, the difficulty of a problem is characterized
by an assumption on the approximation error. Under
this condition, the need for regularization becomes clear.
Indeed, in the absence of other constraints, the good
performance of the algorithm relies on a bias-variance
trade-off that can be controlled by suitably choosing the
step-size and/or the number of passes. These latter
parameters can be seen to act as regularization parameters.

