Variational Inference for Monte Carlo Objectives

Andriy Mnih
Danilo J. Rezende
Google DeepMind

AMNIH @ GOOGLE . COM
DANILOR @ GOOGLE . COM

Abstract
Recent progress in deep latent variable models
has largely been driven by the development of
flexible and scalable variational inference methods. Variational training of this type involves
maximizing a lower bound on the log-likelihood,
using samples from the variational posterior to
compute the required gradients. Recently, Burda
et al. (2016) have derived a tighter lower bound
using a multi-sample importance sampling estimate of the likelihood and showed that optimizing it yields models that use more of their capacity and achieve higher likelihoods. This development showed the importance of such multisample objectives and explained the success of
several related approaches.
We extend the multi-sample approach to discrete latent variables and analyze the difficulty
encountered when estimating the gradients involved. We then develop the first unbiased gradient estimator designed for importance-sampled
objectives and evaluate it at training generative
and structured output prediction models. The resulting estimator, which is based on low-variance
per-sample learning signals, is both simpler and
more effective than the NVIL estimator (Mnih
& Gregor, 2014) proposed for the single-sample
variational objective, and is competitive with the
currently used biased estimators.

1. Introduction
Directed latent variable models parameterized using neural networks have recently enjoyed a surge in popularity
due to the recent advances in variational inference methods that made it possible to train such models efficiently.
These methods (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al.,
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

2014; Mnih & Gregor, 2014) approximate the intractable
posterior of the model with a variational posterior parameterized using a neural network and maximize a lower bound
on the intractable marginal log-likelihood, estimating the
required gradients using samples from the variational posterior. This approach implements an efficient feedforward
approximation to the expensive iterative process required
by traditional variational inference methods for each data
point.
One important weakness of variational methods is that
training a powerful model using an insufficiently expressive variational posterior can cause the model to use only
a small fraction of its capacity. The most direct route to
addressing this issue is to develop more expressive but still
tractable variational posteriors as was done in (Salimans
et al., 2015; Rezende & Mohamed, 2015; Gregor et al.,
2015).
However, the crippling effect of an excessively simple posterior on the model can alternatively be seen as a consequence of the form of the lower bound optimized by the
variational methods (Burda et al., 2016). As the bound is
based on a single-sample estimate of the marginal likelihood of the observation, it heavily penalizes samples that
explain the observation poorly and thus produce low estimates of the likelihood. As result, the variational posterior
learns to cover only the high-probability areas of the true
posterior, which in turn assumes a simpler shape which is
easier to approximate by the variational posterior. A simple way to minimize this effect is to average over multiple
samples when computing the marginal likelihood estimate.
The resulting lower bound on the log-likelihood gets tighter
as the number of samples increases (Burda et al., 2016),
converging to the true value in the limit of infinitely many
samples. We will refer to such objectives derived from likelihood estimates computed by averaging over independent
samples as Monte Carlo objectives. When using an objective that averages over multiple samples, the distribution
for generating samples no longer explicitly represents the
variational posterior and instead is thought of as a proposal
distribution due to connections to importance sampling.
Multi-sample objectives of this type have been used for

