Hierarchical Compound Poisson Factorization

Mehmet E. Basbug
Princeton University, 35 Olden St., Princeton, NJ 08540 USA

MEHMETBASBUG @ YAHOO . COM

Barbara E. Engelhardt
Princeton University, 35 Olden St., Princeton, NJ 08540 USA

BEE @ PRINCETON . EDU

Abstract
Non-negative matrix factorization models based
on a hierarchical Gamma-Poisson structure capture user and item behavior effectively in extremely sparse data sets, making them the ideal
choice for collaborative filtering applications.
Hierarchical Poisson factorization (HPF) in particular has proved successful for scalable recommendation systems with extreme sparsity. HPF,
however, suffers from a tight coupling of sparsity model (absence of a rating) and response
model (the value of the rating), which limits
the expressiveness of the latter. Here, we introduce hierarchical compound Poisson factorization (HCPF) that has the favorable GammaPoisson structure and scalability of HPF to highdimensional extremely sparse matrices. More
importantly, HCPF decouples the sparsity model
from the response model, allowing us to choose
the most suitable distribution for the response.
HCPF can capture binary, non-negative discrete,
non-negative continuous, and zero-inflated continuous responses. We compare HCPF with HPF
on nine discrete and three continuous data sets
and conclude that HCPF captures the relationship
between sparsity and response better than HPF.

1. Introduction
Matrix factorization has been a central subject in statistics since the introduction of principal component analysis (PCA) (Pearson, 1901). The goal is to embed data into
a lower dimensional space with minimal loss of information. The dimensionality reduction aspect of matrix factorization has become increasingly important in exploratory
data analysis as the dimensionality of data has exploded.
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

One alternative to PCA, non-negative matrix factorization (NMF), was first developed for factorizing matrices
for face recognition (Lee & Seung, 1999). The idea behind NMF is that the contributions of each feature to a
factor are non-negative. Although the motivation behind
this choice has roots in cerebral representations of objects,
non-negativeness has found great appeal in applications
such as collaborative filtering (Gopalan et al., 2013), document classification (Xu et al., 2003), and signal processing (Févotte et al., 2009).
In collaborative filtering, the data are highly sparse user by
item response matrices. For example, the Netflix movie rating data set includes 480K users, 17K movies and 100M
ratings, meaning that 0.988 of the matrix entries are missing. In the donors-choose data set, the user (donor) response to an item (project) quantifies their monetary donation to that project; this matrix includes 1.3M donors, 525K
projects and 2.66M donations, meaning that 0.999996 of
the matrix entries are missing.
In the collaborative filtering literature, there are two school
of thoughts on how to treat missing entries. The first one
assumes that entries are missing at random; that is, we observe a uniformly sampled subset of the data (Marlin et al.,
2012). Factorization is done on the premise that the response value provides all the information needed. The second method assumes that matrix entries are not missing at
random, but instead there is a underlying mixture model:
first, a coin is flipped to determine if an entry is missing. If
the entry is missing, its value is set to zero; if it is not missing, the response is drawn from a specific distribution (Marlin & Zemel, 2009). In this framework, we postulate that
absence of an entry carries information about the item and
the user, and this information can be exploited to improve
the overall quality of the factorization. The difficult part
is in representing the connection between the absence of a
response (sparsity model) and the numerical value of a response (response model) (Little & Rubin, 2014). We are
concerned with the problem of sparse matrix factorization
where the data are not missing at random.

