A Simple and Provable Algorithm for Sparse Diagonal CCA
Megasthenis Asteris
Anastasios Kyrillidis
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin

MEGAS @ UTEXAS . EDU
ANASTASIOS @ UTEXAS . EDU

Oluwasanmi Koyejo
Stanford University & University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

SANMI @ ILLINOIS . EDU

Russell Poldrack
Department of Psychology, Stanford University

Abstract
Given two sets of variables, derived from a common set of samples, sparse Canonical Correlation
Analysis (CCA) seeks linear combinations of a
small number of variables in each set, such that
the induced canonical variables are maximally
correlated. Sparse CCA is NP-hard.
We propose a novel combinatorial algorithm for
sparse diagonal CCA, i.e., sparse CCA under the
additional assumption that variables within each
set are standardized and uncorrelated. Our algorithm operates on a low rank approximation
of the input data and its computational complexity scales linearly with the number of input variables. It is simple to implement, and parallelizable. In contrast to most existing approaches,
our algorithm administers precise control on the
sparsity of the extracted canonical vectors, and
comes with theoretical data-dependent global approximation guarantees, that hinge on the spectrum of the input data. Finally, it can be straightforwardly adapted to other constrained variants
of CCA enforcing structure beyond sparsity.
We empirically evaluate the proposed scheme
and apply it on a real neuroimaging dataset to investigate associations between brain activity and
behavior measurements.

1. Introduction

POLDRACK @ STANFORD . EDU

their role in human behavior, as measured by psychological scores and physiological measurements (Posner et al.,
1988). This mapping may be investigated by using functional neuroimaging techniques to measure brain activation
during carefully designed experimental tasks (Poldrack,
2006). Following the experimental manipulation, a joint
analysis of brain activation and behavioral measurements
across subjects can reveal associations that exist between
the two (Berman et al., 2006).
Similarly, in genetics and molecular biology, several studies involve the joint analysis of multiple assays performed
on a single group of patients (Pollack et al., 2002; Morley
et al., 2004; Stranger et al., 2007). If DNA variants and
gene expression measurements are simultaneously available for a set of tissue samples, a natural objective is to
identify correlations between the expression levels of gene
subsets and variation in the related genes.
Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) (Hotelling, 1936) is
a classic method for discovering such linear relationships
across two sets of variables and has been extensively used
to investigate associations between multiple views of the
same set of observations; e.g., see (Deleus & Van Hulle,
2011; Li et al., 2012; Smith et al., 2015) in neuroscience.
Given two datasets X and Y of dimensions k × m and k ×
n, respectively, on k common samples, CCA seeks linear
combinations of the original variables of each type that are
maximally correlated. More formally, the objective is to
compute a pair of canonical vectors (or weights) u and v
such that the canonical variables Xu and Yv achieve the
maximum possible correlation:1

One of the key objectives in cognitive neuroscience is to
localize cognitive processes in the brain, and understand
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

u⊤ ΣXY v

max

u, v6=0 (u⊤ Σ
1

XX

u)

1/2

(v⊤ ΣYY v)

1/2

.

(1)

We assume that the variables in X and Y are standardized,
i.e., each column has zero mean and has been scaled to have unit
standard deviation.

