Fast Inference in Nonlinear Dynamical Systems using Gradient Matching

Mu Niu
School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Glasgow, UK
Simon Rogers
Department of Computing Science, University of Glasgow,UK

MU . NIU @ GLASGOW. AC . UK

S IMON .ROGERS @ GLASGOW. AC . UK

Maurizio Filippone
Eurecom, France

MAURIZIO . FILIPPONE @ EURECOM . FR

Dirk Husmeier
School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Glasgow, UK

D IRK .H USMEIER @ GLASGOW. AC . UK

Abstract
Parameter inference in mechanistic models of
coupled differential equations is a topical problem. We propose a new method based on kernel ridge regression and gradient matching, and
an objective function that simultaneously encourages goodness of fit and penalises inconsistencies
with the differential equations. Fast minimisation is achieved by exploiting partial convexity
inherent in this function, and setting up an iterative algorithm in the vein of the EM algorithm.
An evaluation of the proposed method on various benchmark data suggests that it compares
favourably with state-of-the-art alternatives.

1. INTRODUCTION
Many processes in science and engineering can be described by dynamical systems based on nonlinear ordinary
differential equations (ODEs). Often ODE parameters are
unknown and not directly measurable. Since nonlinear
ODEs typically have no closed form solution, standard iterative inference procedures require a computationally expensive numerical integration of the ODEs every time the
parameters are adapted, which in practice restricts statistical inference to very small systems. To overcome this computational bottleneck, approximate methods based on gradient matching have recently gained much attention. The
idea is to circumvent the numerical integration step by using a surrogate cost function that quantifies the discrepancy
between the derivative obtained from a smooth interpolant
to the data and the derivatives predicted by the ODEs. VariProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

ous methods have been proposed in the literature, based on
P-splines (Ramsay et al., 2007; Liang and Wu, 2008), parallel tempering (Campbell and Steele, 2012), Gaussian processes (Dondelinger et al. (2013), Calderhead et al. (2009),
Barber and Wang (2014)), and reproducing kernel Hilbert
spaces (RKHS, see González et al. (2013; 2014)). While
the application of Gaussian processes in this context has recently been subject to some controversy (Macdonald et al.,
2015), the RKHS approach appears to have achieved very
promising results (González et al., 2013; 2014) and provides the motivation for the present study.
Consider n arbitrary time points t1 < t2 < . . . < tn and
a set of noisy observations ys (ti ) of a set of unknown state
variables xs (ti ), i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n}, s ∈ {1, 2, . . . , r}. The
variable xs (t) represents the value of state variable s at time
t, x(t) is an r-dimensional column vector of the values of
all state variables at time t, xs is an n-dimensional row
vector of the values of state variable s at all time points, and
T T
X = (x(t1 ), . . . , x(tn )) = (xT
1 , . . . , xr ) is the matrix of
all r state variables at all n time points. We use the same
notational convention for the noisy observations ys (t) with
all observations combined into a matrix Y . The dynamics
of the system composed of the r interacting states xs , 1 ≤
s ≤ r, are governed by coupled non-linear ODEs:
ẋ =

∂x
= f (x(t), θ) ,
∂t

(1)

with parameters θ determining the kinetics of the interactions, and fixed initial values x(t1 ) (which, if unknown,
can be integrated into θ). We observe or measure the states
subject to iid additive Gaussian noise s ∼ N (0, σ 2 I):
ys = x s + s

(2)

and the objective of inference is to learn θ from these noisy
measurements or observations. The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: The state-of-the-art in ODE

