Binary embeddings with structured hashed projections

Anna Choromanska1
Krzysztof Choromanski1
Mariusz Bojarski
Tony Jebara
Sanjiv Kumar
Yann LeCun

Abstract
We consider the hashing mechanism for constructing binary embeddings, that involves
pseudo-random projections followed by nonlinear (sign function) mappings. The pseudorandom projection is described by a matrix,
where not all entries are independent random
variables but instead a fixed “budget of randomness” is distributed across the matrix. Such matrices can be efficiently stored in sub-quadratic or
even linear space, provide reduction in randomness usage (i.e. number of required random values), and very often lead to computational speed
ups. We prove several theoretical results showing
that projections via various structured matrices
followed by nonlinear mappings accurately preserve the angular distance between input highdimensional vectors. To the best of our knowledge, these results are the first that give theoretical ground for the use of general structured
matrices in the nonlinear setting. We empirically
verify our theoretical findings and show the dependence of learning via structured hashed projections on the performance of neural network as
well as nearest neighbor classifier.

1. Introduction
The paradigm of binary embedding for data compression is
of the central focus of this paper. The paradigm has been
studied in some earlier works (see: (Weiss et al., 2008),
(Gong et al., 2013), (Plan & Vershynin, 2014), (Yi et al.,
2015)), and in particular it was observed that by using linear projections and then applying sign function as a non1

Equal contribution.

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

ACHOROMA @ CIMS . NYU . EDU
KCHORO @ GOOGLE . COM
MBOJARSKI @ NVIDIA . COM
JEBARA @ CS . COLUMBIA . EDU
SANJIVK @ GOOGLE . COM
YANN @ CS . NYU . EDU

linear map one does not loose completely the information
about the angular distance between vectors, but instead the
information might be approximately reconstructed from the
Hamming distance between hashes. In this paper we are
interested in using pseudo-random projections via structured matrices in the linear projection phase. The pseudorandom projection is described by a matrix, where not all
the entries are independent random variables but instead a
fixed “budget of randomness” is distributed across the matrix. Thus they can be efficiently stored in a sub-quadratic
or even linear space and provide reduction in the randomness usage. Moreover, using them often leads to computational speed ups since they provide fast matrix-vector
multiplications via Fast Fourier Transform. We prove an
extension of the Johnson-Lindenstrauss lemma (Sivakumar, 2002) for general pseudo-random structured projections followed by nonlinear mappings. We show that the
angular distance between high-dimensional data vectors is
approximately preserved in the hashed space. This result
is also new compared to previous extensions (Hinrichs &
Vybral, 2011; Vybral, 2011) of the Johnson-Lindenstrauss
lemma, that consider special cases of our structured projections (namely: circulant matrices) and do not consider at all
the action of the non-linear mapping. We give theoretical
explanation of the approach that was so far only heuristically confirmed for some special structured matrices.
Our theoretical findings imply that many types of matrices, such as circulant or Toeplitz Gaussian matrices, can
be used as a preprocessing step in neural networks. Structured matrices were used before in different contexts also
in deep learning, see for example (Saxe et al., 2011; Mathieu et al., 2014; Sindhwani et al., 2015)). Our theoretical
results however extend to more general class of matrices.
Our work has primarily theoretical focus, but we also
ask an empirical question: how the action of the random projection followed by non-linear transformation may
influence learning? We focus on the deep learning setting, where the architecture contains completely random or
pseudo-random structured layers that are not trained. Little

