No Oops, You Won’t Do It Again:
Mechanisms for Self-correction in Crowdsourcing
Nihar B. Shah
Dept. of EECS, University of California, Berkeley
Dengyong Zhou
Microsoft Research, Redmond

Abstract
Crowdsourcing is a very popular means of obtaining the large amounts of labeled data that
modern machine learning methods require. Although cheap and fast to obtain, crowdsourced
labels suffer from significant amounts of error, thereby degrading the performance of downstream machine learning tasks. With the goal
of improving the quality of the labeled data, we
seek to mitigate the many errors that occur due
to silly mistakes or inadvertent errors by crowdsourcing workers. We propose a two-stage setting for crowdsourcing where the worker first
answers the questions, and is then allowed to
change her answers after looking at a (noisy)
reference answer. We mathematically formulate
this process and develop mechanisms to incentivize workers to act appropriately. Our mathematical guarantees show that our mechanism incentivizes the workers to answer honestly in both
stages, and refrain from answering randomly in
the first stage or simply copying in the second.
Numerical experiments reveal a significant boost
in performance that such “self-correction” can
provide when using crowdsourcing to train machine learning algorithms.

1. Introduction
The emergence of deep learning and other complex machine learning tools have resulted in a need for huge
amounts of labeled data (Raykar et al., 2010; Deng et al.,
2009; Carlson et al., 2010). One of the most popular
means of obtaining labeled data is crowdsourcing, where
data is labeled by crowds of semi-skilled workers through
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

NIHAR @ EECS . BERKELEY. EDU

DENGYONG . ZHOU @ MICROSOFT. COM

the Internet typically in exchange from some monetary
payments. Crowdsourcing is widely used in many realworld applications, and is particularly popular for collecting training labels for machine learning powered systems
like web search engines (Burges et al., 2005; Alonso &
Mizzaro, 2009; Kazai, 2011) or to supplement automated
algorithms (Khatib et al., 2011; Lang & Rio-Ross, 2011;
Von Ahn et al., 2008). The labels obtained from crowdsourcing, however, have significant amounts of error (Kazai
et al., 2011; Vuurens et al., 2011; Wais et al., 2010), thereby
degrading the performance of the machine learning algorithms that use this data downstream. Consequently, there
is much emphasis on gathering higher quality labels, since
a lower noise implies requirement of fewer labels for obtaining the same accuracy in practice.
In a study from a few years back, Kahneman & Frederick
(2002) asked the following question to many participants:
“A bat and ball cost a dollar and ten cents. The bat costs a
dollar more than the ball. How much does the ball cost?”
(See also The New Yorker (2012).) A large number of respondents gave an incorrect answer of “10 cents”, including a majority of the students surveyed at Harvard University, Princeton University and MIT. Indeed, making silly
mistakes is a part and parcel of being human. In several
domains of science and technology that deal with humans,
there are special provisions to mitigate the effects of such
inadvertent errors (Dijkstra, 1979; Ayewah & Pugh, 2009;
Aggarwal et al., 2013). In this work, we consider the problem of mitigating silly mistakes in crowdsourcing.
Unsurprisingly, the data obtained from crowdsourcing also
suffers from several forms of inadvertent errors. Examples
of such errors include those resulting from not following
instructions properly (Gupta et al., 2012), misreading questions (Chros & Sundell, 2011), mistakes when entering solutions (Gupta et al., 2012), incorrect recollection (Lasecki
et al., 2013), framing effects (Levin et al., 1998), satisficing (Krosnick, 1991), and many others (e.g., see Tversky &
Kahneman 1974; Fleurbaay & Eveleigh 2012).

