A Kernel Test of Goodness of Fit
Kacper Chwialkowski∗
Heiko Strathmann∗
Arthur Gretton
Gatsby Unit, University College London, United Kingdom

Abstract
We propose a nonparametric statistical test for
goodness-of-fit: given a set of samples, the test
determines how likely it is that these were generated from a target density function. The measure of goodness-of-fit is a divergence constructed
via Stein’s method using functions from a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space. Our test statistic
is based on an empirical estimate of this divergence, taking the form of a V-statistic in terms
of the log gradients of the target density and the
kernel. We derive a statistical test, both for i.i.d.
and non-i.i.d. samples, where we estimate the
null distribution quantiles using a wild bootstrap
procedure. We apply our test to quantifying convergence of approximate Markov Chain Monte
Carlo methods, statistical model criticism, and
evaluating quality of fit vs model complexity in
nonparametric density estimation.1

1. Introduction
Statistical tests of goodness-of-fit are a fundamental tool in
statistical analysis, dating back to the test of Kolmogorov
and Smirnov (Kolmogorov, 1933; Smirnov, 1948). Given
a set of samples {Zi }ni=1 with distribution Zi ∼ q, our interest is in whether q matches some reference or target distribution p, which we assume to be only known up to the
normalisation constant. Recently, in the multivariate setting, Gorham & Mackey (2015) proposed an elegant measure of sample quality with respect to a target. This measure
is a maximum discrepancy between empirical sample expectations and target expectations over a large class of test
functions, constructed so as to have zero expectation over
the target distribution by use of a Stein operator. This operator depends only on the derivative of the log q: thus, the
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

KACPER . CHWIALKOWSKI @ GMAIL . COM
HEIKO . STRATHMANN @ GMAIL . COM
ARTHUR . GRETTON @ GMAIL . COM

approach can be applied very generally, as it does not require closed-form integrals over the target distribution (or
numerical approximations of such integrals). By contrast,
many earlier discrepancy measures require integrals with
respect to the target (see below for a review). This is problematic if the intention is to perform benchmarks for assessing Markov Chain Monte Carlo, since these integrals
will certainly not be known to the practitioner.
A challenge in applying the approach of Gorham &
Mackey is the complexity of the function class used, which
results from applying the Stein operator to the W 2,∞ Sobolev space. Thus, their sample quality measure requires
solving a linear program that arises from a complicated
construction of graph Stein discrepancies and geometric
spanners. Their metric furthermore requires access to nontrivial lower bounds that, despite being provided for logconcave densities, are a largely open problem otherwise, in
particular for multivariate cases.
An important application of a goodness-of-fit measure is in
statistical testing, where it is desired to determine whether
the empirical discrepancy measure is large enough to reject
the null hypothesis (that the sample arises from the target
distribution). One approach is to establish the asymptotic
behaviour of the test statistic, and to set a test threshold at
a large quantile of the asymptotic distribution. The asymptotic behaviour of the W 2,∞ -Sobolev Stein discrepancies
remains a challenging open problem, due to the complexity of the function class used. It is not clear how one would
compute p-values for this statistic, or determine when the
goodness of fit test would allow us to accept the null hypothesis (at the user-specified test level).
The key contribution of this work is to define a statistical
test of goodness-of-fit, based on a Stein discrepancy computed in a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS). To
construct our test statistic, we use a function class defined
by applying the Stein operator to a chosen space of RKHS
functions, as proposed by (Oates et al., 2015).1 Our meas1
Oates et al. addressed the problem variance reduction in
Monte Carlo integration, using the Stein operator to avoid bias.

