PAC Lower Bounds and Efficient Algorithms for The Max K-Armed Bandit
Problem
Yahel David
YAHEL 83@ GMAIL . COM
Nahum Shimkin
SHIMKIN @ EE . TECHNION . AC . IL
Department of Electrical Engineering, Technion–Israel Institute of Technology, 32000 Haifa, Israel

Abstract
We consider the Max K-Armed Bandit problem, where a learning agent is faced with several
stochastic arms, each a source of i.i.d. rewards
of unknown distribution. At each time step the
agent chooses an arm, and observes the reward of
the obtained sample. Each sample is considered
here as a separate item with the reward designating its value, and the goal is to find an item with
the highest possible value. Our basic assumption
is a known lower bound on the tail function of
the reward distributions. Under the PAC framework, we provide a lower bound on the sample
complexity of any (, δ)-correct algorithm, and
propose an algorithm that attains this bound up
to logarithmic factors. We provide an analysis
of the robustness of the proposed algorithm to
the model assumptions, and further compare its
performance to the simple non-adaptive variant,
in which the arms are chosen randomly at each
stage.

1. Introduction
In the classic stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem, the learning agent faces a set K of stochastic arms, and
wishes to maximize the cumulative reward (in the regret
formulation), or find the arm with the highest expected reward (the pure exploration problem). This model has been
studied extensively in the statistical and learning literature,
see for example (Bubeck & Cesa-Bianchi, 2012) for a comprehensive survey.
We consider a variant of the MAB problem called the Max
K-Armed Bandit problem (Max-Bandit for short). In this
variant, the objective is to obtain a sample with the highest
possible reward (namely, the highest value in the support
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

of the probability distribution of any arm). More precisely,
considering the PAC setting, the objective is to return an
(, δ)-correct sample, namely a sample whose value is close to the overall best with a probability larger than 1 − δ.
In addition, we wish to minimize the sample complexity,
namely the expected number of samples observed by the
learning algorithm before it terminates. To minimize the
sample complexity, a learning agent should ideally be able
to focus on sampling the best arm, at the expense of the
other, sub-optimal ones. To facilitate that, some assumptions on the reward distributions, or at least their tails, are
required. These assumptions may be parametric, such as
those used in (Cicirello & Smith, 2005; Streeter & Smith,
2006a; Carpentier & Valko, 2014). In this paper we use a
more relaxed approach, by assuming a known lower bound
on the tail of each distribution near its maximal value (Assumption 1). This assumption is further relaxed in Section
5.
The scenario considered in the Max-Bandit problem is
most relevant when a single best item needs to be selected
from a large collections of items, which are divided among
several distinct sets. Here each set represented as a single arm. These sets may represent, for example, parts that
come from different sources or produced by different processes, or job candidates that are referred by different employment agencies. Relevant problems include finding the
best single match to certain genetic characteristics in several distinct populations, choosing the best channel among
different frequency bands in a cognitive radio wireless network, or searching in multiple data bases for a match to a
given image or document. Another application of interest
is the search of a chemical compound which is suited for
a given task (e.g., (Amis, 2004; Apostolidis et al., 2004)).
Here, one empirically searches for a material (or a composition of materials) that provides the best result for the
given task, with the number of tested compositions often
reaching hundreds of thousands variations, coming from
different families of materials.
For the classical MAB problem, algorithms that find the
best arm (in terms of its expected reward) in the PAC

