Learning Population-Level Diffusions with Generative Recurrent Networks
Tatsunori B. Hashimoto
David K. Gifford
Tommi S. Jaakkola

THASHIM @ MIT. EDU
DKG @ MIT. EDU
TOMMI @ CSAIL . MIT. EDU

Abstract
We estimate stochastic processes that govern the
dynamics of evolving populations such as cell
differentiation. The problem is challenging since
longitudinal trajectory measurements of individuals in a population are rarely available due to
experimental cost and/or privacy. We show that
cross-sectional samples from an evolving population suffice for recovery within a class of processes even if samples are available only at a
few distinct time points. We provide a stratified
analysis of recoverability conditions, and establish that reversibility is sufficient for recoverability. For estimation, we derive a natural loss and
regularization, and parameterize the processes as
diffusive recurrent neural networks. We demonstrate the approach in the context of uncovering
complex cellular dynamics known as the ‘epigenetic landscape’ from existing biological assays.

Figure 1. In population-level inference we observe samples (colored points) drawn from the process at different times. The goal
is to infer the dynamics (blue vectors). In this toy dataset each
point can be thought of as a single cell and the x and y axes as
gene expression levels of two genes.

tudinal data with cross-sectional data for inferring the underlying dynamics behind continuous time-series.

Understanding the population dynamics of individuals over
time is a fundamental problem in a variety of areas, from
biology (gene expression of a cell population (Waddington et al., 1940)), ecology (spatial distribution of animals
(Tereshko, 2000)), to census data (life expectancy (Manton et al., 2008) and racially segregated housing (Bejan &
Merkx, 2007)). In such areas, experimental cost or privacy
concerns often prevent measurements of complete trajectories of individuals over time, and instead we observe samples from an evolving population over time (Fig. 1).

The framework we develop will be applicable to the general cross-sectional population inference problem, but in
order to ground our discussion we will focus on a specific
application in computational biology, where we seek to understand the process by which embryonic stem cells differentiate into mature cells. An individual cell’s tendency to
differentiate into a mature cell is thought to follow a ‘epigenetic landscape’ much like a ball rolling down a hill. The
local minima of this landscape represents cell states and
the slope represents the rate of differentiation (Waddington
et al., 1940). While more recent work has established the
validity of modeling differentiation as a diffusion process
(Hanna et al., 2009; Morris et al., 2014), direct inference of
the epigenetic landscape has been limited to the dynamics
of single genes (Sisan et al., 2012) due to the difficulty of
longitudinally tracking single cells.

For example, modeling the active life expectancy and disabilities of an individual over time is an area of substantial
interest for healthcare statistics (Manton et al., 2008), but
the expense and difficulty of collecting longitudinal health
data has meant that much of the data is cross-sectional
(Robine & Michel, 2004). Our technique replaces longi-

Our work establishes that no longitudinal tracking is necessary and population data alone can be used to recover
the latent dynamics driving diffusions. This result allows
cheap, high-throughput assays such as single cell RNA-seq
to be used to infer the latent dynamics of tens to hundreds
of genes.

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

Analyzing the inference problem for population-level diffusions, we utilize the connection between partial differential equations, diffusion processes, and recurrent neural

1. Motivation

