Parameter Estimation for Generalized Thurstone Choice Models
Milan Vojnovic
Microsoft Research, Cambridge, UK

MILANV @ MICROSOFT. COM

Se-Young Yun
Microsoft Research, Cambridge, UK

YUNSEYOUNG @ GMAIL . COM

Abstract
We consider the maximum likelihood parameter estimation problem for a generalized Thurstone choice model, where choices are top-1
items from comparison sets of two or more items.
We provide tight characterizations of the mean
square error, as well as necessary and sufficient
conditions for correct classification when each
item belongs to one of two classes. These results provide insights into how the estimation
accuracy depends on the choice of a generalized Thurstone choice model and the structure of
comparison sets. We find that for a priori unbiased structures of comparisons, e.g., when comparison sets are drawn independently and uniformly at random, the number of observations
needed to achieve a prescribed estimation accuracy depends on the choice of a generalized Thurstone choice model. For a broad set of generalized Thurstone choice models, which includes all
popular instances used in practice, the estimation
error is shown to be largely insensitive to the cardinality of comparison sets. On the other hand,
we found that there exist generalized Thurstone
choice models for which the estimation error decreases much faster with the cardinality of comparison sets.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of estimating the strengths of
items based on observed choices of items, where each
choice is from a subset of two or more items. This accommodates pair comparisons as a special case, where each
comparison set consists of two items. In general, the outcome of each comparison is a top-1 list that singles out
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

one item from given set of compared items. There are
many applications in practice that are accommodated by
this framework, e.g., single-winner contests in crowdsourcing services such as TopCoder or Taskcn, or hiring decisions where one applicant gets hired among those who applied for a job, e.g., in online labour marketplaces such as
Fiverr and Upwork, as well as numerous sports competitions and online gaming platforms.
In particular, we consider the choices according to a generalized Thurstone choice model. This model accommodates
several well known models, e.g. Luce’s choice model, and
Bradley-Terry model for pair comparisons; see discussion
of related work in Section 1.1. A generalized Thurstone
choice model is defined by a cumulative distribution function F and a parameter vector ✓ = (✓1 , ✓2 , . . . , ✓n ) 2 Rn ,
where ✓i represents the strength of item i. For every given
non-empty subset of items S, the choice is assumed to be
an item in S that exhibits the best performance, where the
performance of each item i 2 S is defined as the sum of
the strength parameter ✓i and an independent sample from
the cumulative distribution function F . Many well known
models of choice are special instances of generalized Thurstone choice models for specific choices of F ; see a catalogue of examples in Section 2.3.
In this paper, our goal is to characterize the accuracy of a
parameter estimator of a top-1 list generalized Thurstone
choice model. In particular, we want to understand how is
the estimation accuracy affected by the choice of a generalized Thurstone model, and the structure of the comparison
sets. Our results show that the choice of a generalized Thurstone model can have a substantial effect on the parameter
estimation accuracy.
More specifically, our main contributions in this paper can
be summarized as follows.
We provide tight lower and upper bounds for the mean
square error of the maximum likelihood parameter estimator (Section 3). These results provide necessary and sufficient conditions for the estimation of the parameter within a
prescribed accuracy. Moreover, they reveal how the choice

