Black-Box α-Divergence Minimization

José Miguel Hernández-Lobato1∗
JMH @ SEAS . HARVARD . EDU
Yingzhen Li2∗
YL 494@ CAM . AC . UK
Mark Rowland2
MR 504@ CAM . AC . UK
Daniel Hernández-Lobato3
DANIEL . HERNANDEZ @ UAM . ES
Thang D. Bui2
TDB 40@ CAM . AC . UK
Richard E. Turner2
RET 26@ CAM . AC . UK
1
2
3
∗
Harvard University, University of Cambridge, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Both authors contributed equally.

Abstract
Black-box alpha (BB-α) is a new approximate
inference method based on the minimization of
α-divergences. BB-α scales to large datasets
because it can be implemented using stochastic
gradient descent. BB-α can be applied to complex probabilistic models with little effort since
it only requires as input the likelihood function
and its gradients. These gradients can be easily obtained using automatic differentiation. By
changing the divergence parameter α, the method
is able to interpolate between variational Bayes
(VB) (α → 0) and an algorithm similar to expectation propagation (EP) (α = 1). Experiments on
probit regression and neural network regression
and classification problems show that BB-α with
non-standard settings of α, such as α = 0.5, usually produces better predictions than with α → 0
(VB) or α = 1 (EP).

1. Introduction
Bayesian probabilistic modelling provides useful tools for
making predictions from data. The formalism requires a
probabilistic model p(x|θ), parameterized by a parameter
vector θ, over the observations D = {xn }N
n=1 . Bayesian
inference treats θ as a random variable and predictions are
then made by averaging with respect to the posterior belief
"N
#
Y
p(θ|D) ∝
p(xn |θ) p0 (θ) ,
n=1

where p(xn |θ) is a likelihood factor and p0 (θ) is the prior.
Unfortunately the computation of this posterior distribution
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

is often intractable for many useful probabilistic models.
One can use approximate inference techniques to sidestep
this difficulty. Two examples are variational Bayes (VB)
(Jordan et al., 1999) and expectation propagation (EP)
(Minka, 2001a). These methods adjust the parameters of
a tractable distribution so that it is close to the true posterior, by finding an stationary point of an energy function.
Both VB and EP are specific cases of local α-divergence
minimization, where the parameter α ∈ (−∞, +∞) \ {0}
specifies the properties of the divergence to be minimized
(Minka, 2005). If α → 0, VB is obtained and α = 1 gives
EP (Minka, 2005). Power EP (PEP) (Minka, 2004) extends
EP to general settings of α, whose optimal value may be
model, dataset and/or task specific.
EP can provide better solutions than VB in specific cases.
For instance, VB provides poor approximations when nonsmooth likelihood functions are used (Cunningham et al.,
2011; Turner & Sahani, 2011b; Opper & Winther, 2005).
EP also often performs better when factored approximations are employed (Turner & Sahani, 2011a; Minka,
2001b). There are, however, issues that hinder the wide
deployment of EP, and by extension of power EP too. First,
EP requires to store in memory local approximations of the
likelihood factors. This has prohibitive memory cost for
large datasets and big models. Second, efficient implementations of EP based on message passing have no convergence guarantees to an stationary point of the energy function (Minka, 2001a).
Previous work has addressed the first issue by using “factor tying”/“local parameter sharing” through the “stochastic EP”/“averaged EP” (SEP/AEP) algorithms (Li et al.,
2015; Dehaene & Barthelmé, 2015). However, the energy
function of SEP/AEP is unknown, making the attempts
for proving convergence of these algorithms difficult. On
the second issue, Heskes & Zoeter (2002) and Opper &
Winther (2005) derived a convergent double-loop implementation of EP. However, it can be far slower than the

