Pliable Rejection Sampling
Akram Erraqabi1
MILA, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC H3C 3J7, Canada

AKRAM . ER - RAQABI @ UMONTREAL . CA

Michal Valko
MICHAL . VALKO @ INRIA . FR
INRIA Lille - Nord Europe, SequeL team, 40 avenue Halley 59650, Villeneuve d’Ascq, France
Alexandra Carpentier
CARPENTIER @ MATH . UNI - POTSDAM . DE
Institut für Mathematik, Univertät Potsdam, Germany, Haus 9 Karl-Liebknecht-Strasse 24-25, D-14476 Potsdam
Odalric-Ambrym Maillard
ODALRIC . MAILLARD @ INRIA . FR
INRIA Saclay - Île-de-France, TAO team, 660 Claude Shannon, Université Paris Sud, 91405 Orsay, France

Abstract
Rejection sampling is a technique for sampling
from difficult distributions. However, its use
is limited due to a high rejection rate. Common adaptive rejection sampling methods either
work only for very specific distributions or without performance guarantees. In this paper, we
present pliable rejection sampling (PRS), a new
approach to rejection sampling, where we learn
the sampling proposal using a kernel estimator.
Since our method builds on rejection sampling,
the samples obtained are with high probability
i.i.d. and distributed according to f . Moreover,
PRS comes with a guarantee on the number of
accepted samples.

1. Introduction
In machine learning, we often need to sample from distributions. Rejection sampling is a known textbook method
for sampling from density f with intractable direct sampling. The basic method (SRS, Figure 1) constructs an envelope M g that is an upper bound on f , where g is a proposal distribution from which we can sample easily. Each
time we get a sample from g, we accept or reject it with
probability depending on the value of g and f in this point.
To guarantee efficiency, a good proposal distribution is a
necessary knowledge we need to provide to the sampler.
In the absence of such knowledge, we typically resort to
a uniform upper bound on f which results in high rejection rates and the method stays in textbooks. What’s wrong
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

envelope M g

R
proposal g

A

target f

x
Figure 1. Simple rejection sampling

with a high rejection rate? The reason is that for every point
proposed, we need to call f to decide whether this point is
accepted. If many points are rejected, then f is called many
times with few generated samples. When evaluating f is
costly, then we are wasting resources.
To alleviate this problem, adaptive rejection samplers (Gilks, 1992; Gilks & Wild, 1992; Martino & Mı́guez,
2011) increase the acceptance rate by taking advantage of
particular properties of f . They construct a proposal g
that is better adapted to f than just a uniform distribution.
Adaptive rejection sampling (ARS, Gilks & Wild, 1992) is
the most known among them. ARS works when the target
is log-concave and constructs a sequence of proposal densities tailored to f . In particular, if a sample that is drawn
from a proposal gt (x) is rejected, this sample is used to
build an improved proposal, gt+1 (x), with a higher acceptance rate. ARS then adds the rejected point to set S of
points defining an envelope of f in order to decrease the
area R between the proposal and the target density (Gilks
& Wild, 1992; Gilks, 1992). However, ARS can only be applied for log-concave (and thus unimodal) densities, which
is a stringent constraint in practice (Gilks & Wild, 1992;
Martino & Mı́guez, 2011) and therefore its use is limited.
1

Research done during author’s stay at SequeL, INRIA Lille.

