ForecastICU: A Prognostic Decision Support System for Timely Prediction of
Intensive Care Unit Admission
Jinsung Yoon1
JSYOON 0823@ UCLA . EDU
Ahmed M. Alaa1
AHMEDMALAA @ UCLA . EDU
Scott Hu2 , MD
S COTT H U @ MEDNET. UCLA . EDU
Mihaela van der Schaar1
MIHAELA @ EE . UCLA . EDU
1
Electrical Engineering Department, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), CA, 90095, USA.
2
David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), CA, 90095, USA.

Abstract
We develop ForecastICU: a prognostic decision
support system that monitors hospitalized patients and prompts alarms for intensive care unit
(ICU) admissions. ForecastICU is first trained in
an offline stage by constructing a Bayesian belief system that corresponds to its belief about
how trajectories of physiological data streams of
the patient map to a clinical status. After that,
ForecastICU monitors a new patient in real-time
by observing her physiological data stream, updating its belief about her status over time, and
prompting an alarm whenever its belief process
hits a predefined threshold (confidence). Using a
real-world dataset obtained from UCLA Ronald
Reagan Medical Center, we show that ForecastICU can predict ICU admissions 9 hours before a physician’s decision (for a sensitivity of
40% and a precision of 50%). Also, ForecastICU
performs consistently better than other state-ofthe-art machine learning algorithms in terms of
sensitivity, precision, and timeliness: it can predict ICU admissions 3 hours earlier, and offers a
7.8% gain in sensitivity and a 5.1% gain in precision compared to the best state-of-the-art algorithm. Moreover, ForecastICU offers an area under curve (AUC) gain of 22.3% compared to the
Rothman index, which is the currently deployed
technology in most hospital wards.

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Intensive Care Unit (ICU) admission for hospitalized patients is a vital and delay-critical decision. The timing of
transfer to the ICU is an important determinant of a patient’s outcomes. Various medical studies have demonstrated that delayed identification of clinical deterioration,
leading to delayed admission to the ICU and delayed therapeutic intervention, results in increased morbidity and mortality (Liu et al., 2012) (Young et al., 2003). This illustrates
the urgency to develop automated prognostic decision support systems that alert the medical staff of impending clinical deterioration, enabling clinicians to intervene at an earlier time, thereby preventing an arrest or reducing the need
for ICU transfer.
An automated system for ICU admission prediction is envisioned to operate in the following manner. The system is
fed with high-dimensional physiological data streams that
belong to a monitored patient and tries to infer whether the
patient is clinically deteriorating or not in a timely manner, i.e. earlier than the time at which a physician would
normally decide to impend an ICU transfer for that patient.
The system can take advantage of the available electronic
health record (EHR) data to learn the trends in the physiological data streams associated with patients who previously got discharged or admitted to the ICU (Churpek et al.,
2014).
Designing a system that carries out the steps described
above is associated with many practical and technical challenges. First, while data streams for previously hospitalized
patients are recorded in the EHR, the clinical status of such
patients upon their hospitalization differs from one patient
to another; thus, learning from the labeled patient examples is not straightforward as the examples themselves entail some ambiguity. Second, not all the data streams are
relevant to the ICU admission decision, and not all of the
different streams are sampled at the same rate, i.e. some

