Estimating Structured Vector Autoregressive Models

Igor Melnyk
Arindam Banerjee
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota, Twin Cities

Abstract

1996; Zou & Hastie, 2005; Yuan & Lin, 2006). Specific
choices of R(·) lead to certain types of structured parameters to be estimated. For example, the decomposable norm
R(β) = kβk1 yields Lasso, estimating sparse parameters,
R(β) = kβkG gives Group Lasso, estimating group sparse
parameters, and R(β) = kβkowl , the ordered weighted
L1 norm (OWL) (Bogdan et al., 2013), gives sorted L1 penalized estimator, clustering correlated regression parameters (Figueiredo & Nowak, 2014). Non-decomposable
norms, such as K-support norm (Argyriou et al., 2012) or
overlapping group sparsity norm (Jacob et al., 2009) can be
used to uncover more complicated model structures. Theoretical analysis of such models, including sample complexity and non-asymptotic bounds on the estimation error rely on the design matrix Z, usually assumed (sub)Gaussian with independent rows, and the specific norm
R(·) under consideration (Raskutti et al., 2010; Rudelson &
Zhou, 2013). Recent work has generalized such estimators
to work with any norm (Negahban et al., 2012; Banerjee
et al., 2014) with i.i.d. rows in Z.

While considerable advances have been made
in estimating high-dimensional structured models from independent data using Lasso-type models, limited progress has been made for settings
when the samples are dependent. We consider estimating structured VAR (vector auto-regressive
model), where the structure can be captured by
any suitable norm, e.g., Lasso, group Lasso, order weighted Lasso, etc. In VAR setting with
correlated noise, although there is strong dependence over time and covariates, we establish
bounds on the non-asymptotic estimation error of
structured VAR parameters. The estimation error
is of the same order as that of the corresponding
Lasso-type estimator with independent samples,
and the analysis holds for any norm. Our analysis relies on results in generic chaining, subexponential martingales, and spectral representation of VAR models. Experimental results on
synthetic and real data with a variety of structures
are presented, validating theoretical results.

1. Introduction
The past decade has seen considerable progress on approaches to structured parameter estimation, especially in
the linear regression setting, where one considers regularized estimation problems of the form:
β̂ = argmin
β∈Rq

1
ky − Zβk22 + λM R(β) ,
M

MELNYK @ CS . UMN . EDU
BANERJEE @ CS . UMN . EDU

(1)

where {(yi , zi ), i = 1, . . . , M }, yi ∈ R, zi ∈ Rq , such
T T
T T
that y = [y1T , . . . , yM
] and Z = [z1T , . . . , zM
] , is
the training set of M independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.) samples, λM > 0 is a regularization
parameter, and R(·) denotes a suitable norm (Tibshirani,
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

The focus of the current paper is on structured estimation
in vector auto-regressive (VAR) models (Lutkepohl, 2007),
arguably the most widely used family of multivariate time
series models. VAR models have been applied widely,
ranging from describing the behavior of economic and financial time series (Tsay, 2005) to modeling the dynamical
systems (Ljung, 1998) and estimating brain function connectivity (Valdes-Sosa et al., 2005), among others. A VAR
model of order d is defined as
xt = A1 xt−1 + A2 xt−2 + · · · + Ad xt−d + t ,

(2)

where xt ∈ Rp denotes a multivariate time series, Ak ∈
Rp×p , k = 1, . . . , d are the parameters of the model, and
d ≥ 1 is the order of the model. In this work, we assume that the noise t ∈ Rp follows a Gaussian distribution, t ∼ N (0, Σ), with E(t Tt ) = Σ and E(t Tt+τ ) = 0,
for τ 6= 0. The VAR process is assumed to be stable and
stationary (Lutkepohl, 2007), while the noise covariance
matrix Σ is assumed to be positive definite with bounded
largest eigenvalue, i.e., Λmin (Σ) > 0 and Λmax (Σ) < ∞.
In the current context, the parameters {Ak } are assumed

