Interacting Particle Markov Chain Monte Carlo

Tom Rainforth1 *
Christian A. Naesseth2 *
Fredrik Lindsten3
Brooks Paige1
Jan-Willem van de Meent1
Arnaud Doucet1
Frank Wood1
∗ equal contribution
1
The University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom
2
Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden
3
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden

Abstract
We introduce interacting particle Markov chain
Monte Carlo (iPMCMC), a PMCMC method
based on an interacting pool of standard and conditional sequential Monte Carlo samplers. Like
related methods, iPMCMC is a Markov chain
Monte Carlo sampler on an extended space. We
present empirical results that show significant improvements in mixing rates relative to both noninteracting PMCMC samplers and a single PMCMC sampler with an equivalent memory and
computational budget. An additional advantage
of the iPMCMC method is that it is suitable for
distributed and multi-core architectures.

1. Introduction

TWGR @ ROBOTS . OX . AC . UK
CHRISTIAN . A . NAESSETH @ LIU . SE
FREDRIK . LINDSTEN @ IT. UU . SE
BROOKS @ ROBOTS . OX . AC . UK
JWVDM @ ROBOTS . OX . AC . UK
DOUCET @ STATS . OX . AC . UK
FWOOD @ ROBOTS . OX . AC . UK

The PG method was first introduced as an efficient Gibbs
sampler for latent variable models with static parameters
(Andrieu et al., 2010). Since then, the PG algorithm and the
extension by Lindsten et al. (2014) have found numerous
applications in e.g. Bayesian non-parametrics (Valera et al.,
2015; Tripuraneni et al., 2015), probabilistic programming
(Wood et al., 2014; van de Meent et al., 2015) and graphical
models (Everitt, 2012; Naesseth et al., 2014; 2015).
A drawback of PG is that it can be particularly adversely affected by path degeneracy in the CSMC step. Conditioning
on an existing trajectory means that whenever resampling
of the trajectories results in a common ancestor, this ancestor must correspond to this trajectory. Consequently, the
mixing of the Markov chain for the early steps in the state sequence can become very slow when the particle set typically
coalesces to a single ancestor during the CSMC sweep.

One particularly widely used PMCMC algorithm is particle
Gibbs (PG). The PG algorithm modifies the SMC step in
the PMCMC algorithm to sample the latent variables conditioned on an existing particle trajectory, resulting in what is
called a conditional sequential Monte Carlo (CSMC) step.

In this paper we propose the interacting particle Markov
chain Monte Carlo (iPMCMC) sampler. In iPMCMC we
run a pool of CSMC and unconditional SMC algorithms
as parallel processes that we refer to as nodes. After each
run of this pool, we apply successive Gibbs updates to the
indexes of the CSMC nodes, such that the indices of the
CSMC nodes changes. Hence, the nodes from which retained particles are sampled can change from one MCMC
iteration to the next. This lets us trade off exploration (SMC)
and exploitation (CSMC) to achieve improved mixing of the
Markov chain. Crucially, the pool provides numerous candidate indices at each Gibbs update. This gives a significantly
higher probability that an entirely new retained particle will
be “switched in” than in non-interacting alternatives.

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume 48.
Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

This interaction requires only minimal communication; each
node must report an estimate of the marginal likelihood and
receive a new role (SMC or CSMC) for the next sweep. This

MCMC methods are a fundamental tool for generating samples from a posterior density in Bayesian data analysis
(see e.g., Robert & Casella (2013)). Particle Markov chain
Monte Carlo (PMCMC) methods, introduced by Andrieu
et al. (2010), make use of sequential Monte Carlo (SMC)
algorithms (Gordon et al., 1993; Doucet et al., 2001) to
construct efficient proposals for the MCMC sampler.

