Clustering High Dimensional Categorical Data via Topographical Features

Chao Chen
CUNY Queens College & Graduate Center, New York, NY, USA

CHAO . CHEN @ QC . CUNY. EDU

Novi Quadrianto
SMiLe CLiNiC, University of Sussex, Brighton, UK

N.Q UADRIANTO @ SUSSEX . AC . UK

Abstract
Analysis of categorical data is a challenging
task. In this paper, we propose to compute topographical features of high-dimensional categorical data. We propose an efficient algorithm
to extract modes of the underlying distribution
and their attractive basins. These topographical
features provide a geometric view of the data
and can be applied to visualization and clustering of real world challenging datasets. Experiments show that our principled method outperforms state-of-the-art clustering methods while
also admits an embarrassingly parallel property.

1. Introduction
Categorical data analysis has been critical in many domains. In biomedical informatics, basic attributes of a patient include blood type, gender and race. Disease-specific
attributes include the subtypes of disease and the treatments
a patient has received. DNA/RNA sequence data have categorical values, that is, different nucleobases. These modern categorical data exhibit high dimensionality, insufficient samples and inhomogeneity. To handle these challenges, new methods for visualizing and exploring complex
datasets are crucially needed.
In this paper, we develop a method to characterize the
geometry of a categorical dataset by computing its topographical features, i.e., modes and their associated attractive basins. These features provide a geometric description
of a given dataset and naturally lead to practical tools for visualization and clustering. For a given data and an estimation of its underlying distribution, we compute modes, i.e.,
local maxima whose probability is bigger than all nearby
points. By exploiting modes, we then decompose the discrete domain into regions called the basins of attraction.
Within each basin of attraction, every point converges to
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

m1

p

m2

x
Figure 1: The topographical landscape of a distribution. There
are two modes, m1 and m2 . Their attractive basins are separated
by a valley (dashed line). Each data point converges to one of the
two modes following a discrete gradient ascent path.

the same mode as directed by a discrete version of gradient
ascent. See Figure 1 for a schematic illustration.
It is computationally prohibitive to compute all the
modes and their attractive basins. Instead, we take a datacentered approach and compute the discrete gradient ascent
paths, each of which starts from a data point and ends at
a mode. These paths associate data points with different
modes and form a natural clustering. The paths merging
into a same mode provide an outline of the attractive basin.
The computation of each discrete gradient ascent step can
be viewed as finding a neighboring point with the highest
probability. This is challenging as the neighborhood of a
high dimensional point can be of exponential size.
To address this issue, we propose to adopt the classic
tree-structured graphical model to approximate the underlying probabilistic density function from given data. We
leverage the tree structure of the model and develop a dynamic programming algorithm that finds the neighbor with
the highest probability efficiently. While the tree model
brings computational advantage, it also provides a satisfying description of high-dimensional data, as have been
proven theoretically and practically (Liu et al., 2011; Minka
& Qi, 2003). Our algorithm is efficient; given a tree model,
computing one gradient ascent step is linear to the dimension. The method is linear to the data size. But it is extremely easy to parallelize as we can compute gradient ascent paths for all data independently.

