Speeding up k-means by approximating Euclidean distances via block vectors

Thomas Bottesch1,2
Thomas Bühler1
Markus Kächele2
1
2

THOMAS . BOTTESCH @ AVIRA . COM
THOMAS . BUEHLER @ AVIRA . COM
MARKUS . KAECHELE @ UNI - ULM . DE

Avira Operations GmbH & Co. KG, Tettnang, Germany
Institute of Neural Information Processing, Ulm University, Ulm, Germany

Abstract
This paper introduces a new method to approximate Euclidean distances between points using
block vectors in combination with the Hölder inequality. By defining lower bounds based on the
proposed approximation, cluster algorithms can
be considerably accelerated without loss of quality. In extensive experiments, we show a considerable reduction in terms of computational time
in comparison to standard methods and the recently proposed Yinyang k-means. Additionally
we show that the memory consumption of the
presented clustering algorithm does not depend
on the number of clusters, which makes the approach suitable for large scale problems.

1. Introduction
The problem of finding meaningful clusters in large quantities of data is an essential task with a wide range of applications in data analysis and machine learning. Intuitively,
the clustering problem can be described as finding groups
of points which are similar to each other but are different
from the members of other groups. One of the most popular clustering techniques is k-means clustering. The standard algorithm for the k-means problem (Lloyd, 1982) has
been applied to a wide range of applications including image segmentation and compression (Kanungo et al., 2002),
information retrieval (Steinbach et al., 2000), and bioinformatics (Yeung et al., 2001). Among the reasons for the
popularity of Lloyd’s algorithm is its simplicity, geometric
intuition as well as its experimentally proven ability to find
meaningful clusters.
At the heart of the k-means algorithm is the computation of
distances between the points and the cluster centers. HowProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

ever, in a naı̈ve implementation of the algorithm, one would
need to compute the Euclidean distances between all points
and all cluster centers in the assignment step. For large
sample sizes, this becomes the main bottleneck and prevents the algorithm from being scalable to large datasets
and high dimensions. Moreover, note that the standard version of k-means is not adapted to large sparse datasets.
For this reason, recent research by several authors focused
on accelerating k-means. Their approaches can be divided
into two categories. The algorithms of the first category
try to find an approximate solution of the standard k-means
efficiently, see e.g. Philbin et al. (2007); Sculley (2010);
Wang et al. (2012). A second class of algorithms is exact
in the sense that it can be guaranteed that the same result
as standard k-means is achieved, given the same initialization. Examples of this type of methods are techniques
based on more efficient data structures (Alsabti, 1998; Pelleg & Moore, 1999; Kanungo et al., 2002) or methods utilizing the triangle inequality (Elkan, 2003; Hamerly, 2010;
Drake & Hamerly, 2012; Ding et al., 2015).
In this paper, we propose a set of exact optimization techniques for k-means which decrease the computational time
while guaranteeing the same results as standard k-means.
Our techniques are based on efficiently obtained lower
bounds on the distances to the cluster centers, allowing
us to skip corresponding distance calculations. In recent
research (Ding et al., 2015) it was shown that an initial
grouping of the cluster centers can be used to obtain an
efficient filtering mechanism to avoid redundant distance
calculations. This approach is known as Yinyang k-means.
We show that a similar technique is possible by utilizing a
grouping of the input dimensions, which will be referred to
as blockification. Thus, our approach can be seen as complementary to the one by Ding et al. (2015). Indeed, we will
see in the experiments that the best results are obtained by
combining the strengths of both methods.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section
2 contains an overview of the k-means algorithm and sev-

