Stochastically Transitive Models for Pairwise Comparisons:
Statistical and Computational Issues
Nihar B. Shah†
Sivaraman Balakrishnan]
Adityanand Guntuboyina⇤
Martin J. Wainwright†⇤
†
Dept. of EECS, ⇤ Dept. of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley
]
Dept. of Statistics, Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
There are various parametric models for analyzing pairwise comparison data, including the
Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) and Thurstone models, but their reliance on strong parametric assumptions is limiting. In this work, we study a
flexible model for pairwise comparisons, under
which the probabilities of outcomes are required
only to satisfy a natural form of stochastic transitivity. This class includes parametric models including the BTL and Thurstone models as special
cases, but is considerably more general. We provide various examples of models in this broader
stochastically transitive class for which classical parametric models provide poor fits. Despite
this greater flexibility, we show that the matrix
of probabilities can be estimated at the same rate
as in standard parametric models. On the other
hand, unlike in the BTL and Thurstone models,
computing the minimax-optimal estimator in the
stochastically transitive model is non-trivial, and
we explore various computationally tractable alternatives. We show that a simple singular value
thresholding algorithm is statistically consistent
but does not achieve the minimax rate. We then
propose and study algorithms that achieve the
minimax rate over interesting sub-classes of the
full stochastically transitive class. We complement our theoretical results with thorough numerical simulations.

1. Introduction
Pairwise comparison data is ubiquitous and arises naturally
in a variety of applications, including tournament play, votProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

NIHAR @ EECS . BERKELEY. EDU
SIVA @ STAT. CMU . EDU
ADITYA @ STAT. BERKELEY. EDU
WAINWRIG @ BERKELEY. EDU

ing, online search rankings, and ad placement problems.
In rough terms, given a set of n objects, and a collection of possibly inconsistent comparisons between pairs of
these objects, the goal is to aggregate these comparisons
in order to perform effective statistical inference on various underlying properties of the population. A particular
property of interest is the underlying pairwise comparison
probabilities—that is, the probability that object i is preferred to object j in a pairwise comparison. The BradleyTerry-Luce (Bradley & Terry, 1952; Luce, 1959) and Thurstone (Thurstone, 1927) models are mainstays in analyzing
this type of pairwise comparison data. These models are
parametric in nature: more specifically, they assume the
existence of an n-dimensional weight vector that measures
the quality or strength of each item. The pairwise comparison probabilities are then determined via some fixed
(parametric) function of the qualities of the pair of objects.
Estimation in these models reduces to estimating the underlying weight vector, and a large body of prior work has
focused on these models (see, e.g., Negahban et al. 2012;
Hajek et al. 2014; Shah et al. 2016a). These models however, enforce strong relationships on the pairwise comparison probabilities that often fail to hold in real applications.
Various papers (Davidson & Marschak, 1959; McLaughlin
& Luce, 1965; Tversky, 1972; Ballinger & Wilcox, 1997)
have provided experimental results in which these parametric modeling assumptions fail to hold.
Our focus in this paper is on models with roots in social science and psychology (e.g., see Fishburn 1973 for
an overview), where the only coherence assumption made
on the pairwise comparison probabilities is that of strong
stochastic transitivity, or SST for short. These models
include parametric models as special cases but are considerably more general. The SST model is validated by
several empirical analyses in a long line of work (Davidson & Marschak, 1959; McLaughlin & Luce, 1965; Tversky, 1972; Ballinger & Wilcox, 1997). The conclusion of Ballinger & Wilcox (1997) is especially strongly
worded:

