A Superlinearly-Convergent Proximal Newton-Type Method for the
Optimization of Finite Sums

Anton Rodomanov
ANTON . RODOMANOV @ GMAIL . COM
Higher School of Economics, Faculty of Computer Science, 125319, Kochnovsky Proezd, 3, Moscow, RUSSIA
Dmitry Kropotov
DMITRY. KROPOTOV @ GMAIL . COM
Lomonosov Moscow State University, 119991, CMC Faculty, Leninskie Gory, 1, Moscow, RUSSIA

Abstract
We consider the problem of optimizing the
strongly convex sum of a finite number of convex
functions. Standard algorithms for solving this
problem in the class of incremental/stochastic
methods have at most a linear convergence rate.
We propose a new incremental method whose
convergence rate is superlinear – the Newtontype incremental method (NIM). The idea of the
method is to introduce a model of the objective with the same sum-of-functions structure and
further update a single component of the model
per iteration. We prove that NIM has a superlinear local convergence rate and linear global convergence rate. Experiments show that the method
is very effective for problems with a large number of functions and a small number of variables.

1. Introduction
In this paper we consider the following strongly convex unconstrained optimization problem:
#
"
n
1X
min φ(x) :=
fi (x) + h(x) ,
(1)
n i=1
x∈Rd
where all fi : Rd → R are twice continuously differentiable convex functions and h : Rd → R is convex, but not
necessarily differentiable. We also assume that for function h(x) we have access to some efficient implementation
of its proximal mapping


1
(2)
proxh (x) := argmin h(y) + ky − xk2 .
2
y∈Rd
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

A typical example of problem (1) is regularized empirical risk minimisation for training a machine learning algorithm. In this case the variables x are the parameters of
the model, fi (x) measures the error of the model on the ith
training sample and h(x) is a regularizer, e.g. l1 - or l1 /l2 norm. Since the objective φ is supposed to be strongly convex, it has the unique minimizer which we denote by x∗ .
We consider the case when the number of functions n may
be very large. In this situation for minimizing φ it is convenient to use incremental optimization methods (Bertsekas,
2011) since the complexity of their iteration does not depend on n. Unlike classical optimization methods which
process all the n functions at every iteration, incremental
methods in each iteration work only with a single component fi 1 . If each incremental iteration tends to make
reasonable progress in some “average” sense, then an incremental method may significantly outperform its nonincremental counterpart (Bertsekas, 2011).
There is a large body of work in the field of incremental optimization methods (Byrd et al., 2014; Bordes et al., 2009;
Schraudolph et al., 2007). They all can be divided into two
groups depending on their rate of convergence.
The first group contains the stochastic gradient method
(SGD) and other methods with iterations of the form,
xk+1 = proxh (xk − αk Bk ∇fik (xk )), where Bk is some
scaling matrix. For instance, in SGD Bk is just the identity matrix; in methods oBFGS and oLBFGS (Schraudolph et al., 2007), the matrix Bk is set to a quasiNewton estimate of the inverse Hessian; in method SGDQN (Bordes et al., 2009) the matrix Bk is a diagonal matrix whose entries are estimated from the secant equation;
method SQN (Byrd et al., 2014) is an advanced version
of oLBFGS; instead of estimating the gradient difference
∇f (xk+1 ) − ∇f (xk ) by subtracting two stochastic gradi1

Usually all the functions fi are grouped in small subsets
called mini-batches with further processing of one mini-batch per
incremental iteration

