A Kronecker-factored approximate Fisher matrix for convolution layers
Roger Grosse
James Martens
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto

Abstract
Second-order optimization methods such as natural gradient descent have the potential to speed
up training of neural networks by correcting for
the curvature of the loss function. Unfortunately,
the exact natural gradient is impractical to compute for large models, and most approximations
either require an expensive iterative procedure
or make crude approximations to the curvature.
We present Kronecker Factors for Convolution
(KFC), a tractable approximation to the Fisher
matrix for convolutional networks based on a
structured probabilistic model for the distribution
over backpropagated derivatives. Similarly to the
recently proposed Kronecker-Factored Approximate Curvature (K-FAC), each block of the approximate Fisher matrix decomposes as the Kronecker product of small matrices, allowing for efficient inversion. KFC captures important curvature information while still yielding comparably
efficient updates to stochastic gradient descent
(SGD). We show that the updates are invariant
to commonly used reparameterizations, such as
centering of the activations. In our experiments,
approximate natural gradient descent with KFC
was able to train convolutional networks several
times faster than carefully tuned SGD. Furthermore, it was able to train the networks in 10-20
times fewer iterations than SGD, suggesting its
potential applicability in a distributed setting.

1. Introduction
Despite advances in optimization, most neural networks are
still trained using variants of stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) with momentum. It has been suggested that natural gradient descent (Amari, 1998) could greatly speed up
optimization because it accounts for the geometry of the
optimization landscape and has desirable invariance properties. (See Martens (2014) for a review.) Unfortunately,
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

RGROSSE @ CS . TORONTO . EDU
JMARTENS @ CS . TORONTO . EDU

computing the exact natural gradient is intractable for large
networks, as it requires solving a large linear system involving the Fisher matrix, whose dimension is the number
of parameters (potentially tens of millions for modern architectures). Approximations to the natural gradient typically either impose very restrictive structure on the Fisher
matrix (e.g. LeCun et al., 1998; Le Roux et al., 2008) or
require expensive iterative procedures to compute each update, analogously to approximate Newton methods (e.g.
Martens, 2010). An ongoing challenge has been to develop
a curvature matrix approximation which reflects enough
structure to yield high-quality updates, while introducing
minimal computational overhead beyond the standard gradient computations.
Much progress in machine learning has been driven by
the development of structured probabilistic models whose
independence structure allows for efficient computations,
yet which still capture important dependencies between the
variables of interest. In our case, since the Fisher matrix is the covariance of the backpropagated log-likelihood
derivatives, we are interested in modeling the distribution
over these derivatives. The model must support efficient
computation of the inverse covariance, as this is what’s
required to compute the natural gradient. Recently, the
Factorized Natural Gradient (FANG) (Grosse & Salakhutdinov, 2015) and Kronecker-Factored Approximate Curvature (K-FAC) (Martens & Grosse, 2015) methods exploited probabilistic models of the derivatives to efficiently
compute approximate natural gradient updates. In its simplest version, K-FAC approximates each layer-wise block
of the Fisher matrix as the Kronecker product of two much
smaller matrices. These (very large) blocks can then be
can be tractably inverted by inverting each of the two factors. K-FAC was shown to greatly speed up the training of
deep autoencoders. However, its underlying probabilistic
model assumed fully connected networks with no weight
sharing, rendering the method inapplicable to two architectures which have recently revolutionized many applications of machine learning — convolutional networks (LeCun et al., 1989; Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and recurrent neural networks (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Sutskever
et al., 2014).
We introduce Kronecker Factors for Convolution (KFC), an
approximation to the Fisher matrix for convolutional net-

