`1 -regularized Neural Networks are Improperly Learnable in Polynomial Time

Yuchen Zhang
Jason D. Lee
Michael I. Jordan
Department of EECS, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

Abstract
We study the improper learning of multi-layer
neural networks. Suppose that the neural network to be learned has k hidden layers and that
the `1 -norm of the incoming weights of any neuron is bounded by L. We present a kernel-based
method, such that with probability at least 1 − δ,
it learns a predictor whose generalization error is
at most  worse than that of the neural network.
The sample complexity and the time complexity
of the presented method are polynomial in the
input dimension and in (1/, log(1/δ), F (k, L)),
where F (k, L) is a function depending on (k, L)
and on the activation function, independent of
the number of neurons. The algorithm applies
to both sigmoid-like activation functions and
ReLU-like activation functions. It implies that
any sufficiently sparse neural network is learnable in polynomial time.

1. Introduction
Neural networks have been successfully applied in many
areas of artificial intelligence, such as image classification,
face recognition, speech recognition and natural language
processing. Practical successes have been driven by the
rapid growth in the size of data sets and the increasing
availability of large-scale parallel and distributed computing platforms. Examples of recent work in this area include (Le, 2013; Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Chen & Manning,
2014; Dahl et al., 2013; Hinton et al., 2012).
The theoretical understanding of learning in neural networks has lagged the practical successes. It is known that
any smooth function can be approximated by a network
with just one hidden layer (Barron, 1993), but training such
a network is NP-hard (Blum & Rivest, 1992). In practice,
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

YUCZHANG @ EECS . BERKELEY. EDU
JASONDLEE @ BERKELEY. EDU
JORDAN @ CS . BERKELEY. EDU

people use optimization algorithms such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) to train neural networks. Although
strong theoretical results are available for SGD in the setting of convex objective functions, there are few such results in the nonconvex setting of neural networks. While it
is possible to transform the neural network training problem to a convex optimization problem involving an infinite
number of variables (Bengio et al., 2005), the infinitude of
variables means that there is no longer a guarantee that the
learning algorithm will terminate in polynomial time.
Several recent papers have risen to the challenge of establishing polynomial-time learnability results for neural
networks. These papers necessarily (given that the problem is NP-hard) introduce additional assumptions or relaxations. For instance, one may assume that the data is in
fact generated by the neural network. Under this assumption, Arora et al. (2013) study the recovery of denoising
auto-encoders which are represented by multi-layer neural
networks. They assume that the top-layer values of the network are randomly generated and all network weights are
randomly drawn from {−1, 1}. As a consequence, the bottom layer generates a sequence of random observations using which the algorithm can recover the network weights.
The algorithm has polynomial-time complexity and is capable of learning random networks that are drawn from
a specific distribution. However, in practice people want
to learn deterministic networks that encode data-dependent
representations.
Sedghi & Anandkumar (2014) study the supervised learning of neural networks under the assumption that the data
distribution has a score function that is known in advance.
They show that if the input dimension is large enough and
the network is sparse enough, then the first network layer
can be learned by a polynomial-time algorithm. Learning
the deeper layers remains as an open problem. In addition,
their method assumes that the network weights are randomly drawn from a Bernoulli-Gaussian distribution. More
recently, Janzamin et al. (2015) propose another algorithm
based on the score function that removes the restrictions of
Sedghi & Anandkumar (2014). The assumption in this case

