Deep Gaussian Processes for Regression using Approximate Expectation
Propagation

Thang D. Bui1
José Miguel Hernández-Lobato2
Daniel Hernández-Lobato3
Yingzhen Li1
Richard E. Turner1
1
University of Cambridge, 2 Harvard University, 3 Universidad Autónoma de Madrid

Abstract
Deep Gaussian processes (DGPs) are multilayer hierarchical generalisations of Gaussian
processes (GPs) and are formally equivalent to
neural networks with multiple, infinitely wide
hidden layers. DGPs are nonparametric probabilistic models and as such are arguably more
flexible, have a greater capacity to generalise,
and provide better calibrated uncertainty estimates than alternative deep models. This paper develops a new approximate Bayesian learning scheme that enables DGPs to be applied to a
range of medium to large scale regression problems for the first time. The new method uses an
approximate Expectation Propagation procedure
and a novel and efficient extension of the probabilistic backpropagation algorithm for learning.
We evaluate the new method for non-linear regression on eleven real-world datasets, showing
that it always outperforms GP regression and is
almost always better than state-of-the-art deterministic and sampling-based approximate inference methods for Bayesian neural networks. As
a by-product, this work provides a comprehensive analysis of six approximate Bayesian methods for training neural networks.

1

Introduction

Gaussian Processes (GPs) are powerful nonparametric distributions over continuous functions that can be used
for both supervised and unsupervised learning problems
(Rasmussen & Williams, 2005). In this article, we
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

TDB 40@ CAM . AC . UK
JMH @ SEAS . HARVARD . EDU
DANIEL . HERNANDEZ @ UAM . ES
YL 494@ CAM . AC . UK
RET 26@ CAM . AC . UK

study a multi-layer hierarchical generalisation of GPs or
deep Gaussian Processes (DGPs) (Damianou & Lawrence,
2013) for supervised learning tasks. A GP is equivalent to
an infinitely wide neural network with single hidden layer
and similarly a DGP is a multi-layer neural network with
multiple infinitely wide hidden layers (Neal, 1995). The
mapping between layers in this type of network is parameterised by a GP, and, as a result, DGPs retain useful properties of GPs such as nonparametric modelling power and
well-calibrated predictive uncertainty estimates. In addition, DGPs employ a hierarchical structure of GP mappings
and therefore are arguably more flexible, have a greater capacity to generalise, and are able to provide better predictive performance (Damianou, 2015). This family of models
is attractive as it can also potentially discover layers of increasingly abstract data representations, in much the same
way as their deep parametric counterparts, but it can also
handle and propagate uncertainty in the hierarchy.
The addition of non-linear hidden layers can also potentially overcome practical limitations of shallow GPs. First,
modelling real-world complex datasets often requires rich,
hand-designed covariance functions. DGPs can perform input warping or dimensionality compression or expansion,
and automatically learn to construct a kernel that works
well for the data at hand. As a result, learning in this model
provides a flexible form of Bayesian kernel design. Second,
the functional mapping from inputs to outputs specified by
a DGP is non-Gaussian which is a more general and flexible modelling choice. Third, DGPs can repair damage done
by sparse approximations to the representational power of
each GP layer. For example, pseudo datapoint based approximation methods for DGPs trade model complexity for
a lower computational complexity of O(N LM 2 ) where N
is the number of datapoints, L is the number of layers, and
M is the number of pseudo datapoints. This complexity
scales quadratically in M whereas the dependence on the
number of layers L is only linear. Therefore, it can be

