Matrix Eigen-decomposition via Doubly Stochastic Riemannian Optimization

Zhiqiang Xu
Peilin Zhao
Jianneng Cao
Xiaoli Li
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore

Abstract
Matrix eigen-decomposition is a classic and
long-standing problem that plays a fundamental
role in scientific computing and machine learning. Despite some existing algorithms for this
inherently non-convex problem, the study remains inadequate for the need of large data nowadays. To address this gap, we propose a Doubly
Stochastic Riemannian Gradient EIGenSolver,
DSRG-EIGS, where the double stochasticity
comes from the generalization of the stochastic
Euclidean gradient ascent and the stochastic Euclidean coordinate ascent to Riemannian manifolds. As a result, it induces a greatly reduced
complexity per iteration, enables the algorithm to
completely avoid the matrix inversion, and consequently makes it well-suited to large-scale applications. We theoretically analyze its convergence properties and empirically validate it on
real-world datasets. Encouraging experimental
results demonstrate its advantages over the deterministic counterpart.

1. Introduction
Matrix eigen-decomposition, aiming at a group of top
eigenvectors of a given matrix (Golub & Van Loan, 1996),
has found widespread applications in many areas of
scientific and engineering computing, e.g., numerical
computation (Press et al., 2007) and structure analysis
(Torbjorn Ringertz, 1997)). Particularly, it plays a fundamental role in many machine learning tasks, such
as spectral clustering (Ng et al., 2002), dimensionality reduction (Jolliffe, 2002), and kernel approximation
(Drineas & Mahoney, 2005), etc. Despite the great importance of this problem, existing solutions, i.e., eigenProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

XUZQ @ I 2 R . A - STAR . EDU . SG
ZHAOP @ I 2 R . A - STAR . EDU . SG
CAOJN @ I 2 R . A - STAR . EDU . SG
XLLI @ I 2 R . A - STAR . EDU . SG

solvers, have been relatively lacking. Among them, the
power method (Golub & Van Loan, 1996) and the (block)
Lanczos algorithm (Parlett, 1998) belong to well-known
eigensolvers, while randomized SVD (Halko et al., 2011)
and online learning of eigenvectors (Garber et al., 2015)
are recently proposed. In addition, matrix eigendecompostion can be formulated as a quadratically constrained
quadratic program, and thus can be addressed from the
optimization perspective, for example, the trace penalty
minimization (Wen et al., 2013). Notably, its non-convex
constraint set constitutes a Riemannian manifold, or more
precisely, Stiefel manifold, which turns it into a Riemannian optimization problem that can be tackled by the methods of optimization on manifolds (Edelman et al., 1999;
Absil et al., 2008; Wen & Yin, 2013). However, most of
existing eigensolvers belong to batch learning, i.e., using
the entire dataset at each update step, and thus are not
suitable to large-scale matrices, especially those unable to
completely fit into memory. To address this issue, we usually could resort to stochastic optimization, which enables
the algorithm to work through access to only a subset of the
data each time. And stochastic algorithms often converge
faster than their batch counterparts even if no memory issue
arises.
To overcome the limitations of existing batch learning
eigensolvers, we propose a doubly stochastic Riemannian
gradient method to obtain the DSRG-EIGS algorithm, a
new eigensolver. The method simultaneously generalizes
the stochastic gradient ascent (SGA) and the stochastic coordinate ascent (SCA) (Nesterov, 2012) from the Euclidean
space to the Riemannian space, and arrives at a combination of their Riemannian counterparts: stochastic Riemannian gradient ascent (SRGA) and stochastic Riemannian
coordinate ascent (SRCA). Specifically, SRGA works by
sampling data sub-matrices, while SRCA proceeds by sampling column blocks of Riemannian gradient coordinates in
our problem. Both methods keep iterates remaining on the
manifold and stochastic Riemannian gradients staying in
the tangent space during iterations. They greatly reduce
the complexity per iteration of the algorithm, especially for

