Fast Constrained Submodular Maximization:
Personalized Data Summarization
Baharan Mirzasoleiman
ETH Zurich

BAHARANM @ INF. ETHZ . CH

Ashwinkumar Badanidiyuru
Google

ASHWINKUMARBV @ GOOGLE . COM

Amin Karbasi
Yale University

AMIN . KARBASI @ YALE . EDU

Abstract
Can we summarize multi-category data based on
user preferences in a scalable manner? Many
utility functions used for data summarization satisfy submodularity, a natural diminishing returns
property. We cast personalized data summarization as an instance of a general submodular maximization problem subject to multiple
constraints. We develop the first practical and
FAst coNsTrained submOdular Maximization algorithm, FANTOM, with strong theoretical guarantees. FANTOM maximizes a submodular function (not necessarily monotone) subject to the intersection of a p-system and l knapsacks constrains. It achieves a (1+)(p+1)(2p+2l+1)/p
approximation guarantee with only O( nrp log(n)
)

query complexity (n and r indicate the size of
the ground set and the size of the largest feasible solution, respectively). We then show how
we can use FANTOM for personalized data summarization. In particular, a p-system can model
different aspects of data, such as categories or
time stamps, from which the users choose. In
addition, knapsacks encode users’ constraints including budget or time. In our set of experiments, we consider several concrete applications:
movie recommendation over 11K movies, personalized image summarization with 10K images, and revenue maximization on the YouTube
social networks with 5000 communities. We observe that FANTOM constantly provides the highest utility against all the baselines.
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
A tremendous amount of data is generated every second,
every day by tens of social media and millions of users empowering them. Recent statistics indicate that every minute
Instagram users post nearly 220,000 new photos, YouTube
users upload 72 hours of video, and Facebook users share
nearly 2.5 million pieces of content. Organizing and making sense of big data has become one of today’s major challenges in machine learning. Data summarization, in the
form of extracting a representative subset of data points, is
a natural way to obtain a faithful description of the whole
data. In general, a representative summary has two requirements [Tschiatschek et al., 2014; Dasgupta et al., 2013]:
• Coverage: A good summary is concise so that it contains elements from distinct parts of data. Naturally, a
concise summary minimizes information loss.
• Diversity: A good summary is compact so that it does
not contain elements that are too similar to each other.
Very often, the utility/scoring function f capturing the coverage or diversity of a subset w.r.t. the entire dataset E satisfies submodularity, an intuitive diminishing returns condition [Lin and Bilmes, 2011; Mirzasoleiman et al., 2013].
In words, adding a new element to a smaller summary, adds
more value than adding the same element to its superset.
Note that coverage and diversity could sometimes be conflicting requirements: higher coverage usually means selecting more elements whereas higher diversity penalizes
having similar elements in the summary and prevents the
summary from growing too large. Depending on the application, a good summary can trade off between coverage and diversity by putting more emphasis on one or
the other. By design, utility functions expressing coverage are monotone as it is quit natural to assume that

