Importance Sampling Tree for Large-scale Empirical Expectation

Olivier Canévet∗
Cijo Jose∗
François Fleuret
Idiap Research Institute, Martigny, Switzerland
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland

Abstract
We propose a tree-based procedure inspired by
the Monte-Carlo Tree Search that dynamically
modulates an importance-based sampling to prioritize computation, while getting unbiased estimates of weighted sums. We apply this generic
method to learning on very large training sets,
and to the evaluation of large-scale SVMs.
The core idea is to reformulate the estimation of
a score – whether a loss or a prediction estimate –
as an empirical expectation, and to use such a tree
whose leaves carry the samples to focus efforts
over the problematic “heavy weight” ones.
We illustrate the potential of this approach on
three problems: to improve Adaboost and a
multi-layer perceptron on 2D synthetic tasks
with several million points, to train a large-scale
convolution network on several millions deformations of the CIFAR data-set, and to compute
the response of a SVM with several hundreds of
thousands of support vectors. In each case, we
show how it either cuts down computation by
more than one order of magnitude and/or allows
to get better loss estimates.

1. Introduction
Virtually every single machine learning algorithm relies
on data-based empirical expectations, either to estimate a
loss, or the response of a predictor (see the examples in
§ 3.1). The larger the data-set, the more accurate the prediction, and many state-of-the-art results have been obtained
by enriching already very large sets using synthetic perturbations, resulting in hundreds of millions of labelled samProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).
∗
Authors contributed equally to the paper

OLIVIER . CANEVET @ IDIAP. CH

CIJO . JOSE @ IDIAP. CH
FRANCOIS . FLEURET @ IDIAP. CH

ples (Krizhevsky et al., 2012).
An empirical expectation takes the form of a sum of a quantity evaluated on many data-points, and in practice most of
these summed terms are negligible. In training it is because most of the samples are far from the boundary between populations, and get a “trivially correct answer”, in
test it is because the prediction on a test point is modulated
only by its immediate neighbors in the training set. For example in the case of Gaussian kernel SVM trained on large
data-sets, even though the model has very large number of
support vectors only few of them will actually matter in the
final decision score.
Despite this well known state of affairs, algorithms still
rely on an exhaustive loop through the samples. Some
approaches have been developed to prioritize samples after they have already been seen (Kalal et al., 2008; Fleuret
& Geman, 2008), or in subsets sampled uniformly (Loosli
et al., 2007), but they do not use structures given a priori
over the said samples, combining it with statistical observations made over those already observed to reject groups
without looking at them.
In some sense, the problem at hand is related to the choice
of an optimal move in a strategy game. This has been tackled traditionally with branch-and-bound approaches, going
down the tree of possible choices, and discarding sub-trees
that can be proven to be bad. This type of methods however
founds its limits with games of very large combinatorial
complexity. State-of-the-art performance for the game of
Go for instance is obtained with Monter-Carlo Tree Search
(Gelly et al., 2006) which at the same time samples and
optimizes the sampling over configurations.
The technique we propose, dubbed as IST for “Importance Sampling Tree”, similarly, at the same time, samples
leaves, provides a correcting factor to compensate for its
sampling bias, and optimizes inner statistical estimates to
improve sampling over time.

