A Simple and Strongly-Local Flow-Based Method for Cut Improvement

Nate Veldt
Mathematics Department, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47906

lveldt@purdue.edu

David F. Gleich
Computer Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47906

dgleich@purdue.edu

Michael W. Mahoney
mmahoney@stat.berkeley.edu
International Computer Science Institute and Dept. of Statistics, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720

Abstract
Many graph-based learning problems can be cast
as finding a good set of vertices nearby a seed set,
and a powerful methodology for these problems
is based on maximum flows. We introduce and
analyze a new method for locally-biased graphbased learning called SimpleLocal, which finds
good conductance cuts near a set of seed vertices.
An important feature of our algorithm is that it is
strongly-local, meaning it does not need to explore the entire graph to find cuts that are locally
optimal. This method solves the same objective as existing strongly-local flow-based methods, but it enables a simple implementation. We
also show how it achieves localization through
an implicit `1 -norm penalty term. As a flowbased method, our algorithm exhibits several advantages in terms of cut optimality and accurate
identification of target regions in a graph. We
demonstrate the power of SimpleLocal by solving problems on a 467 million edge graph based
on an MRI scan.

1. Introduction and Related Work
Finding good conductance cuts near a set of seed vertices
in a graph is a well-studied and widely-applied problem in
graph-based learning. Such an algorithm is strongly-local
if its runtime depends only on the size of the seed set or on
the size of the output set rather than on the size of the entire
graph. Seeded PageRank and other spectral and randomwalk methods give these guarantees. While these methods
Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

provide nice approximation guarantees, they fail to give optimal solutions and often exhibit “sloppy” boundaries when
it comes to solving label propagation and community detection problems.
Flow-based methods exhibit numerous advantages including the ability to provide exact optimal solutions in some
cases. The first strongly local flow-based method was introduced by Orecchia & Zhu (2014), which exhibits a fast
runtime but relies on a complicated variation of Dinic’s algorithm for maximum flows, making it difficult to use in
practice. In this paper we provide a new strongly-local algorithm that provides the same optimality guarantees while
offering the flexibility of employing any max-flow algorithm as a subroutine. While our algorithm’s theoretical
runtime is weaker than Orecchia & Zhu (2014), we provide
implementation details for it and demonstrate its ability to
find low-conductance cuts in a large real-world dataset.
Graph-based learning. Graph-based learning is a recurring problem in machine learning where we are given
a graph and some information about the nodes of this
graph and the task is to infer the information on the unlabeled nodes. This is an instance of semi-supervised learning (Blum & Chawla, 2001; Zhu et al., 2003) or transductive learning (Joachims, 2003). Algorithms for these problems on graphs are often called label propagation methods due to their interpretation as spreading labels around a
graph (Zhu et al., 2003; Fujiwara & Irie, 2014). Related
problems include guided image segmentation (Mahoney
et al., 2012) and seeded community detection (Andersen
& Lang, 2006; Kloumann & Kleinberg, 2014), where we
are given a set of sample pixels or nodes and the goal is to
find the rest.
Algorithms for graph-based learning largely split into three
types: flow-based methods, spectral methods, and graphbased heuristics. Some of the seminal papers in semi-

