Inference Networks for Sequential Monte Carlo in Graphical Models

Brooks Paige
Frank Wood
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford

Abstract
We introduce a new approach for amortizing inference in directed graphical models by learning
heuristic approximations to stochastic inverses,
designed specifically for use as proposal distributions in sequential Monte Carlo methods. We
describe a procedure for constructing and learning a structured neural network which represents
an inverse factorization of the graphical model,
resulting in a conditional density estimator that
takes as input particular values of the observed
random variables, and returns an approximation to
the distribution of the latent variables. This recognition model can be learned offline, independent
from any particular dataset, prior to performing
inference. The output of these networks can be
used as automatically-learned high-quality proposal distributions to accelerate sequential Monte
Carlo across a diverse range of problem settings.

1. Introduction
Recently proposed methods for Bayesian inference based
on sequential Monte Carlo (Doucet et al., 2001) have shown
themselves to provide state-of-the art results in applications
far broader than the traditional use of sequential Monte
Carlo (SMC) for filtering in state space models (Gordon
et al., 1993; Pitt and Shephard, 1999), with diverse application to factor graphs (Naesseth et al., 2014), hierarchical
Bayesian models (Lindsten et al., 2014), procedural generative graphics (Ritchie et al., 2015), and general probabilistic programs (Wood et al., 2014; Todeschini et al.,
2014). These are accompanied by complementary computational advances, including memory-efficient implementations (Jun and Bouchard-Côté, 2014), and highly-parallel
variants (Murray et al., 2014; Paige et al., 2014).
All these algorithms, however, share the need for specifying
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume 48.
Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

BROOKS @ ROBOTS . OX . AC . UK
FWOOD @ ROBOTS . OX . AC . UK

a series of proposal distributions, used to sample candidate
values at each stage of the algorithm. Sequential Monte
Carlo methods perform inference progressively, iteratively
targeting a sequence of intermediate distributions which culminates in a final target distribution. Well-chosen proposal
distributions for transitioning from one intermediate target
distribution to the next can lead to sample-efficient inference, and are necessary for practical application of these
methods to difficult inference problems. Theoretically optimal proposal distributions (Doucet et al., 2000; Cornebise
et al., 2008) are in general intractable, thus in practice implementing these algorithms requires either active (human)
work to design an appropriate proposal distribution prior
to sampling, or using an online estimation procedure to
approximate the optimal proposal during inference (as in
e.g. Van Der Merwe et al. (2000) or Cornebise et al. (2014)
for state-space models). In many cases, a baseline proposal
distribution which simulates from a prior distribution can be
used, analogous to the so-called bootstrap particle filter for
inference in state-space models; however, when confronted
with tightly peaked likelihoods (i.e. highly informative observations), proposing from the prior distribution may be
arbitrarily statistically inefficient (Del Moral and Murray,
2015). Furthermore, for some choices of sequences of densities there is no natural prior distribution, or even it may
not be available in closed form. All in all, the need to design
appropriate proposal distributions is a real impediment to
the automatic application of these SMC methods to new
models and problems.
This paper investigates how autoregressive neural network
models for modeling probability distributions (Bengio and
Bengio, 1999; Uria et al., 2013; Germain et al., 2015) can
be leveraged to automate the design of model-specific proposal distributions for sequential Monte Carlo. We propose
a method for learning proposal distributions for a given
probabilistic generative model offline, prior to performing
inference on any particular dataset. The learned proposals
can then be reused as desired, allowing SMC inference to be
performed quickly and efficiently for the same probabilistic
model, but for new data — that is, for new settings of the
observed random variables — once we have incurred the
up-front cost of learning the proposals.

