Gaussian quadrature for matrix inverse forms with applications
Chengtao Li
Suvrit Sra
Stefanie Jegelka
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Abstract
We present a framework for accelerating a spectrum of machine learning algorithms that require
computation of bilinear inverse forms u> A 1 u,
where A is a positive definite matrix and u a
given vector. Our framework is built on Gausstype quadrature and easily scales to large, sparse
matrices. Further, it allows retrospective computation of lower and upper bounds on u> A 1 u,
which in turn accelerates several algorithms. We
prove that these bounds tighten iteratively and
converge at a linear (geometric) rate. To our
knowledge, ours is the first work to demonstrate
these key properties of Gauss-type quadrature,
which is a classical and deeply studied topic.
We illustrate empirical consequences of our results by using quadrature to accelerate machine
learning tasks involving determinantal point processes and submodular optimization, and observe
tremendous speedups in several instances.

1. Introduction
Symmetric positive definite matrices arise in many areas
in a variety of guises: covariances, kernels, graph Laplacians, or otherwise. A basic computation with such matrices is evaluation of the bilinear form uT f (A)v, where f is
a matrix function and u, v are given vectors. If f (A) =
A 1 , we speak of computing a bilinear inverse form (BIF)
uT A 1 v. For example, with u=v=ei (ith canonical vector)
uT f (A)v = (A 1 )ii is the ith diagonal entry of the inverse.
In this paper, we are interested in efficiently computing
BIFs, primarily due to their importance in several machine
learning contexts, e.g., evaluation of Gaussian density at a
point, the Woodbury matrix inversion lemma, implementation of MCMC samplers for Determinantal Point ProProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

CTLI @ MIT. EDU
SUVRIT @ MIT. EDU
STEFJE @ MIT. EDU

cesses (D PP), computation of graph centrality measures,
and greedy submodular maximization (see Section 2).
When A is large, it is preferable to compute uT A 1 v iteratively rather than to first compute A 1 (using Cholesky) at
a cost of O(N 3 ) operations. One could think of using conjugate gradients to solve Ax = v approximately, and then
obtain uT A 1 v = uT x. But several applications require
precise bounds on numerical estimates to u> A 1 v (e.g.,
in MCMC based D PP samplers such bounds help decide
whether to accept or reject a transition in each iteration–see
Section 5.1), which necessitates a more finessed approach.
Gauss quadrature is one such approach. Originally proposed in (Gauss, 1815) for approximating integrals, Gaussand Gauss-type quadrature (i.e., Gauss-Lobatto (Lobatto,
1852) and Gauss-Radau (Radau, 1880) quadrature) have
since found application to bilinear forms including computation of uT A 1 v (Bai et al., 1996). Bai et al. also show
that Gauss and (right) Gauss-Radau quadrature yield lower
bounds, while Gauss-Lobatto and (left) Gauss-Radau yield
upper bounds on the BIF uT A 1 v.
However, despite its long history and voluminous existing work (see e.g., (Golub & Meurant, 2009)), our understanding of Gauss-type quadrature for matrix problems is
far from complete. For instance, it is not known whether
the bounds on BIFs improve with more quadrature iterations; nor is it known how the bounds obtained from Gauss,
Gauss-Radau and Gauss-Lobatto quadrature compare with
each other. We do not even know how fast the iterates of
Gauss-Radau or Gauss-Lobatto quadrature converge.
Contributions. We address all the aforementioned problems and make the following main contributions:
– We show that the lower and upper bounds generated by
Gauss-type quadrature monotonically approach the target value (Theorems 4 and 6; Corr. 7). Furthermore,
we show that for the same number of iterations, GaussRadau quadrature yields bounds superior to those given
by Gauss or Gauss-Lobatto, but somewhat surprisingly
all three share the same convergence rate.
– We prove linear convergence rates for Gauss-Radau and

