Deconstructing the Ladder Network Architecture

Mohammad Pezeshki∗
Linxi Fan?
Philémon Brakel∗
Aaron Courville∗†
Yoshua Bengio∗†
∗
Université de Montréal, ? Columbia University, † CIFAR

Abstract
The Ladder Network is a recent new approach
to semi-supervised learning that turned out to be
very successful. While showing impressive performance, the Ladder Network has many components intertwined, whose contributions are not
obvious in such a complex architecture. This paper presents an extensive experimental investigation of variants of the Ladder Network in which
we replaced or removed individual components
to learn about their relative importance. For
semi-supervised tasks, we conclude that the most
important contribution is made by the lateral connections, followed by the application of noise,
and the choice of what we refer to as the ‘combinator function’. As the number of labeled training examples increases, the lateral connections
and the reconstruction criterion become less important, with most of the generalization improvement coming from the injection of noise in each
layer. Finally, we introduce a combinator function that reduces test error rates on PermutationInvariant MNIST to 0.57% for the supervised setting, and to 0.97% and 1.0% for semi-supervised
settings with 1000 and 100 labeled examples, respectively.

1. Introduction
Labeling data sets is typically a costly task and in many
settings there are far more unlabeled examples than labeled
ones. Semi-supervised learning aims to improve the performance on some supervised learning problem by using information obtained from both labeled and unlabeled examples. Since the recent success of deep learning methods has
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

MOHAMMAD . PEZESHKI @ UMONTREAL . CA
LINXI . FAN @ COLUMBIA . EDU
PBPOP 3@ GMAIL . COM
AARON . COURVILE @ UMONTREAL . CA
YOSHUA . BENGIO @ UMONTREAL . CA

mainly relied on supervised learning based on very large labeled datasets, it is interesting to explore semi-supervised
deep learning approaches to extend the reach of deep learning to these settings.
Since unsupervised methods for pre-training layers of neural networks were an essential part of the first wave of
deep learning methods (Hinton et al., 2006; Vincent et al.,
2008; Bengio, 2009), a natural next step is to investigate how ideas inspired by Restricted Boltzmann Machine training and regularized autoencoders can be used for
semi-supervised learning. Examples of approaches based
on such ideas are the discriminative RBM (Larochelle &
Bengio, 2008) and a deep architecture based on semisupervised autoencoders that was used for document classification (Ranzato & Szummer, 2008). More recent examples of approaches for semi-supervised deep learning
are the semi-supervised Variational Autoencoder (Kingma
et al., 2014) and the Ladder Network (Rasmus et al., 2015)
which obtained very impressive, state of the art results
(1.13% error) on the MNIST handwritten digits classification benchmark using just 100 labeled training examples.
The Ladder Network adds an unsupervised component to
the supervised learning objective of a deep feedforward
network by treating this network as part of a deep stack
of denoising autoencoders or DAEs (Vincent et al., 2010)
that learns to reconstruct each layer (including the input)
based on a corrupted version of it, using feedback from upper levels. The term ’ladder’ refers to how this architecture
extends the stacked DAE in the way the feedback paths are
formed.
This paper is focusing on the design choices that lead to
the Ladder Network’s superior performance and tries to
disentangle them empirically. We identify some general
properties of the model that make it different from standard feedforward networks and compare various architectures to identify those properties and design choices that are
the most essential for obtaining good performance with the
Ladder Network. While the original authors of the Ladder

