Accurate Robust and Efficient Error Estimation for Decision Trees
Lixin Fan
Nokia Technologies, Valtatie 30, Tampere, Finland

Abstract
This paper illustrates a novel approach to the estimation of generalization error of decision tree
classifiers. We set out the study of decision tree
errors in the context of consistency analysis theory, which proved that the Bayes error can be
achieved only if when the number of data samples thrown into each leaf node goes to infinity. For the more challenging and practical case
where the sample size is finite or small, a novel
sampling error term is introduced in this paper to
cope with the small sample problem effectively
and efficiently. Extensive experimental results
show that the proposed error estimate is superior
to the well-known K-fold cross validation methods in terms of robustness and accuracy. Moreover it is orders of magnitudes more efficient than
cross validation methods.

1. Introduction
The aim of decision tree classifier learning is to construct
a tree-based predictive model which maps unseen data observations to designated class labels. Often the learning
process is driven by fitting a given set of training data and
corresponding class labels with recursively partitioned leaf
nodes e.g. as in (Breiman et al., 1984). While in recent
years a number of learning approaches have demonstrated
more advanced features and superior performances than decision tree approaches, the study of fundamental learning
mechanisms of decision trees still give deep insights into
the driving force of advanced learning algorithms e.g. random forest (Breiman, 2001). In particular the estimation of
the probability of classification errors on unseen data i.e.
the generalization error of a learned decision tree is of the
utmost importance.
It is well known that the generalization error of any learning
rules is bounded below by the Bayes error or Bayes risk. It
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

LIXIN . FAN @ NOKIA . COM

is also shown by Theorem 6.1 of (Devroye et al., 1996)
that the Bayes error is achieved for decision tree classifiers
if two conditions are satisfied: 1) the diameter of decision
tree leaf node cells decreases to infinitesimal, and 2) the
number of observations thrown into each leaf node goes
to infinity. While the asymptotic performance of a learned
decision tree is guaranteed by the Theorem, in this article
we address the open issue of how to estimate the generalization error when above two conditions are not fulfilled.
The goal to make estimation under such circumstances is
motivated by the unfortunate facts that a) the number of
data samples is often limited in practice, and b) even for
large datasets with millions of samples the small sample
problem may still persist in certain leaf nodes attached to
exceedingly long branches.
This paper shows that by applying the consistency analysis theory, one is able to decompose the upper bound of
generalization error into the quantized Bayes error and the
sampling error. We prove that the quantized Bayes error is
the minimal error bound that one can reach for a given set
of partitioning leaf nodes, no matter how node-wise class
posteriors are actually estimated. The upper bound of the
sampling error, on the other hand, is related to variances
and biases of estimated node-wise class posteriors, and inversely depends on the number of data samples thrown into
each leaf nodes. The resultant generalization error estimate, without resorting to explicit complexity analysis of
tree models, can be readily used to prevent overfitting of
deep decision trees.
It was shown on ten benchmark datasets that the proposed
generalization error estimate compared favourably with the
well-known K-fold cross validation methods in terms of
both robustness and accuracy (see Figure 1 for a summarized comparison). Moreover the proposed method is
orders of magnitudes more efficient than cross validation
methods, since repeated training of decision trees on validation datasets is no longer needed.
The layout of this paper is as follows. Section 2 reviews
related K-fold cross validation methods, and model complexity based error bounds. Section 3 lays down theoretic
foundation for the proposed generalization error estimate
from a consistency analysis point of view. Section 4 com-

