Non-negative Matrix Factorization under Heavy Noise

Chiranjib Bhattacharyya†
CHIRU @ CSA . IISC . ERNET. IN
Navin Goyal‡
NAVINGO @ MICROSOFT. COM
Ravindran Kannan‡
KANNAN @ MICROSOFT. COM
Jagdeep Pani†
PANI . JAGDEEP @ GMAIL . COM
† Department of Computer Science and Automation, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
‡ Microsoft Research India

Abstract
The Noisy Non-negative Matrix factorization
(NMF) is: given a data matrix A (d × n), find
non-negative matrices B, C (d × k, k × n respy.) so that A = BC + N , where N is a
noise matrix. Existing polynomial time algorithms with proven error guarantees require each
column N·,j to have l1 norm much smaller than
||(BC)·,j ||1 , which could be very restrictive. In
important applications of NMF such as Topic
Modeling as well as theoretical noise models (eg.
Gaussian with high σ), almost every column of
N·j violates this condition. We introduce the
heavy noise model which only requires the average noise over large subsets of columns to be
small. We initiate a study of Noisy NMF under
the heavy noise model. We show that our noise
model subsumes noise models of theoretical and
practical interest (for eg. Gaussian noise of maximum possible σ). We then devise an algorithm
TSVDNMF which under certain assumptions on
B, C, solves the problem under heavy noise. Our
error guarantees match those of previous algorithms. Our running time of O((n + d)2 k) is
substantially better than the O(n3 d) for the previous best. Our assumption on B is weaker than
the “Separability” assumption made by all previous results. We provide empirical justification
for our assumptions on C. We also provide the
first proof of identifiability (uniqueness of B) for
noisy NMF which is not based on separability
and does not use hard to check geometric conditions. Our algorithm outperforms earlier polynomial time algorithms both in time and error,
particularly in the presence of high noise.
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Let A be a d × n matrix (where each column, A·,j , is
a d dimensional data-point) with non-negative real entries.
Exact NMF is the problem of factoring A into the product
BC of two non-negative matrices, with k columns in B.
k is generally small. So, NMF would find the small number of “basis vectors” (columns of B) with each data point
a non-negative combination of them. This has led to the
applicability of NMF (Gillis, 2014).
There has been recent interest in developing polynomial
time bounded algorithms with proven error bounds under
specialized assumptions on the data (Arora et al., 2012;
Gillis & Luce, 2014; Recht et al., 2012; Rong & Zou,
2015). All such algorithms require separability assumption, first introduced in (Donoho & Stodden, 2003). An
NMF BC is separable if after a permutation of rows of A
and B, the top k rows of B form a non-singular diagonal
matrix D0 . Using separability (Donoho & Stodden, 2003)
showed that B is essentially identifiable (i.e., unique) given
A. (Arora et al., 2012) observed that if A has an exact separable NMF, and its rows are in general position, the rows
of A corresponding to D0 can be identified by solving d
Linear Programs and then B can be found. (Recht et al.,
2012) gave a clever reduction to a single linear program
in n2 variables. (Gillis & Luce, 2014) made important
theoretical and practical improvements to the Linear Program. (Rong & Zou, 2015) introduces subset separability,
a milder assumption than separability, but requires solving many convex programs. Algorithms based on Linear
and Convex programs are hard to scale (Gillis, 2014) because of their high complexity. Besides separability, all algorithms make the stronger assumption of reasonably large
diagonal entries in D0 .
In practice, A is not exactly factorable into BC, but A =
BC + N , where, N is the noise matrix. (As before, B, C
have non-negative entries, but N, A can have negative entries.) An algorithm for the Noisy NMF problem seeks to

