Algorithms for Optimizing the Ratio of Submodular Functions

Wenruo Bai
Rishabh Iyer
Kai Wei
Jeff Bilmes
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA

Abstract
We investigate a new optimization problem involving minimizing the Ratio of two Submodular
(RS) functions. We argue that this problem
occurs naturally in several real world applications.
We then show the connection between this
problem and several related problems including
minimizing the difference between submodular
functions (Iyer & Bilmes, 2012b; Narasimhan &
Bilmes, 2005), and to submodular optimization
subject to submodular constraints (Iyer & Bilmes,
2013). We show that RS optimization can be
solved with bounded approximation factors. We
also provide a hardness bound and show that our
tightest algorithm matches the lower bound up to
a log factor. Finally, we empirically demonstrate
the performance and good scalability properties
of our algorithms.

1. Introduction

WRBAI @ UW. EDU
RKIYER @ U . WASHINGTON . EDU
WEIKAI . HUST @ GMAIL . COM
BILMES @ UW. EDU

problems that have the following form:
Problem 1:

min

∅⊂X⊆V

f (X)
,
g(X)

(1)

where f and g are monotone non-decreasing submodu(A)
lar functions. We call the objective fg(A)
a ratio of submodular (RS) function. We do not require that either
f or g is normalized, we only assume f (∅) ≥ 0 and
g(∅) ≥ 0. We assume, w.l.o.g., that both f and g satisfy
f (v) > 0, g(v) > 0, ∀v ∈ V , since we may simply remove
any item v ∈ V for consideration if g(v) = 0 and add any
item v ∈ V to the solution if f (v) = 0. As a consequence
of this assumption and the monotonicity of f and g, we have
that f (A) > 0, g(A) > 0, ∀∅ ⊂ A ⊆ V .
We call this problem RS minimization. In Section 5, we
extend the algorithms here to handle non-monotone submodular functions. We also consider a related problem called
RS maximization:
Problem 2:

max

g(X)

∅⊂X⊆V f (X)

.

(2)

V

A set function f : 2 → R+ is said to be submodular
(Fujishige, 2005) if for all subsets S, T ⊆ V , it holds
that f (S) + f (T ) ≥ f (S ∪ T ) + f (S ∩ T ). Defining
f (j|S) , f (S ∪ j) − f (S) as the gain of j ∈ V in the
context of S ⊆ V , then f is submodular if and only if
f (j|S) ≥ f (j|T ) for all S ⊆ T and j ∈
/ T . The function
f is monotone iff f (j|S) ≥ 0, ∀j ∈
/ S, S ⊆ V . W.l.o.g.,
we assume the ground set is V = {1, 2, · · · , n}. While
general set function optimization is often intractable, many
forms of submodular function optimization can be solved
near optimally or even optimally in certain cases, and
hence submodularity is also often called the discrete analog
of convexity (Lovász, 1983). Submodularity, moreover,
is inherent in a large set of real-world machine learning
applications, therefore making them useful in practice.
In this paper, we study a new class of discrete optimization
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume 48.
Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

We observe that RS Minimization and RS Maximization are
equivalent, in that an algorithm for Problem 1 also solves
Problem 2. To be precise, given an α-approximation algorithm (α > 1) for Problem 1, one can achieve a 1/α
approximation for Problem 2, using the solution obtained
by the algorithm for Problem 1.
1.1. Applications
In the below, we describe how Problems 1 and 2 appear
naturally in several machine learning applications.
Maximizing the F-Measure in Information Retrieval:
Consider the problem where one is given a set U of objects
(e.g., documents, images etc.) which can be expressed as
a bag of words W . One can construct a bipartite graph
G(U, W, E), where U is the set of objects, W is the set of
words, and the edge eu,w ∈ E between the object u and the
word w exists if the word w is present in the object u. Define
a neighborhood function Γ : 2U → 2W on the bipartite

