Model-Free Trajectory Optimization
for Reinforcement Learning

Riad Akrour1
Abbas Abdolmaleki3
Hany Abdulsamad2
Gerhard Neumann1
1: CLAS, 2: IAS, TU Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany
3: IEETA, University of Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal

Abstract
Many of the recent Trajectory Optimization algorithms alternate between local approximation
of the dynamics and conservative policy update.
However, linearly approximating the dynamics
in order to derive the new policy can bias the update and prevent convergence to the optimal policy. In this article, we propose a new model-free
algorithm that backpropagates a local quadratic
time-dependent Q-Function, allowing the derivation of the policy update in closed form. Our policy update ensures exact KL-constraint satisfaction without simplifying assumptions on the system dynamics demonstrating improved performance in comparison to related Trajectory Optimization algorithms linearizing the dynamics.

1. Introduction
Trajectory Optimization methods based on stochastic optimal control (Todorov, 2006; Theodorou et al., 2009;
Todorov & Tassa, 2009) have been very successful in learning high dimensional controls in complex settings such as
end-to-end control of physical systems (Levine & Abbeel,
2014). These methods are based on a time-dependent linearization of the dynamics model around the mean trajectory in order to obtain a closed form update of the policy as
a Linear-Quadratic Regulator (LQR). This linearization is
then repeated locally for the new policy at every iteration.
However, the linearization of the dynamics might induce a
bias and impede the algorithm from converging to the optimal policy. To circumvent this limitation, we propose in
this paper a novel model-free trajectory optimization algoProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

AKROUR @ IAS . TU - DARMSTADT. DE
ABBAS . A @ UA . PT
ABDULSAMAD @ IAS . TU - DARMSTADT. DE
NEUMANN @ IAS . TU - DARMSTADT. DE

rithm (MOTO) couched in the approximate policy iteration
framework. At each iteration, a Q-Function is estimated
locally around the current trajectory distribution using a
time-dependent quadratic function. Afterward, the policy
is updated according to a new information theoretic formulation that bounds a KL-divergence in closed form.
MOTO is well suited for high dimensional state space and
continuous action control problems. The policy is represented by a time-dependent stochastic linear-feedback controller which is updated by a Q-Function propagated backward in time. We extend the work of (Abdolmaleki et al.,
2015), which was proposed in the domain of stochastic
search (having no notion of state space nor of sequential
decisions), to that of sequential decision making and show
that our policy class can be updated under a KL-constraint
in closed form, when the learned Q-Function is a quadratic
function of the state and action space. In order to maximize sample efficiency we rely on importance sampling to
reuse transition samples from policies of all time-steps and
all previous iterations in a principled way. MOTO is able
to solve complex control problems despite the simplicity of
the Q-Function thanks to two key properties: i) the learned
Q-Function is fitted to samples of the current policy, which
ensures that the function is valid locally and ii) the closed
form update of the policy ensures that the KL-constraint is
satisfied exactly irrespective of the number of samples or
the non-linearity of the dynamics, which ensures that the
Q-Function is used locally.
The experimental section demonstrates that on tasks with
highly non-linear dynamics MOTO outperforms similar
methods that rely on a linearization of these dynamics. Additionally, it is shown on a simulated Robot Table Tennis Task that MOTO is able to scale to high dimensional
tasks while keeping the sample complexity relatively low;
amenable to a direct application to a physical system.

