Estimation from Indirect Supervision with Linear Moments
Aditi Raghunathan
Roy Frostig
John Duchi
Percy Liang
Stanford University, Stanford, CA

Abstract
In structured prediction problems where we have
indirect supervision of the output, maximum
marginal likelihood faces two computational obstacles: non-convexity of the objective and intractability of even a single gradient computation. In this paper, we bypass both obstacles for a
class of what we call linear indirectly-supervised
problems. Our approach is simple: we solve a
linear system to estimate sufficient statistics of
the model, which we then use to estimate parameters via convex optimization. We analyze the
statistical properties of our approach and show
empirically that it is effective in two settings:
learning with local privacy constraints and learning from low-cost count-based annotations.

1. Introduction
Consider the problem of estimating a probabilistic graphical model from indirect supervision, where only a partial
view of the variables is available. We are interested in indirect supervision for two reasons: first, one might not trust
a data collector and wish to use privacy mechanisms to reveal only partial information about sensitive data (Warner,
1965; Evfimievski et al., 2004; Dwork et al., 2006; Duchi
et al., 2013). Second, if data is generated by human annotators, say in a crowdsourcing setting, it can often be more
cost-effective to solicit lightweight annotations (Oded &
Tomás, 1998; Mann & McCallum, 2008; Quadrianto et al.,
2008; Liang et al., 2009). In both cases, we trade statistical
efficiency for another resource: privacy or annotator cost.
Indirect supervision is naturally handled by defining a
latent-variable model where the structure of interest is
treated as a latent variable. While statistically sensible,
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

ADITIR @ STANFORD . EDU
RF @ CS . STANFORD . EDU
JDUCHI @ STANFORD . EDU
PLIANG @ CS . STANFORD . EDU

learning latent-variable models poses two computational
challenges. First, maximum marginal likelihood requires
non-convex optimization, where popular procedures such
as gradient descent or Expectation Maximization (EM)
(Dempster et al., 1977) are only guaranteed to converge to
local optima. Second, even the computation of the gradient
or performing the E-step can be intractable, requiring probabilistic inference on a loopy graphical model induced by
the indirect supervision (Chang et al., 2007; Graça et al.,
2008; Liang et al., 2009).
In this paper, we propose an approach that bypasses both
computational obstacles for a class which we call linear
indirectly-supervised learning problems. We lean on the
method of moments (Pearson, 1894), which has recently
led to advances in learning latent-variable models (Hsu
et al., 2009; Anandkumar et al., 2013; Chaganty & Liang,
2014), although we do not appeal to tensor factorization.
Instead, we express indirect supervision as a linear combination of the sufficient statistics of the model, which we
recover by solving a simple noisy linear system. Once we
have the sufficient statistics, we use convex optimization to
solve for the model parameters. The key is that while supervision per example is indirect and leads to intractability,
aggregation over a large number of examples renders the
problem tractable.
While our moments-based estimator yields computational
benefits, we suffer some statistical loss relative to maximum marginal likelihood. In Section 5, we compare the
asymptotic variance of marginal-likelihood and momentbased estimators, and provide some geometric insight into
their differences in Section 6. Finally, in Section 7, we apply our framework empirically to our two motivating settings: (i) learning a regression model under local privacy
constraints, and (ii) learning a part-of-speech tagger with
lightweight annotations. In both applications, we show that
our moments-based estimator obtains good accuracies.

