Barron and Cover’s Theory in Supervised Learning
and its Application to Lasso

Masanori Kawakita
KAWAKITA @ INF. KYUSHU - U . AC . JP
Jun’ichi Takeuchi
TAK @ INF. KYUSHU - U . AC . JP
Kyushu University, 744 Motooka, Nishi-Ku, Fukuoka city, Fukuoka 819-0395, JAPAN

Abstract
We study Barron and Cover’s theory (BC theory) in supervised learning. The original BC
theory can be applied to supervised learning
only approximately and limitedly.
Though
Barron & Luo (2008) and Chatterjee & Barron
(2014a) succeeded in removing the approximation, their idea cannot be essentially applied to
supervised learning in general. By solving this
issue, we propose an extension of BC theory to
supervised learning. The extended theory has
several advantages inherited from the original
BC theory. First, it holds for finite sample number n. Second, it requires remarkably few assumptions. Third, it gives a justification of the
MDL principle in supervised learning. We also
derive new risk and regret bounds of lasso with
random design as its application. The derived
risk bound hold for any finite n without boundedness of features in contrast to past work. Behavior of the regret bound is investigated by numerical simulations. We believe that this is the
first extension of BC theory to general supervised
learning without approximation.

1. Introduction
There have been various techniques to evaluate performance of machine learning methods theoretically. For
an example, lasso (Tibshirani, 1996) has been analyzed
by nonparametric statistics, empirical process, statistical
physics and so on. Most of them require various assumptions like asymptotic assumption (sample number n and/or
feature number p go to infinity), boundedness of features
or moment conditions. Some of them are much restrictive for practical use. In this paper, we try to develop anProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

other way for performance evaluation with as few assumptions as possible. As an important candidate for this purpose, we focus on Barron and Cover’s theory (BC theory)
(Barron & Cover, 1991), which is one of the most famous
results for the minimum description length (MDL) principle. The MDL principle (Rissanen, 1978; Barron et al.,
1998; Grünwald, 2007; Takeuchi, 2014) claims that the
shortest description of a given set of data leads to the best
hypotheses about the data. A famous model selection criterion based on the MDL principle was proposed by Rissanen
(1978). This criterion corresponds to a codelength of a twostage code in which one encodes a statistical model to encode data and then the data are encoded with the model. In
this case, an MDL estimator is defined as the minimizer of
the total codelength of this two-stage code. BC theory guarantees that a risk based on the Rényi divergence (Rényi,
1961) is tightly bounded above by redundancy of the twostage code. This result gives a mathematical justification of
the MDL principle. Furthermore, BC theory holds for finite
n without any complicated technical conditions. However,
BC theory has been applied to supervised learning only approximately or limitedly. The original BC theory seems
to be widely recognized that it is applicable to both unsupervised and supervised learning. Though it is not false,
BC theory actually cannot be applied to supervised learning
without a certain condition (2) defined in Section 3. This
condition is critical in a sense that a lack of (2) breaks a
key technique of BC theory. (Yamanishi, 1992) is the only
example of application of BC theory to supervised learning to our knowledge. His work assumed a specific setting,
where (2) can be satisfied. However, the risk bound may
not be sufficiently tight due to imposing (2) forcedly, which
will be explained in Section 3. Another well-recognized
disadvantage is the necessity of quantization of parameter space. Barron & Luo (2008) and Chatterjee & Barron
(2014b) proposed a way to avoid the quantization and derived a risk bound of lasso. However, their idea cannot be
applied to supervised learning in general. This difficulty
stems from the above condition (2). It is thus essentially
difficult to solve. Actually, their risk bound of lasso was derived with fixed design only (i.e., essentially unsupervised

