One-Shot Generalization in Deep Generative Models

Danilo J. Rezende*
Shakir Mohamed*
Ivo Danihelka
Karol Gregor
Daan Wierstra
Google DeepMind, London

Abstract
Humans have an impressive ability to reason
about new concepts and experiences from just a
single example. In particular, humans have an
ability for one-shot generalization: an ability to
encounter a new concept, understand its structure, and then be able to generate compelling
alternative variations of the concept. We develop machine learning systems with this important capacity by developing new deep generative models, models that combine the representational power of deep learning with the inferential power of Bayesian reasoning. We develop a class of sequential generative models that
are built on the principles of feedback and attention. These two characteristics lead to generative models that are among the state-of-the art
in density estimation and image generation. We
demonstrate the one-shot generalization ability
of our models using three tasks: unconditional
sampling, generating new exemplars of a given
concept, and generating new exemplars of a family of concepts. In all cases our models are able
to generate compelling and diverse samples—
having seen new examples just once—providing
an important class of general-purpose models for
one-shot machine learning.

1. Introduction
Consider the images in the red
box in figure 1. We see each
of these new concepts just once,
understand their structure, and
are then able to imagine and
generate compelling alternative
variations of each concept, similar to those drawn in the rows
beneath the red box. This is an

Figure 1. Given the first
row, our model generates new exemplars.
*Equal contributions. Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR:
W&CP volume 48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

DANILOR @ GOOGLE . COM
SHAKIR @ GOOGLE . COM
DANIHELKA @ GOOGLE . COM
KAROLG @ GOOGLE . COM
WIERSTRA @ GOOGLE . COM

ability that humans have for one-shot generalization: an
ability to generalize to new concepts given just one or a few
examples. In this paper, we develop new models that possess this capacity for one-shot generalization—models that
allow for one-shot reasoning from the data streams we are
likely to encounter in practice, that use only limited forms
of domain-specific knowledge, and that can be applied to
diverse sets of problems.
There are two notable approaches that incorporate one-shot
generalization. Salakhutdinov et al. (2013) developed a
probabilistic model that combines a deep Boltzmann machine with a hierarchical Dirichlet process to learn hierarchies of concept categories as well as provide a powerful
generative model. Recently, Lake et al. (2015) presented
a compelling demonstration of the ability of probabilistic
models to perform one-shot generalization, using Bayesian
program learning, which is able to learn a hierarchical,
non-parametric generative model of handwritten characters. Their approach incorporates specific knowledge of
how strokes are formed and the ways in which they are
combined to produce characters of different types, exploiting similar strategies used by humans. Lake et al. (2015)
see the capacity for one-shot generalization demonstrated
by Bayesian programming learning ‘as a challenge for neural models’. By combining the representational power of
deep neural networks embedded within hierarchical latent
variable models, with the inferential power of approximate
Bayesian reasoning, we show that this is a challenge that
can be overcome. The resulting deep generative models are
general-purpose image models that are accurate and scalable, among the state-of-the-art, and possess the important
capacity for one-shot generalization.
Deep generative models are a rich class of models for density estimation that specify a generative process for observed data using a hierarchy of latent variables. Models
that are directed graphical models have risen in popularity and include discrete latent variable models such as sigmoid belief networks and deep auto-regressive networks
(Saul et al., 1996; Gregor et al., 2014), or continuous latent variable models such as non-linear Gaussian belief networks and deep latent Gaussian models (Rezende et al.,

