Conservative Bandits
Yifan Wu
YWU 12@ UALBERTA . CA
Roshan Shariff
ROSHAN . SHARIFF @ UALBERTA . CA
Tor Lattimore
TOR . LATTIMORE @ GMAIL . COM
Csaba Szepesvári
SZEPESVA @ CS . UALBERTA . CA
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada

Abstract
We study a novel multi-armed bandit problem
that models the challenge faced by a company
wishing to explore new strategies to maximize
revenue whilst simultaneously maintaining their
revenue above a fixed baseline, uniformly over
time. While previous work addressed the problem under the weaker requirement of maintaining the revenue constraint only at a given fixed
time in the future, the design of those algorithms
makes them unsuitable under the more stringent
constraints. We consider both the stochastic and
the adversarial settings, where we propose natural yet novel strategies and analyze the price
for maintaining the constraints. Amongst other
things, we prove both high probability and expectation bounds on the regret, while we also
consider both the problem of maintaining the
constraints with high probability or expectation.
For the adversarial setting the price of maintaining the constraint appears to be higher, at least
for the algorithm considered. A lower bound is
given showing that the algorithm for the stochastic setting is almost optimal. Empirical results
obtained in synthetic environments complement
our theoretical findings.

1. Introduction
The manager of Zonlex, a fictional company, has just
learned about bandit algorithms and is very excited about
the opportunity to use this advanced technology to maximize Zonlex’s revenue by optimizing the content on the
landing page of the company’s website. Every click on the
content of their website pays a small reward; thanks to the
high traffic that Zonlex’s website enjoys, this translates into
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

a decent revenue stream. Currently, Zonlex chooses the
website’s contents using a strategy designed over the years
by its best engineers, but the manager suspects that some
alternative strategies could potentially extract significantly
more revenue. The manager is willing to explore bandit
algorithms to identify the winning strategy. The manager’s
problem is that Zonlex cannot afford to lose more than 10%
of its current revenue during its day-to-day operations and
at any given point in time, as Zonlex needs a lot of cash
to support its operations. The manager is aware that standard bandit algorithms experiment “wildly”, at least initially, and as such may initially lose too much revenue and
jeopardize the company’s stable operations. As a result, the
manager is afraid of deploying cutting-edge bandit methods, but notes that this just seems to be a chicken-and-egg
problem: a learning algorithm cannot explore due to the
potential high loss, whereas it must explore to be good in
the long run.
The problem described in the previous paragraph is ubiquitous. It is present, for example, when attempting to learn
better human-computer interaction strategies, say in dialogue systems or educational games. In these cases a designer may feel that experimenting with sub-par interaction
strategies could cause more harm than good (e.g., Rieser
and Lemon, 2008; Liu et al., 2014). Similarly, optimizing
a production process in a factory via learning (and experimentation) has much potential (e.g., Gabel and Riedmiller,
2011), but deviating too much from established “best practices” will often be considered too dangerous. For examples from other domains see the survey paper of Garcı́a and
Fernández (2015).
Staying with Zonlex, the manager also knows that the standard practice in today’s internet companies is to employ
A/B testing on an appropriately small percentage of the
traffic for some period of time (e.g., 10% in the case of
Zonlex). The manager even thinks that perhaps a best-arm
identification strategy from the bandit literature, such as
the recent lil’UCB method of Jamieson et al. (2014), could
be more suitable. While this is appealing, identifying the

