Energetic Natural Gradient Descent

Philip S. Thomas
Bruno Castro da Silva
Christoph Dann
Emma Brunskill

PHILIPT @ CS . CMU . EDU
BSILVA @ INF. UFRGS . BR
CDANN @ CS . CMU . EDU
EBRUN @ CS . CMU . EDU

Abstract
We propose a new class of algorithms for minimizing or maximizing functions of parametric
probabilistic models. These new algorithms are
natural gradient algorithms that leverage more
information than prior methods by using a new
metric tensor in place of the commonly used
Fisher information matrix. This new metric tensor is derived by computing directions of steepest ascent where the distance between distributions is measured using an approximation of energy distance (as opposed to Kullback-Leibler divergence, which produces the Fisher information
matrix), and so we refer to our new ascent direction as the energetic natural gradient.

1. Introduction
In this paper we consider a fundamental problem within
machine learning research: minimizing or maximizing
functions of parametric probabilistic models (also called
parametrized probability distributions). This problem lies
at the heart of all three branches of machine learning. In
unsupervised learning, for instance, it arises in the maximization step of the expectation-maximization algorithm.
In supervised learning, nearly every modern algorithm fits
a parametric model by minimizing a loss function over candidate models. In reinforcement learning the goal is to find
a parametric probabilistic model (a stochastic policy) that
maximizes an objective function (expected return).
Although sometimes the parameter vector that minimizes
or maximizes a function of a parametric model can be
solved for analytically, the use of gradient-based algorithms is still common. When using gradient methods we
usually know how the parametric model is parametrized,
e.g., that the parameters encode the mean and standard deviation of a normal distribution. Natural gradient descent
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

using the Fisher information matrix (FIM) is one popular
extension of the ordinary gradient descent algorithm that
leverages this additional information to improve data efficiency (to speed up convergence).
Often we know more than just how we parametrized the
parametric model: we also know what the parametric
model is a distribution over. This additional knowledge is
not leveraged by gradient descent or natural gradient descent using the FIM. In this paper we propose a new
class of natural gradient algorithms that provide more
informed update directions by leveraging knowledge of
both how the parametric probabilistic model is parameterized and what it is a distribution over.
We derive our method by computing directions of steepest
ascent of the objective function when the distances between
probability distributions are measured using an approximation of energy distance. The resulting class of algorithms
are natural gradient algorithms that use a new metric tensor
that we call the energy information matrix (EIM). We therefore call our method energetic natural gradient descent.

2. Setting
Let θ ∈ Rn be the parameters of a parametric probabilistic model (PPM), p(θ). That is, for each θ ∈ Rn , p(θ) is a
probability distribution. Let Ω be the set of outcomes that
p(θ) is a distribution over, and let p(ω|θ) denote the probability (or probability density) of ω under p(θ). Let f be an
objective function that takes as input a probability distribution and produces as output a real number. We assume that
f ◦ p : Rn → R is a continuous function, where ◦ denotes
function composition, i.e., (f ◦ p)(θ) := f (p(θ)). Our goal
is to find a (local) minimum of f ◦ p.
For example, we might wish to find the normal distribution
that maximizes the log-likelihood of some observed data.
The research reported here was supported by an ONR Young
Investigator award, NSF CAREER grant 1350984 and by the
Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education,
through Grant R305A130215 to Carnegie Mellon University. The
opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not represent
views of the Institute or the U.S. Department of Education.

