Guided Cost Learning: Deep Inverse Optimal Control via Policy Optimization

Chelsea Finn
Sergey Levine
Pieter Abbeel
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94709 USA

Abstract
Reinforcement learning can acquire complex behaviors from high-level specifications. However,
defining a cost function that can be optimized
effectively and encodes the correct task is challenging in practice. We explore how inverse optimal control (IOC) can be used to learn behaviors from demonstrations, with applications to
torque control of high-dimensional robotic systems. Our method addresses two key challenges
in inverse optimal control: first, the need for informative features and effective regularization to
impose structure on the cost, and second, the difficulty of learning the cost function under unknown dynamics for high-dimensional continuous systems. To address the former challenge,
we present an algorithm capable of learning arbitrary nonlinear cost functions, such as neural
networks, without meticulous feature engineering. To address the latter challenge, we formulate an efficient sample-based approximation for
MaxEnt IOC. We evaluate our method on a series
of simulated tasks and real-world robotic manipulation problems, demonstrating substantial improvement over prior methods both in terms of
task complexity and sample efficiency.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning can be used to acquire complex behaviors from high-level specifications. However, defining
a cost function that can be optimized effectively and encodes the correct task can be challenging in practice, and
techniques like cost shaping are often used to solve complex real-world problems (Ng et al., 1999). Inverse optimal
control (IOC) or inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) provide an avenue for addressing this challenge by learning a
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

CBFINN @ EECS . BERKELEY. EDU
SVLEVINE @ EECS . BERKELEY. EDU
PABBEEL @ EECS . BERKELEY. EDU

human
demonstrations
initial
distribution q0

Ddemo
run policy qi
on robot

Dtraj

Dsamp

qi+1
policy
optimization step

optimize cost cθ
cθ

θ

argmin LIOC
θ

Guided Cost Learning

Figure 1. Right: Guided cost learning uses policy optimization
to adaptively sample trajectories for estimating the IOC partition
function. Bottom left: PR2 learning to gently place a dish in a
plate rack.

cost function directly from expert demonstrations, e.g. Ng
et al. (2000); Abbeel & Ng (2004); Ziebart et al. (2008).
However, designing an effective IOC algorithm for learning from demonstration is difficult for two reasons. First,
IOC is fundamentally underdefined in that many costs induce the same behavior. Most practical algorithms therefore require carefully designed features to impose structure
on the learned cost. Second, many standard IRL and IOC
methods require solving the forward problem (finding an
optimal policy given the current cost) in the inner loop of
an iterative cost optimization. This makes them difficult
to apply to complex, high-dimensional systems, where the
forward problem is itself exceedingly difficult, particularly
real-world robotic systems with unknown dynamics.
To address the challenge of representation, we propose
to use expressive, nonlinear function approximators, such
as neural networks, to represent the cost. This reduces
the engineering burden required to deploy IOC methods,
and makes it possible to learn cost functions for which
expert intuition is insufficient for designing good features. Such expressive function approximators, however,
can learn complex cost functions that lack the structure
typically imposed by hand-designed features. To mitigate
this challenge, we propose two regularization techniques
for IOC, one which is general and one which is specific to
episodic domains, such as to robotic manipulation skills.
In order to learn cost functions for real-world robotic tasks,

