Epigraph projections for fast general convex programming
Po-Wei Wang
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Matt Wytock
Electrical Engineering Department, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA
J. Zico Kolter
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Abstract
This paper develops an approach for efficiently
solving general convex optimization problems
specified as disciplined convex programs (DCP),
a common general-purpose modeling framework. Specifically we develop an algorithm
based upon fast epigraph projections, projections
onto the epigraph of a convex function, an approach closely linked to proximal operator methods. We show that by using these operators, we
can solve any disciplined convex program without transforming the problem to a standard cone
form, as is done by current DCP libraries. We
then develop a large library of efficient epigraph
projection operators, mirroring and extending
work on fast proximal algorithms, for many common convex functions. Finally, we evaluate the
performance of the algorithm, and show it often
achieves order of magnitude speedups over existing general-purpose optimization solvers.

1. Introduction
Although convex optimization techniques underly a large
number of machine learning algorithms, there has been a
traditional tension between general purpose optimization
methods and specialized algorithms. General purpose algorithms, exemplified by standard cone form solvers like
linear, second order, and semidefinite cone solvers, with
the addition of modeling languages such as cvx (Grant &
Boyd, 2008) or cvxpy (Diamond & Boyd, 2015) (which
convert problems to these forms), provide a very flexible “rapid prototyping” framework for convex optimizaProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

POWEIW @ CS . CMU . EDU

MWYTOCK @ STANFORD . EDU

ZKOLTER @ CS . CMU . EDU

tion. However, these methods typically do not scale beyond medium-size problems, and are not well-suited to the
larger problems that make up much current machine learning work. This has lead to the development of a number of specialized solvers for many problems of interest
including support vector machines (Platt, 1999; ShalevShwartz et al., 2011; Chang & Lin, 2011), ranking approaches (Joachims, 2002), sparse inverse covariance estimation (Friedman et al., 2008; Hsieh et al., 2014), etc,
just to name a very small number of examples. Recently,
many special purpose algorithms have started to use proximal operators as a key building block.
This current work looks to begin bridging the gap between
specialized and general purposes solvers. The first main
contribution of this work is a method for converting any
disciplined convex program (DCP) into a form that can be
directly solved by proximal methods, without converting
to cone form. Doing so requires a new set of operators
for epigraph projections, an operator related to but distinct from most existing proximal operators; specifically,
for some convex function f : Rn ! R, epigraph projections are optimization problems of the form
epif (v, s) = argmin {kx vk22 +(t s)2 | f (x)  t} (1)
x,t

i.e., they are a projection of some (v 2 Rn , s 2 R) onto the
epigraph set {(x, t) | f (x)  t}. Thus, the second main
contribution of this work is the development of a wide set of
epigraph projection algorithms (plus some additional proximal operators), which in turn can solve a very broad range
of DCPs without ever resorting to standard cone transformations. To build these fast epigraph projections operators we develop new optimization approaches, including
an implicit dual Newton method and a O(n) “sum-of-clip”
solver, both of which we detail in later sections. Finally, we
implement these methods in a generic optimization solver,
and show significant speedup over existing general-purpose
approaches, often an order of magnitude or more.

