On the Iteration Complexity of Oblivious First-Order
Optimization Algorithms

Yossi Arjevani
Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 7610001, Israel

YOSSI . ARJEVANI @ WEIZMANN . AC . IL

Ohad Shamir
Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 7610001, Israel

OHAD . SHAMIR @ WEIZMANN . AC . IL

Abstract
We consider a broad class of first-order optimization algorithms which are oblivious, in the
sense that their step sizes are scheduled regardless of the function under consideration, except for limited side-information such as smoothness or strong convexity parameters. With the
knowledge of these two parameters, we show
that any such algorithm attains
p an iteration complexity lower bound of Ω(p L/) for L-smooth
convex functions, and Ω̃( L/µ ln(1/)) for Lsmooth µ-strongly convex functions. These
lower bounds are stronger than those in the traditional oracle model, as they hold independently
of the dimension. To attain these, we abandon
the oracle model in favor of a structure-based approach which builds upon a framework recently
proposed in (Arjevani et al., 2015). We further
show that without knowing the strong convexity
parameter, it is impossible to attain an iteration
complexity better than Ω̃ ((L/µ) ln(1/)). This
result is then used to formalize an observation regarding L-smooth convex functions, namely, that
the iteration complexity of algorithms employing
time-invariant step sizes must be at least Ω(L/).

problem of minx∈Rd f (x) where f : Rd → R is convex and L-smooth, i.e., k∇f (x) − ∇f (y)k ≤ L kx − yk
for some L > 0, and possibly µ-strongly convex, that is,
2
f (y) ≥ f (x) + hy − x, ∇f (x)i + µ2 ky − xk for some
µ > 0. In this work, we address questions regarding
how fast can one expect to solve this sort of problems to
a prescribed level of accuracy, using methods which are
based on first-order information (gradients, or more generally sub-gradients) alone.
The standard approach to quantify the computational hardness of optimization problems is through the oracle model.
In this approach, one models the interaction of a given optimization algorithm with some instance from a class of
functions as a sequence of queries, issued by the algorithm,
to an external first-order oracle procedure. Upon receiving
a query point x ∈ Rd , the oracle reports the corresponding value f (x) and gradient ∇f (x). In their seminal work,
Nemirovsky and Yudin (1983) showed that for any firstorder optimization algorithm, there exists an L-smooth and
µ-strongly convex function f : Rd → R such that the number of queries required to obtain an -optimal solution x̃
which satisfies
f (x̃) < min f (x) + ,
x∈Rd

is at least1

1. Introduction
The ever-increasing utility of mathematical optimization in
machine learning and other fields has led to a great interest in understanding the computational boundaries of solving optimization problems. Of a particular interest is the
class of unconstrained smooth, and possibly strongly convex, optimization problems. Formally, we consider the
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

 √

Ω̃ min d, κ ln(1/) ,
p
Ω̃(min{d ln(1/), L/}),

µ>0

(1)

µ=0

where κ := L/µ is the so-called condition number. This
lower bound, although based on information considerations
alone, is tight. Concretely, it is achieved by a combination of Nesterov’s well-known accelerated gradient descent
1
Following standard conventions, here, tilde notation hides
logarithmic factors in the smoothness parameter, the strong convexity parameter and the distance of the initialization point from
the minimizer.

