Learning Mixtures of Plackett-Luce Models

Zhibing Zhao
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 110 8th St., Troy, NY 12180 USA

ZHAOZ 6@ RPI . EDU

Peter Piech
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 110 8th St., Troy, NY 12180 USA

PIECHP @ RPI . EDU

Lirong Xia
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 110 8th St., Troy, NY 12180 USA

XIAL @ CS . RPI . EDU

Abstract
In this paper we address the identifiability and
efficient learning problems of finite mixtures of
Plackett-Luce models for rank data. We prove
that for any k ≥ 2, the mixture of k PlackettLuce models for no more than 2k − 1 alternatives
is non-identifiable and this bound is tight for k =
2. For generic identifiability, we prove that the
mixture of k Plackett-Luce models over m alternatives is generically identifiable if k ≤ b m−2
2 c!.
We also propose an efficient generalized method
of moments (GMM) algorithm to learn the mixture of two Plackett-Luce models and show that
the algorithm is consistent. Our experiments
show that our GMM algorithm is significantly
faster than the EMM algorithm by Gormley &
Murphy (2008), while achieving competitive statistical efficiency.

& Murphy, 2008).
Perhaps the most commonly-used statistical model for rank
data is the Plackett-Luce model (Plackett, 1975; Luce,
1959). The Plackett-Luce model is a natural generalization of multinomial logistic regression. In a Plackett-Luce
model, each alternative is parameterized by a positive number that represents the “quality” of the alternative. The
greater the quality, the the chance the alternative will be
ranked at a higher position.

1. Introduction

In practice, mixtures of Plackett-Luce models can provide
better fitness than a single Plackett-Luce model. An additional benefit is that the learned parameter of a mixture
model can naturally be used for clustering (McLachlan
& Basford, 1988). The k-mixture of Plackett-Luce combines k individual Plackett-Luce models via a linear vector
of mixing coefficients. For example, Gormley & Murphy
(2008) propose an Expectation Minorization Maximization
(EMM) algorithm to compute the MLE of Plackett-Luce
mixture models. The EMM was applied to an Irish election
dataset with 5 alternatives and the four components in the
mixture model are interpreted as voting blocs.

In many machine learning problems the data are composed
of rankings over a finite number of alternatives (Marden,
1995). For example, meta-search engines aggregate rankings over webpages from individual search engines (Dwork
et al., 2001); rankings over documents are combined to find
the most relevant document in information retrieval (Liu,
2011); noisy answers from online workers are aggregated
to produce a more accurate answer in crowdsourcing (Mao
et al., 2013). Rank data are also very common in economics and political science. For example, consumers often give discrete choices data (McFadden, 1974) and voters
often give rankings over presidential candidates (Gormley

Surprisingly, the identifiability of Plackett-Luce mixture
models is still unknown. Identifiability is an important
property for statistical models, which requires that different
parameters of the model have different distributions over
samples. Identifiability is crucial because if the model is
not identifiable, then there are cases where it is impossible to estimate the parameter from the data, and in such
cases conclusions drawn from the learned parameter can
be wrong. In particular, if Plackett-Luce mixture models
are not identifiable, then the voting bloc produced by the
EMM algorithm of Gormley & Murphy (2008) can be dramatically different from the ground truth.

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

In this paper, we address the following two important questions about the theory and practice of Plackett-Luce mixture models for rank data.

