Unitary Evolution Recurrent Neural Networks

Martin Arjovsky ∗
Amar Shah ∗
Yoshua Bengio
Universidad de Buenos Aires, University of Cambridge,
Université de Montréal. Yoshua Bengio is a CIFAR Senior Fellow.
∗

MARJOVSKY @ DC . UBA . AR
AS 793@ CAM . AC . UK

Indicates first authors. Ordering determined by coin flip.

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are notoriously difficult to train. When the eigenvalues
of the hidden to hidden weight matrix deviate
from absolute value 1, optimization becomes difficult due to the well studied issue of vanishing and exploding gradients, especially when trying to learn long-term dependencies. To circumvent this problem, we propose a new architecture
that learns a unitary weight matrix, with eigenvalues of absolute value exactly 1. The challenge we address is that of parametrizing unitary matrices in a way that does not require expensive computations (such as eigendecomposition) after each weight update. We construct an
expressive unitary weight matrix by composing
several structured matrices that act as building
blocks with parameters to be learned. Optimization with this parameterization becomes feasible
only when considering hidden states in the complex domain. We demonstrate the potential of
this architecture by achieving state of the art results in several hard tasks involving very longterm dependencies.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks have shown remarkably good performance on a wide range of complex data problems including speech recognition (Hinton et al., 2012), image
recognition (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and natural language
processing (Collobert et al., 2011). However, training very
deep models remains a difficult task. The main issue surrounding the training of deep networks is the vanishing
and exploding gradients problems introduced by HochreProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

iter (1991) and shown by Bengio et al. (1994) to be necessarily arising when trying to learn to reliably store bits
of information in any parametrized dynamical system. If
gradients propagated back through a network vanish, the
credit assignment role of backpropagation is lost, as information about small changes in states in the far past has no
influence on future states. If gradients explode, gradientbased optimization algorithms struggle to traverse down a
cost surface, because gradient-based optimization assumes
small changes in parameters yield small changes in the objective function. As the number of time steps considered
in the sequence of states grows, the shrinking or expanding
effects associated with the state-to-state transformation at
individual time steps can grow exponentially, yielding respectively vanishing or exploding gradients. See Pascanu
et al. (2010) for a review.
Although the long-term dependencies problem appears
intractable in the absolute (Bengio et al., 1994) for
parametrized dynamical systems, several heuristics have
recently been found to help reduce its effect, such as the
use of self-loops and gating units in the LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) and GRU (Cho et al., 2014) recurrent architectures. Recent work also supports the idea
of using orthogonal weight matrices to assist optimization
(Saxe et al., 2014; Le et al., 2015).
In this paper, we explore the use of orthogonal and unitary
matrices in recurrent neural networks. We start in Section 2
by showing a novel bound on the propagated gradients in
recurrent nets when the recurrent matrix is orthogonal. Section 3 discusses the difficulties of parameterizing real valued orthogonal matrices and how they can be alleviated by
moving to the complex domain.
We discuss a novel approach to constructing expressive
unitary matrices as the composition of simple unitary matrices which require at most O(n log n) computation and
O(n) memory, when the state vector has dimension n.
These are unlike general matrices, which require O(n2 )
computation and memory. Complex valued representations

