Loss Factorization, Weakly Supervised Learning and Label Noise Robustness

Giorgio Patrini1,2
GIORGIO . PATRINI @ ANU . EDU . AU
Frank Nielsen3,4
NIELSEN @ LIX . POLYTECHNIQUE . FR
Richard Nock2,1
RICHARD . NOCK @ DATA 61. CSIRO . AU
Marcello Carioni5
MARCELLO . CARIONI @ MIS . MPG . DE
1
2
3
Australian National University , Data61 , École Polytechnique ,
Sony Computer Science Laboratories Inc4 , Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences5

Abstract
We prove that the empirical risk of most wellknown loss functions factors into a linear term
aggregating all labels with a term that is label
free, and can further be expressed by sums of the
same loss. This holds true even for non-smooth,
non-convex losses and in any RKHS. The first
term is a (kernel) mean operator — the focal
quantity of this work — which we characterize
as the sufficient statistic for the labels. The result
tightens known generalization bounds and sheds
new light on their interpretation.
Factorization has a direct application on weakly
supervised learning. In particular, we demonstrate that algorithms like SGD and proximal
methods can be adapted with minimal effort to
handle weak supervision, once the mean operator has been estimated. We apply this idea to
learning with asymmetric noisy labels, connecting and extending prior work. Furthermore, we
show that most losses enjoy a data-dependent (by
the mean operator) form of noise robustness, in
contrast with known negative results.

1. Introduction
Supervised learning is by far the most effective application of the machine learning paradigm. However, there is
a growing need of decoupling the success of the field from
its topmost framework, often unrealistic in practice. In fact
while the amount of available data grows continuously, its
relative training labels — often derived by human effort —
become rare, and hence learning is performed with partially
missing, aggregate-level and/or noisy labels. For this reason, weakly supervised learning (WSL) has attracted much
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

3

12
log(1 + e−x)
le(x)

2

(1 − x)2
le(x)

8

lo(x)

lo(x)

1

4

0

0

−1
−2

−1

0

1

x

(a) logistic loss

2

−4
−2

−1

0

1

2

x

(b) square loss

Figure 1. Loss factorization: `(x) = `e (x) + `o (x).

research. In this work, we focus on binary classification under weak supervision. Traditionally, WSL problems are attacked by designing ad-hoc loss functions and optimization
algorithms tied to the particular learning setting. Instead,
we advocate to “do not reinvent the wheel” and present an
unifying treatment. In summary, we show that, under a
mild decomposability assumption,
Any loss admitting a minimizing algorithm over fully labelled data, can also be minimized in WSL setting with
provable generalization and noise robustness guarantees.
Our proof is constructive: we show that a simple change in
the input and of one line of code is sufficient.
We introduce linear-odd losses (LOLs), a definition not
demanding smoothness or convexity and embracing many
losses of practical interest, e.g. logistic and square. They
decompose into an even and an odd function (Figure 1) as
`(x) = `e (x) + `o (x) ,
.

where `e (x) = (`(x) + `(−x))/2 is label-independent. We
term this result Factorization. When we consider linear or
kernel models, the `-risk factors in a label free term with
another incorporating a sufficient statistic of the labels, the
.
mean operator µ = E[yx]. The interplay of the two components is apparent in a new generalization bound, that also
improves Kakade et al. (2009). The result is reminiscent of
Fisher-Neyman’s factorization (Lehmann & Casella, 1998)
of the exponential family that can be seen as a special case.

