A Deep Learning Approach to Unsupervised Ensemble Learning
Uri Shaham
Xiuyuan Cheng
Omer Dror
Ariel Jaffe
Boaz Nadler
Joseph Chang
Yuval Kluger

URI . SHAHAM @ YALE . EDU
X IUYUAN .C HENG @ YALE . EDU
OMERDR @ GMAIL . COM
ARIEL . JY @ GMAIL . COM
BOAZ . NADLER @ WEIZMANN . AC . IL
JOSEPH . CHANG @ YALE . EDU
YUVAL . KLUGER @ YALE . EDU

Abstract
We show how deep learning methods can be applied in the context of crowdsourcing and unsupervised ensemble learning. First, we prove that
the popular model of Dawid and Skene, which
assumes that all classifiers are conditionally independent, is equivalent to a Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) with a single hidden node.
Hence, under this model, the posterior probabilities of the true labels can be instead estimated
via a trained RBM. Next, to address the more
general case, where classifiers may strongly violate the conditional independence assumption,
we propose to apply RBM-based Deep Neural
Net (DNN). Experimental results on various simulated and real-world datasets demonstrate that
our proposed DNN approach outperforms other
state-of-the-art methods, in particular when the
data violates the conditional independence assumption.

1. Introduction
In recent years, crowdsourcing applications gained significant popularity, and consequently much academic attention. At the same time, deep learning has become a major
tool in machine learning and artificial intelligence, demonstrating impressive performance in several applications, including computer vision, speech recognition and natural
language processing.
The goal of this paper is to show that deep learning methods
can also be applied to the areas of crowdsourcing and unsupervised ensemble learning, and provide state-of-the-art
results. In unsupervised ensemble learning, one is given the
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

predictions of d classifiers on a set of n instances and the
goal is to recover the true, unknown label of each instance.
Dawid & Skene (1979) were among the first to consider
such a setup. They assumed that the classifiers are conditionally independent given the true labels. We refer to this
model as the DS model and also as the Conditional Independence model.
Despite its simplicity, computing the maximum likelihood
estimates of the classifiers’ accuracies and the true labels
in the DS model is a non-convex optimization problem. In
their paper, Dawid and Skene estimated these quantities by
the EM algorithm, which is only guaranteed to converge to
a local optimum. In recent years, several authors developed
computationally efficient spectral methods that are asymptotically consistent under the DS model, see Zhang et al.
(2014); Parisi et al. (2014); Jain & Oh (2013); Jaffe et al.
(2014) and references therein.
The model of Dawid and Skene relied on two key assumptions that typically do not hold in practice: (i) that classifiers make perfectly independent errors; and (ii) that these
errors are uniformly distributed across all instances. To
address the second issue above, several authors proposed
richer models, that include parameters such as instance difficulty and varying skills of annotators across different regions of the input space, see for example Raykar et al.
(2010), Whitehill et al. (2009) and Welinder et al. (2010).
In contrast, relatively few works considered relaxations of
the conditional independence assumption: Platanios et al.
(2014) proposed to estimate the accuracies of possibly dependent classifiers, via their agreement rates over classifier
groups of different sizes. Donmez et al. (2010) proposed
a model with pairwise interactions between all classifiers.
Closest to our approach is the work of Jaffe et al. (2015),
who assumed that some of the classifiers may be conditionally dependent, yet their dependency structure can be
accurately described by a tree of depth 2.
In this manuscript, we propose a deep learning approach

