Low-rank tensor completion:
a Riemannian manifold preconditioning approach

Hiroyuki Kasai
KASAI @ IS . UEC . AC . JP
The University of Electro-Communications,1-5-1, Chofu-gaoka, Chofu-shi, Tokyo, 182-8585, Japan
Bamdev Mishra
Amazon Development Centre India, Bengaluru 560055, Karnataka, India

Abstract

where the operator PΩ (X )i1 ,i2 ,i3 = Xi1 ,i2 ,i3 if
(i1 , i2 , i3 ) ∈ Ω and PΩ (X )i1 ,i2 ,i3 = 0 otherwise and
(with a slight abuse of notation) k · kF is the Frobenius
norm. |Ω| is the number of known entries. rank(X )
(= r = (r1 , r2 , r3 )), called the multilinear rank of X , is
the set of the ranks of for each of mode-d unfolding matrices. rd ≪ nd enforces a low-rank structure. The mode is a
matrix obtained by concatenating the mode-d fibers along
columns, and mode-d unfolding of a D-order tensor X is
Xd ∈ Rnd ×nd+1 ···nD n1 ···nd−1 for d = {1, . . . , D}.

We propose a novel Riemannian manifold preconditioning approach for the tensor completion
problem with rank constraint. A novel Riemannian metric or inner product is proposed that exploits the least-squares structure of the cost function and takes into account the structured symmetry that exists in Tucker decomposition. The specific metric allows to use the versatile framework
of Riemannian optimization on quotient manifolds to develop preconditioned nonlinear conjugate gradient and stochastic gradient descent
algorithms for batch and online setups, respectively. Concrete matrix representations of various optimization-related ingredients are listed.
Numerical comparisons suggest that our proposed algorithms robustly outperform state-ofthe-art algorithms across different synthetic and
real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
This paper addresses the problem of low-rank tensor completion when the rank is a priori known or estimated. We
focus on 3-order tensors in the paper, but the developments
can be generalized to higher order tensors in a straightforward way. Given a tensor X n1 ×n2 ×n3 , whose entries
Xi⋆1 ,i2 ,i3 are only known for some indices (i1 , i2 , i3 ) ∈
Ω, where Ω is a subset of the complete set of indices
{(i1 , i2 , i3 ) : id ∈ {1, . . . , nd }, d ∈ {1, 2, 3}}, the fixedrank tensor completion problem is formulated as
min

X ∈Rn1 ×n2 ×n3

subject to

1
kPΩ (X ) − PΩ (X ⋆ )k2F
|Ω|
rank(X ) = r,

BAMDEVM @ AMAZON . COM

(1)

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

Problem (1) has many variants, and one of those is extending the nuclear norm regularization approach from the
matrix case (Candès & Recht, 2009) to the tensor case.
This results in a summation of nuclear norm regularization
terms, each one corresponds to each of the unfolding matrices of X . While this generalization leads to good results
(Liu et al., 2013; Tomioka et al., 2011; Signoretto et al.,
2014), its applicability to large-scale instances is not trivial, especially due to the necessity of high-dimensional
singular value decomposition computations. A different
approach exploits Tucker decomposition (Kolda & Bader,
2009, Section 4) of a low-rank tensor X to develop largescale algorithms for (1), e.g., in (Filipović & Jukić, 2013;
Kressner et al., 2014).
The present paper exploits both the symmetry present
in Tucker decomposition and the least-squares structure of the cost function of (1) to develop competitive algorithms. The multilinear rank constraint forms
To this
a smooth manifold (Kressner et al., 2014).
end, we use the concept of manifold preconditioning.
While preconditioning in unconstrained optimization is
well studied (Nocedal & Wright, 2006, Chapter 5), preconditioning on constraints with symmetries, owing to
non-uniqueness of Tucker decomposition (Kolda & Bader,
2009), is not straightforward. We build upon the recent work (Mishra & Sepulchre, 2016) that suggests to
use preconditioning with a tailored metric (inner product) in the Riemannian optimization framework on quo-

