Strongly-Typed Recurrent Neural Networks

David Balduzzi1
Muhammad Ghifary1,2
1
Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand
2
Weta Digital, New Zealand

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks are increasing popular models for sequential learning. Unfortunately, although the most effective RNN architectures are perhaps excessively complicated, extensive searches have not found simpler alternatives. This paper imports ideas from physics and
functional programming into RNN design to provide guiding principles. From physics, we introduce type constraints, analogous to the constraints that forbids adding meters to seconds.
From functional programming, we require that
strongly-typed architectures factorize into stateless learnware and state-dependent firmware, reducing the impact of side-effects. The features learned by strongly-typed nets have a simple semantic interpretation via dynamic averagepooling on one-dimensional convolutions. We
also show that strongly-typed gradients are better
behaved than in classical architectures, and characterize the representational power of stronglytyped nets. Finally, experiments show that, despite being more constrained, strongly-typed architectures achieve lower training and comparable generalization error to classical architectures.

1. Introduction
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are models that learn
nonlinear relationships between sequences of inputs and
outputs. Applications include speech recognition (Graves
et al., 2013), image generation (Gregor et al., 2015), machine translation (Sutskever et al., 2014) and image captioning (Vinyals et al., 2015; Karpathy & Fei-Fei, 2015).
Training RNNs is difficult due to exploding and vanishing gradients (Hochreiter, 1991; Bengio et al., 1994; Pascanu et al., 2013). Researchers have therefore developed
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

DBALDUZZI @ GMAIL . COM
MGHIFARY @ GMAIL . COM

gradient-stabilizing architectures such as Long Short-Term
Memories or LSTMs (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997)
and Gated Recurrent Units or GRUs (Cho et al., 2014).
Unfortunately, LSTMs and GRUs are complicated and contain many components whose roles are not well understood.
Extensive searches (Bayer et al., 2009; Jozefowicz et al.,
2015; Greff et al., 2015) have not yielded significant improvements. This paper takes a fresh approach inspired by
dimensional analysis and functional programming.
Intuition from dimensional analysis. Nodes in neural
networks are devices that, by computing dot products,
measure the similarity of their inputs to representations
encoded in weight matrices. Ideally, the representation
learned by a net should “carve nature at its joints”. An exemplar is the system of measurement that has been carved
out of nature by physicists. It prescribes units for expressing the readouts of standardized measuring devices (e.g.
kelvin for thermometers and seconds for clocks) and rules
for combining them.
A fundamental rule is the principle of dimensional homogeneity: it is only meaningful to add quantities expressed in
the same units (Bridgman, 1922; Hart, 1995). For example
adding seconds to volts is inadmissible. In this paper, we
propose to take the measurements performed by neural networks as seriously as physicists take their measurements,
and apply the principle of dimensional homogeneity to the
representations learned by neural nets, see section 2.
Intuition from functional programming. Whereas
feedforward nets learn to approximate functions, recurrent
nets learn to approximate programs – suggesting lessons
from language design are relevant to RNN design. Language researchers stress the benefits of constraints: eliminating GOTO (Dijkstra, 1968); introducing type-systems
that prescribe the interfaces between parts of computer programs and guarantee their consistency (Pierce, 2002); and
working with stateless (pure) functions.
For our purposes, types correspond to units as above. Let
us therefore discuss the role of states. The reason for recur-

