Recommendations as Treatments: Debiasing Learning and Evaluation

Tobias Schnabel, Adith Swaminathan, Ashudeep Singh, Navin Chandak, Thorsten Joachims
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA
{TBS 49, FA 234, AS 3354, NC 475, TJ 36}@ CORNELL . EDU

Abstract
Most data for evaluating and training recommender systems is subject to selection biases,
either through self-selection by the users or
through the actions of the recommendation system itself. In this paper, we provide a principled
approach to handle selection biases by adapting
models and estimation techniques from causal inference. The approach leads to unbiased performance estimators despite biased data, and to a
matrix factorization method that provides substantially improved prediction performance on
real-world data. We theoretically and empirically
characterize the robustness of the approach, and
find that it is highly practical and scalable.

1. Introduction
Virtually all data for training recommender systems is subject to selection biases. For example, in a movie recommendation system users typically watch and rate those
movies that they like, and rarely rate movies that they
do not like (Pradel et al., 2012). Similarly, when an adplacement system recommends ads, it shows ads that it believes to be of interest to the user, but will less frequently
display other ads. Having observations be conditioned on
the effect we would like to optimize (e.g. the star rating, the
probability of a click, etc.) leads to data that is Missing Not
At Random (MNAR) (Little & Rubin, 2002). This creates
a widely-recognized challenge for evaluating recommender
systems (Marlin & Zemel, 2009; Myttenaere et al., 2014).
We develop an approach to evaluate and train recommender
systems that remedies selection biases in a principled, practical, and highly effective way. Viewing recommendation
from a causal inference perspective, we argue that exposing
a user to an item in a recommendation system is an intervention analogous to exposing a patient to a treatment in a
medical study. In both cases, the goal is to accurately estiProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

mate the effect of new interventions (e.g. a new treatment
policy or a new set of recommendations) despite incomplete and biased data due to self-selection or experimenterbias. By connecting recommendation to causal inference
from experimental and observational data, we derive a principled framework for unbiased evaluation and learning of
recommender systems under selection biases.
The main contribution of this paper is four-fold. First,
we show how estimating the quality of a recommendation
system can be approached with propensity-weighting techniques commonly used in causal inference (Imbens & Rubin, 2015), complete-cases analysis (Little & Rubin, 2002),
and other problems (Cortes et al., 2008; Bickel et al., 2009;
Sugiyama & Kawanabe, 2012). In particular, we derive
unbiased estimators for a wide range of performance measures (e.g. MSE, MAE, DCG). Second, with these estimators in hand, we propose an Empirical Risk Minimization
(ERM) framework for learning recommendation systems
under selection bias, for which we derive generalization error bounds. Third, we use the ERM framework to derive a
matrix factorization method that can account for selection
bias while remaining conceptually simple and highly scalable. Fourth, we explore methods to estimate propensities
in observational settings where selection bias is due to selfselection by the users, and we characterize the robustness
of the framework against mis-specified propensities.
Our conceptual and theoretical contributions are validated
in an extensive empirical evaluation. For the task of evaluating recommender systems, we show that our performance
estimators can be orders-of-magnitude more accurate than
standard estimators commonly used in the past (Bell et al.,
2007). For the task of learning recommender systems, we
show that our new matrix factorization method substantially outperforms methods that ignore selection bias, as
well as existing state-of-the-art methods that perform jointlikelihood inference under MNAR data (Hernández-Lobato
et al., 2014). This is especially promising given the conceptual simplicity and scalability of our approach compared to
joint-likelihood inference. We provide an implemention of
our method, as well as a new benchmark dataset, online1 .
1

https://www.cs.cornell.edu/∼schnabts/mnar/

