Unsupervised Deep Embedding for Clustering Analysis

Junyuan Xie
University of Washington
Ross Girshick
Facebook AI Research (FAIR)
Ali Farhadi
University of Washington

Abstract
Clustering is central to many data-driven application domains and has been studied extensively
in terms of distance functions and grouping algorithms. Relatively little work has focused on
learning representations for clustering. In this
paper, we propose Deep Embedded Clustering
(DEC), a method that simultaneously learns feature representations and cluster assignments using deep neural networks. DEC learns a mapping from the data space to a lower-dimensional
feature space in which it iteratively optimizes a
clustering objective. Our experimental evaluations on image and text corpora show significant
improvement over state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Clustering, an essential data analysis and visualization
tool, has been studied extensively in unsupervised machine
learning from different perspectives: What defines a cluster? What is the right distance metric? How to efficiently
group instances into clusters? How to validate clusters?
And so on. Numerous different distance functions and embedding methods have been explored in the literature. Relatively little work has focused on the unsupervised learning
of the feature space in which to perform clustering.
A notion of distance or dissimilarity is central to data clustering algorithms. Distance, in turn, relies on representing the data in a feature space. The k-means clustering algorithm (MacQueen et al., 1967), for example, uses
the Euclidean distance between points in a given feature
space, which for images might be raw pixels or gradientProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

JXIE @ CS . WASHINGTON . EDU

RBG @ FB . COM

ALI @ CS . WASHINGTON . EDU

orientation histograms. The choice of feature space is customarily left as an application-specific detail for the enduser to determine. Yet it is clear that the choice of feature
space is crucial; for all but the simplest image datasets,
clustering with Euclidean distance on raw pixels is completely ineffective. In this paper, we revisit cluster analysis
and ask: Can we use a data driven approach to solve for
the feature space and cluster memberships jointly?
We take inspiration from recent work on deep learning for
computer vision (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Girshick et al.,
2014; Zeiler & Fergus, 2014; Long et al., 2014), where
clear gains on benchmark tasks have resulted from learning better features. These improvements, however, were
obtained with supervised learning, whereas our goal is unsupervised data clustering. To this end, we define a parameterized non-linear mapping from the data space X to
a lower-dimensional feature space Z, where we optimize
a clustering objective. Unlike previous work, which operates on the data space or a shallow linear embedded space,
we use stochastic gradient descent (SGD) via backpropagation on a clustering objective to learn the mapping, which
is parameterized by a deep neural network. We refer to
this clustering algorithm as Deep Embedded Clustering, or
DEC.
Optimizing DEC is challenging. We want to simultaneously solve for cluster assignment and the underlying feature representation. However, unlike in supervised learning, we cannot train our deep network with labeled data.
Instead we propose to iteratively refine clusters with an
auxiliary target distribution derived from the current soft
cluster assignment. This process gradually improves the
clustering as well as the feature representation.
Our experiments show significant improvements over stateof-the-art clustering methods in terms of both accuracy and
running time on image and textual datasets. We evaluate
DEC on MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998), STL (Coates et al.,

