Persistent RNNs: Stashing Recurrent Weights On-Chip

Gregory Diamos
GREGDIAMOS @ BAIDU . COM
Shubho Sengupta
SSENGUPTA @ BAIDU . COM
Bryan Catanzaro
BCATANZARO @ BAIDU . COM
Mike Chrzanowski
MIKECHRZANOWSKI @ BAIDU . COM
Adam Coates
ADAMCOATES @ BAIDU . COM
Erich Elsen
ERICHELSEN @ BAIDU . COM
Jesse Engel
JENGEL @ BAIDU . COM
Awni Hannun
AWNIHANNUN @ BAIDU . COM
Sanjeev Satheesh
SANJEEVSATHEESTH @ BAIDU . COM
Baidu Silicon Valley AI Lab, 1195 Bordeaux Drive, Sunnyvale, CA 94089, UNITED STATES

Abstract
This paper introduces a new technique for mapping Deep Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) efficiently onto GPUs. We show how it is possible to achieve substantially higher computational
throughput at low mini-batch sizes than direct
implementations of RNNs based on matrix multiplications. The key to our approach is the use of
persistent computational kernels that exploit the
GPU’s inverted memory hierarchy to reuse network weights over multiple timesteps. Our initial
implementation sustains 2.8 TFLOP/s at a minibatch size of 4 on an NVIDIA TitanX GPU. This
provides a 16x reduction in activation memory
footprint, enables model training with 12x more
parameters on the same hardware, allows us to
strongly scale RNN training to 128 GPUs, and allows us to efficiently explore end-to-end speech
recognition models with over 100 layers.

1. Introduction
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) have been shown to
be powerful tools for solving general sequence to sequence
mapping problems in domains ranging from speech recognition (Sainath et al., 2015) to natural language processing (Gao et al., 2015)(Sutskever et al., 2014).
In this paper, we explore techniques for mapping RNNs to
throughput optimized processors such as GPUs. We use the
Multi-Bulk-Synchronous-Parallel (Valiant, 2008) (MBSP)
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

model to analyze the computation, communication, and
synchronization operations performed by a RNN. We focus on mapping strategies that carefully manage data movement through the processor’s memory hierarchy to balance
these costs. These changes enable RNN implementations
on GPUs that are very efficient at small mini-batch sizes,
even on mini-batch sizes of just 4 examples. We exploit
this reduction in batch size to decrease the memory footprint of our networks by 16x, allowing us to explore deeper
networks without exceeding GPU memory.
We exploit the largest source of on-chip memory on the
GPU—the collective register files of 6144 hardware thread
contexts on a TitanX GPU—to cache the RNN parameters
and reuse them over multiple timesteps during training. We
attack the cost of inter-processor synchronization with an
optimized assembly level barrier implementation, demonstrating that such barriers implemented in software can reduce latency by approximately 10x compared to relying on
repeated kernel launches.
To make our results relevant for deployment, we only consider models with a hard constraint of 800ms of future context. We find that accuracy improves with deeper models
using batch normalization and skip connections (He et al.,
2015; Srivastava et al., 2015), reinforcing the trend towards
deeper models in vision applications. We present evidence
that accuracy continues to improve with increased depth.

2. Related Work
This work is motivated by recent advances in speech recognition and natural language processing using deep RNNs.
It draws insight from related work on performance optimization of DNN and dense linear algebra libraries, distributed training of DNNs, work on general purpose GPU

