Primal-Dual Rates and Certificates
Celestine Dünner
IBM Research, Zürich, Switzerland

CDU @ ZURICH . IBM . COM

Simone Forte
ETH Zürich, Switzerland

FORTESIMONE 90@ GMAIL . COM

Martin Takáč
Lehigh University, USA

TAKAC .MT@ GMAIL . COM

Martin Jaggi
ETH Zürich, Switzerland

JAGGIM @ INF. ETHZ . CH

Abstract
We propose an algorithm-independent framework to equip existing optimization methods
with primal-dual certificates. Such certificates
and corresponding rate of convergence guarantees are important for practitioners to diagnose
progress, in particular in machine learning applications.
We obtain new primal-dual convergence rates,
e.g., for the Lasso as well as many L1 , Elastic Net, group Lasso and TV-regularized problems. The theory applies to any norm-regularized
generalized linear model. Our approach provides efficiently computable duality gaps which
are globally defined, without modifying the original problems in the region of interest.

1. Introduction
The massive growth of available data has moved data analysis and machine learning to center stage in many industrial as well as scientific fields, ranging from web and sensor data to astronomy, health science, and countless other
applications. With the increasing size of datasets, machine
learning methods are limited by the scalability of the underlying optimization algorithms to train these models, which
has spurred significant research interest in recent years.
However, practitioners face a significant problem arising
with the larger model complexity in large-scale machine
learning and in particular deep-learning methods - it is increasingly hard to diagnose if the optimization algorithm
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

used for training works well or not. With the optimization
algorithms also becoming more complex (e.g., in a distributed setting), it can often be very hard to pin down if
bad performance of a predictive model either comes from
slow optimization, or from poor modeling choices. In this
light, easily verifiable guarantees for the quality of an optimization algorithm are very useful — note that the optimum solution of the problem is unknown in most cases.
For convex optimization problems, a primal-dual gap can
serve as such a certificate. If available, the gap also serves
as a useful stopping criterion for the optimizer.
So far, the majority of popular optimization algorithms for
learning applications comes without a notion of primaldual gap. In this paper, we aim to change this for a relevant
class of machine learning problems. We propose a primaldual framework which is algorithm-independent, and allows to equip existing algorithms with additional primaldual certificates as an add-on.
Our approach is motivated by the recent analysis of SDCA
(Shalev-Shwartz & Zhang, 2013). We extend their setting to the significantly larger class of convex optimization
problems of the form
min f (Aα) + g(α)

α∈Rn

for a given matrix A ∈ Rd×n , f being smooth, and g being a general convex function. This problem class includes
the most prominent regression and classification methods
as well as generalized linear models. We will formalize the
setting in more details in Section 3, and highlight the associated dual problem, which has the same structure. An
overview over some popular examples that can be formulated in this setting either as primal or dual problem is given
in Table 1.
Contributions. The main contributions in this work can be
summarized as follows:

