Variance-Reduced and Projection-Free Stochastic Optimization

Elad Hazan
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08540, USA

EHAZAN @ CS . PRINCETON . EDU

Haipeng Luo
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08540, USA

HAIPENGL @ CS . PRINCETON . EDU

Abstract
The Frank-Wolfe optimization algorithm has recently regained popularity for machine learning applications due to its projection-free property and its ability to handle structured constraints. However, in the stochastic learning setting, it is still relatively understudied compared
to the gradient descent counterpart. In this work,
leveraging a recent variance reduction technique,
we propose two stochastic Frank-Wolfe variants
which substantially improve previous results in
terms of the number of stochastic gradient evaluations needed to achieve 1 −  accuracy. For example, we improve from O( 1 ) to O(ln 1 ) if the
objective function is smooth and strongly con1
vex, and from O( 12 ) to O( 1.5
) if the objective
function is smooth and Lipschitz. The theoretical
improvement is also observed in experiments on
real-world datasets for a multiclass classification
application.

1. Introduction
We consider the following optimization problem
n

1X
fi (w)
w∈Ω n
i=1

more (see for example (Hazan & Kale, 2012; Hazan et al.,
2012; Jaggi, 2013; Dudik et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2012;
Harchaoui et al., 2015)).
The Frank-Wolfe algorithm (Frank & Wolfe, 1956) (also
known as conditional gradient) and it variants are natural
candidates for solving these problems, due to its projectionfree property and its ability to handle structured constraints.
However, despite gaining more popularity recently, its applicability and efficiency in the stochastic learning setting,
where computing stochastic gradients is much faster than
computing exact gradients, is still relatively understudied
compared to variants of projected gradient descent methods.
In this work, we thus try to answer the following question:
what running time can a projection-free algorithm achieve
in terms of the number of stochastic gradient evaluations
and the number of linear optimizations needed to achieve a
certain accuracy? Utilizing Nesterov’s acceleration technique (Nesterov, 1983) and the recent variance reduction
idea (Johnson & Zhang, 2013; Mahdavi et al., 2013), we
propose two new algorithms that are substantially faster
than previous work. Specifically, to achieve 1 −  accuracy,
while the number of linear optimization is the same as previous work, the improvement of the number of stochastic
gradient evaluations is summarized in Table 1:

min f (w) = min

w∈Ω

which is an extremely common objective in machine learning. We are interested in the case where 1) n, usually
corresponding to the number of training examples, is very
large and therefore stochastic optimization is much more
efficient; and 2) the domain Ω admits fast linear optimization, while projecting onto it is much slower, necessitating
projection-free optimization algorithms. Examples of such
problem include multiclass classification, multitask learning, recommendation systems, matrix learning and many
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

Smooth
Smooth and
Strongly Convex

previous work
O( 12 )

this work
1
O( 1.5
)

O( 1 )

O(ln 1 )

Table 1: Comparisons of number of stochastic gradients
The extra overhead of our algorithms is computing at most
O(ln 1 ) exact gradients, which is computationally insignificant compared to the other operations. A more detailed
comparisons to previous work is included in Table 2, which
will be further explained in Section 2.
While the idea of our algorithms is quite straightforward,

