Anytime optimal algorithms in stochastic multi-armed bandits

Rémy Degenne
LPMA, Université Paris Diderot
Vianney Perchet
CREST, ENSAE

REMY. DEGENNE @ MATH . UNIV- PARIS - DIDEROT. FR

VIANNEY. PERCHET @ NORMALESUP. ORG

Abstract
We introduce an anytime algorithm for stochastic
multi-armed bandit with optimal distribution free
and distribution dependent bounds (for a specific
family of parameters). The performances of this
algorithm (as well as another one motivated by
the conjectured optimal bound) are evaluated empirically. A similar analysis is provided with full
information, to serve as a benchmark.

1. INTRODUCTION
The classical sequential decision problem known as the
”multi-armed bandit problem” (Thompson, 1933; Robbins,
1985) has been widely used in operations research, computer science and economics, in sequential clinical trials
or to construct policies maximizing the “click-throughrate” (i.e., finding the ad with the highest probability of
click). At each stage t ∈ N, an agent takes a decision
πt ∈ {1, . . . , K} (or “he pulls arm πt ”) and gets a random reward, the objective being to maximize the cumulative reward. A popular class of algorithms designed for this
problem use the principle of “optimism under uncertainty”
(Auer et al., 2002; Audibert & Bubeck, 2010b).
There are several different frameworks that have been studied, depending on the feedbacks available to the algorithm
(bandit vs. full information), on the rewards generating processes (stochastic vs. adversarial) and on the duration of
the problem (anytime vs. fixed horizon).
Feedbacks: In the bandit setting, the feedback is only the
reward of the pulled arm while with full information,
it is the rewards of all the arms.
Processes: In the stochastic case we consider, the successive rewards of an arm k ∈ {1, . . . , K} are i.i.d. samProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

ples from a distribution ν (k) with mean µ(k) , such that
i
h
(k)
∀y ∈ R, log Eν (k) ey(X−µ ) ≤ y 2 /8 ,
that is, they are 12 sub-Gaussian, up to the centering.
The main example of such rewards are distributions
with support in [0, 1]. In fact, while most papers on the
subject restrict themselves to such bounded rewards,
often only the more general sub-Gaussian assumption
is used. The results can be extended to other subGaussian variables by normalizing the constants in the
bounds accordingly.
Duration: With a fixed known horizon T , the performance
of an algorithm is only evaluated after T stages. On
the other hand, the performance of an anytime algorithm is evaluated at all stages t ∈ N, up the appropriate time renormalization.
The objectif is to define an anytime policy (πt )t≥1 that
Pt
maximizes the expected sum of rewards E[ s=1 X (πs ) ]
with X (πs ) ∼ ν (πs ) , or equivalently that minimizes the
expected regret ERt , where
Rt =

t
X
(µ∗ − µ(πs ) ) .
s=1

Let us denote by µ∗ the mean of the best arm, ∆k =
µ∗ − µ(k) the gap between arm k and the optimal arm and
T (k) (t) the number of times arm k was pulled until time t.
The regret is then equivalently written as
Rt =

K
X

∆k T (k) (t) .

k=1

In that setup, we can exhibit three main types of regret
bounds at some stage t:
Distribution free bound: This bound is independent of
the set of parameters ∆k and only depends on K .

