A Kernelized Stein Discrepancy for Goodness-of-fit Tests

Qiang Liu
Computer Science, Dartmouth College, NH, 03755

QLIU @ CS . DARTMOUTH . EDU

Jason D. Lee
JASONDLEE 88@ EECS . BERKELEY. EDU
Michael Jordan
JORDAN @ CS . BERKELEY. EDU
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science University of California, Berkeley, CA 94709

Abstract
We derive a new discrepancy statistic for measuring differences between two probability distributions based on combining Stein’s identity with
the reproducing kernel Hilbert space theory. We
apply our result to test how well a probabilistic model fits a set of observations, and derive
a new class of powerful goodness-of-fit tests that
are widely applicable for complex and high dimensional distributions, even for those with computationally intractable normalization constants.
Both theoretical and empirical properties of our
methods are studied thoroughly.

1. Introduction
Evaluating the goodness-of-fit of models over observed
data is a fundamental task in machine learning and statistics. Traditional approaches often involve calculating or
comparing the likelihoods or cumulative distribution functions (CDF) of the models. Unfortunately, modern learning techniques increasingly involve complex probabilistic models with computationally intractable likelihoods
or CDFs, such as large graphical models, hidden variables models and deep generative models (Koller & Friedman, 2009; Salakhutdinov, 2015). Although Markov chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) or variational methods can be used
to approximate the likelihood, their approximation errors
are often large and hard to estimate, making it difficult
to give results with calibrated statistical significance. In
fact, it is often a #P-complete problem to calculate or
even approximate likelihoods for graphical models (e.g,
Chandrasekaran et al., 2008), making likelihood-based approaches fundamentally infeasible.
We propose a likelihood-free approach for model evaluaProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

tion with guaranteed statistical significance. In particular,
we consider the setting of goodness-of-fit testing, where
we test whether a given sample {xi } ∼ p(x) is drawn
from a given distribution q(x), meaning H0 : p = q. Our
method is based on a new discrepancy measure between
distributions that can be empirically estimated using U statistics, and depends on q only through its score function
sq = ∇x log q(x); this score function does not depend on
the normalization constant in q(x), and can often be calculated efficiently even when the likelihood is intractable.
This allows us to apply our methods to complex and high
dimensional models on which the likelihood-based methods, or other traditional goodness-of-fit tests, such as χ2 test and Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, can not be applied.
Main Idea Our method is motivated by Stein’s method
and the reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) theory. Stein’s method (Stein, 1972) is a general theoretical
tool for obtaining bounds on distances between distributions. Roughly speaking, it relies on the basic fact that two
smooth densities p(x) and q(x) supported on R are identical if and only if
Ep [sq (x)f (x) + ∇x f (x)] = 0

(1)

for smooth functions f (x) with proper zero-boundary conditions, where sq (x) = ∇x log q(x) = ∇x q(x)/q(x) is
called the (Stein) score function of q(x); when p = q, (1) is
known as Stein’s identity (e.g., Stein et al., 2004), and can
be proved using integration by parts. As a result, one can
define a Stein discrepancy measure1 between p and q via
2
S(p, q) = max Ep [sq (x)f (x) + ∇x f (x)] , (2)
f ∈F

where F is a set of smooth functions that satisfies (1) and
is also rich enough to ensure S(p, q) > 0 whenever p 6= q.
The problem, however, is that S(p, q) is often computationally intractable because it requires a difficult variational
1
Our definition is the square of the typical definition of Stein
discrepancy, as such that in Gorham & Mackey (2015).

