Exact Exponent in Optimal Rates for Crowdsourcing

Chao Gao
Yale University, 24 Hillhouse Ave, New Haven, CT 06511 USA

CHAO . GAO @ YALE . EDU

Yu Lu
Yale University, 24 Hillhouse Ave, New Haven, CT 06511 USA

YU . LU @ YALE . EDU

Dengyong Zhou
Microsoft Research, One Microsoft Way, Redmond, WA 98052 USA

Abstract
In many machine learning applications, crowdsourcing has become the primary means for label collection. In this paper, we study the optimal error rate for aggregating labels provided
by a set of non-expert workers. Under the classic Dawid-Skene model, we establish matching
upper and lower bounds with an exact exponent
mI(π) in which m is the number of workers and
I(π) the average Chernoff information that characterizes the workers’ collective ability. Such an
exact characterization of the error exponent allows us to state a precise sample size requirement
1
log 1 in order to achieve an  misclasm > I(π)
sification error. In addition, our results imply the
optimality of various EM algorithms for crowdsourcing initialized by consistent estimators.

1. Introduction
In many machine learning problems such as image classification and speech recognition, we need a large amount
of labeled data. Crowdsourcing provides an efficient while
inexpensive way to collect labels. On a commercial crowdsourcing platform like Amazon Mechanical Turk (Amazon Mechanical Turk), in general, it takes only few hours
to obtain hundreds of thousands labels from crowdsourcing
workers worldwide, and each label costs only several cents.
Though massive in amount, the crowdsourced labels are
usually fairly noisy. The low quality is partially due to the
lack of domain expertise from the workers and presence of
spammers. To overcome this issue, a common strategy is
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

D ENGYONG .Z HOU @ MICROSOFT. COM

to repeatedly label each item by different workers, and then
estimate truth from the redundant labels, for example, using majority voting. Since the pioneering work by Dawid
and Skene (Dawid & Skene, 1979), which jointly estimates
truth and workers’ abilities via a simple EM algorithm, various approaches have been developed in recent years for aggregating noisy crowdsourced labels. See (Whitehill et al.,
2009; Welinder et al., 2010; Raykar et al., 2010; Ghosh
et al., 2011; Bachrach et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2012; Zhou
et al., 2012; Dalvi et al., 2013; Zhou et al., 2014; Venanzi
et al., 2014; Parisi et al., 2014; Tian & Zhu, 2015) and references therein.
Compared with the active progress in aggregation algorithms, statistical understandings of crowdsourcing do not
get much attention except (Gao & Zhou, 2013; Karger
et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2014; Berend & Kontorovich,
2015). These papers not only show exponential convergence rates for several estimators, they also provide lower
bounds to justify the optimality of the rates. However, the
exponents found in these work are not matched in their upper and lower bounds. They are optimal only up to some
constants. The main focus of this paper is to find the exact
error exponent to better guide algorithm design and optimization.
Main Contribution. We study the minimax rate of
misclassification for estimating the truth from crowdsourced labels. We provide upper and lower bounds with
exact exponents that match each other. The exponent
has a natural interpretation of the collective wisdom
of a crowd. In the special case where each worker’s
ability is modeled by a real number pi ∈ [0, 1], the
exponent takes a simple
form −(1 +
 p
 o(1))mI(p) with
Pm
1
I(p) = − m i=1 log 2 pi (1 − pi ) being the average
Rényi divergence of order 1/2. Therefore, in order to
achieve an error of  in the misclassification proportion,
it is necessary and sufficient that the number of workers

