Actively Learning Hemimetrics
with Applications to Eliciting User Preferences

Adish Singla
Sebastian Tschiatschek
Andreas Krause
ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract
Motivated by an application of eliciting users’
preferences, we investigate the problem of learning hemimetrics, i.e., pairwise distances among a
set of n items that satisfy triangle inequalities and
non-negativity constraints. In our application, the
(asymmetric) distances quantify private costs a
user incurs when substituting one item by another.
We aim to learn these distances (costs) by asking
the users whether they are willing to switch from
one item to another for a given incentive offer.
Without exploiting structural constraints of the
hemimetric polytope, learning the distances between each pair of items requires Θ(n2 ) queries.
We propose an active learning algorithm that
substantially reduces this sample complexity by
exploiting the structural constraints on the version
space of hemimetrics. Our proposed algorithm
achieves provably-optimal sample complexity for
various instances of the task. For example, when
the items are embedded into K tight clusters, the
sample complexity of our algorithm reduces to
O(nK). Extensive experiments on a restaurant
recommendation data set support the conclusions
of our theoretical analysis.

1

Introduction

Learning a distance function over a set of items or a data
manifold plays a crucial role in many real-world applications. In machine learning algorithms, the distances serve as
a notion of similarity (or dissimilarity) between data points
and are important for various tasks such as clustering (Xing
et al., 2002), object ranking (Lim & Lanckriet, 2014), image
retrieval / classification (He et al., 2004; Huang et al., 2015),
etc.1 In economics, the distance function can encode the
1
We refer the interested reader to the survey by Bellet et al.
(2013) for a detailed discussion of various applications.
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume 48.
Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

ADISH . SINGLA @ INF. ETHZ . CH
SEBASTIAN . TSCHIATSCHEK @ INF. ETHZ . CH
KRAUSEA @ ETHZ . CH

preferences of users (e.g., buyers or sellers in a marketplace)
for different items (e.g., from a catalogue of products) to
improve product recommendation and dynamic pricing
of goods (Desjardins et al., 2006; Horton & Johari, 2015;
Blum et al., 2015; Vázquez-Gallo et al., 2014).
Motivating applications. We are interested in learning the
preferences of users across different choices available in
a marketplace — these choices are given in the form of n
(types of) items. For instance, in a restaurant recommendation system such as Yelp, the item types could correspond to
restaurants abstracted by attributes such as cuisine, locality,
reviews and so on. Consider a user who seeks recommendations from the system and has chosen item i (e.g., “Mexican
restaurant in Manhattan with over 50 reviews”). However,
to incentivize exploration and maximize its overall utility,
the marketplace may consider offering a discount to the
user to instead choose item j (e.g., “Newly opened fastfood
restaurant in New Jersey with 0 reviews”), e.g., to gather
more reviews for item j. The price of the offer would clearly
depend on how similar or dissimilar the choices i and j are.
In general, a high dissimilarity would require the system to
offer higher incentives (larger discounts).
Distance function quantifying private costs. We capture
the above-mentioned notion of dissimilarity by a pairwise
distance Di,j — the distance Di,j corresponds to the private
cost of a user incurred by switching from her default choice
of item i to item j. We assume that the distance function D
is a hemimetric, i.e., a relaxed form of a metric, satisfying
only non-negativity constraints and triangle inequalities.
The asymmetry in the distances (i.e., Di,j 6= Dj,i ) is
naturally required in our application setting — it may arise
from various factors such as the underlying quality of
the items (e.g., switching between a highly rated and an
unreviewed restaurant). Our goal is to efficiently learn the
distance function D via interactions with the users, without
assuming any knowledge of the underlying attributes that
affect the users’ preferences.
User query and active learning. In our setting, the interactions with the users take the form of a binary labeling query,
i.e., given two items i and j, and a proposed value c, the user

