Robust Principal Component Analysis with Side Information
Kai-Yang Chiang?
KYCHIANG @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU
Cho-Jui Hsieh†
CHOHSIEH @ UCDAVIS . EDU
Inderjit S. Dhillon?
INDERJIT @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU
?
Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA
†
Department of Statistics and Computer Science, University of California at Davis, Davis, CA 95616, USA

Abstract
The robust principal component analysis (robust
PCA) problem has been considered in many machine learning applications, where the goal is to
decompose the data matrix to a low rank part plus
a sparse residual. While current approaches are
developed by only considering the low rank plus
sparse structure, in many applications, side information of row and/or column entities may also be
given, and it is still unclear to what extent could
such information help robust PCA. Thus, in this
paper, we study the problem of robust PCA with
side information, where both prior structure and
features of entities are exploited for recovery. We
propose a convex problem to incorporate side information in robust PCA and show that the low
rank matrix can be exactly recovered via the proposed method under certain conditions. In particular, our guarantee suggests that a substantial
amount of low rank matrices, which cannot be
recovered by standard robust PCA, become recoverable by our proposed method. The result
theoretically justifies the effectiveness of features
in robust PCA. In addition, we conduct synthetic
experiments as well as a real application on noisy
image classification to show that our method also
improves the performance in practice by exploiting side information.

1. Introduction
Robust principal component analysis (robust PCA) receives much attention in recent studies for its ability to recover the low rank model from sparse noise. Such sparse
structure of noise is common in many real applications
such as image processing and bioinformatics (Wright et al.,
2009). Formally, assuming that the given observation R 2
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

Rn⇥n is in the form of:
R = L 0 + S0 ,
where L0 is a low rank matrix and S0 is a sparse noise
matrix with unknown support and magnitude, the goal of
robust PCA is to recover L0 given R. One state-of-the-art
approach is to decompose R into a low rank and a sparse
component via a simple convex program. This approach
has been shown to be advantageous for several reasons.
First, it overcomes the weakness of standard PCA where
the solution could be extremely skewed even if a single
entry is corrupted, and second, exact recovery of L0 can
be guaranteed under certain assumptions (Chandrasekaran
et al., 2011; Candès et al., 2011).
Despite these strength, one criticism of robust PCA is that
it disregards side information, or features, in the recovery process even if it is provided. For example, imagine
that data matrix R represents the gene-disease association
where few entries are corrupted due to some contamination
in experiments, and furthermore, some additional features
of each gene (e.g. its gene-expression profile) and each disease (e.g. co-occurrence of diseases for a patient) are also
given in advance. Then, instead of simply applying robust
PCA to filter out the noise, one would expect to incorporate these side information in order to better recover the
clean association. To the best of our knowledge, however,
it is still unclear that to what degree side information could
help the recoverability of robust PCA.
With above motivation, in this paper, we consider the problem of robust PCA with side information, where the goal
is to recover the underlying matrix by utilizing both the
“low rank plus sparse structure” and additional feature information. Our approach is to link feature information
to the underlying matrix via an implicit bilinear function,
which leads us to solve the problem via a feature-embedded
convex program. Furthermore, to justify the usefulness
of features in theory, we show that under certain assumptions, exact recovery could be attained by the proposed
method given that the rank of underlying low rank matrix
is in O(n2 /(d log n log d)), with up to O(n2 ) corrupted

