Learning Physical Intuition of Block Towers by Example

Adam Lerer
Facebook AI Research

ALERER @ FB . COM

Sam Gross
Facebook AI Research

SGROSS @ FB . COM

Rob Fergus
Facebook AI Research

ROBFERGUS @ FB . COM

Abstract
Wooden blocks are a common toy for infants, allowing them to develop motor skills and gain intuition about the physical behavior of the world.
In this paper, we explore the ability of deep feedforward models to learn such intuitive physics.
Using a 3D game engine, we create small towers
of wooden blocks whose stability is randomized
and render them collapsing (or remaining upright). This data allows us to train large convolutional network models which can accurately predict the outcome, as well as estimating the block
trajectories. The models are also able to generalize in two important ways: (i) to new physical
scenarios, e.g. towers with an additional block
and (ii) to images of real wooden blocks, where
it obtains a performance comparable to human
subjects.

1. Introduction
Interaction with the world requires a common-sense understanding of how it operates at a physical level. For example,
we can quickly assess if we can walk over a surface without
falling, or how an object will behave if we push it. Making
such judgements does not require us to invoke Newton’s
laws of mechanics – instead we rely on intuition, built up
through interaction with the world.
In this paper, we explore if a deep neural network can capture this type of knowledge. While DNNs have shown remarkable success on perceptual tasks such as visual recognition (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and speech understanding
(Hinton et al., 2012), they have been rarely applied to probProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

lems involving higher-level reasoning, particularly those
involving physical understanding. However, this is needed
to move beyond object classification and detection to a true
understanding of the environment, e.g. “What will happen
next in this scene?” Indeed, the fact that humans develop
such physical intuition at an early age (Carey, 2009), well
before most other types of high-level reasoning, suggests
its importance in comprehending the world.
To learn this common-sense understanding, a model needs
a way to interact with the physical world. A robotic platform is one option that has been explored e.g. (Agrawal
et al., 2015), but inherent complexities limit the diversity
and quantity of data that can be acquired. Instead, we use
Unreal Engine 4 (UE4) (Epic Games, 2015), a platform for
modern 3D game development, to provide a realistic environment. We chose UE4 for its realistic physics simulation,
modern 3D rendering, and open source license. We integrate the Torch (Collobert et al., 2011) machine learning
framework directly into the UE4 game loop, allowing for
online interaction with the UE4 world.
One of the first toys encountered by infants, wooden blocks
provide a simple setting for the implicit exploration of basic
Newtonian concepts such as center-of-mass, stability and
momentum. By asking deep models to predict the behavior
of the blocks, we hope that they too might internalize such
notions. Another reason for selecting this scenario is that
real world examples can be constructed, enabling the generalization ability of our models to be probed (see Fig. 1).
Two tasks are explored: (i) will the blocks fall over or not?
and (ii) where will the blocks end up? The former is a binary classification problem, based on the stability of the
block configuration. For the latter we predict image masks
that show the location of each block. In contrast to the
first task, this requires the models to capture the dynamics of the system. Both tasks require an effective visual
system to analyze the configuration of blocks. We explore

