Near Optimal Behavior via Approximate State Abstraction

David Abel†
D. Ellis Hershkowitz†
Michael L. Littman
Brown University, 115 Waterman Street, Providence, RI 02906

Abstract
The combinatorial explosion that plagues planning and reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms
can be moderated using state abstraction. Prohibitively large task representations can be condensed such that essential information is preserved, and consequently, solutions are tractably
computable. However, exact abstractions, which
treat only fully-identical situations as equivalent,
fail to present opportunities for abstraction in environments where no two situations are exactly
alike. In this work, we investigate approximate
state abstractions, which treat nearly-identical
situations as equivalent. We present theoretical
guarantees of the quality of behaviors derived
from four types of approximate abstractions. Additionally, we empirically demonstrate that approximate abstractions lead to reduction in task
complexity and bounded loss of optimality of behavior in a variety of environments.

1. Introduction
Abstraction plays a fundamental role in learning. Through
abstraction, intelligent agents may reason about only the
salient features of their environment while ignoring what
is irrelevant. Consequently, agents are able to solve considerably more complex problems than they would be able
to without the use of abstraction. However, exact abstractions, which treat only fully-identical situations as equivalent, require complete knowledge that is computationally
intractable to obtain. Furthermore, often no two situations
are identical, so exact abstractions are often ineffective.
To overcome these issues, we investigate approximate abstractions that enable agents to treat sufficiently similar situations as identical. This work characterizes the impact
of equating “sufficiently similar” states in the context of
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

DAVID ABEL @ BROWN . EDU
DAVID HERSHKOWITZ @ BROWN . EDU
MICHAEL LITTMAN @ BROWN . EDU

planning and RL in Markov Decision Processes (MDPs).
The remainder of our introduction contextualizes these intuitions in MDPs.
Solving for optimal behavior in MDPs in a planning setting
is known to be P-Complete in the size of the state space (Papadimitriou & Tsitsiklis, 1987; Littman et al., 1995). Similarly, many RL algorithms for solving MDPs are known to
require a number of samples polynomial in the size of the
state space (Strehl et al., 2009). Although polynomial runtime or sample complexity may seem like a reasonable constraint, the size of the state space of an MDP grows superpolynomially with the number of variables that characterize
the domain - a result of Bellman’s curse of dimensionality. Thus, solutions polynomial in state space size are often
ineffective for sufficiently complex tasks. For instance, a
robot involved in a pick-and-place task might be able to
employ planning algorithms to solve for how to manipulate
some objects into a desired configuration in time polynomial in the number of states, but the number of states it
must consider grows exponentially with the number of objects with which it is working (Abel et al., 2015).
Thus, a key research agenda for planning and RL is leveraging abstraction to reduce large state spaces (Andre &
Russell, 2002; Jong & Stone, 2005; Dietterich, 2000; Bean
et al., 2011). This agenda has given rise to methods that
reduce ground MDPs with large state spaces to abstract
MDPs with smaller state spaces by aggregating states according to some notion of equality or similarity. In the
context of MDPs, we understand exact abstractions as those
that aggregate states with equal values of particular quantities, for example, optimal Q-values. Existing work has
characterized how exact abstractions can fully maintain optimality in MDPs (Li et al., 2006; Dean & Givan, 1997).
The thesis of this work is that performing approximate abstraction in MDPs by relaxing the state-aggregation criteria
from equality to similarity achieves polynomially bounded
error in the resulting behavior while offering three benefits.
First, approximate abstractions employ the sort of knowl†

The first two authors contributed equally.

