On the Quality of the Initial Basin in Overspecified Neural Networks

Itay Safran
Ohad Shamir
Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel

Abstract
Deep learning, in the form of artificial neural networks, has achieved remarkable practical success
in recent years, for a variety of difficult machine
learning applications. However, a theoretical explanation for this remains a major open problem,
since training neural networks involves optimizing a highly non-convex objective function, and
is known to be computationally hard in the worst
case. In this work, we study the geometric structure of the associated non-convex objective function, in the context of ReLU networks and starting from a random initialization of the network
parameters. We identify some conditions under
which it becomes more favorable to optimization, in the sense of (i) High probability of initializing at a point from which there is a monotonically decreasing path to a global minimum;
and (ii) High probability of initializing at a basin
(suitably defined) with a small minimal objective
value. A common theme in our results is that
such properties are more likely to hold for larger
(“overspecified”) networks, which accords with
some recent empirical and theoretical observations.

1. Introduction
Deep learning (in the form of multi-layered artificial neural networks) has been tremendously successful in recent
years, and advanced the state of the art across a range of
difficult machine learning applications. Inspired by the
structure of biological nervous systems, these predictors
are usually composed of several layers of simple computational units (or neurons), parameterized by a set of weights,
which can collectively express highly complex functions.
Given a dataset of labeled examples, these networks are
generally trained by minimizing the average of some loss
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

ITAY. SAFRAN @ WEIZMANN . AC . IL
OHAD . SHAMIR @ WEIZMANN . AC . IL

function over the data, using a local search procedure such
as stochastic gradient descent.
Although the expressiveness and statistical performance of
such networks is relatively well-understood, it is a major
open problem to understand the computational tractability
of training such networks. Although these networks are
trained successfully in practice, most theoretical results are
negative. For example, it is known that finding the weights
that best fit a given training set, even for very small networks, is NP-hard (Blum & Rivest, 1992). Even if we relax
the problem by allowing improper learning or assuming the
data is generated by a network, the problem remains worstcase hard (see e.g. (Livni et al., 2014) for a discussion of
this and related results). This theory-practice gap is a prime
motivation for our work.
In this paper, we study the geometric structure of the objective function associated with training such networks,
namely the average loss over the training data as a function
of the network parameters. We focus on plain-vanilla, feedforward networks which use the simple and popular ReLU
activation function (see Sec. 2.1 for precise definitions),
and losses convex in the network’s predictions, for example
the squared loss and cross-entropy loss. The structure of
the resulting objective function is poorly understood. Not
surprisingly, it is complex, highly non-convex, and local
search procedures are by no means guaranteed to converge
to a global minimum. Moreover, it is known that even if the
network is composed of a single neuron, the function may
have exponentially many local minima (Auer et al., 1996).
Furthermore, as we discuss later in the paper, the construction can be done such that the vast majority of these local minima are sub-optimal. Nevertheless, our goal in this
work is to understand whether, perhaps under some conditions, the function has some geometric properties which
may make it more favorable to optimization.
Before continuing, we emphasize that our observations are
purely geometric in nature, independent of any particular optimization procedure. Moreover, we make no claim
that these properties necessarily imply that a practical local
search procedure, such as stochastic gradient descent, will
converge to a good solution (although proving such a result

