Optimal Classification with Multivariate Losses

T- NANATA @ MICROSOFT. COM

Nagarajan Natarajan
Microsoft Research, INDIA
Oluwasanmi Koyejo
Stanford University, CA & University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA
Pradeep Ravikumar
Inderjit S. Dhillon
The University of Texas at Austin, TX, USA

Abstract
Multivariate loss functions are extensively employed in several prediction tasks arising in Information Retrieval. Often, the goal in the tasks is to
minimize expected loss when retrieving relevant
items from a presented set of items, where the expectation is with respect to the joint distribution
over item sets. Our key result is that for most
multivariate losses, the expected loss is provably
optimized by sorting the items by the conditional
probability of label being positive and then selecting top k items. Such a result was previously
known only for the F -measure. Leveraging on
the optimality characterization, we give an algorithm for estimating optimal predictions in practice with runtime quadratic in size of item sets
for many losses. We provide empirical results on
benchmark datasets, comparing the proposed algorithm to state-of-the-art methods for optimizing multivariate losses.

1. Introduction
A recent flurry of theoretical results and practical algorithms highlights a growing interest in understanding and
optimizing general multivariate losses (Joachims, 2005;
Petterson and Caetano, 2011; Dembczynski et al., 2011; Ye
et al., 2012; Koyejo et al., 2014; Narasimhan et al., 2014).
Conventional losses such as the 0-1 loss (or the error) in
binary or multiclass classification, and Hamming loss in
case of multilabel learning fall short in many applications,
such as medical diagnosis, fraud detection, and informaProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

SANMI @ ILLINOIS . EDU

PRADEEPR @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU
INDERJIT @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU

tion retrieval, with imbalanced and rare event classification tasks (Lewis and Gale, 1994; Drummond and Holte,
2005; Gu et al., 2009; He and Garcia, 2009). Practitioners
employ multivariate loss functions such as the F -measure
that capture non-linear trade-off between the entries of the
“confusion matrix”, namely, true positives, false positives,
true negatives and false negatives. Multivariate loss functions are defined on vector-valued predictions, such as label
vectors in multilabel learning, subsets of classes in multiclass classification, etc. The goal in the prediction tasks
is to minimize expected loss when retrieving relevant items
from a presented set of items, where the expectation is with
respect to the joint distribution over item sets (that models
uncertainty in the data).
Algorithmic approaches for minimizing expected multivariate losses such as structured support vector machines
have been proposed (Joachims, 2005; Petterson and Caetano, 2011). Interestingly, the optimization can be performed efficiently for most multivariate losses that can be
written as a function of the entries of the confusion matrix. However, there are no known consistency guarantees
for these approaches; in fact, recently, Dembczynski et al.
(2013) showed that structured loss minimization is not consistent for the F -measure. On the other hand, an important theoretical question is if and when one can explicitly
characterize the optimal solution for the loss minimization
problem. A key difficulty in the analysis of general multivariate losses is that they are often non-decomposable,
i.e., the loss on prediction vectors does not decompose into
the sum of losses over individual predictions. Two decades
ago, Lewis (1995) showed that the optimal solution to minimizing expected F -measure, under the assumption that
the labels are conditionally independent, admits a simple
form — in particular, it requires only the knowledge of
the marginals P(Yi |x). Then, Dembczynski et al. (2011)
showed that the optimal solution for F -measure can be de-

