Bidirectional Helmholtz Machines
Jörg Bornschein∗
Samira Shabanian
Asja Fischer
Yoshua Bengio∗
Dept. Computer Science and Operations Research, University of Montreal
∗
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR)

Abstract
Efficient unsupervised training and inference in
deep generative models remains a challenging
problem. One basic approach, called Helmholtz
machine or Variational Autoencoder, involves
training a top-down directed generative model
together with a bottom-up auxiliary model used
for approximate inference. Recent results indicate that better generative models can be obtained with better approximate inference procedures. Instead of improving the inference procedure, we here propose a new model, the bidirectional Helmholtz machine, which guarantees that
the top-down and bottom-up distributions can efficiently invert each other. We achieve this by interpreting both the top-down and the bottom-up
directed models as approximate inference distributions and by defining the model distribution to
be the geometric mean of these two. We present a
lower-bound for the likelihood of this model and
we show that optimizing this bound regularizes
the model so that the Bhattacharyya distance between the bottom-up and top-down approximate
distributions is minimized. This approach results
in state of the art generative models which prefer
significantly deeper architectures while it allows
for orders of magnitude more efficient likelihood
estimation.

1. Introduction and background
Training good generative models and fitting them to complex and high dimensional training data with probability
mass in multiple disjunct locations remains a major challenge. This is especially true for models with multiple layers of deterministic or stochastic variables, which is unProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

BORNJ @ IRO . UMONTREAL . CA
SHABANIS @ IRO . UMONTREAL . CA
FISCHER @ IRO . UMONTREAL . CA
BENGIOY @ IRO . UMONTREAL . CA

fortunate because it has been argued previously (Hinton
et al., 2006; Bengio, 2009) that deeper generative models
have the potential to capture higher-level abstractions and
thus generalize better. Although there has been progress
in dealing with continous-valued latent variables (Kingma
& Welling, 2014), building a hierarchy of representations,
especially with discrete-valued latent variables, remains a
challenge.
With the Helmholtz machine (Hinton et al., 1995; Dayan
et al., 1995), a concept was introduced that proposed to not
only fit a powerful but intractable generative model p(x, h)
to the training data, but also to jointly train a parametric
approximate inference model q(h|x). The distribution q is
used to perform approximate inference over the latent variables h of the generative model given an observed example
x, i.e. to approximate p(h|x). This basic idea has been
applied and enhanced many times; initially with the wakesleep algorithm (WS, Hinton et al. (1995); Dayan & Hinton
(1996)) and more recently with the variational autoencoder
(VAE, Kingma & Welling (2014)), stochastic backpropagation and approximate inference in deep generative models (Rezende et al., 2014), neural variational inference and
learning (NVIL, Mnih & Gregor (2014)) and reweighted
wake-sleep (RWS, Bornschein & Bengio (2015)).
Recent results indicate that significant improvements can
be made when better approximate inference methods are
used: Salimans et al. (2014) for example presented an iterative inference procedure that improves the samples from
q by employing a learned MCMC transition operator. In
(Hjelm et al., 2015) the authors propose an iterative, gradient based procedure to refine the approximate posterior.
Burda et al. (2015) present the importance weighted auto
encoder (IWAE), an improved VAE that, similarly to RWS,
uses multiple samples from q to calculate gradients. And
RWS already reported that autoregressive q distributions
lead to noticable improvements. In contrast to these previous approaches that aimed at incorporating more powerful
inference methods to gain better approximations of p(h|x),
we here propose to regularize the top-down model p such

