Square Root Graphical Models: Multivariate Generalizations of
Univariate Exponential Families that Permit Positive Dependencies

David I. Inouye
Pradeep Ravikumar
Inderjit S. Dhillon
Dept. of Computer Science, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712, USA

Abstract
We develop Square Root Graphical Models
(SQR), a novel class of parametric graphical
models that provides multivariate generalizations
of univariate exponential family distributions.
Previous multivariate graphical models (Yang
et al., 2015) did not allow positive dependencies
for the exponential and Poisson generalizations.
However, in many real-world datasets, variables
clearly have positive dependencies. For example,
the airport delay time in New York—modeled as
an exponential distribution—is positively related
to the delay time in Boston. With this motivation,
we give an example of our model class derived
from the univariate exponential distribution that
allows for almost arbitrary positive and negative
dependencies with only a mild condition on the
parameter matrix—a condition akin to the positive definiteness of the Gaussian covariance matrix. Our Poisson generalization allows for both
positive and negative dependencies without any
constraints on the parameter values. We also develop parameter estimation methods using nodewise regressions with `1 regularization and likelihood approximation methods using sampling.
Finally, we demonstrate our exponential generalization on a synthetic dataset and a real-world
dataset of airport delay times.

1. Introduction
Gaussian, binary and discrete undirected graphical
models—or Markov Random Fields (MRF)—have become
popular for compactly modeling and studying the structural dependencies between high-dimensional continuous,
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

DINOUYE @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU
PRADEEPR @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU
INDERJIT @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU

binary and categorical data respectively (Friedman et al.,
2008; Hsieh et al., 2014; Banerjee et al., 2008; Ravikumar et al., 2010; Jalali et al., 2010). However, real-world
data does not often fit the assumption that variables come
from Gaussian or discrete distributions. For example, word
counts in documents are nonnegative integers with many
zero values and hence are more appropriately modeled by
the Poisson distribution. Yet, an independent Poisson distribution would be insufficient because words are often either positively or negatively related to other words—e.g.
the words “machine” and “learning” would often co-occur
together in ICML papers (positive dependency) whereas
the words “deep” and “kernel” would rarely co-occur since
they usually refer to different topics (negative dependency).
Thus, a Poisson-like model that allows for dependencies
between words is desirable. As another example, the delay
times at airports are nonnegative continuous values that are
more closely modeled by an exponential distribution than
a Gaussian distribution but an independent exponential distribution is insufficient because delays at different airports
are often related (and sometimes causally related)—e.g. if
a flight from Los Angeles, CA (LAX) to San Francisco,
CA (SFO) is delayed then it is likely that the return flight
of the same airplane will also be delayed. Other examples of non-Gaussian and non-discrete data include highthroughput gene sequencing count data, crime statistics,
website visits, survival times, call times and delay times.
Though univariate distributions for these types of data have
been studied quite extensively, multivariate generalizations
have only been given limited attention. One basic approach
to forming dependent multivariate distributions is to assume that the marginal distributions are exponentially distributed (Marshall & Olkin, 1967; Embrechts et al., 2003)
or Poisson distributed (Karlis, 2003). This idea is related
to copula-based models (Bickel et al., 2009) in which a
probability distribution is decomposed into the univariate
marginal distributions and a copula distribution on the unit
hypercube that models the dependency between variables.
However, the exponential model in (Marshall & Olkin,

