Stochastic Block BFGS: Squeezing More Curvature out of Data

Robert M. Gower
Donald Goldfarb
Peter Richtárik

GOWERROBERT @ GMAIL . COM
GOLDFARB @ COLUMBIA . EDU
P ETER .R ICHTARIK @ ED . AC . UK

refer to Ht as the metric matrix 1 .

Abstract

The most successful classical optimization methods fit the
format (2), such as gradient
 descent (Ht = I), Newton’s
method Ht = ∇2 f (xt)−1 , and the quasi-Newton methods Ht ≈ ∇2 f (xt )−1 ; all with gt = ∇f (xt ). The difficulty in our setting is that the large number of data points
makes the computational costs of a single iteration of these
classical methods prohibitively expensive.

We propose a novel limited-memory stochastic
block BFGS update for incorporating enriched
curvature information in stochastic approximation methods. In our method, the estimate of
the inverse Hessian matrix that is maintained by
it, is updated at each iteration using a sketch
of the Hessian, i.e., a randomly generated compressed form of the Hessian. We propose several
sketching strategies, present a new quasi-Newton
method that uses stochastic block BFGS updates
combined with the variance reduction approach
SVRG to compute batch stochastic gradients,
and prove linear convergence of the resulting
method. Numerical tests on large-scale logistic regression problems reveal that our method is
more robust and substantially outperforms current state-of-the-art methods.

To amortize these costs, the current state-of-the-art methods use subsampling, where gt and Ht are calculated using
only derivatives of the subsampled function
def 1 P
fS (x) = |S|
i∈S fi (x),
def

1. Introduction

where S ⊆ [n] = {1, 2, . . . , n} is a subset selected uniformly at random. Using the subsampled gradient ∇fS (x)
as a proxy for the gradient is the basis for the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) method, but also for many successful
variance reduced methods (Schmidt et al., 2013; ShalevShwartz & Zhang, 2013; Johnson & Zhang, 2013; Konečný
& Richtárik, 2014; Defazio et al., 2014; Shalev-Shwartz &
Zhang, 2016; Konečný et al., 2016) that make use of the
subsampled gradient in calculating gt .

We design a new stochastic variable-metric (quasi-Newton)
method—the stochastic block BFGS method—for solving
the Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) problem:
Pn
def
(1)
minx∈Rd f (x) = n1 i=1 fi (x).

Recently, there has been an effort to calculate Ht using subsampled Hessian matrices ∇2 fT (xt ), where T ⊆ [n] is
sampled uniformly at random and independently of S (Erdogdu & Montanari, 2015; Roosta-Khorasani & Mahoney,
2016).

We assume the loss functions fi : Rd → R to be convex
and twice differentiable and focus on the setting where the
number of data points (examples) (n) is very large.
To solve (1), we employ iterative methods of the form
xt+1 = xt − ηHt gt ,

(2)

d

where η > 0 is a stepsize, gt ∈ R is an estimate of the gradient ∇f (xt ) and Ht ∈ Rd×d is a positive definite estimate
of the inverse Hessian matrix, that is Ht ≈ ∇2 f (xt )−1 . We
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

One fairly successful solution to these issues (Byrd
et al., 2015; Moritz et al., 2016) is to use a single
Hessian-vector product ∇2 fT (xt )v, where v ∈ Rd is
a suitably selected vector, to update Ht by the limitedmemory (L-BFGS) (Nocedal, 1980) version of the classical BFGS (Broyden, 1967; Fletcher, 1970; Goldfarb, 1970;
Shanno, 1971) method. Calculating this Hessian-vector
product can be done inexpensively using the directional
1
Methods of the form (2) can be seen as estimates of a gradient descent method under the metric defined by Ht . Indeed, let
def
hx, yiHt = Ht−1 x, y for any x, y ∈ Rd denote an inner product, then the gradient of f (xt ) in this metric is Ht ∇f (xt ).

