Efficient Multi-Instance Learning for Activity Recognition from Time Series
Data Using an Auto-Regressive Hidden Markov Model

Xinze Guan, Raviv Raich, Weng-Keen Wong
{GUAN , RAICH , WONG}@ EECS . OREGONSTATE . EDU
School of EECS, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331-5501 USA

Supervised Learning

Abstract
Activity recognition from sensor data has spurred
a great deal of interest due to its impact on health
care. Prior work on activity recognition from
multivariate time series data has mainly applied
supervised learning techniques which require a
high degree of annotation effort to produce training data with the start and end times of each activity. In order to reduce the annotation effort, we
present a weakly supervised approach based on
multi-instance learning. We introduce a generative graphical model for multi-instance learning
on time series data based on an auto-regressive
hidden Markov model. Our model has a number
of advantages, including the ability to produce
both bag and instance-level predictions as well
as an efficient exact inference algorithm based on
dynamic programming.

Multi-instance Learning

Bag 1: Positive

Bag 2: Negative

Figure 1. (Top) A synthesized sample of 3 dimensional accelerometer data created from the Opportunity data set (Chavarriaga et al., 2013). Each activity in this sequence is labeled, along
with its start and end times. The data from each axis is shown in a
different color. (Bottom) An example of a positive and a negative
bag in multi-instance learning applied to PAR, with “Drink from
Cup” as the activity of interest.

1. Introduction
Modern wearable sensors, such as accelerometers, have
provided an unobtrusive and cost-effective way to accurately measure body movement. In a “free-living” environment (i.e. outside a controlled laboratory environment),
the individual wearing the sensor performs a diverse set of
variable-length activities during their daily routine and the
data from these activities is collected. Typically, this data
is in the form of a continuous multivariate time series. This
data can then be used to perform physical activity recognition (PAR), which involves segmenting the time series
into individual activities and then identifying the individual activities. PAR is an important task in health surveillance and epidemiological research (Bauman et al., 2006)
as well as in assistance of individuals with cognitive disorders (Popescu & Mahnot, 2012).
Prior approaches to PAR have mainly employed supervised
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

learning techniques (see Section 2). These approaches require labeled sensor data for training, with the labels identifying the activity as well as the start and end times of each
activity as shown in Figure 1 (top). A viable annotation approach under free-living conditions is experience sampling
(Froehlich et al., 2007), which periodically prompts the
user to annotate their activities since their previous prompt.
In order to reduce annotation effort in experience sampling,
(Stikic et al., 2011) proposed a weakly supervised approach
based on multi-instance learning (MIL) (Dietterich et al.,
1997). In MIL, instead of labeling all instances, the annotator only needs to label bags of instances. A bag is labeled positive if and only if there is at least one positive
instance in the bag. The ambiguity of the positive bags
reduces the labeling effort but puts the burden of resolving the ambiguity on the learning algorithm. When MIL
is applied to activity recognition data, the bags correspond
to data in the time interval between experience sampling
prompts. Although these intervals (bags) typically contain
multiple activities, under a MIL setting, the bags are la-

