Learning End-to-end Video Classification with Rank-Pooling

Basura Fernando
BASURA . FERNANDO @ ANU . EDU . AU
Research School of Engineering, The Australian National University, ACT 2601, Australia
Stephen Gould
STEPHEN . GOULD @ ANU . EDU . AU
Research School of Computer Science, The Australian National University, ACT 2601, Australia

Abstract
We introduce a new model for representation
learning and classification of video sequences.
Our model is based on a convolutional neural
network coupled with a novel temporal pooling
layer. The temporal pooling layer relies on an
inner-optimization problem to efficiently encode
temporal semantics over arbitrarily long video
clips into a fixed-length vector representation.
Importantly, the representation and classification
parameters of our model can be estimated jointly
in an end-to-end manner by formulating learning
as a bilevel optimization problem. Furthermore,
the model can make use of any existing convolutional neural network architecture (e.g., AlexNet
or VGG) without modification or introduction of
additional parameters. We demonstrate our approach on action and activity recognition tasks.

1. Introduction
Representation learning from sequence data has many applications including, but not limited to, action and activity
recognition from video, gesture recognition, music classification, and gene regulatory network analysis. Neural
network-based supervised learning of representations from
sequence data has many advantages compared to handcrafted feature engineering. However, capturing the discriminative behaviour of sequence data is a very challenging problem; especially when neural network-based supervised learning is used. In this paper we present a principled
method to jointly learn discriminative dynamic representations and classification model parameters from video data
using convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
In recent years CNNs have become very popular for automatically learning representations from large collections
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

of static images. Many application domains, such as image classification, image segmentation and object detection, have benefited from such automatic representation
learning (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Girshick et al., 2014).
However, it is unclear how one may extend these highly
successful CNNs to sequence data; especially, when the
intended task requires capturing dynamics of video sequences (e.g., action and activity recognition). Indeed, capturing the discriminative dynamics of a video sequence remains an open problem. Some authors have propose to
use recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Du et al., 2015)
or extensions, such as long short term memory (LSTM)
networks (Srivastava et al., 2015), to classify video sequences. However, CNN-RNN/LSTM models introduce
a large number of additional parameters to capture sequence information. Consequently, these methods need
much more training data. For sequence data such as videos,
obtaining labelled data is more costly than obtaining labels
for static images. This is reflected in the size of datasets
used in action and activity recognition research today. Even
though there are datasets that consist of millions of labelled
images (e.g., ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009)), the largest
fully labelled action recognition dataset, UCF101, consists
of barely more than 13,000 videos (Soomro et al., 2012). It
is highly desirable, therefore, to develop frameworks that
can learn discriminative dynamics from video data without
the cost of additional training data or model complexity.
Perhaps the most straightforward CNN-based method for
encoding video sequence data is to apply temporal max
pooling or temporal average pooling over the video frames.
However, these methods do not capture any valuable time
varying information of the video sequences (Karpathy
et al., 2014). In fact, an arbitrary reshuffling of the frames
would produce an identical video representation under
these pooling schemes. Rank-pooling (Fernando et al.,
2015), on the other hand, attempts to encode time varying information by learning a linear ranking machine, one
for each video, to produce a chronological ordering of the
video’s frames based on their appearance (i.e., the CNN
features). The parameters of the ranking machine are then

