Fast D PP Sampling for Nyström with Application to Kernel Methods
Chengtao Li
Stefanie Jegelka
Suvrit Sra
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Abstract
The Nyström method has long been popular for
scaling up kernel methods. Its theoretical guarantees and empirical performance rely critically on
the quality of the landmarks selected. We study
landmark selection for Nyström using Determinantal Point Processes (D PPs), discrete probability models that allow tractable generation of diverse samples. We prove that landmarks selected
via D PPs guarantee bounds on approximation errors; subsequently, we analyze implications for
kernel ridge regression. Contrary to prior reservations due to cubic complexity of D PP sampling, we show that (under certain conditions)
Markov chain D PP sampling requires only linear time in the size of the data. We present several empirical results that support our theoretical analysis, and demonstrate the superior performance of D PP-based landmark selection compared with existing approaches.

1. Introduction
Low-rank matrix approximation is an important ingredient
of modern machine learning methods. Numerous learning
tasks rely on multiplication and inversion of matrices, operations that scale cubically in the number of data points N ,
and therefore quickly become a bottleneck for large data.
In such cases, low-rank matrix approximations promise
speedups with a tolerable loss in accuracy.
A notable instance is the Nyström method (Nyström, 1930;
Williams & Seeger, 2001), which takes a positive semidefinite matrix K 2 RN ⇥N as input, selects from it a small
subset C of columns K·,C , and constructs the approxima†
tion K̃ = K·,C KC,C
KC,· . The matrix K̃ is then used in
place of K, which can decrease runtimes from O(N 3 ) to
O(N |C|3 ), a huge savings (since typically |C| ⌧ N ).
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

CTLI @ MIT. EDU
STEFJE @ MIT. EDU
SUVRIT @ MIT. EDU

Since its introduction into machine learning, the Nyström
method has been applied to a wide spectrum of problems,
including kernel ICA (Bach & Jordan, 2003; Shen et al.,
2009), kernel and spectral methods in computer vision
(Belabbas & Wolfe, 2009a; Fowlkes et al., 2004), manifold learning (Talwalkar et al., 2008; 2013), regularization (Rudi et al., 2015), and efficient approximate sampling
(Affandi et al., 2013). Recent work (Cortes et al., 2010;
Bach, 2013; Alaoui & Mahoney, 2015) shows risk bounds
for Nyström applied to various kernel methods.
The most important step of the Nyström method is
the selection of the subset C, the so-called landmarks.
This choice governs the approximation error and subsequent performance of the approximated learning methods (Cortes et al., 2010). The most basic strategy is
to sample landmarks uniformly at random (Williams &
Seeger, 2001). More sophisticated non-uniform selection
strategies include deterministic greedy schemes (Smola
& Schölkopf, 2000), incomplete Cholesky decomposition
(Fine & Scheinberg, 2002; Bach & Jordan, 2005), sampling
with probabilities proportional to diagonal values (Drineas
& Mahoney, 2005) or to column norms (Drineas et al.,
2006), sampling based on leverage scores (Gittens & Mahoney, 2013), via K-means (Zhang et al., 2008), or using
submatrix determinants (Belabbas & Wolfe, 2009b).
We study landmark selection using Determinantal Point
Processes (D PP), discrete probability models that allow tractable sampling of diverse non-independent subsets (Macchi, 1975; Kulesza & Taskar, 2012). Our work
generalizes the determinant based scheme of Belabbas &
Wolfe (2009b).1 We refer to our scheme as D PP-Nyström,
and analyze it from several perspectives.
A key quantity in our analysis is the error of the Nyström
approximation. Suppose k is the target rank; then for selecting c k landmarks, Nyström’s error is typically measured using the Frobenius or spectral norm relative to the
1

The authors do not make any connection to D PPs.

