Experimental Design on a Budget for Sparse Linear Models and Applications
Sathya N. Ravi†
Vamsi K. Ithapu†
Sterling C. Johnson§ †
Vikas Singh†
†
University of Wisconsin Madison

Abstract
Budget constrained optimal design of experiments is a well studied problem. Although the
literature is very mature, not many strategies are
available when these design problems appear in
the context of sparse linear models commonly
encountered in high dimensional machine learning. In this work, we study this budget constrained design where the underlying regression
model involves a `1 -regularized linear function.
We propose two novel strategies: the first is motivated geometrically whereas the second is algebraic in nature. We obtain tractable algorithms
for this problem which also hold for a more general class of sparse linear models. We perform a
detailed set of experiments, on benchmarks and a
large neuroimaging study, showing that the proposed models are effective in practice. The latter
experiment suggests that these ideas may play a
small role in informing enrollment strategies for
similar scientific studies in the future.

1. Introduction
Experimental Design (ED) is a problem with deep foundations dating back at least to the early 1900s (Kempthorne,
1952; Kirk, 1982). Here, given the covariates xi ’s, an experimenter must conduct an experiment in order to obtain
the value of the dependent (or response) variables yi ’s. The
focus of much of the classical work on this topic is to maximize the amount of information that the full experiment
yields for a given (or least) amount of work. In many situations, each experiment or measurement may have a monetary cost associated with it. Given a fixed budget B 2 R+ ,
the budgeted version of the experimental design problem
is to choose the set of xi ’s for which we will conduct an
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

RAVI 5@ WISC . EDU
ITHAPU @ WISC . EDU
SCJ @ MEDICINE . WISC . EDU
VSINGH @ BIOSTAT. WISC . EDU
§†

William S. Middleton Memorial Veterans Hospital

experiment to obtain the corresponding yi ’s, while satisfying the budget constraint. As a simple example, the budget
constraint may restrict the number of yi ’s we may request,
i.e., the experimenter can perform at most B experiments.
As before, the selected subset must be a good prototype
for the entire dataset for model estimation purposes, e.g.,
: xi ! yi . These problems are studied under the umbrella of optimal design (Pukelsheim, 1993).
In recent years, there is a renewed interest in ED since
it provides a framework to study numerous adaptive data
acquisition scenarios. While randomization offers one solution (Recht et al., 2011), recent results demonstrate that
optimization based schemes yield a competitive alternative
(Bertsimas et al., 2015). Solutions to a number of interesting variants of the problem have been proposed, for instance, (Horel et al., 2014) assumes that the “cost” of a
response yi depends on participant i and that they may lie
about these costs and develops a mechanism. In vision, the
availability of crowd-sourced platforms has led to scenarios where we seek to acquire low cost reliable data; trusted
workers charge a premium per HIT (Li & Guo, 2013).
Apart from these results, active learning approaches also
make use of ED concepts, but the selection process there
is sequential. An important distinction in active learning
is that the algorithm chooses the next (subset of) examples
which the back-end machine learning algorithm needs labeled. The algorithm then proceeds and request labels for
more examples iteratively. Most ED formulations do not
offer this flexibility. Specifically, while these methods may
try to minimize the number of queries or labelings required
(for a pre-determined accuracy), we study a related but distinct question. If we fix the number of queries a priori, we
study the issue of choosing a subset such that the corresponding estimator is close to the estimator inferred from
the full dataset (i.e., yi for all xi were available). Further,
the algorithm gets no more chances to query the experimenter. For this formulation to make sense, the criteria for
subset selection must be closely tied to the later statistical
estimation task that the subset of samples will be used for.

