Fast Rate Analysis of Some Stochastic Optimization Algorithms

Chao Qu
Department of Mechanical Engineering, National University of Singapore
Huan Xu
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, National University of Singapore
Chong Jin Ong
Department of Mechanical Engineering , National University of Singapore

Abstract
In this paper, we revisit three fundamental
and popular stochastic optimization algorithms
(namely, Online Proximal Gradient, Regularized
Dual Averaging method and ADMM with online
proximal gradient) and analyze their convergence
speed under conditions weaker than those in literature. In particular, previous works showed that
these algorithms converge at a rate of O(ln T /T )
when√the loss function is strongly convex, and
O(1/ T ) in the weakly convex case. In contrast,
we relax the strong convexity assumption of the
loss function, and show that the algorithms converge at a rate O(ln T /T ) if the expectation of
the loss function is locally strongly convex. This
is a much weaker assumption and is satisfied by
many practical formulations including Lasso and
Logistic Regression. Our analysis thus extends
the applicability of these three methods, as well
as provides a general recipe for improving analysis of convergence rate for stochastic and online
optimization algorithms.

1. Introduction
The last decade has witnessed the surge of attention in big
data: learning and decision tasks involving datasets with
unprecedented size – e.g., data from computational biology, video, social networks – are becoming ubiquitous.
Big data brings in severe challenges: the memory cannot fit
the size of data, the computation time can be prohibitively
long, etc. A popular and powerful tool to overcome these
challenges is stochastic and online optimization methods,
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

A0117143@ U . NUS . EDU
ISEXUH @ NUS . EDU . SG

MPEONGCJ @ NUS . EDU . SG

as they draw one data point at a time (hence mitigate the
storage issue), and update the variable to optimize with
low complexity at each iteration (Shalev-Shwartz, 2011;
Zhang, 2004). Yet, stochastic optimization methods may
suffer from slow convergence. Take the (arguably simplest)
stochastic subgradient method
√ (SGD) as an example. SGD
converges at a rate of O(1/ T ), and hence requires a significant number of iterations if an accurate solution is in
need (Kushner & Yin, 2003).
To solve problems in the high-dimensional (i.e., p  n
setting), various formulations have been proposed based on
the idea of exploiting the lower dimensional structure such
as sparsity via regularization. For example, `1 norm regularization is widely used to obtain sparse solutions. SGD
cannot efficiently exploit the structure of such regularized
formulations. Fortunately, several algorithms have been
developed to successfully address this setting. Duchi’s
Forward-Backward-Splitting algorithm (Duchi et al., 2010;
Singer & Duchi, 2009), also termed online proximal gradient (OPG), is an online version of the celebrated proximal gradient method (Combettes & Wajs, 2005). Xiao’s
Regularized Dual Averaging method (RDA) (Xiao, 2009)
extends Nesterov’s work (Nesterov, 2009) into the online
and regularized version. Based upon these two fundamental algorithms, several variants have been developed.
Notably, Suzuki considers new variants of online ADMM
with online proximal gradient descent type method (OPGADMM) and regularized dual averaging type method
(RDA-ADMM) (Suzuki, 2013). OPG-ADMM is also independently developed by Ouyang et al (Ouyang et al., 2013).
It can solve problems with structured sparsity regularization such as overlapped group lasso (Jacob et al., 2009) or
low rank tensor estimation(Signoretto et al., 2010).
This paper studies the convergence speed of OPG, RDA
and OPG-ADMM. All these three √
methods are known to
achieve a convergence rate of O(1/ T ) when the function
to optimize is (weakly) convex (Duchi et al., 2010; Xiao,

