Bounded Off-Policy Evaluation with Missing Data for Course Recommendation
and Curriculum Design

William Hoiles
University of California, Los Angeles

WHOILES @ UCLA . EDU

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of California, Los Angeles

MIHAELA @ EE . UCLA . EDU

Abstract
Successfully recommending personalized course
schedules is a difficult problem given the diversity of students knowledge, learning behaviour,
and goals. This paper presents personalized
course recommendation and curriculum design
algorithms that exploit logged student data. The
algorithms are based on the regression estimator for contextual multi-armed bandits with a penalized variance term. Guarantees on the predictive performance of the algorithms are provided using empirical Bernstein bounds. We
also provide guidelines for including expert domain knowledge into the recommendations. Using undergraduate engineering logged data from
a post-secondary institution we illustrate the performance of these algorithms.

1. Introduction
The goal of this paper is to provide algorithms for personalized course recommendation and curriculum design.
In an academic setting it is difficult to apply online reinforcement learning algorithms as this requires controlling the students actions. Standard methods for counterfactual estimation can not be applied for course recommendation as there is an extremely large number of counterfactuals resulting from differences in students knowledge
backgrounds, learning behaviour, and learning goals. Missing data resulting from unobserved course schedules and
associated grades also impedes learning which courses to
recommend. These issues are also present for the optimal design of curricula for students. This paper presents
two algorithms for personalized course recommendation
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

and curriculum design that address these issues. The algorithms only require logged student data (i.e. historical
data) mitigating the difficulties associated with online data
collection. The logged student data depends on the courses
taken, their difficulty, concepts taught and style in which
they were taught as well as the students preferences, abilities, and knowledge, which are all evolving endogenously
as they take classes. Thus, our recommender algorithms
consider the evolving students characteristics when issuing
recommendations. The algorithms do not just learn the students and courses characteristics and then match them; a
richer structure is exploited: the algorithms consider the
teaching style, course characteristics, as well as the students evolving characteristics as they take classes. The algorithms can also incorporate expert predictions for missing data resulting in refinement of course and curriculum
recommendations. Guaranteed bounds are provided for the
algorithms to ensure that reliable course recommendations
and curricula are computed. Note that the algorithms can
be used to identify curriculum gaps by detecting that certain students have difficulties and get low GPAs in certain
classes. Such findings can be brought to the attention of
administrators, who can add new classes or remedial materials to reinforce student learning.
Course recommendation and curriculum design can be naturally formulated using contextual multi-armed bandits
(e.g. non-sequential, stateless Markov Decision Processes).
In contextual multi-armed bandits the logged historical data
consists of a collection of context, action, and reward tuples. An example of a context, action, reward tuple is the
previous grade point average, the courses selected, and the
resulting cumulative grade received. To perform off-policy
evaluation we utilize the regression estimator introduced
in (Li et al., 2015) in combination with a penalized variance term. The three main contributions of the paper are
the finite bounds on the evaluations from the regression estimator, methods to incorporate missing data into the regression estimator, and course recommendation and curric-

