Polynomial Networks and Factorization Machines:
New Insights and Efficient Training Algorithms
Mathieu Blondel
MATHIEU . BLONDEL @ LAB . NTT. CO . JP
Masakazu Ishihata
ISHIHATA . MASAKAZU @ LAB . NTT. CO . JP
Akinori Fujino
FUJINO . AKINORI @ LAB . NTT. CO . JP
Naonori Ueda
UEDA . NAONORI @ LAB . NTT. CO . JP
NTT Communication Science Laboratories, 2-4 Hikaridai Seika-cho Soraku-gun, Kyoto 619-0237, Japan

Abstract
Polynomial networks and factorization machines
are two recently-proposed models that can efficiently use feature interactions in classification
and regression tasks. In this paper, we revisit
both models from a unified perspective. Based
on this new view, we study the properties of both
models and propose new efficient training algorithms. Key to our approach is to cast parameter
learning as a low-rank symmetric tensor estimation problem, which we solve by multi-convex
optimization. We demonstrate our approach on
regression and recommender system tasks.

1. Introduction
Interactions between features play an important role in
many classification and regression tasks. One of the simplest approach to leverage such interactions consists in explicitly augmenting feature vectors with products of features (monomials), as in polynomial regression. Although
fast linear model solvers can be used (Chang et al., 2010;
Sonnenburg & Franc, 2010), an obvious drawback of this
kind of approach is that the number of parameters to estimate scales as O(dm ), where d is the number of features
and m is the order of interactions considered. As a result,
it is usually limited to second or third-order interactions.
Another popular approach consists in using a polynomial
kernel so as to implicitly map the data via the kernel trick.
The main advantage of this approach is that the number of
parameters to estimate in the model is actually independent
of d and m. However, the cost of storing and evaluating
the model is now proportional to the number of training instances. This is sometimes called the curse of kernelization
(Wang et al., 2010). Common ways to address the issue inProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

clude the Nyström method (Williams & Seeger, 2001), random features (Kar & Karnick, 2012) and sketching (Pham
& Pagh, 2013; Avron et al., 2014).
In this paper, in order to leverage feature interactions in
possibly very high-dimensional data, we consider models
which predict the output y ∈ R associated with an input
vector x ∈ Rd by
ŷK (x; λ, P ) :=

k
X
s=1

λs K(ps , x),

(1)

where λ = [λ1 , . . . , λk ]T ∈ Rk , P = [p1 , . . . , pk ] ∈
Rd×k , K is a kernel and k is a hyper-parameter. More
specifically, we focus on two specific choices of K which
allow us to use feature interactions: the homogeneous polynomial and the ANOVA kernels. Our contributions are as
follows. We show (Section 3) that choosing one kernel or
the other allows us to recover polynomial networks (PNs)
(Livni et al., 2014) and, surprisingly, factorization machines (FMs) (Rendle, 2010; 2012). Based on this new
view, we show important properties of PNs and FMs. Notably, we show for the first time that the objective function of arbitrary-order FMs is multi-convex (Section 4).
Unfortunately, the objective function of PNs is not multiconvex. To remedy this problem, we propose a lifted approach, based on casting parameter estimation as a lowrank tensor estimation problem (Section 5.1). Combined
with a symmetrization trick, this approach leads to a multiconvex problem, for both PNs and FMs (Section 5.2). We
demonstrate our approach on regression and recommender
system tasks.
Notation. We denote vectors, matrices and tensors using
lower-case, upper-case and calligraphic bold, e.g., w, W
m times
z }| {
and W. We denote the set of d × · · · × d real tensors by
m
m
Rd and the set of symmetric real tensors by Sd . We
use h·, ·i to denote vector, matrix and tensor inner product. Given x, we define a symmetric rank-one tensor by

