Automatic Construction of Nonparametric Relational Regression Models for
Multiple Time Series

Yunseong Hwang†1
Anh Tong†
Jaesik Choi†
†
Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology, Ulsan, 44919, Korea

Abstract
Gaussian Processes (GPs) provide a general and
analytically tractable way of modeling complex
time-varying, nonparametric functions. The Automatic Bayesian Covariance Discovery (ABCD)
system constructs natural-language description
of time-series data by treating unknown timeseries data nonparametrically using GP with a
composite covariance kernel function. Unfortunately, learning a composite covariance kernel
with a single time-series data set often results in
less informative kernel that may not give qualitative, distinctive descriptions of data. We address
this challenge by proposing two relational kernel learning methods which can model multiple
time-series data sets by finding common, shared
causes of changes. We show that the relational
kernel learning methods find more accurate models for regression problems on several real-world
data sets; US stock data, US house price index
data and currency exchange rate data.

1. Introduction
Gaussian Processes (GPs) provide a general and analytically tractable way of capturing complex time-varying,
nonparametric functions. The time varying parameters of
GPs can be explained as a composition of base kernels such
as linearity, smoothness or periodicity in that covariance
kernels are closed under addition and multiplication. The
Automatic Bayesian Covariance Discovery (ABCD) system (Lloyd et al., 2014) constructs natural-language description of time-series data by treating unknown timeseries data nonparametrically using GPs.
1

Currently at NAVER Corp., Seongnam, 13561, Korea
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

YUNSEONG . HWANG @ NAVERCORP. COM
ANHTH @ UNIST. AC . KR
JAESIK @ UNIST. AC . KR

It is important to find data dependencies and structure in
time-series data. GPs represent data in a non-parametric
way with a mean function and a covariance kernel function. The covariance kernel function determines correlation patterns between the data points. Therefore, learning
a proper kernel is essential to model data points with GPs
(Rasmussen & Williams, 2006; Diosan et al., 2007; Bing
et al., 2010; Klenske et al., 2013; Lloyd, 2014). Unfortunately, finding an appropriate kernel often requires manual encoding by human experts or reduction to a simple
problem estimating parameters of a fixed, predefined kernel structure.
The covariance kernels of GPs are known to be closed under addition and multiplication (Duvenaud et al., 2013).
Thus, a sequence of complex real-valued variables could
be explained by a compositional kernel with base kernels
and kernel operations (Bach et al., 2004; Candela & Rasmussen, 2005; Wilson & Adams, 2013). Recently, kernel operation grammars and a framework for an automatic
discovery of a compositional kernel have been proposed
(Lloyd et al., 2014). This framework is flexible and interpretable in that the framework automatically discovers a
complex composition of interpretable base kernels. Once
a compositional kernel is found, the individual base components can be construed in a human readable form. This
capability for decomposition into multiple components and
for interpretability, shed light on finding shared structure
given multiple sets of data.
Finding a shared structure in multiple sequences may reveal
the common covariance structures of the sequences beyond
the patterns in a single sequence (Chu et al., 2006; Xu et al.,
2009; Wilson & Ghahramani, 2011). As a typical example
in economics, the multivariate view is central where each
variable is normally viewed in the context of relationships
to other variables, as with exchange rates affecting gross
domestic product (GDP).
We propose two Relational Multi-Kernel Learning methods
(explained in Section 3) to find a shared covariance ker-

