CryptoNets: Applying Neural Networks to Encrypted Data
with High Throughput and Accuracy

Nathan Dowlin1
Department of Mathematics, Princeton University
Ran Gilad-Bachrach
Kim Laine
Kristin Lauter
Michael Naehrig
John Wernsing
Microsoft Research, Redmond

Abstract

NDOWLIN @ PRINCETON . EDU

RANG @ MICROSOFT. COM
KIM . LAINE @ MICROSOFT. COM
KLAUTER @ MICROSOFT. COM
MNAEHRIG @ MICROSOFT. COM
JOHN . WERNSING @ MICROSOFT. COM

1. Introduction

Applying machine learning to a problem which
involves medical, financial, or other types of sensitive data, not only requires accurate predictions but also careful attention to maintaining
data privacy and security. Legal and ethical requirements may prevent the use of cloud-based
machine learning solutions for such tasks. In
this work, we will present a method to convert
learned neural networks to CryptoNets, neural
networks that can be applied to encrypted data.
This allows a data owner to send their data in an
encrypted form to a cloud service that hosts the
network. The encryption ensures that the data remains confidential since the cloud does not have
access to the keys needed to decrypt it. Nevertheless, we will show that the cloud service is
capable of applying the neural network to the encrypted data to make encrypted predictions, and
also return them in encrypted form. These encrypted predictions can be sent back to the owner
of the secret key who can decrypt them. Therefore, the cloud service does not gain any information about the raw data nor about the prediction it made. We demonstrate CryptoNets on
the MNIST optical character recognition tasks.
CryptoNets achieve 99% accuracy and can make
around 59000 predictions per hour on a single
PC. Therefore, they allow high throughput, accurate, and private predictions.

Consider a hospital that would like to use a cloud service
to predict the probability of readmission of a patient within
the next 30 days, in order to improve the quality of care and
to reduce costs. Due to ethical and legal requirements regarding the confidentiality of patient information, the hospital might be prohibited from using such a service. In
this work we present a way by which the hospital can use
this valuable service without sacrificing patient privacy. In
the proposed protocol, the hospital encrypts the private information and sends it in encrypted form to the prediction
provider, referred to as the cloud in our discussion below.
The cloud is able to compute the prediction over the encrypted data records and sends back the results that the hospital can decrypt and read. The encryption scheme uses a
public key for encryption and a secret key (private key) for
decryption. It is important to note that the cloud does not
have access to the secret key, so it cannot decrypt the data
nor can it decrypt the prediction. The only information it
obtains during the process is that it did perform a prediction
on behalf of the hospital. Hence, the cloud can charge the
hospital for its services, but does not learn anything about
the patient’s medical files or the predicted outcomes. This
procedure allows for private and secure predictions without
requiring the establishment of trust between the data owner
and the service provider. This may have applications in
fields such as health, finance, business, and possibly others.

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

1
This work was done while the first author was at Microsoft
Research, Redmond

It is important to note that this work focuses on the inference stage. We make the assumption that the cloud already
has a model. In our case it would be a neural network that

