Generative Adversarial Text to Image Synthesis

Scott Reed, Zeynep Akata, Xinchen Yan, Lajanugen Logeswaran
REEDSCOT 1 , AKATA 2 , XCYAN 1 , LLAJAN 1
Bernt Schiele, Honglak Lee
SCHIELE 2 , HONGLAK 1
1
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA (UMICH . EDU)
2
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany (MPI - INF. MPG . DE)

Abstract
Automatic synthesis of realistic images from text
would be interesting and useful, but current AI
systems are still far from this goal. However, in
recent years generic and powerful recurrent neural network architectures have been developed
to learn discriminative text feature representations. Meanwhile, deep convolutional generative
adversarial networks (GANs) have begun to generate highly compelling images of specific categories, such as faces, album covers, and room
interiors. In this work, we develop a novel deep
architecture and GAN formulation to effectively
bridge these advances in text and image modeling, translating visual concepts from characters
to pixels. We demonstrate the capability of our
model to generate plausible images of birds and
flowers from detailed text descriptions.

this small bird has a pink
this magnificent fellow is
breast and crown, and black almost all black with a red
primaries and secondaries. crest, and white cheek patch.

the flower has petals that
are bright pinkish purple
with white stigma

this white and yellow flower
have thin white petals and a
round yellow stamen

Figure 1. Examples of generated images from text descriptions.
Left: captions are from zero-shot (held out) categories, unseen
text. Right: captions are from the training set.

1. Introduction
In this work we are interested in translating text in the form
of single-sentence human-written descriptions directly into
image pixels. For example, “this small bird has a short,
pointy orange beak and white belly” or ”the petals of this
flower are pink and the anther are yellow”. The problem of
generating images from visual descriptions gained interest
in the research community, but it is far from being solved.

properties of attribute representations are attractive, attributes are also cumbersome to obtain as they may require
domain-specific knowledge. In comparison, natural language offers a general and flexible interface for describing
objects in any space of visual categories. Ideally, we could
have the generality of text descriptions with the discriminative power of attributes.

Traditionally this type of detailed visual information about
an object has been captured in attribute representations distinguishing characteristics the object category encoded
into a vector (Farhadi et al., 2009; Kumar et al., 2009;
Parikh & Grauman, 2011; Lampert et al., 2014), in particular to enable zero-shot visual recognition (Fu et al., 2014;
Akata et al., 2015), and recently for conditional image generation (Yan et al., 2015).

Recently, deep convolutional and recurrent networks for
text have yielded highly discriminative and generalizable (in the zero-shot learning sense) text representations
learned automatically from words and characters (Reed
et al., 2016). These approaches exceed the previous stateof-the-art using attributes for zero-shot visual recognition
on the Caltech-UCSD birds database (Wah et al., 2011),
and also are capable of zero-shot caption-based retrieval.
Motivated by these works, we aim to learn a mapping directly from words and characters to image pixels.

While the discriminative power and strong generalization
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

To solve this challenging problem requires solving two subproblems: first, learn a text feature representation that captures the important visual details; and second, use these fea-

