Learning to Filter with Predictive State Inference Machines
Wen Sun†
Arun Venkatraman†
Byron Boots⇤
J. Andrew Bagnell†
†
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
⇤
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA

Abstract
Latent state space models are a fundamental
and widely used tool for modeling dynamical
systems. However, they are difficult to learn
from data and learned models often lack performance guarantees on inference tasks such as filtering and prediction. In this work, we present
the P REDICTIVE S TATE I NFERENCE M ACHINE
(PSIM), a data-driven method that considers the
inference procedure on a dynamical system as
a composition of predictors. The key idea is
that rather than first learning a latent state space
model, and then using the learned model for inference, PSIM directly learns predictors for inference in predictive state space. We provide theoretical guarantees for inference, in both realizable and agnostic settings, and showcase practical performance on a variety of simulated and
real world robotics benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Data driven approaches to modeling dynamical systems is
important in applications ranging from time series forecasting for market predictions to filtering in robotic systems. The classic generative approach is to assume that
each observation is correlated to the value of a latent
state and then model the dynamical system as a graphical model, or latent state space model, such as a Hidden Markov Model (HMM). To learn the parameters of the
model from observed data, Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) based methods attempt to maximize the likelihood of the observations with respect to the parameters.
This approach has proven to be highly successful in some
applications (Coates et al., 2008; Roweis & Ghahramani,
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

WENSUN @ CS . CMU . EDU
ARUNVENK @ CS . CMU . EDU
BBOOTS @ CC . GATECH . EDU
DBAGNELL @ RI . CMU . EDU

1999), but has at least two shortcomings. First, it may be
difficult to find an appropriate parametrization for the latent states. If the model is parametrized incorrectly, the
learned model may exhibit poor performance on inference
tasks such as Bayesian filtering or predicting multiple time
steps into the future. Second, learning a latent state space
model is difficult. The MLE objective is non-convex and
finding the globally optimal solution is often computationally infeasible. Instead, algorithms such as ExpectationMaximization (EM) are used to compute locally optimal
solutions. Although the maximizer of the likelihood objective can promise good performance guarantees when it is
used for inference, the locally optimal solutions returned
by EM typically do not have any performance guarantees.
Spectral Learning methods are a popular alternative to
MLE for learning models of dynamical systems (Boots,
2012; Boots et al., 2011; Hsu et al., 2009; Hefny et al.,
2015). This family of algorithms provides theoretical guarantees on discovering the global optimum for the model parameters under the assumptions of infinite training data and
realizability. However, in the non-realizable setting — i.e.
model mismatch (e.g., using learned parameters of a Linear Dynamical System (LDS) model for a non-linear dynamical system) — these algorithms lose any performance
guarantees on using the learned model for filtering or other
inference tasks. For example, Kulesza et al. (2014) shows
when the model rank is lower than the rank of the underlying dynamical system, the inference performance of the
learned model may be arbitrarily bad.
Both EM and spectral learning suffer from limited theoretical guarantees: from model mismatch for spectral methods,
and from computational hardness for finding the global optimality of non-convex objectives for MLE-based methods.
In scenarios where our ultimate goal is to infer some quantity from observed data, a natural solution is to skip the
step of learning a model, and instead directly optimize the
inference procedure. Toward this end, we generalize the
supervised message-passing Inference Machine approach

