Control of Memory, Active Perception, and Action in Minecraft

Junhyuk Oh
Valliappa Chockalingam
Satinder Singh
Honglak Lee
Computer Science & Engineering, University of Michigan

1. Introduction
Deep learning approaches (surveyed in LeCun et al., 2015;
Schmidhuber, 2015) have made advances in many lowlevel perceptual supervised learning problems (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012; Girshick et al., 2014; Simonyan & Zisserman,
2015). This success has been extended to reinforcement
learning (RL) problems that involve visual perception. For
example, the Deep Q-Network (DQN) (Mnih et al., 2015)
architecture has been shown to successfully learn to play
many Atari 2600 games in the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) benchmark (Bellemare et al., 2013) by learning visual features useful for control directly from raw pixels using Q-Learning (Watkins & Dayan, 1992).
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

First-Person
View

In this paper, we introduce a new set of reinforcement learning (RL) tasks in Minecraft (a
flexible 3D world). We then use these tasks
to systematically compare and contrast existing deep reinforcement learning (DRL) architectures with our new memory-based DRL architectures. These tasks are designed to emphasize,
in a controllable manner, issues that pose challenges for RL methods including partial observability (due to first-person visual observations),
delayed rewards, high-dimensional visual observations, and the need to use active perception in
a correct manner so as to perform well in the
tasks. While these tasks are conceptually simple
to describe, by virtue of having all of these challenges simultaneously they are difficult for current DRL architectures. Additionally, we evaluate the generalization performance of the architectures on environments not used during training. The experimental results show that our new
architectures generalize to unseen environments
better than existing DRL architectures.

Top-Down
View

Abstract

JUNHYUK @ UMICH . EDU
VALLI @ UMICH . EDU
BAVEJA @ UMICH . EDU
HONGLAK @ UMICH . EDU

(a) t=3

(b) t=10

(c) t=11

(d) t=19

Figure 1. Example task in Minecraft. In this task, the agent should
visit the red block if the indicator (next to the start location) is
yellow. Otherwise, if the indicator is green, it should visit the blue
block. The top row shows the agent’s first-person observation.
The bottom row visualizes the map and the agent’s location; this
is not available to the agent. (a) The agent observes the yellow
indicator. (b) The agent looks left and sees the blue block, (c)
but it decides to keep going straight having previously seen the
yellow indicator. (d) Finally, it visits the red block and receives a
positive reward.

Recently, researchers have explored problems that require
faculties associated with higher-level cognition (e.g., inferring simple general purpose algorithms: Graves et al.,
2014, and, Q&A: Weston et al., 2015). Most of these
advances, however, are restricted to the supervised learning setting, which provides clear error signals. In this paper, we are interested in extending this success to similarly
cognition-inspired RL tasks. Specifically, this paper introduces a set of tasks in Minecraft1 , a flexible 3D world in
which an agent can collect resources, build structures, and
survive attacks from enemies. Our RL tasks (one example is illustrated in Figure 1) not only have the usual RL
challenges of partial observability, high-dimensional (visual) perception, and delayed reward, but also require an
agent to develop movement policies by learning how to use
its active perception to observe useful information and collect reward. In addition, our RL tasks require an agent to
learn to use any memory it possesses including its interaction with active perception which feeds observations into
1

https://minecraft.net/

