Dynamic Memory Networks for Visual and Textual Question Answering

Caiming Xiong*, Stephen Merity*, Richard Socher
Salesforce Inc., CA USA

Abstract

{CXIONG , SMERITY, RSOCHER}SALESFORCE . COM
*indicates equal contribution.

Episodic Memory

Episodic Memory
Answer

Neural network architectures with memory and
attention mechanisms exhibit certain reasoning capabilities required for question answering.
One such architecture, the dynamic memory network (DMN), obtained high accuracy on a variety of language tasks. However, it was not shown
whether the architecture achieves strong results
for question answering when supporting facts are
not marked during training or whether it could
be applied to other modalities such as images.
Based on an analysis of the DMN, we propose
several improvements to its memory and input
modules. Together with these changes we introduce a novel input module for images in order
to be able to answer visual questions. Our new
DMN+ model improves the state of the art on
both the Visual Question Answering dataset and
the bAbI-10k text question-answering dataset
without supporting fact supervision.

1. Introduction
Neural network based methods have made tremendous
progress in image and text classification (Krizhevsky et al.,
2012; Socher et al., 2013b). However, only recently has
progress been made on more complex tasks that require
logical reasoning. This success is based in part on the
addition of memory and attention components to complex
neural networks. For instance, memory networks (Weston
et al., 2015b) are able to reason over several facts written in
natural language or (subject, relation, object) triplets. Attention mechanisms have been successful components in
both machine translation (Bahdanau et al., 2015; Luong
et al., 2015) and image captioning models (Xu et al., 2015).
The dynamic memory network (Kumar et al., 2015)
(DMN) is one example of a neural network model that has
both a memory component and an attention mechanism.
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

Attention
Mechanism

Memory
Update

Input Module
John moved to the garden.
John got the apple there.

Kitchen

Question

Answer

Attention
Mechanism

Memory
Update

Input Module

Palm

Question

What kind of
tree is in the
background?

Where is the
apple?

John moved to the kitchen.
Sandra got the milk there.
John dropped the apple.
John moved to the office.

(a) Text Question-Answering

(b) Visual Question-Answering

Figure 1. Question Answering over text and images using a Dynamic Memory Network.

The DMN yields state of the art results on question answering with supporting facts marked during training, sentiment
analysis, and part-of-speech tagging.
We analyze the DMN components, specifically the input
module and memory module, to improve question answering. We propose a new input module which uses a two
level encoder with a sentence reader and input fusion layer
to allow for information flow between sentences. For the
memory, we propose a modification to gated recurrent units
(GRU) (Chung et al., 2014). The new GRU formulation incorporates attention gates that are computed using global
knowledge over the facts. Unlike before, the new DMN+
model does not require that supporting facts (i.e. the facts
that are relevant for answering a particular question) are
labeled during training. The model learns to select the important facts from a larger set.
In addition, we introduce a new input module to represent
images. This module is compatible with the rest of the
DMN architecture and its output is fed into the memory
module. We show that the changes in the memory module
that improved textual question answering also improve visual question answering. Both tasks are illustrated in Fig. 1.

2. Dynamic Memory Networks
We begin by outlining the DMN for question answering
and the modules as presented in Kumar et al. (2015).
The DMN is a general architecture for question answering

