Dictionary Learning for Massive Matrix Factorization
Arthur Mensch
Parietal team, Inria, CEA, Paris-Saclay University. Neurospin, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
Julien Mairal
Thoth team, Inria, Grenoble, France

ARTHUR . MENSCH @ M 4 X . ORG

JULIEN . MAIRAL @ INRIA . FR

Bertrand Thirion
BETRAND . THIRION @ INRIA . FR
Gaël Varoquaux
GAEL . VAROQUAUX @ INRIA . FR
Parietal team, Inria, CEA, Paris-Saclay University. Neurospin, Gif-sur-Yvette, France

Abstract
Sparse matrix factorization is a popular tool to
obtain interpretable data decompositions, which
are also effective to perform data completion
or denoising. Its applicability to large datasets
has been addressed with online and randomized
methods, that reduce the complexity in one of
the matrix dimension, but not in both of them.
In this paper, we tackle very large matrices in
both dimensions. We propose a new factorization
method that scales gracefully to terabyte-scale
datasets. Those could not be processed by previous algorithms in a reasonable amount of time.
We demonstrate the efficiency of our approach on
massive functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(fMRI) data, and on matrix completion problems
for recommender systems, where we obtain significant speed-ups compared to state-of-the art
coordinate descent methods.
Matrix factorization is a flexible tool for uncovering latent
factors in low-rank or sparse models. For instance, building on low-rank structure, it has proven very powerful for
matrix completion, e.g. in recommender systems (Srebro
et al., 2004; Candès & Recht, 2009). In signal processing and computer vision, matrix factorization with a sparse
regularization is often called dictionary learning and has
proven very effective for denoising and visual feature encoding (see Mairal, 2014, for a review). It is also flexible
enough to accommodate a large set of constraints and regularizations, and has gained significant attention in scientific
domains where interpretability is a key aspect, such as geProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

netics and neuroscience (Varoquaux et al., 2011).
As a widely-used model, the literature of matrix factorization is very rich and two main classes of formulations have
emerged. The first one addresses an optimization problem involving a convex penalty, such as the trace or max
norms (Srebro et al., 2004). These penalties promote lowrank structures, have strong theoretical guarantees (Candès
& Recht, 2009), but they do not encourage sparse factors
and lack scalability for very-large datasets. For these reasons, our paper is focused on a second type of approach,
that relies on nonconvex optimization. Specifically, the motivation of our work originally came from the need to analyze huge-scale fMRI datasets, and the difficulty of current
algorithms to process them.
To gain scalability, stochastic (or online) optimization
methods have been developed; unlike classical alternate
minimization procedures, they learn matrix decompositions by observing a single matrix column (or row) at each
iteration. In other words, they stream data along one matrix
dimension. Their cost per iteration is significantly reduced,
leading to faster convergence in various practical contexts.
More precisely, two approaches have been particularly successful: stochastic gradient descent (see Bottou, 2010) has
been widely used in recommender systems (see Bell & Koren, 2007; Rendle & Schmidt-Thieme, 2008; Rendle, 2010;
Blondel et al., 2015, and references therein), and stochastic
majorization-minimization methods for dictionary learning
with sparse and/or structured regularization (Mairal et al.,
2010; Mairal, 2013). Yet, stochastic algorithms for dictionary learning are currently unable to deal efficiently with
matrices that are large in both dimensions.
In a somehow orthogonal way, the growth of dataset size
has proven to be manageable by randomized methods,
that exploit random projections (Johnson & Lindenstrauss,
1984; Bingham & Mannila, 2001) to reduce data dimension

