A Random Matrix Approach to Echo-State Neural Networks

Romain Couillet
CentraleSupélec, 91192 Gif-sur-Yvette, FRANCE

ROMAIN . COUILLET @ CENTRALESUPELEC . FR

Gilles Wainrib
Ecole Normale Suprieure, 75005 Paris, FRANCE

GILLES . WAINRIB @ ENS . FR

Hafiz Tiomoko Ali
CentraleSupélec, 91192 Gif-sur-Yvette, FRANCE

HAFIZ . TIOMOKOALI @ CENTRALESUPELEC . FR

Harry Sevi
ENS Lyon, 69000 Lyon, FRANCE

HARRY. SEVI @ ENS - LYON . FR

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks, especially in their
linear version, have provided many qualitative
insights on their performance under different
configurations. This article provides, through a
novel random matrix framework, the quantitative
counterpart of these performance results, specifically in the case of echo-state networks. Beyond
mere insights, our approach conveys a deeper understanding on the core mechanism under play
for both training and testing.

1. Introduction
Echo-state networks (ESN’s) are part of the broader family of recurrent neural networks, specifically dedicated
to handling time-series related tasks (such as prediction,
non-linear interpolation, etc.) (Jaeger, 2001a;b). Their
main feature, as opposed to more conventional neural networks, is to rely on a fixed (but generally randomly chosen) connectivity matrix, the so-called reservoir, and only
to enforce network-to-sink edges during the training phase.
This reduces overfitting but in turn only allows for shortterm memorization capabilities, unlike backward propagated neural networks that instead target long-term memory.
The fact that the reservoir is chosen once and for all, instead
of constantly being updated, eases the theoretical analysis
of these networks. As such, by means of a succession of
works (e.g., (Jaeger, 2001a; Ganguli et al., 2008; Ganguli
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Echo-state neural network.

& Sompolinsky, 2010; Strauss et al., 2012; Charles et al.,
2014)), many qualitative aspects of ESN’s have been fairly
well understood. In particular, it has been made clear that
both the operator norm and the spectral radius of the connectivity matrix play a central role in the ESN performance,
that normal versus non-normal connectivity matrices convey strikingly different behavior (White et al., 2004), etc.
However, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, there has
never been an attempt to turn these qualitative considerations into concrete quantitative figures of the end-to-end
neural network performance (such as here the reconstruction mean square error).
The objective of the present article is to provide a first theoretical analysis of the (mean-square error) performance of
linear ESN’s with internal noise for both the training and
the testing tasks (an illustration of such a network is depicted in Figure 1). To this end, we shall leverage recent
tools from the field of random matrix theory (the applications of which are so far almost not existent in neural
networks) and shall conveniently work under the assumption that both the reservoir size n and the training (or test-

