Fast Algorithms for Segmented Regression

Jayadev Acharya
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

JAYADEV @ MIT. EDU

Ilias Diakonikolas
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, MA 90089, USA

DIAKONIK @ USC . EDU

Jerry Li
Ludwig Schmidt∗
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

JERRYZLI @ MIT. EDU
LUDWIGS @ MIT. EDU

Abstract
We study the fixed design segmented regression
problem: Given noisy samples from a piecewise
linear function f , we want to recover f up to a
desired accuracy in mean-squared error.
Previous rigorous approaches for this problem
rely on dynamic programming (DP) and, while
sample efficient, have running time quadratic
in the sample size. As our main contribution,
we provide new sample near-linear time algorithms for the problem that – while not being
minimax optimal – achieve a significantly better
sample-time tradeoff on large datasets compared
to the DP approach. Our experimental evaluation shows that, compared with the DP approach,
our algorithms provide a convergence rate that is
only off by a factor of 2 to 4, while achieving
speedups of three orders of magnitude.

dent observations are corrupted by random noise. More
specifically, we assume that there exists a family of functions F such that for some f ∈ F the following holds:
yi = f (xi ) + i , where the i ’s are i.i.d. random variables
drawn from a “tame” distribution such as a Gaussian (later,
we also consider model misspecification).

1. Introduction

Throughout this paper, we consider the classical notion of
Mean Squared Error (MSE) to measure the performance
(risk) of an estimator. As expected, the minimax risk depends on the family F that f comes from. The natural
case that f is linear is fully understood: It is well-known
that the least-squares estimator is statistically efficient and
runs in sample-linear time. The more general case that f is
non-linear, but satisfies some well-defined structural constraint has been extensively studied in a variety of contexts
(see, e.g., (Gallant & A., 1973; Feder, 1975; Friedman,
1991; Bai & Perron, 1998; Yamamoto & Perron, 2013;
Kyng et al., 2015; Avron et al., 2013; Meyer, 2008; Chatterjee et al., 2015)). In contrast to the linear case, this more
general setting is not well-understood from an informationtheoretic and/or computational aspect.

We study the regression problem – a fundamental inference
task with numerous applications that has received tremendous attention in machine learning and statistics during the
past fifty years (see, e.g., (Mosteller & Tukey, 1977) for a
classical textbook). Roughly speaking, in a (fixed design)
regression problem, we are given a set of n observations
(xi , yi ), where the yi ’s are the dependent variables and the
xi ’s are the independent variables, and our goal is to model
the relationship between them. The typical assumptions
are that (i) there exists a simple function f that (approximately) models the underlying relation, and (ii) the depen-

In this paper, we focus on the case that the function f is
promised to be piecewise linear with a given number k of
unknown pieces (segments). This is known as fixed design segmented regression, and has received considerable
attention in the statistics community (Gallant & A., 1973;
Feder, 1975; Bai & Perron, 1998; Yamamoto & Perron,
2013). The special case of piecewise polynomial functions
(splines) has been extensively used in the context of inference, including density estimation and regression, see,
e.g., (Wegman & Wright, 1983; Friedman, 1991; Stone,
1994; Stone et al., 1997; Meyer, 2008).

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

Information-theoretic aspects of the segmented regression
problem are well-understood: Roughly speaking, the min∗

Authors ordered alphabetically.

