Dropout Distillation

Samuel Rota Bulò
FBK-irst, Trento, Italy

ROTABULO @ FBK . EU

Lorenzo Porzi
FBK-irst, Trento, Italy

PORZI @ FBK . EU

Peter Kontschieder
Mapillary, Graz, Austria - Microsoft Research, Cambridge, UK

Abstract
Dropout is a popular stochastic regularization
technique for deep neural networks that works
by randomly dropping (i.e. zeroing) units from
the network during training. This randomization process allows to implicitly train an ensemble of exponentially many networks sharing the
same parametrization, which should be averaged
at test time to deliver the final prediction. A typical workaround for this intractable averaging operation consists in scaling the layers undergoing
dropout randomization. This simple rule called
“standard dropout” is efficient, but might degrade
the accuracy of the prediction. In this work we
introduce a novel approach, coined “dropout distillation”, that allows us to train a predictor in
a way to better approximate the intractable, but
preferable, averaging process, while keeping under control its computational efficiency. We are
thus able to construct models that are as efficient as standard dropout, or even more efficient,
while being more accurate. Experiments on standard benchmark datasets demonstrate the validity
of our method, yielding consistent improvements
over conventional dropout.

1. Introduction
Dropout is a popular regularization technique introduced
in the context of neural networks that improves on the generalization capabilities of a predictor by preventing the coadaptation of features (Hinton et al., 2012; Srivastava et al.,
2014). The idea is to randomly set to zero (a.k.a. dropout)
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

PKONTSCHIEDER @ MAPILLARY. COM

hidden and/or input units of a neural network during each
iteration of the optimization algorithm in order to discourage the network from relying on single features, but rather
consider the output of committees of features. This simple
idea has been playing a pivotal role in the field for the last
few years by effectively overcoming overfitting issues and
pushing the performance of neural networks to new stateof-the-art levels in many application areas.
Since the introduction of dropout, several works in the literature have attempted to explain its success in avoiding
overfitting. Some works supported the view of dropout
performing stochastic gradient descent of some regularized
loss function (Baldi & Sadowski, 2013), or as an adaptive
L2 regularizer (Wager et al., 2013), or more recently as an
approximation to a well-known Bayesian model, namely
the deep Gaussian process (Gal & Ghahramani, 2015a).
Thanks to its regularizing effect, dropout contributes to reducing the inherent complexity, and thus the variance of
the model it is applied to. This is formally stated in (Gao
& Zhou, 2014), where the authors show that dropout delivers an exponential reduction in the Rademacher complexity
of deep neural networks. While it is intuitive that dropout
contributes to reducing the generalization error by keeping
the variance of the model under control, it seems less obvious that dropout might also play a role in reducing the
model bias. The latter property arises from the ability of
dropout training to escape poor, local minima during the
optimization of the empirical risk (Jain et al., 2015).
Dropout training intuitively trains an ensemble of exponentially many neural networks, one for each configuration of
dropped units, while sharing the same parametrization. The
goal is to minimize the expected empirical risk of the ensemble, which is however an intractable objective. Nevertheless, it can be effectively optimized via a stochastic gradient descent procedure, where the randomization process
involves also dropping out units. At test time, the contribution from each network in the ensemble should be av-

