Model-Free Imitation Learning with Policy Optimization

Jonathan Ho
Jayesh K. Gupta
Stefano Ermon
Stanford University

HOJ @ CS . STANFORD . EDU
JKG @ CS . STANFORD . EDU
ERMON @ CS . STANFORD . EDU

Abstract
In imitation learning, an agent learns how to behave in an environment with an unknown cost
function by mimicking expert demonstrations.
Existing imitation learning algorithms typically
involve solving a sequence of planning or reinforcement learning problems. Such algorithms
are therefore not directly applicable to large,
high-dimensional environments, and their performance can significantly degrade if the planning
problems are not solved to optimality. Under the
apprenticeship learning formalism, we develop
alternative model-free algorithms for finding a
parameterized stochastic policy that performs at
least as well as an expert policy on an unknown
cost function, based on sample trajectories from
the expert. Our approach, based on policy gradients, scales to large continuous environments
with guaranteed convergence to local minima.

1. Introduction
To use reinforcement learning, the learner needs access to
a cost or reward signal to identify desirable outcomes. The
dependence between the cost function and the corresponding optimal policy, however, is generally complex, as it involves planning. In practice, eliciting a cost function that
achieves desired behavior can be difficult (Bagnell, 2015).
An alternative and often more practical approach, called
imitation learning, is to encode preferences and differentiate between desirable and undesirable outcomes using
demonstrations provided by an expert (Pomerleau, 1991;
Russell, 1998).
The simplest approach to imitation learning is behavioral
cloning, in which the goal is to learn the relationship between states and optimal actions as a supervised learning
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

problem (Pomerleau, 1991). While conceptually simple
and theoretically sound (Syed & Schapire, 2010), small inaccuracies of the learned model compound over time, and
can lead to situations that are quite different from the ones
encountered during training. This is often referred to as the
problem of cascading errors, and is related to covariate
shift (Ross & Bagnell, 2010; Bagnell, 2015).
Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) methods (Russell,
1998; Ng & Russell, 2000; Ratliff et al., 2006; Ziebart et al.,
2008), which are some of the most successful approaches
to imitation learning, assume that the behavior the learner
desires to imitate is generated by an expert behaving optimally with respect to an unknown cost function. IRL
algorithms train models over entire trajectories of behavior instead of individual actions, and hence do not suffer
from cascading error problems. Furthermore, because the
assumption of expert optimality acts as a prior on the space
of policies, IRL algorithms can allow the learner to generalize expert behavior to unseen states much more effectively
than if the learner had tried to produce a policy or value
function instead (Ng & Russell, 2000; Bagnell, 2015).
Unfortunately, the assumption of expert optimality leads to
expensive design choices in IRL algorithms. At each iteration, to determine whether a certain cost function c fits
an expert policy πE , the IRL algorithm must compare the
return of πE with the return of all other possible policies.
Most IRL algorithms do this by running a reinforcement
learning algorithm on c (Neu & Szepesvári, 2009). Because reinforcement learning must be run at each iteration,
IRL algorithms can be extremely expensive to run in large
domains.
We forgo learning a cost function. We propose a method
that directly learns a policy from expert trajectories, exploiting for learning signal a class of cost functions, which
distinguish the expert policy from all others. We first develop a simple, unified view of a certain class of imitation
learning algorithms called apprenticeship learning algorithms (Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Syed et al., 2008). This view
naturally leads to the development of a gradient-based optimization formulation over parameterized policies for ap-

