Doubly Robust Off-policy Value Evaluation for Reinforcement Learning

Nan Jiang
Computer Science & Engineering, University of Michigan
Lihong Li
Microsoft Research

NANJIANG @ UMICH . EDU

LIHONGLI @ MICROSOFT. COM

Abstract
We study the problem of off-policy value evaluation in reinforcement learning (RL), where one
aims to estimate the value of a new policy based
on data collected by a different policy. This problem is often a critical step when applying RL to
real-world problems. Despite its importance, existing general methods either have uncontrolled
bias or suffer high variance. In this work, we
extend the doubly robust estimator for bandits to
sequential decision-making problems, which gets
the best of both worlds: it is guaranteed to be unbiased and can have a much lower variance than
the popular importance sampling estimators. We
demonstrate the estimator’s accuracy in several
benchmark problems, and illustrate its use as a
subroutine in safe policy improvement. We also
provide theoretical results on the inherent hardness of the problem, and show that our estimator
can match the lower bound in certain scenarios.

1. Introduction
We study the off-policy value evaluation problem, where one
aims to estimate the value of a policy with data collected by
another policy (Sutton & Barto, 1998). This problem is critical in many real-world applications of reinforcement learning (RL), whenever it is infeasible to estimate policy value
by running the policy because doing so is expensive, risky,
or unethical/illegal. In robotics and business/marketing applications, for instance, it is often risky (thus expensive) to
run a policy without an estimate of the policy’s quality (Li
et al., 2011; Bottou et al., 2013; Thomas et al., 2015a). In
medical and public-policy domains (Murphy et al., 2001;
Hirano et al., 2003), it is often hard to run a controlled
experiment to estimate the treatment effect, and off-policy
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume 48.
Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

value evaluation is a form of counterfactual reasoning that
infers the causal effect of a new intervention from historical
data (Holland, 1986; Pearl, 2009).
There are roughly two classes of approaches to off-policy
value evaluation. The first is to fit an MDP model from data
via regression, and evaluate the policy against the model.
Such a regression based approach has a relatively low variance and works well when the model can be learned to
satisfactory accuracy. However, for complex real-world
problems, it is often hard to specify a function class in regression that is efficiently learnable with limited data while
at the same time has a small approximation error. Furthermore, it is in general impossible to estimate the approximation error of a function class, resulting in a bias that
cannot be easily quantified. The second class of approaches
are based on the idea of importance sampling (IS), which
corrects the mismatch between the distributions induced by
the target policy and by the behavior policy (Precup et al.,
2000). Such approaches have the salient properties of being
unbiased and independent of the size of the problem’s state
space, but its variance can be too large for the method to be
useful when the horizon is long (Mandel et al., 2014).
In this work, we propose a new off-policy value evaluation
estimator that can achieve the best of regression based approaches (low variance) and importance sampling based
approaches (no bias). Our contributions are three-fold:
1. A simple doubly robust (DR) estimator is proposed for
RL that extends and subsumes a previous off-policy
estimator for contextual bandits.
2. The estimator’s statistical properties are analyzed,
which suggests its superiority over previous approaches. Furthermore, in certain scenarios, we prove
that the estimator’s variance matches the Cramer-Rao
lower bound for off-policy value evaluation.
3. On benchmark problems, the new estimator is much
more accurate than importance sampling baselines,
while remaining unbiased in contrast to regressionbased approaches. As an application, we show how
such a better estimator can benefit safe policy iteration
with a more effective policy improvement step.

