A Variational Analysis of Stochastic Gradient Algorithms

Stephan Mandt
Columbia University, Data Science Institute, New York, USA

SM 3976@ COLUMBIA . EDU

Matthew D. Hoffman
Adobe Research, San Francisco, USA

MATHOFFM @ ADOBE . COM

David M. Blei
Columbia University, Departments of CS and Statistics, New York, USA

Abstract
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) is an important algorithm in machine learning. With constant learning rates, it is a stochastic process
that, after an initial phase of convergence, generates samples from a stationary distribution. We
show that SGD with constant rates can be effectively used as an approximate posterior inference
algorithm for probabilistic modeling. Specifically, we show how to adjust the tuning parameters of SGD such as to match the resulting stationary distribution to the posterior. This analysis rests on interpreting SGD as a continuoustime stochastic process and then minimizing the
Kullback-Leibler divergence between its stationary distribution and the target posterior. (This
is in the spirit of variational inference.) In
more detail, we model SGD as a multivariate
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process and then use properties of this process to derive the optimal parameters. This theoretical framework also connects
SGD to modern scalable inference algorithms;
we analyze the recently proposed stochastic gradient Fisher scoring under this perspective. We
demonstrate that SGD with properly chosen constant rates gives a new way to optimize hyperparameters in probabilistic models.

1. Introduction
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) has become crucial to
modern machine learning. SGD optimizes a function by
following noisy gradients with a decreasing step size. The
Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

DAVID . BLEI @ COLUMBIA . EDU

classical result of Robbins and Monro (1951) is that this
procedure provably reaches the optimum of the function
(or local optimum, when it is nonconvex). Recent studies
investigate the merits of adaptive step sizes (Duchi et al.,
2011; Tieleman and Hinton, 2012), gradient or iterate averaging (Toulis et al., 2016; Défossez and Bach, 2015), and
constant step-sizes (Bach and Moulines, 2013; Flammarion
and Bach, 2015). Stochastic gradient descent has enabled
efficient optimization with massive data.
Recently, stochastic gradients (SG) have also been used
in the service of scalable Bayesian Markov Chain MonteCarlo (MCMC) methods, where the goal is to generate
samples from a conditional distribution of latent variables
given a data set. In Bayesian inference, we assume a probabilistic model p(θ, x) with data x and hidden variables θ;
our goal is to approximate the posterior
p(θ | x) = exp{log p(θ, x) − log p(x)}.

(1)

New scalable MCMC algorithms—such as SG Langevin
dynamics (Welling and Teh, 2011), SG Hamiltonian
Monte-Carlo (Chen et al., 2014), SG thermostats (Ding
et al., 2014), and SG Fisher scoring (Ahn et al., 2012)—
employ stochastic gradients of log p(θ, x) to improve convergence and computation of existing sampling algorithms.
Also see Ma et al. (2015) for a complete classification of
these algorithms.
These methods all take precautions to sample from an
asymptotically exact posterior. In contrast to this and
specifically in the limit of large data, we will show how
to effectively use the simplest stochastic gradient descent
algorithm as a sensible approximate Bayesian inference
method. Specifically, we consider SGD with a constant
learning rate (constant SGD). Constant SGD first marches
toward an optimum of the objective function and then
bounces around its vicinity because of the sampling noise
in the gradient. (In contrast, traditional SGD converges to
the optimum by decreasing the learning rate.) Our analy-

