Learning from Multiway Data: Simple and Efficient Tensor Regression

Rose Yu
Yan Liu
Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California

Abstract
Tensor regression has shown to be advantageous
in learning tasks with multi-directional relatedness. Given massive multiway data, traditional
methods are often too slow to operate on or suffer from memory bottleneck. In this paper, we
introduce subsampled tensor projected gradient
to solve the problem. Our algorithm is impressively simple and efficient. It is built upon projected gradient method with fast tensor power
iterations, leveraging randomized sketching for
further acceleration. Theoretical analysis shows
that our algorithm converges to the correct solution in fixed number of iterations. The memory requirement grows linearly with the size of
the problem. We demonstrate superior empirical performance on both multi-linear multi-task
learning and spatio-temporal applications.

1. Introduction
Massive multiway data emerge from many fields: spacetime measurements on several variables in climate dynamics (Hasselmann, 1997), multichannel EEG signals in neurology (Acar et al., 2007) and natural images sequences in
computer vision (Vasilescu & Terzopoulos, 2002). Tensor
provides a natural representation for multiway data. In particular, tensor decomposition has been a popular technique
for exploratory data analysis (Kolda & Bader, 2009) and
has been extensively studied. In contrast, tensor regression,
which aims to learn a model with multi-linear parameters,
is especially suitable for applications with multi-directional
relatedness, but has not been fully examined. For example,
in a task that predicts multiple climate variables at different locations and time, the data can be indexed by variable
× location × time. Tensor regression provides us with a
concise way of modeling complex structures in multiway
data.
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

QIYU @ USC . EDU
YANLIU . CS @ USC . EDU

Many tensor regression methods have been proposed (Zhao
et al., 2011; Zhou et al., 2013; Romera-Paredes et al., 2013;
Wimalawarne et al., 2014; Signoretto et al., 2014), leading
to a broad range of successful applications ranging from
neural science to climate research to social network analysis. These methods share the assumption that the model
parameters form a high order tensor and there exists a lowdimensional factorization for the model tensor. They can be
summarized into two types of approaches: (1) alternating
least square (ALS) sequentially finds the factor that minimizes the loss while keeping others fixed; (2) spectral regularization approximates the original non-convex problem
with a convex surrogate loss, such as the nuclear norm of
the unfolded tensor.
A clear drawback of all the algorithms mentioned above
is high computational cost. ALS displays unstable convergence properties and outputs sub-optimal solutions (Cichocki et al., 2009). Trace-norm minimization suffers from
slow convergence (Gandy et al., 2011). Moreover, those
methods face the memory bottleneck when dealing with
large-scale datasets. ALS, for example, requires the matricization of entire data tensor at every mode. In addition,
most existing algorithms are largely constrained by the specific tensor regression model. Adapting one algorithm to a
new regression model involves derivations for all the updating steps, which can be tedious and sometimes non-trivial.
In this paper, we introduce subsampled Tensor Projected
Gradient (TPG), a simple and fast recipe to address the
challenge. It is an efficient solver for a variety of tensor
regression problems. The memory requirement grows linearly with the size of the problem. Our algorithm is based
upon projected gradient descent (Calamai & Moré, 1987)
and can also be seen as a tensor generalization of iterative
hard thresholding algorithm (Blumensath & Davies, 2009).
At each projection step, our algorithm iteratively returns a
set of leading singular vectors of the model, avoiding full
singular value decomposition (SVD). To handle large sample size, we employ randomized sketching for subsampling
and noise reduction to further accelerate the process.
We provide theoretical analysis of our algorithm, which is
guaranteed to find the correct solution under the Restricted

