Learning Sparse Combinatorial Representations via
Two-stage Submodular Maximization
Eric Balkanski
Harvard University

ERICBALKANSKI @ G . HARVARD . EDU

Andreas Krause
ETH Zurich

KRAUSEA @ ETHZ . CH

Baharan Mirzasoleiman
ETH Zurich

BAHARANM @ INF. ETHZ . CH

Yaron Singer
Harvard University

YARON @ SEAS . HARVARD . EDU

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning sparse representations of data sets, where the goal is to reduce a data set in manner that optimizes multiple objectives. Motivated by applications of
data summarization, we develop a new model
which we refer to as the two-stage submodular maximization problem. This task can be
viewed as a combinatorial analogue of representation learning problems such as dictionary
learning and sparse regression. The two-stage
problem strictly generalizes the problem of cardinality constrained submodular maximization,
though the objective function is not submodular and the techniques for submodular maximization cannot be applied. We describe a continuous
optimization method which achieves an approximation ratio which asymptotically approaches
1 1/e. For instances where the asymptotics do
not kick in, we design a local-search algorithm
whose approximation ratio is arbitrarily close to
1/2. We empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of our methods on two multi-objective data
summarization tasks, where the goal is to construct summaries via sparse representative subsets w.r.t. to predefined objectives.

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider the task of learning combinatorial
representations of data. We are motivated by the following
genre of multi-objective summarization tasks: Given a collection of articles (say all articles about ML on Wikipedia),
as well as a set of subcategories (kernel methods, neural
networks, etc.), pick a set of articles that are representative
with respect to the whole corpus (field of ML). We study
such problems through a novel model we call two-stage
submodular maximization.
Submodularity is a natural diminishing returns condition
which serves as a rich abstraction of combinatorial information measures such as entropy (Rényi, 1961), mutual
information (Guiasu, 1977), coverage (Wolsey, 1982) etc.
Much recent work in machine learning has explored submodular maximization as a natural abstraction for data
summarization tasks (e.g., extractive summarization of
documents, image collections, videos etc. (Lin and Bilmes,
2011; 2012; Tschiatschek et al., 2014)). In these applications, one typically designs (or learns) a submodular utility
function f , which quantifies the representativeness f (S) of
a subset S of items (e.g, pictures, sentences) w.r.t. a large
data set (image collection, document). Given a constraint
on the size of the desired summary, the combinatorial problem of finding a summary S of maximum utility reduces to
constrained submodular optimization, for which a wealth
of efficient algorithms with strong theoretical guarantees
have been developed.
In order to model the task of learning data representations,
we depart from the classical (single-stage) setup, and consider a more general, two-stage task: We are given multiple
submodular objectives f1 , . . . , fm , and aim to select a set S

