Truthful Univariate Estimators
Ioannis Caragiannis
University of Patras, Greece

CARAGIAN @ CEID . UPATRAS . GR

Ariel D. Procaccia
Carnegie Mellon University, USA

ARIELPRO @ CS . CMU . EDU

Nisarg Shah
Carnegie Mellon University, USA

NKSHAH @ CS . CMU . EDU

Abstract
We revisit the classic problem of estimating
the population mean of an unknown singledimensional distribution from samples, taking a
game-theoretic viewpoint. In our setting, samples are supplied by strategic agents, who wish
to pull the estimate as close as possible to their
own value. In this setting, the sample mean gives
rise to manipulation opportunities, whereas the
sample median does not. Our key question is
whether the sample median is the best (in terms
of mean squared error) truthful estimator of the
population mean. We show that when the underlying distribution is symmetric, there are truthful
estimators that dominate the median. Our main
result is a characterization of worst-case optimal truthful estimators, which provably outperform the median, for possibly asymmetric distributions with bounded support.

1. Introduction
A central problem in statistics deals with estimating the
population mean of an unknown distribution D given
n samples x1 , . . . , xn drawn i.i.d. from the distribution (Fisher, 1925; Lehmann & Casella, 1998). Classic results
P show that, not surprisingly, the sample mean
(1/n) i xi is a good estimator for the population mean. It
is unbiased and often minimizes a popular risk function—
the mean squared error (MSE)—that measures the error of
an estimator by the expected square of the distance between
the estimate and the population mean (Lehmann & Casella,
1998).
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

However, from the game-theoretic viewpoint, the sample
mean suffers from serious incentive issues when the input samples are provided by (and are the private information of) self-interested individuals. To illustrate this, imagine a setting where we want to set a common temperature
throughout a building with many occupants. Each occupant
has an ideal temperature in mind, and our goal is to set the
temperature to be the mean of the distribution representing
the occupants’ ideal temperatures.1 We ask the occupants
to fill out a survey, which is completed by n (arguably random) respondents, and use the sample mean to set the common temperature. The difficulty is that, for example, an occupant who prefers a relatively high temperature can easily
manipulate the outcome by lying about her ideal temperature and reporting a much higher value, thereby pulling the
sample mean closer to her desired ideal temperature.
This simple example is representative of a much broader
phenomenon. Indeed, machine learning based algorithms
now govern many aspects of our daily lives. Their power
stems from data, but when it comes from strategic sources
and incentives are not correctly aligned, the data will inevitably be contaminated, and any statistical properties
the algorithms possess in the non-strategic setting will be
worthless. This has led a number of researchers in machine
learning, algorithmic game theory, and economics to explore the role of incentives in machine learning and statistics; see Section 1.2 for a brief survey. The current paper
contributes to this line of research by addressing the issue
of strategic behavior in the ubiquitous statistical problem of
estimating the mean of a single-dimensional distribution.
Going back to our illustrative example, one approach that is
known to prevent any incentives for manipulation is to take
the median (rather than the mean) of the elicited samples.
Why? If an occupant’s ideal temperature is higher than
1
This is in the spirit of the Predicted Mean Vote (PMV) model
of thermal comfort (Fanger, 1970).

