-1

Multi-Bias Non-linear Activation in Deep Neural Networks

Hongyang Li
Wanli Ouyang
Xiaogang Wang
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract
As a widely used non-linear activation, Rectified
Linear Unit (ReLU) separates noise and signal
in a feature map by learning a threshold or bias.
However, we argue that the classification of noise
and signal not only depends on the magnitude of
responses, but also the context of how the feature responses would be used to detect more abstract patterns in higher layers. In order to output
multiple response maps with magnitude in different ranges for a particular visual pattern, existing networks employing ReLU and its variants
have to learn a large number of redundant filters.
In this paper, we propose a multi-bias non-linear
activation (MBA) layer to explore the information hidden in the magnitudes of responses. It
is placed after the convolution layer to decouple
the responses to a convolution kernel into multiple maps by multi-thresholding magnitudes, thus
generating more patterns in the feature space at
a low computational cost. It provides great flexibility of selecting responses to different visual
patterns in different magnitude ranges to form
rich representations in higher layers. Such a simple and yet effective scheme achieves the stateof-the-art performance on several benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006;
Krizhevsky et al., 2012) have made great progress on different domains and applications in recent years. The community has witnessed the machine trained with deep networks and massive data being the first computer program
defeating a European professional in the game of Go (Silver et al., 2016); the convolutional neural network surpassing human-level performance in image classification (He
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

YANGLI @ EE . CUHK . EDU . HK
WLOUYANG @ EE . CUHK . EDU . HK
XGWANG @ EE . CUHK . EDU . HK

feature map

bias
2
1
0.5

non-linearity

eyebrow
mouth

-1

Figure 1. Example illustrating how biases can select different patterns. The eyes and mouth have different magnitudes in their
responses to the curved edges. Whether responses of various
strength should be considered as informative signal or noise depends on more abstract patterns to be detected in higher layers. By
adding different biases to the map with MBA, they are strengthened, preserved, or eliminated according to each bias.

et al., 2015); the deep neural network framework to build an
acoustic model in speech recognition (Hinton et al., 2012).
The importance of activation function has been recognized
in the design of deep models. It not only fits complex data
distributions but also achieves important invariance to various noise, data corruption and transforms affecting recognition (Bruna & Mallat, 2013). It is placed after every convolution layer with sigmoid or hyperbolic tangent as nonlinear activation. If the input responses are too large positively or negatively, they are compressed to a saturation
value through the nonlinear mapping and thus invariance
is achieved. The rectified linear unit (ReLU) is found to
be particularly effective (Nair & Hinton, 2010; Krizhevsky
et al., 2012) in deep neural networks and widely used. It
separates noisy signals and informative signals in a feature
map by learning a threshold (bias). Certain amount of information is discarded after the non-linear activation. However, ReLU also has limitation because of the observations.
Given the same convolution kernel in the convolution layer,
we observe that different magnitudes of responses may indicate different patterns. An illustrative example is shown
in Figure 1. The eyes should have higher magnitudes in
the responses to curved edges compared with those on the
mouth because edge contrast on eyes is generally higher
than that on mouths. Therefore, it is desirable to separate
the responses according to its magnitude.
More importantly, the separation between informative sig-

