Mixing Rates for the Alternating Gibbs Sampler over
Restricted Boltzmann Machines and Friends
Christopher Tosh
CTOSH @ CS . UCSD . EDU
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, UC San Diego, 9500 Gilman Dr., La Jolla, CA 92093

Abstract
Alternating Gibbs sampling is a modification of
classical Gibbs sampling where several variables
are simultaneously sampled from their joint conditional distribution. In this work, we investigate
the mixing rate of alternating Gibbs sampling
with a particular emphasis on Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBMs) and variants.

1. Introduction
Markov Random Fields (MRFs) are a popular class of
graphical models which have found uses from image
restoration (Geman & Geman, 1984), to modeling in statistical physics (Ising, 1925; Potts, 1952), to pretraining
deep neural networks (Hinton et al., 2006; Bengio, 2009).
Formally, a Markov Random Field consists of an underlying graph G = (V, E) and a set of random variables
X = (Xv )v2V indexed by the vertices V satisfying
P Xv | XV \{v} = P Xv | XN (v)
where N (v) is the set of vertices adjacent to v in G, also
known as the Markov blanket of v.
A fundamental problem in the setting of MRFs is to sample from the joint distribution P (X). When the state space
of X is finite and each state has positive probability, the
Hammersley-Clifford theorem (Hammersley & Clifford,
1971; Besag, 1974) tells us that we can decompose the
probability density function as
P (X = x) =

1
Z

Y

c (xc )

c2cl(G)

where cl(G) is the set of maximal cliques of G, c (·) are
positive functions, and Z is the normalizing constant to
make the density sum to one. In general, computing Z is a
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

hard problem (Bulatov & Grohe, 2005), which makes exactly sampling from P (X) challenging. The solution to
this problem is to approximately sample from P (X).
The Gibbs sampler is a generic Markov chain method to approximately sample from a joint distribution using only the
conditional distributions to do so. In the case of MRFs, the
Gibbs sampler maintains a current state (Xv = xv )v2V ,
and it takes a single step by choosing an index v 2 V and
updating the value of Xv according to the conditional distribution P (Xv | XN (v) = xN (v) ). If we can efficiently
sample from these conditional distributions then each step
of the Gibbs sampler is also efficient. For many MRFs of
interest, this is indeed the case.
It is well known that the state of the Gibbs sampler converges to the joint distribution P (X) (Levin et al., 2008,
Chapter 3). Unfortunately, this convergence is only guaranteed in the limit. Thus, a central object of study in Markov
chain literature is the rate at which a Markov chain converges to its stationary distribution, and this quantity is
known as its mixing rate.
In some cases, it is possible to efficiently sample more
than a single random variable at a time. Consider an MRF
whose underlying graph is k-colorable, i.e. there is a partition B1 , . . . , Bk of V such that for all i 2 {1, . . . , k} and
all u, v 2 Bi , the edge (u, v) does not appear in the graph.
Then conditioning on V \ Bi , the elements of Bi are independent and the joint conditional distribution factorizes:
Y
P (XBi | XV \Bi ) =
P (Xv | XN (v) ).
v2Bi

If we can efficiently sample from the individual conditional
distributions then we can also do so for these joint conditional distributions. Moreover, we can modify the Gibbs
sampler so that at each step it updates an entire block Bi ,
and it will still converge to the correct distribution. This
Markov chain is the alternating Gibbs sampler.
1.1. Restricted Boltzmann Machines
An important special case of a Markov Random Field is
the Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM). The underly-

