On the Analysis of Complex Backup Strategies in Monte Carlo Tree Search

Piyush Khandelwal
PIYUSHK @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU
Elad Liebman
ELADLIEB @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU
Scott Niekum
SNIEKUM @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU
Peter Stone
PSTONE @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU
Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at Austin, 2317 Speedway, Stop D9500, Austin, TX 78712 USA

Abstract
Over the past decade, Monte Carlo Tree Search
(MCTS) and specifically Upper Confidence
Bound in Trees (UCT) have proven to be quite
effective in large probabilistic planning domains.
In this paper, we focus on how values are backpropagated in the MCTS tree, and apply complex
return strategies from the Reinforcement Learning (RL) literature to MCTS, producing 4 new
MCTS variants. We demonstrate that in some
probabilistic planning benchmarks from the International Planning Competition (IPC), selecting a MCTS variant with a backup strategy different from Monte Carlo averaging can lead to
substantially better results. We also propose a
hypothesis for why different backup strategies
lead to different performance in particular environments, and manipulate a carefully structured
grid-world domain to provide empirical evidence
supporting our hypothesis.

1. Introduction

solving MDPs that only requires generative samples from
the MDP. UCT was first popularized due to excellent performance in Computer Go (Gelly and Wang, 2006; Chaslot
et al., 2008), and it has also performed well in large Partially Observable MDPs (POMDPs) (Silver and Veness,
2010). The PROST planner (Keller and Eyerich, 2012),
based on UCT, won the probabilistic track of the International Planning Competition (IPC) in 2011 and 2014.
In this paper, we explore how complex backup techniques,
a longstanding focus of the Reinforcement Learning (RL)
literature that has not previously been considered in MCTS,
can improve the performance of MCTS in some domains.
In the original MCTS algorithm, the long-term expected
return of taking an action is averaged using Monte Carlo
backups. In contrast, it has been demonstrated that complex backup strategies can speed up convergence of value
estimates in RL problems. Such complex backup strategies
include the λ-return (Sutton, 1988), γ-return (Konidaris
et al., 2011), and the Ω-return (Thomas et al., 2015),
where the last two approaches are parameter free. Motivated especially by real-time applications that require finding good policies within limited per-step computation time
(e.g. Khandelwal et al. (2015)), we evaluate these backup
strategies using benchmarks with limited planning time.

Planning under uncertainty, or probabilistic planning, is an
important part of many intelligent systems. Problems requiring such planning can be represented as Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) (Sutton and Barto, 1998), and
solved using techniques such as Value Iteration (VI) (Bellman, 1957). More recent approaches such as RTDP (Barto
et al., 1995) and LAO* (Hansen and Zilberstein, 2001) can
solve MDPs more efficiently than VI by restricting traversal of state-action space. While these approaches require
access to a full declarative model of an MDP, Monte Carlo
Tree Search (MCTS), or specifically Upper Confidence
Bound in Trees (UCT) (Kocsis and Szepesvári, 2006), is
an anytime planning algorithm designed for approximately

The main contributions of this paper are four novel MCTS
variants which utilize complex backup strategies for value
backpropagation in MCTS. We find that one proposed
parameter-free backup strategy, MaxMCTSγ , performs
equivalently to or better than Monte Carlo backups in
all probabilistic planning benchmarks from the IPC. Another novel strategy, MaxMCTS(λ), performs better than
all other backup strategies when an appropriate value of λ
is selected. Apart from experiments on IPC domains, we
also study how domain structure influences performance of
backup strategies in a grid-world domain, shedding some
light on the empirical results presented in this paper.

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume 48.
Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We
first present a general overview of MCTS in § 2, followed
by how complex backup strategies can be applied to MCTS

