K-Means Clustering with Distributed Dimensions

Hu Ding
Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA

HUDING @ MSU . EDU

Yu Liu
LIUYUJYYZ @126. COM
Lingxiao Huang
HUANGLINGXIAO 1990@126. COM
Jian Li
LAPORDGE @ GMAIL . COM
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Science, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

Abstract
Distributed clustering has attracted significant attention in recent years. In this paper, we study
the k-means problem in the distributed dimension setting, where the dimensions of the data are
partitioned across multiple machines. We provide new approximation algorithms, which incur
low communication costs and achieve constant
approximation ratios. The communication complexity of our algorithms significantly improve
on existing algorithms. We also provide the
first communication lower bound, which nearly
matches our upper bound in a certain range of parameter setting. Our experimental results show
that our algorithms outperform existing algorithms on real data-sets in the distributed dimension setting.

1. Introduction
Clustering is a central problem in unsupervised learning
and data analytics. Among hundreds of clustering problems and algorithms, the k-means problem is arguably the
most popular one, due to its simplicity and effectiveness
in numerous applications. Specifically, given n points in
Rd , k-means seeks k points (cluster centers) to induce a
partition of the given point-set, so that the average squared
distance from each data point to its closest cluster center is
minimized.
Due to the sheer increase in volume and dimensionality of
data, clustering (in particular k-means) in the distributed
setting has attracted significant attention from various research communities in recent years. While much prior
work has focused on the model where the data records
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

(points, items) are distributed in different locations, we
study the k-means problem in the distributed dimension
model, in which the dimensions of the data points are
stored across multiple machines.
Suppose the input data points are vectors in Rd . In the distributed dimension model, each party is assigned a subset
of the d dimensions, and holds the projection of all the data
points onto these dimensions. If the whole input point-set
is represented by an n × d matrix, where each row indicates one point and each column indicates one dimension,
each party holds a column partition in our model, while
the prior work focused on row partition. The distributed
dimension (or column partition) model arise naturally in
a variety of applications and data management platforms,
some of which we briefly mention below.
(1). Suppose that we want to cluster online users based
on several features such as online shopping records, online social relationships, and job hunting records, which
are collected by different companies (Amazon, Facebook,
and Linkedin) (assuming that there is a unique id, e.g.,
email address, which can be used to identify the same user).
It is also quite common that different teams in the same
company develop apps which automatically store different
features in different machines. (2). Several widely deployed distributed DBMS systems, such as MonetDB, CStore, VectorWise, HBASE, are column-oriented by design
(Stonebraker et al., 2005; Abadi et al., 2009; 2013). These
systems partition and store the data based on the columns.1
(3). Another motivation comes from the proliferation of
networked sensing systems, where we need to monitor several attributes of the objects using multiple sensors of different types. For example, an environment monitoring system (Gu et al., 2005; Su et al., 2011) may have video cameras, and different sensors recording audio, temperature, il1

Such systems typically perform compression of the columns,
particularly for sparse data. We ignore such issue and assume the
raw columns are stored and readily available in each server.

