Extended and Unscented Kitchen Sinks
Edwin V. Bonilla
The University of New South Wales
Daniel Steinberg
NICTA

E . BONILLA @ UNSW. EDU . AU

DANIEL .S TEINBERG @ NICTA . COM . AU

Alistair Reid
NICTA

A LISTAIR .R EID @ NICTA . COM . AU

Abstract
We propose a scalable multiple-output generalization of unscented and extended Gaussian processes. These algorithms have been designed
to handle general likelihood models by linearizing them using a Taylor series or the Unscented
Transform in a variational inference framework.
We build upon random feature approximations of
Gaussian process covariance functions and show
that, on small-scale single-task problems, our
methods can attain similar performance as the
original algorithms while having less computational cost. We also evaluate our methods at a
larger scale on MNIST and on a seismic inversion
which is inherently a multi-task problem.

1. Introduction
Gaussian process (GP) models can be used as nonparametric probabilistic approaches to standard machine learning
settings such as regression and classification (Rasmussen
& Williams, 2006), where the latent functions modeled by
the GP are only important as a means to an end, that of providing greater flexibility than their parametric counterparts.
In other application areas such as inversion problems, the
latent functions are quantities of interest themselves, and
they are passed through a domain-specific forward model
in order to generate the observations.
Standard machine learning tasks and inversion problems
present three key challenges when having Gaussian process (GP) priors. The first challenge is scalability, as GPs
are notorious for their poor scalability as a function of the
number of training points. The second challenge is multiProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

output and multi-task task learning, as required by problems such as multi-output regression, multi-class classification or inversions over a multi-layer geological structure
(where each layer is a task). Finally, the third challenge
is that of dealing with nonlinear non-Gaussian likelihoods,
for example in classification, regression with non-Gaussian
noise, and seismic inversion, as the posterior over the latent
functions is analytically intractable.
In order to address the latter challenge, dealing with nonlinear non-Gaussian likelihoods, Steinberg & Bonilla (2014)
have shown recently that it is possible to obtain good posterior estimates in GP models using approximations of the
nonlinear likelihood via a Taylor series expansion or via the
Unscented Transform (Julier & Uhlmann, 2004). They refer to their methods as the extended Gaussian process (EGP)
and the unscented Gaussian process (UGP). One of the fundamental reasons why such linearizations are effective is
because of their locality and adaptivity, as they are constructed around the current posterior estimate, which is iteratively updated within a variational inference procedure.
While such methods are an effective way to tackle nonlinearities in the likelihood, their approach does not deal with
the other two challenges mentioned above, namely multitask learning and scalability. Indeed their method is specific to single-output problems and inherits the cubic scalability of standard GPs on the number of training points.
In this paper we propose a scalable multiple-output generalization of the method of Steinberg & Bonilla (2014). We
deal with multiple-output problems by using affine transformations of the latent functions and achieve scalability
by introducing random feature approximations of the covariance function of the Gaussian processes, in the style
of Rahimi & Recht (2008). Inference of all parameters and
hyperparameters is carried out using a variational inference
framework, and so the kernel learning methods introduced
by Yang et al. (2015) can be applied to our methods. Since
Rahimi & Recht (2008) refer to their approach as Random

