A Comparative Analysis and Study of Multiview CNN Models for Joint Object
Categorization and Pose Estimation

Mohamed Elhoseiny∗ , Tarek El-Gaaly∗
M . ELHOSEINY @ CS . RUTGERS . EDU , TGAALY @ GMAIL . COM
Amr Bakry∗ , Ahmed Elgammal
AMRBAKRY @ CS . RUTGERS . EDU , ELGAMMAL @ CS . RUTGERS . EDU
Rutgers University, Computer Science Department, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 08854, ∗ Equal contribution

Abstract
In the Object Recognition task, there exists a dichotomy between the categorization of objects
and estimating object pose, where the former necessitates a view-invariant representation, while
the latter requires a representation capable of
capturing pose information over different categories of objects. With the rise of deep architectures, the prime focus has been on object category recognition. Deep learning methods have
achieved wide success in this task. In contrast,
object pose estimation using these approaches
has received relatively less attention. In this
work, we study how Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) architectures can be adapted to the
task of simultaneous object recognition and pose
estimation. We investigate and analyze the layers
of various CNN models and extensively compare
between them with the goal of discovering how
the layers of distributed representations within
CNNs represent object pose information and how
this contradicts with object category representations. We extensively experiment on two recent
large and challenging multi-view datasets and we
achieve better than the state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Impressive progress has been made over the last decade
towards solving the problems of object categorization, localization and detection. It is desirable for a vision system to address two tasks under general object recognition: object categorization and object pose estimation (estimating the relative pose of an object with respect to
a camera). Pose estimation is crucial in many applications. These two broad tasks are contradicting in nature.
An optimal object categorization system should be able
to recognize the category of an object, independent of its
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

viewpoint. This means that the system should be able
to learn viewpoint-invariant representations of object categories. In contrast, a pose estimation system requires a
representation that preserves the geometric and visual features of objects in order to distinguish their pose. This
gives rise to a fundamental question: should categorization and pose estimation be solved simultaneously, and if
so, can one aid the other? Contrasting paradigms approach
this question differently. Traditional instance-based 3D
pose estimation approaches solve the instance-recognition
and pose estimation problems simultaneously, given model
bases of instances in 2D or 3D (Grimson & Lozano-Perez,
1985; Lamdan & Wolfson, 1988; Lowe, 1987; Shimshoni
& Ponce, 1997). Most recent object pose estimation approaches solve the problem within the detection process,
where category-specific object detectors that encode part
geometry are trained (Savarese & Fei-Fei, 2007; Savarese
& Li, 2008; Mei et al., 2011; Payet & Todorovic, 2011;
Schels et al., 2012; Pepik et al., 2012). Since part-geometry
is a function of the pose, these approaches are able to provide coarse estimate of the object pose with the detection.
However the underlying assumption here is that the categorization is done a-priori, and the representation is viewvariant. Other recent approaches try to solve the pose estimation simultaneously with categorization through learning dual representations: view-invariant category representation and view-variant category-invariant representation (Zhang et al., 2013a; Bakry & Elgammal, 2014).
With the rise of deep architectures, the main focus has
been on category recognition. A wide success has been
achieved on this task. In contrast, pose estimation has
not received much attention. The impressive results of
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) in tasks of categorizations (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and detection (Sermanet et al., 2013; Girshick et al., 2013) motivated many
researchers to explore their applicability in different tasks.
Several approaches recently showed successful results
where they used networks that are pre-trained for a specific task (e.g. categorization) and then transfer the learnt
deep representations for other tasks (Frome et al., 2013;

