Online Low-Rank Subspace Clustering by Basis Dictionary Pursuit

Jie Shen
Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA

JS 2007@ RUTGERS . EDU

Ping Li
PINGLI @ STAT. RUTGERS . EDU
Dept. of Statistics & Biostatistics, Dept. of Computer Science, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA
Huan Xu
ISEXUH @ NUS . EDU . SG
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore

Abstract
Low-Rank Representation (LRR) has been a significant method for segmenting data that are generated from a union of subspaces. It is also
known that solving LRR is challenging in terms
of time complexity and memory footprint, in that
the size of the nuclear norm regularized matrix
is n-by-n (where n is the number of samples).
In this paper, we thereby develop a novel online
implementation of LRR that reduces the memory cost from O(n2 ) to O(pd), with p being the
ambient dimension and d being some estimated
rank (d < p ≪ n). We also establish the theoretical guarantee that the sequence of solutions
produced by our algorithm converges to a stationary point of the expected loss function asymptotically. Extensive experiments on synthetic and
realistic datasets further substantiate that our algorithm is fast, robust and memory efficient.

1. Introduction
In the past a few years, subspace clustering (Vidal, 2010;
Soltanolkotabi & Candès, 2012) has been extensively studied and has established solid applications, for example,
in computer vision (Elhamifar & Vidal, 2009) and network topology inference (Eriksson et al., 2011). Among
many subspace clustering algorithms which aim to obtain a structured representation to fit the underlying data,
two prominent examples are Sparse Subspace Clustering (SSC) (Elhamifar & Vidal, 2009; Soltanolkotabi et al.,
2014) and Low-Rank Representation (LRR) (Liu et al.,
2013). Both of them utilize the idea of self-expressiveness,
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

i.e., expressing each sample as a linear combination of the
remaining. What is of difference is that SSC pursues a
sparse solution while LRR prefers a low-rank structure.
In this paper, we are interested in the LRR method, which
is shown to achieve state-of-the-art performance on a broad
range of real-world problems (Liu et al., 2013). Recently,
Liu & Li (2014) demonstrated that, when equipped with a
proper dictionary, LRR can even handle the coherent data –
a challenging issue in the literature (Candès & Recht, 2009;
Candès et al., 2011) but commonly emerges in realistic
datasets such as the Netflix.
Formally, the LRR problem we investigate here is formulated as follows (Liu et al., 2013):
λ1
2
∥Z − Y X − E∥F + ∥X∥∗ + λ2 ∥E∥1 . (1.1)
X,E 2

min

Here, Z = (z 1 , z 2 , · · · , z n ) ∈ Rp×n is the observation
matrix with n samples lying in a p-dimensional subspace.
The matrix Y ∈ Rp×n is a given dictionary, E is some
possible sparse corruption and λ1 and λ2 are two tunable
parameters. Typically, Y is chosen as the dataset Z itself.
The program seeks a low-rank representation X ∈ Rn×n
among all samples, each of which can be approximated by
a linear combination of the atoms in the dictionary Y .
While LLR is mathematically elegant, three issues are immediately incurred for LRR in the face of big data:
Issue 1 (Memory cost of X). In the LRR formulation (1.1), there is typically no sparsity assumption on X.
Hence, the memory footprint of X is proportional to n2
which precludes most of the recently developed nuclear
norm solvers (Lin et al., 2010; Jaggi & Sulovský, 2010;
Avron et al., 2012; Hsieh & Olsen, 2014).
Issue 2 (Computational cost of ∥X∥∗ ). Due to the size of
the nuclear norm regularized matrix X is n × n, optimizing such problems can be computationally expensive even
when n is not too large (Recht et al., 2010).

