Tracking Slowly Moving Clairvoyant:
Optimal Dynamic Regret of Online Learning with True and Noisy Gradient

Tianbao Yang
Department of Computer Science, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA

TIANBAO - YANG @ UIOWA . EDU

Lijun Zhang
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
Rong Jin
Institute of Data Science and Technologies at Alibaba Group, Seattle, USA

JINRONG . JR @ ALIBABA - INC . COM

Jinfeng Yi
IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA

Abstract
This work focuses on dynamic regret of online
convex optimization that compares the performance of online learning to a clairvoyant who
knows the sequence of loss functions in advance
and hence selects the minimizer of the loss function at each step. By assuming that the clairvoyant moves slowly (i.e., the minimizers change
slowly), we present several improved variationbased upper bounds of the dynamic regret under
the true and noisy gradient feedback, which are
optimal in light of the presented lower bounds.
The key to our analysis is to explore a regularity metric that measures the temporal changes
in the clairvoyant’s minimizers, to which we refer as path variation. Firstly, we present a general lower bound in terms of the path variation,
and then show that under full information or gradient feedback we are able to achieve an optimal dynamic regret. Secondly, we present a
lower bound with noisy gradient feedback and
then show that we can achieve optimal dynamic
regrets under a stochastic gradient feedback and
two-point bandit feedback. Moreover, for a sequence of smooth loss functions that admit a
small variation in the gradients, our dynamic regret under the two-point bandit feedback matches
what is achieved with full information.

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

ZLJZJU @ GMAIL . COM

JINFENGY @ US . IBM . COM

1. Introduction
Online convex optimization (OCO) can be deemed as a repeated game between an online player and an adversary, in
which an online player iteratively chooses a decision and
then her decisions incur (possibly different) losses by the
loss functions chosen by the adversary. These loss functions are unknown to the decision maker ahead of time,
and can be adversarial or even depend on the action taken
by the decision maker. To formulate the problem mathematically, let Ω ⊆ Rd denote a convex decision set (i.e.,
the feasible set of the decision vector), wt ∈ Ω denote the
decision vector and ft (·) : Rd → R denote the loss function at the t-th step, respectively. The goalP
of the online
T
learner is to minimize her cumulative loss t=1 ft (wt ).
The traditional performance metric - the regret of the decision maker, is defined as the difference between the total
cost she has incurred and that of the best fixed decision in
hindsight, i.e.,
T
X
t=1

ft (wt ) − min

w∈Ω

T
X

ft (w).

(1)

t=1

Recently, there emerges a surge of interest (Besbes et al.,
2013; Hall & Willett, 2013; Jadbabaie et al., 2015) in the
dynamic regret that compares the performance of online
learning to a sequence of optimal solutions. If we denote by
wt∗ ∈ Ω an optimal solution of ft (w), the dynamic regret
is defined as
T
T
X
X
(ft (wt ) − ft (wt∗ )) =
(ft (wt ) − min ft (w)) (2)
t=1

t=1

w∈Ω

i.e., the performance of the online learner is compared to
a clairvoyant who knows the sequence of loss functions in

