Minding the Gaps for Block Frank-Wolfe Optimization of Structured SVMs

Anton Osokin∗,1 Jean-Baptiste Alayrac∗,1
FIRST. LASTNAME @ INRIA . FR
1
2
1
Isabella Lukasewitz Puneet K. Dokania Simon Lacoste-Julien
1
INRIA – École Normale Supérieure, Paris, France 2 INRIA – CentraleSupélec, Châtenay-Malabry, France
∗

Both authors contributed equally.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose several improvements
on the block-coordinate Frank-Wolfe (BCFW)
algorithm from Lacoste-Julien et al. (2013) recently used to optimize the structured support
vector machine (SSVM) objective in the context of structured prediction, though it has wider
applications. The key intuition behind our improvements is that the estimates of block gaps
maintained by BCFW reveal the block suboptimality that can be used as an adaptive criterion. First, we sample objects at each iteration of
BCFW in an adaptive non-uniform way via gapbased sampling. Second, we incorporate pairwise and away-step variants of Frank-Wolfe into
the block-coordinate setting. Third, we cache oracle calls with a cache-hit criterion based on the
block gaps. Fourth, we provide the first method
to compute an approximate regularization path
for SSVM. Finally, we provide an exhaustive
empirical evaluation of all our methods on four
structured prediction datasets.

1. Introduction
One of the most popular learning objectives for structured
prediction is the structured support vector machine (Taskar
et al., 2003; Tsochantaridis et al., 2005), which generalizes
the classical binary SVM to problems with structured outputs. In this paper, we consider the `2 -regularized `1 -slack
structured SVM, to which we will simply refer as SSVM.
The SSVM method consists in the minimization of the regularized structured hinge-loss on the labeled training set.
The optimization problem of SSVM is of significant complexity and, thus, hard to scale up. In the literature, multiple optimization methods have been applied to tackle this
problem, including cutting-plane methods (Tsochantaridis
et al., 2005; Joachims et al., 2009) and stochastic subgradient methods (Ratliff et al., 2007), among others.
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

Recently, Lacoste-Julien et al. (2013) proposed the blockcoordinate Frank-Wolfe method (BCFW), which is currently one of the state-of-the-art algorithms for SSVM.1
In contrast to the classical (batch) Frank-Wolfe algorithm (Frank & Wolfe, 1956), BCFW is a randomized
block-coordinate method that works on block-separable
convex compact domains. In the case of SSVM, BCFW
operates in the dual domain and iteratively applies FrankWolfe steps on the blocks of dual variables corresponding
to different objects of the training set. Distinctive features
of BCFW for SSVM include optimal step size selection
leading to the absence of the step-size parameter, convergence guarantees for the primal objective, and ability to
compute the duality gap as a stopping criterion.
Notably, the duality gap obtained by BCFW can be written as a sum of block gaps, where each block of dual variables corresponds to one training example. In this paper,
we exploit this property and improve the BCFW algorithm
in multiple ways. First, we substitute the standard uniform
sampling of objects at each iteration with an adaptive nonuniform sampling. Our procedure consists in sampling objects with probabilities proportional to the values of their
block gaps, giving one of the first fully adaptive sampling
approaches in the optimization literature that we are aware
of. This choice of sampling probabilities is motivated by
the intuition that objects with higher block gaps potentially
can provide more improvement to the objective. We analyze the effects of the gap-based sampling on convergence
and discuss the practical trade-offs.
Second, we apply pairwise (Mitchell et al., 1974) and
away (Wolfe, 1970) steps of Frank-Wolfe to the blockcoordinate setting. This modification is motivated by the
fact that batch algorithms based on these steps have linear
convergence rates (Lacoste-Julien & Jaggi, 2015) whereas
convergence of standard Frank-Wolfe is sublinear.
Third, we cache oracle calls and propose a gap-based criterion for calling the oracle (cache miss vs. cache hit).
Caching the oracle calls was shown do deliver significant
speed-ups when the oracle is expensive, e.g., in the case of
1

Independently, Branson et al. (2013) proposed their SVM-IS
algorithm which is equivalent to BCFW in some scenarios.

