Why Regularized Auto-Encoders Learn Sparse Representation?

Devansh Arpit
Yingbo Zhou
Hung Q. Ngo
Venu Govindaraju
SUNY Buffalo

DEVANSHA @ BUFFALO . EDU
YINGBOZH @ BUFFALO . EDU
HUNGNGO @ BUFFALO . EDU
GOVIND @ BUFFALO . EDU

Abstract
Sparse distributed representation is the key to
learning useful features in deep learning algorithms, because not only it is an efficient mode of
data representation, but also – more importantly
– it captures the generation process of most real
world data. While a number of regularized autoencoders (AE) enforce sparsity explicitly in their
learned representation and others don’t, there has
been little formal analysis on what encourages
sparsity in these models in general. Our objective is to formally study this general problem for
regularized auto-encoders. We provide sufficient
conditions on both regularization and activation
functions that encourage sparsity. We show that
multiple popular models (de-noising and contractive auto encoders, e.g.) and activations (rectified linear and sigmoid, e.g.) satisfy these conditions; thus, our conditions help explain sparsity
in their learned representation. Thus our theoretical and empirical analysis together shed light on
the properties of regularization/activation that are
conductive to sparsity and unify a number of existing auto-encoder models and activation functions under the same analytical framework.

1. Introduction
Sparse Distributed Representation (SDR) (Hinton, 1984)
constitutes a fundamental reason behind the success of
deep learning. On one hand, it is an efficient way of representing data that is robust to noise; in fact, some of the main
advantages of sparse distributed representation in the context of deep neural networks has been shown to be information disentangling and manifold flattening (Bengio et al.,
2013), as well as better linear separability and representational power (Glorot et al., 2011). On the other hand, and
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

more importantly, SDR captures the data generation process itself and is biologically inspired (Hubel & Wiesel,
1959; Olshausen & Fieldt, 1997; Patterson et al., 2007),
which makes this mode of representation useful in the first
place.
For these reasons, our objective in this paper is to investigate why a number of regularized Auto-Encoders (AE)
exhibit similar behaviour, especially in terms of learning
sparse representations. AEs are especially interesting for
this matter because of the clear distinction between their
learned encoder representation and decoder output. This
is in contrast with other deep models where there is no
clear distinction between the encoder and decoder parts.
The idea of AEs learning sparse representations (SR) is
not new. Due to the aforementioned biological connection between SR and NNs, a natural follow-up pursued by
a number of researchers was to propose AE variants that
encouraged sparsity in their learned representation (Lee
et al., 2008; Kavukcuoglu & Lecun, 2008; Ng, 2011). On
the other hand, there has also been work on empirically
analyzing/suggesting the sparseness of hidden representations learned after pre-training with unsupervised models
(Memisevic et al., 2014; Li et al., 2013; Nair & Hinton,
2010). However, to the best of our knowledge, there has
been no prior work formally analyzing why regularized
AEs learn sparse representation in general. The main challenge behind doing so is the analysis of non-convex objective functions. In addition, questions regarding the efficacy
of activation functions and the choice of regularization on
AE objective are often raised since there are multiple available choices for both. We also try to address these questions with regards to SR in this paper.
We address these questions in two parts. First, we prove
sufficient conditions on AE regularizations that encourage low pre-activations in hidden units. We then analyze
the properties of activation functions that when coupled
with such regularizations result in sparse representation.
Multiple popular activations have these desirable properties. Second, we show that multiple popular AE objectives
including de-noising auto-encoder (DAE) (Vincent et al.,
2008) and contractive auto-encoder (CAE) (Rifai et al.,

