Anytime Exploration for Multi-armed Bandits using Confidence Information
Kwang-Sung Jun
KJUN @ DISCOVERY. WISC . EDU
Wisconsin Institutes for Discovery, UW-Madison, 330 N. Orchard St., Madison, WI 53715 USA
Robert Nowak
RDNOWAK @ WISC . EDU
Wisconsin Institutes for Discovery, UW-Madison, 330 N. Orchard St., Madison, WI 53715 USA

Abstract
We introduce anytime Explore-m, a pure exploration problem for multi-armed bandits (MAB)
that requires making a prediction of the topm arms at every time step. Anytime Explorem is more practical than fixed budget or fixed
confidence formulations of the top-m problem,
since many applications involve a finite, but unpredictable, budget. However, the development
and analysis of anytime algorithms present many
challenges. We propose AT-LUCB (AnyTime
Lower and Upper Confidence Bound), the first
nontrivial algorithm that provably solves anytime
Explore-m. Our analysis shows that the sample
complexity of AT-LUCB is competitive to anytime variants of existing algorithms. Moreover,
our empirical evaluation on AT-LUCB shows
that AT-LUCB performs as well as or better
than state-of-the-art baseline methods for anytime Explore-m.

1. Introduction
We consider the top-m arms identification problem for
multi-armed bandits (MAB). Suppose we have n stochastic arms. When an arm i is pulled, a reward is drawn i.i.d.
from a distribution ⌫i whose support is in [0, 1].1 We define
the expected reward of arm i as µi := EX⇠⌫i X. Without
loss of generality, we assume µ1
µ2
···
µm >
µm+1
···
µn . The goal is to find the set of m arms
with the highest expected rewards (µ1 , . . . , µm ) through efficient sampling decisions.
The top-m arms identification problem for MABs has a
long history dating back to the ’50s (Bechhofer, 1958;
Paulson, 1964). The vast majority of the recent studies fall
1

This can be generalized to a sub-Gaussian distribution while
keeping the means in [0, 1].
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

under either the fixed confidence or the fixed budget setting. The fixed confidence setting asks an algorithm to take
a failure rate and recommend the top-m arms with probability at least 1
using as few samples as possible (Evendar et al., 2002; Kalyanakrishnan et al., 2012; Karnin et al.,
2013; Jamieson et al., 2014). The fixed budget setting asks
an algorithm to sample B times only and then recommend
the top-m with the highest possible confidence (Audibert
et al., 2010; Karnin et al., 2013; Bubeck et al., 2013). In
both settings, the user provides an algorithm with or B
based on which the algorithm adjusts the level of aggressiveness in its adaptive sampling strategy.
Deviating from the two settings above, we introduce a
new setting where an algorithm must recommend the topm arms after every time step, which we call anytime
Explore-m. Anytime Explore-m generalizes the anytime
setting of (Bubeck et al., 2009) from identifying the best
arm to the top-m arms. Specifically, an algorithm for anytime Explore-m must perform at each time step t the following two tasks. First, the algorithm must choose which
arm to pull (It ) based on the samples collected so far. After receiving a reward from arm It , second, the algorithm
must choose and output a set J(t) of m arms that are believed to be the top-m. The user does not provide a desired failure rate nor a budget B; an algorithm must adapt
its aggressiveness of the sampling over time. Note that
anytime Explore-m asks a strictly harder question than the
fixed budget setting in that an anytime algorithm can perform under the fixed budget setting but not vice versa.
Anytime Explore-m is more challenging than the fixed confidence and budget settings, but it is a better fit for many
practical problems. For example, The New Yorker cartoon
caption contest2 uses crowdsourcing to collect ratings for
the hundreds or thousands of captions submitted for each
week’s cartoon. The ratings are used to select the topm captions (e.g., m = 50) to be advanced to the final
round of in-depth evaluation. The crowdsourcing system is
based on NEXT (Jamieson et al., 2015), and it adaptively
selects captions for ratings using a fixed-confidence algo2

http://contest.newyorker.com

