Adaptive Sampling for SGD by Exploiting Side Information

Siddharth Gopal
Google Inc, 1600 Amphitheatre Parkway

SIDDHARTHG @ GOOGLE . COM

Abstract

get output. Throughout this paper, we will assume that
there N training instances and associated target outputs
d
{xi , yi }N
i=1 , where xi ∈ R and the target yi could be a
label or real value. Moreover we assume that each training instance xi is associated with some side information ci
where ci ∈ C ≡ {1, 2, . . . K}. The side information could
represent a class-label or time-stamp or any tag associated
with xi . The side information ci is essentially used as a
way to partition the N instances into K bins. Note that ci
is not the same as yi although it could be. To give a concrete example, lets assume each xi is associated with one
of 100 different class-labels (numbered from 1 to 100) and
we are learning a binary logistic regression to distinguish
between class-labels {1 − 50} vs {51 − 100}. In this case,
the side information ci is the class-label from 1 to 100 and
the target yi ∈ {+1, −1}. The function f (i; θ) is

f (i; θ) = log 1 + exp −yi θ> xi

This paper proposes a new mechanism for sampling training instances for stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) methods by exploiting any sideinformation associated with the instances (for
e.g. class-labels) to improve convergence. Previous methods have either relied on sampling from
a distribution defined over training instances or
from a static distribution that fixed before training. This results in two problems a) any distribution that is set apriori is independent of
how the optimization progresses and b) maintaining a distribution over individual instances
could be infeasible in large-scale scenarios. In
this paper, we exploit the side information associated with the instances to tackle both problems. More specifically, we maintain a distribution over classes (instead of individual instances)
that is adaptively estimated during the course of
optimization to give the maximum reduction in
the variance of the gradient. Intuitively, we sample more from those regions in space that have
a larger gradient contribution. Our experiments
on highly multiclass datasets show that our proposal converge significantly faster than existing
techniques.

Similar situations arise when we take the popular oneversus-rest approach for performing multiclass classification (Rifkin & Klautau, 2004).
To solve such optimization problems, in the standard SGD
setting (Bottou, 2010), the tth iteration involves picking an
instance it uniformly sampled over all instances and performing the following update,
dt = ∇f (it ; θt−1 )
t

θ =θ

1. Introduction
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) based methods (Robbins & Monro, 1951) are among the choice methods for
optimizing the average of a large number of functions. We
consider the typical setup where we want to solve,
arg min F (θ) =
θ

N
X

1
f (i; θ)
N i=1

(1)

Typically, each f (i; θ) is convex and denotes the misfit between the ith training instance and its corresponding tarProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

t−1

t t

−γ d

(2)
(3)

where γ t is the step size at the t’th iteration. In the presence
of any additional penalty term r(θ) like L1 regularizer, the
following proximal update (Beck & Teboulle, 2009) is preferred instead of (3),
θt = Proxγt r (θt−1 − γ t dt )

(4)

Despite working with only one instance an iteration, this
procedure still converges to the optima as long as γ t is appropriately set (Bottou, 2010; Robbins & Monro, 1951).
This is because, the descent direction dt at each iteration is
an unbiased estimate of the true gradient,
N


1 X
∇f (i; θt−1 ) = ∇F (θ)
Eit dt |θt−1 =
N i=1

