Stochastic Discrete Clenshaw-Curtis Quadrature

Nico Piatkowski
Artificial Intelligence Group, TU Dortmund, Germany

NICO . PIATKOWSKI @ TU - DORTMUND . DE

Katharina Morik
Artificial Intelligence Group, TU Dortmund, Germany

KATHARINA . MORIK @ TU - DORTMUND . DE

Abstract
The partition function is fundamental for probabilistic graphical models—it is required for inference, parameter estimation, and model selection.
Evaluating this function corresponds to discrete
integration, namely a weighted sum over an exponentially large set. This task quickly becomes
intractable as the dimensionality of the problem increases. We propose an approximation
scheme that, for any discrete graphical model
whose parameter vector has bounded norm, estimates the partition function with arbitrarily small
error. Our algorithm relies on a near minimax
optimal polynomial approximation to the potential function and a Clenshaw-Curtis style quadrature. Furthermore, we show that this algorithm
can be randomized to split the computation into a
high-complexity part and a low-complexity part,
where the latter may be carried out on small computational devices. Experiments confirm that the
new randomized algorithm is highly accurate if
the parameter norm is small, and is otherwise
comparable to methods with unbounded error.

1. Introduction
Graphical models serve as the underlying framework of
various machine learning techniques and facilitate important real world applications from computer vision, computational biology, signal processing and natural language
processing, to mention just a few (Pearl, 1988; Lauritzen,
1996; Koller & Friedman, 2009). When using these models, a central problem is that of computing the partition function, since it is required for computing probabilities from the model and it plays a fundamental role in
marginal inference (Jaakkola & Jordan, 1996), maximumProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

likelihood and maximum-a-posteriori parameter estimation (Wainwright & Jordan, 2008), and model selection
(Cover & Thomas, 2006; Grünwald, 2007). Unfortunately, exact computation of the partition function is an intractable (#P-complete) problem for many graphical models of interest, such as those involving a non-tree conditional independence structure (short: structure) or highorder cliques/factors. Moreover, chances to find polynomial time algorithms for these tasks are rather low, unless P
= NP. For some special cases, polynomial-time algorithms
are known (Schraudolph & Kamenetsky, 2008; Goldberg &
Jerrum, 2013). However, significant research efforts have
been conducted in order to derive approximations for more
general cases.
There are two well established general approaches to approximate large discrete sums: variational methods and
sampling. Methods which provide reasonable tight error
bounds that hold for any structure are either not available
or require to solve a series of hard combinatorial optimization problems (Ermon et al., 2013).
Based on work from statistical physics, variational methods (Wainwright & Jordan, 2008) are often very fast but
do not provide quality guarantees. Loopy belief propagation (LBP) (Pearl, 1988; Kschischang et al., 2001) is well
known for computing locally consistent solutions. Nevertheless, this procedure might not converge and if it does, the
result is a local minimum of a surrogate objective (Bethe
free energy). Tree-reweighted approaches (Wainwright &
Jordan, 2008) deliver the tightest upper bound, but the exact error can not be quantified. In addition, the approximation error depends on the structure of the corresponding
probability density. In contrast, the worst-case error of our
method is bounded and independent of the structure.
Sampling based techniques are popular, but they suffer
from similar issues because the number of samples required to obtain a statistically reliable estimate for multidimensional random variables grows exponentially fast.
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods are asymptotically accurate, but guarantees exist only for certain spe-

