Dropout as a Bayesian Approximation:
Representing Model Uncertainty in Deep Learning

Yarin Gal
Zoubin Ghahramani
University of Cambridge

Abstract
Deep learning tools have gained tremendous attention in applied machine learning. However
such tools for regression and classification do
not capture model uncertainty. In comparison, Bayesian models offer a mathematically
grounded framework to reason about model uncertainty, but usually come with a prohibitive
computational cost. In this paper we develop a
new theoretical framework casting dropout training in deep neural networks (NNs) as approximate Bayesian inference in deep Gaussian processes. A direct result of this theory gives us
tools to model uncertainty with dropout NNs –
extracting information from existing models that
has been thrown away so far. This mitigates
the problem of representing uncertainty in deep
learning without sacrificing either computational
complexity or test accuracy. We perform an extensive study of the properties of dropout’s uncertainty. Various network architectures and nonlinearities are assessed on tasks of regression
and classification, using MNIST as an example.
We show a considerable improvement in predictive log-likelihood and RMSE compared to existing state-of-the-art methods, and finish by using dropout’s uncertainty in deep reinforcement
learning.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has attracted tremendous attention from researchers in fields such as physics, biology, and manufacturing, to name a few (Baldi et al., 2014; Anjos et al., 2015;
Bergmann et al., 2014). Tools such as neural networks
(NNs), dropout, convolutional neural networks (convnets),
and others are used extensively. However, these are fields in
which representing model uncertainty is of crucial importance (Krzywinski & Altman, 2013; Ghahramani, 2015).
With the recent shift in many of these fields towards the use
of Bayesian uncertainty (Herzog & Ostwald, 2013; TrafiProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

YG 279@ CAM . AC . UK
ZG 201@ CAM . AC . UK

mow & Marks, 2015; Nuzzo, 2014), new needs arise from
deep learning tools.
Standard deep learning tools for regression and classification do not capture model uncertainty. In classification,
predictive probabilities obtained at the end of the pipeline
(the softmax output) are often erroneously interpreted as
model confidence. A model can be uncertain in its predictions even with a high softmax output (fig. 1). Passing a
point estimate of a function (solid line 1a) through a softmax (solid line 1b) results in extrapolations with unjustified
high confidence for points far from the training data. x∗ for
example would be classified as class 1 with probability 1.
However, passing the distribution (shaded area 1a) through
a softmax (shaded area 1b) better reflects classification uncertainty far from the training data.
Model uncertainty is indispensable for the deep learning
practitioner as well. With model confidence at hand we can
treat uncertain inputs and special cases explicitly. For example, in the case of classification, a model might return a
result with high uncertainty. In this case we might decide
to pass the input to a human for classification. This can
happen in a post office, sorting letters according to their zip
code, or in a nuclear power plant with a system responsible for critical infrastructure (Linda et al., 2009). Uncertainty is important in reinforcement learning (RL) as well
(Szepesvári, 2010). With uncertainty information an agent
can decide when to exploit and when to explore its environment. Recent advances in RL have made use of NNs for
Q-value function approximation. These are functions that
estimate the quality of different actions an agent can take.
Epsilon greedy search is often used where the agent selects
its best action with some probability and explores otherwise. With uncertainty estimates over the agent’s Q-value
function, techniques such as Thompson sampling (Thompson, 1933) can be used to learn much faster.
Bayesian probability theory offers us mathematically
grounded tools to reason about model uncertainty, but these
usually come with a prohibitive computational cost. It is
perhaps surprising then that it is possible to cast recent
deep learning tools as Bayesian models – without changing either the models or the optimisation. We show that
the use of dropout (and its variants) in NNs can be interpreted as a Bayesian approximation of a well known prob-

