Partition Functions from
Rao-Blackwellized Tempered Sampling
David E. Carlson∗1,2
Patrick Stinson∗2
Ari Pakman∗1,2
Liam Paninski1,2
1
Department of Statistics
2
Grossman Center for the Statistics of Mind
Columbia University, New York, NY, 10027

Abstract
Partition functions of probability distributions
are important quantities for model evaluation and
comparisons. We present a new method to compute partition functions of complex and multimodal distributions. Such distributions are often sampled using simulated tempering, which
augments the target space with an auxiliary inverse temperature variable. Our method exploits
the multinomial probability law of the inverse
temperatures, and provides estimates of the partition function in terms of a simple quotient of
Rao-Blackwellized marginal inverse temperature
probability estimates, which are updated while
sampling. We show that the method has interesting connections with several alternative popular
methods, and offers some signiﬁcant advantages.
In particular, we empirically ﬁnd that the new
method provides more accurate estimates than
Annealed Importance Sampling when calculating partition functions of large Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBM); moreover, the method is
sufﬁciently accurate to track training and validation log-likelihoods during learning of RBMs, at
minimal computational cost.

1. Introduction
The computation of partition functions (or equivalently,
normalizing constants) and marginal likelihoods is an important problem in machine learning, statistics and statisti*These authors contributed equally to this work. The order of the
names was randomized.
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

DAVID . EDWIN . CARLSON @ GMAIL . COM
PATRICKSTINSON @ GMAIL . COM
ARI @ STAT. COLUMBIA . EDU
LIAM @ STAT. COLUMBIA . EDU

cal physics, and is necessary in tasks such as evaluating the
test likelihood of complex generative models, calculating
Bayes factors, or computing differences in free energies.
There exists a vast literature exploring methods to perform
such computations, and the popularity and usefulness of
different methods change across different communities and
domain applications. Classic and recent reviews include
(Gelman & Meng, 1998; Vyshemirsky & Girolami, 2008;
Marin & Robert, 2009; Friel & Wyse, 2012).
In this paper we are interested in the particularly challenging case of highly multimodal distributions, such as those
common in machine learning applications (Salakhutdinov
& Murray, 2008). Our major novel insight is that simulated
tempering, a popular approach for sampling from such distributions, also provides an essentially cost-free way to estimate the partition function. Simulated tempering allows
sampling of multimodal distributions by augmenting the
target space with a random inverse temperature variable
and introducing a series of tempered distributions. The idea
is that the fast MCMC mixing at low inverse temperatures
allows the Markov chain to land in different modes of the
low-temperature distribution of interest (Marinari & Parisi,
1992; Geyer & Thompson, 1995).
As it turns out, (ratios of) partition functions have a simple expression in terms of ratios of the parameters of
the multinomial probability law of the inverse temperatures. These parameters can be estimated efﬁciently by
averaging the conditional probabilities of the inverse temperatures along the Markov chain. This simple method
matches state-of-the-art performance with minimal computational and storage overhead. Since our estimator
is based on Rao-Blackwellized marginal probability estimates of the inverse temperature variable, we denote it
Rao-Blackwellized Tempered Sampling (RTS).
In Section 2 we review the simulated tempering technique

