Structure Learning of Partitioned Markov Networks

Song Liu†
LIU @ ISM . AC . JP
Taiji Suzuki‡
SUZUKI . T. CT @ M . TITECH . AC . JP
Masashi Sugiyama?
SUGI @ K . U - TOKYO . AC . JP
Kenji Fukumizu†
FUKUMIZU @ ISM . AC . JP
†The Institute of Statistical Mathematics, Tokyo 190-8562, Japan.
‡Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo 152-8552, Japan; PRESTO, Japan Science and Technological Agency (JST).
?University of Tokyo, Chiba 277-8561, Japan.

We learn the structure of a Markov Network between two groups of random variables from joint
observations. Since modelling and learning the
full MN structure may be hard, learning the links
between two groups directly may be a preferable
option. We introduce a novel concept called the
partitioned ratio whose factorization directly associates with the Markovian properties of random variables across two groups. A simple oneshot convex optimization procedure is proposed
for learning the sparse factorizations of the partitioned ratio and it is theoretically guaranteed
to recover the correct inter-group structure under mild conditions. The performance of the proposed method is experimentally compared with
the state of the art MN structure learning methods
using ROC curves. Real applications on analyzing bipartisanship in US congress and pairwise
DNA/time-series alignments are also reported.

1. Introduction
An undirected graphical model, or a Markov Network
(MN) (Koller & Friedman, 2009; Wainwright & Jordan,
2008) has a wide range of applications in real world, such
as natural language processing, computer vision, and computational biology. The structure of MN, which encodes
the interactions among random variables, is one of the
key interests of MN learning tasks. However, on a highdimensional dataset, learning the full MN structure can be
cumbersum since we may not have enough knowledge to
model the entire MN, or our application only concerns a
specific portion of the MN structure.
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

?

?

Abstract
𝑋𝑣

𝑋𝑢

?
?

𝑋𝑣
𝑋𝑢

?
?
?

Figure 1. An illustration of a full MN (left) and PMN (right). Full
MN models all the connections among random variables, while
PMN only models the interactions between groups (red edges)
and does not care connections within groups.

Rather than considering the full MN structure over the
complete set of random variables, we focus on learning a
portion of the MN structure that links two groups of random variables, namely the Partitioned Markov Network
(PMN). PMN is suitable for describing the “inter-group
relations”. For example, politicians in US Congress are
naturally grouped into two parties (Democrats and Republicans). Learning a PMN on congresspersons via their
voting records will reveal bipartisan collaborations among
them. A full gene network may have complicated structure.
However if genes can be clustered into a few homologous
groups, PMN can help us understand how genes in different
functioning groups interact with each other. An illustration
of a full MN and a PMN is shown in Figure 1.
Since a PMN can be regarded as a “sub-structure” of a full
MN, a naive approach may be learning a full MN over the
complete set of random variables and figuring out its PMN.
In fact, the machine learning community has seen huge progresses on learning the sparse structures of MNs, thanks to
the pioneer works on sparsity inducing norms (Tibshirani,
1996; Zhao & Yu, 2006; Wainwright, 2009).
A majority of the previous works fall into the category of
the regularized maximum likelihood approach which maximizes the likelihood function of a probabilistic model under sparsity constrains. Graphical lasso (Friedman et al.,
2008; Banerjee et al., 2008) considers a joint Gaussian
model parameterized by the inverse covariance matrix,

