Pricing a Low-regret Seller

Hoda Heidari
Mohammad Mahdian
Umar Syed
Sergei Vassilvitskii
Sadra Yazdanbod

HODA @ CIS . UPENN . EDU
MAHDIAN @ GOOGLE . COM
USYED @ GOOGLE . COM
SERGEIV @ GOOGLE . COM
YAZDANBOD @ GATECH . EDU

Abstract
As the number of ad exchanges has grown, publishers have turned to low regret learning algorithms to decide which exchange offers the best
price for their inventory. This in turn opens the
following question for the exchange: how to set
prices to attract as many sellers as possible and
maximize revenue. In this work we formulate
this precisely as a learning problem, and present
algorithms showing that by simply knowing that
the counterparty is using a low regret algorithm is
enough for the exchange to have its own low regret learning algorithm to find the optimal price.

1. Introduction
A display ad exchange (e.g. DoubleClick, AdECN, and
AppNexus) is a platform that facilitates buying and selling
of display advertising inventory connecting multiple publishers and advertisers. Publishers can select an exchange
to serve an impression each time a user visits one of their
websites. Upon receiving an ad slot, the exchange sells
it to one of their advertisers—often by running an auction
among real-time bidding agents—and pays the publisher an
amount based on the revenue generated from the ad.
With the recent growth in the number of ad exchanges, one
important decision a publisher has to make is which one of
these exchanges to enlist in order to sell their inventory for
the highest price. Unlike traditional settings where prices
are posted, in display advertising the publisher cannot simply observe the offered prices in advance and choose the
highest paying exchange. There are multiple reasons behind this constraint: First, on the exchange side each price
check often involves running an auction and allocating the
impression to the winner. As the result the publisher cannot send the same item to multiple exchanges at the same
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

time. This combined with the fact that there is very limited time—on the order of a few milliseconds—to serve an
ad to the user, forces the publisher to commit to using a
particular exchange before observing the prices.
Given that prices cannot be observed in advance, in order to
pick the highest paying exchange publishers have to rely on
experimentation, utilizing different exchanges and seeing
the payoffs realized from each over time. In recent years
great progress has been made to automate decision making
processes in such settings. The so called bandit algorithms
automatically explore between the multitude of available
options (here exchanges) and exploit the most profitable
ones. These algorithms are easy to implement, are incredibly practical, and come with strong theoretical guarantees
on the regret of the operator (here publisher). Therefore,
from the point of view of the publisher, the situation is
largely resolved.
From the point of view of an exchange, however, it is far
from clear what strategy it must employ to maximize revenue. In an ideal world the exchange could look at the
prices offered to the publisher by its competitors, and set
the offering price ever so slightly higher. Any strategic publisher (e.g. one minimizing regret) would then shift their
inventory towards this exchange, rewarding them for the
higher prices. In practice, however, these prices are not
publicly announced and there is no easy way to discover
them. For instance, because of cookie based targeting, it is
not possible for the exchange to simply find a ’similar’ impression on one of the competing platforms and check its
price. Given that the exchange cannot observe the competing prices directly, the only way to infer and react to them
is through the actions of the publisher.
Faced with a publisher who selects among exchanges using
a no-regret algorithm, the operator of an exchange must
carefully decide what prices to offer. If the prices are too
low, the publisher will never select the exchange, and if the
prices are too high, the exchange is overpaying. Our goal
in this work is to design a no regret pricing algorithm for
the exchange.

