Learning and Inference via Maximum Inner Product Search

Stephen Mussmann
Stanford University, 450 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305 USA

MUSSMANN @ STANFORD . EDU

Stefano Ermon
Stanford University, 450 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305 USA

ERMON @ CS . STANFORD . EDU

Abstract
A large class of commonly used probabilistic
models known as log-linear models are defined
up to a normalization constant.Typical learning
algorithms for such models require solving a sequence of probabilistic inference queries. These
inferences are typically intractable, and are a major bottleneck for learning models with large output spaces. In this paper, we provide a new approach for amortizing the cost of a sequence of
related inference queries, such as the ones arising
during learning. Our technique relies on a surprising connection with algorithms developed in
the past two decades for similarity search in large
data bases. Our approach achieves improved running times with provable approximation guarantees. We show that it performs well both on synthetic data and neural language models with large
output spaces.

1. Introduction
A large class of probabilistic models used in machine learning, physics and statistics are defined up to a normalization constant. This constant, often known as the partition
function, ensures that the model is a valid probability distribution. Models involving a normalization constant include undirected graphical models, such as Markov Random Fields, Conditional Random Fields (Lafferty et al.,
2001), and extremely common special cases such as multinomial logistic regression (softmax) (Koller & Friedman,
2009; Murphy, 2012).
Defining probabilities up to a normalization constant gives
some extra modeling flexibility, however, it comes at a
price. Nearly all inference tasks, including evaluating the
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

probability of a state according to the model, require evaluating the partition function. Unfortunately, the problem
is generally intractable in the worst case, with complexity
scaling linearly in the number of states (Roth, 1996). Problems with large output spaces arise naturally in many fields
including NLP and computer vision (Bengio et al., 2006;
Andreas et al., 2015; Devlin et al., 2014), and pose numerous challenges to inference and learning algorithms (Ermon et al., 2013a). Learning the parameters from data, in
particular, typically requires solving a sequence of probabilistic inference queries. This is often a major bottleneck
for learning models with large output spaces.
While sequences of inference queries (arising at learning
time, but also at inference time, after the model has been
trained) are often treated independently and solved separately, they share some common structure. This observation has been exploited before, e.g., in the so-called persistent chains used in training RBMs (Tieleman, 2008), where
a Markov Chain is initialized using samples from a related
model (or training data) to speed up convergence. In this
work, we take an alternative view and propose an new approach to amortize the cost of a sequence of related inference queries (Gershman & Goodman, 2014). Specifically,
the idea is to pay upfront an overhead cost to construct a
special data structure. This data structure will later allow
us to answer inference queries in a much more efficient
way, thus amortizing the initial cost and overall reducing
the total computational cost.
Our technique relies on a surprising connection with algorithms for similarity search in large data bases. These
algorithms have been critical to scale up information retrieval systems in the past two decades, e.g., to efficiently
detect duplicate documents at internet scale (Henzinger,
2006; Manku et al., 2007). In this work, we provide a
novel algorithm to sample from general log-linear models
based on solving a randomly perturbed Maximum Inner
Product Search (MIPS) instance (Shrivastava & Li, 2014).
We show that our approach produces samples with the correct marginals when an exact MIPS method is used, and

