On collapsed representation of hierarchical Completely Random Measures

Gaurav Pandey
Ambedkar Dukkipati
Department of Computer Science and Automation
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore-560012, India

Abstract
The aim of the paper is to provide an exact approach for generating a Poisson process sampled from a hierarchical CRM, without having
to instantiate the infinitely many atoms of the
random measures. We use completely random
measures (CRM) and hierarchical CRM to define a prior for Poisson processes. We derive
the marginal distribution of the resultant point
process, when the underlying CRM is marginalized out. Using well known properties unique
to Poisson processes, we were able to derive an
exact approach for instantiating a Poisson process with a hierarchical CRM prior. Furthermore,
we derive Gibbs sampling strategies for hierarchical CRM models based on Chinese restaurant franchise sampling scheme. As an example,
we present the sum of generalized gamma process (SGGP), and show its application in topicmodelling. We show that one can determine the
power-law behaviour of the topics and words in
a Bayesian fashion, by defining a prior on the parameters of SGGP.

1. Introduction
Mixed membership modelling is the problem of assigning
an object to multiple latent classes/features simultaneously.
Depending upon the problem, one can allow a single latent
feature to be exhibited single or multiple times by the object. For instance, a document may comprise several topics, with each topic occurring in the document with variable multiplicity. The corresponding problem of mapping
the words of a document to topics, is referred to as topic
modelling.
While parametric solutions to mixed membership modProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

GP 88@ CSA . IISC . ERNET. IN
AD @ CSA . IISC . ERNET. IN

elling have been available in literature since more than a
decade (Landauer & Dumais, 1997; Hofmann, 1999; Blei
et al., 2001), the first non-parametric approach, that allowed the number of latent classes to be determined as
well, was the hierarchical Dirichlet process (HDP) (Teh
et al., 2006). Both the approaches model the object as a
set of repeated draws from an object-specific distribution,
whereby the object specific distribution is itself sampled
from a common distribution. On the other hand, recent approaches such as hierarchical beta-negative binomial process (Zhou et al., 2012; Broderick et al., 2015) and hierarchical gamma-Poisson process (Titsias, 2008; Zhou &
Carin, 2015) model the object as a point process, sampled
from an object specific random measure, which is itself
sampled from a common random measure. In some sense,
these approaches are more natural for mixed membership
modelling, since they model the object as a single entity
rather than as a sequence of draws from a distribution.
A straightforward implementation of any of the above nonparametric models would require sampling the atoms in the
non-parametric distribution for the base as well as objectspecific measure. However, since the number of atoms in
these distributions are often infinite, a truncation step is required to ensure tractability. Alternatively, for the HDP,
a Chinese restaurant franchise scheme (Teh et al., 2006)
can be used for collapsed inference in the model (that is,
without explicitly instantiating the atoms). Fully collapsed
inference scheme has also been proposed for beta-negative
binomial process (BNBP) (Heaukulani & Roy, 2013; Zhou,
2014) and Gamma-Gamma-Poisson process (Zhou et al.,
2015). Of particular relevance is the work by Roy (2014),
whereby a Chinese restaurant fanchise scheme has been
proposed for hierarchies of beta proceses (and its generalizations), when coupled with Bernoulli process.
In this paper, it is our aim to extend fully collapsed
sampling so as to allow any completely random measure
(CRM) for the choice of base and object-specific measure.
As proposed in Roy (2014) for hierarchies of generalized
beta processes, we propose Chinese restaurant franchise
schemes for hierarchies of CRMs, when coupled with Pois-

