Why Most Decisions Are Easy in Tetris—And Perhaps in
Other Sequential Decision Problems, As Well

Özgür Şimşek
Simón Algorta
Amit Kothiyal
Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition
Max Planck Institute for Human Development
Lentzeallee 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany

Abstract
We examined the sequence of decision problems
that are encountered in the game of Tetris and
found that most of the problems are easy in the
following sense: One can choose well among the
available actions without knowing an evaluation
function that scores well in the game. This is a
consequence of three conditions that are prevalent in the game: simple dominance, cumulative
dominance, and noncompensation. These conditions can be exploited to develop faster and more
effective learning algorithms. In addition, they
allow certain types of domain knowledge to be
incorporated with ease into a learning algorithm.
Among the sequential decision problems we encounter, it is unlikely that Tetris is unique or rare
in having these properties.

1. Introduction
Many problems humans encounter are sequential in nature,
where a successful outcome depends not on a single decision but on a series of related decisions. Furthermore,
typically there is uncertainty regarding the consequences
of decisions. These types of problems, known as sequential decision problems under uncertainty, remain challenging for machine learning despite successful applications in
large, complex domains such as the game of Go (Silver
et al., 2016).
One means to developing faster, more effective learning
algorithms is to study the natural environments in which
sequential decision problems are encountered. It is well
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

OZGUR @ MPIB - BERLIN . MPG . DE
ALGORTA @ MPIB - BERLIN . MPG . DE
KOTHIYAL @ MPIB - BERLIN . MPG . DE

known that many aspects of the natural world have regularities. For example, networks observed in nature are very different from random networks. They exhibit homophily (the
tendency of connected nodes to have correlated attributes)
and they tend to have some nodes with a very high degree.
Both of these properties have informed the development
of algorithms that can search natural networks much more
effectively than they search random networks (Kleinberg,
2000; Watts et al., 2002; Adamic et al., 2001; Şimşek &
Jensen, 2008). It is possible that natural sequential-decision
environments similarly exhibit regularities that can inform
the development of learning algorithms.
We examined one particular environment in depth: Tetris,
one of the most well-known and liked video games of all
time. Our interest is not in Tetris per se but in using it as a
platform for identifying regularities in sequential-decision
environments.
We found that most individual problems encountered while
playing Tetris are easy in the following sense: One can
choose well among the available actions without knowing
an evaluation function that scores well in the game. Furthermore, there is an intuitive feature that typically eliminates a substantial number of actions without eliminating
the best action. The underlying reasons are three types of
regularities in the domain, which we explain in detail in the
following sections.
Our analysis is motivated by earlier results in the decisionmaking literature on single-shot problems. In the following
sections, we review this literature and describe our results
in Tetris. Our analysis leads to two immediate questions
for further research. The first is whether Tetris is unique or
rare in having these regularities. The second is how these
regularities can be exploited for faster, more effective learning. We discuss both questions in some detail, presenting
additional results from the game of backgammon.

