Robust Random Cut Forest Based Anomaly Detection On Streams

Sudipto Guha
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104.

SUDIPTO @ CIS . UPENN . EDU

Nina Mishra
Amazon, Palo Alto, CA 94303.

NMISHRA @ AMAZON . COM

Gourav Roy
Amazon, Bangalore, India 560055.

GOURAVR @ AMAZON . COM

Okke Schrijvers
Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA 94305.

Abstract
In this paper we focus on the anomaly detection
problem for dynamic data streams through the
lens of random cut forests. We investigate a robust random cut data structure that can be used
as a sketch or synopsis of the input stream. We
provide a plausible deﬁnition of non-parametric
anomalies based on the inﬂuence of an unseen
point on the remainder of the data, i.e., the externality imposed by that point. We show how the
sketch can be efﬁciently updated in a dynamic
data stream. We demonstrate the viability of the
algorithm on publicly available real data.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection is one of the cornerstone problems in
data mining. Even though the problem has been well studied over the last few decades, the emerging explosion of
data from the internet of things and sensors leads us to reconsider the problem. In most of these contexts the data
is streaming and well-understood prior models do not exist. Furthermore the input streams need not be append only,
there may be corrections, updates and a variety of other dynamic changes. Two central questions in this regard are
(1) how do we deﬁne anomalies? and (2) what data structure do we use to efﬁciently detect anomalies over dynamic
data streams? In this paper we initiate the formal study of
both of these questions. For (1), we view the problem from
the perspective of model complexity and say that a point is
an anomaly if the complexity of the model increases substantially with the inclusion of the point. The labeling of
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

OKKES @ CS . STANFORD . EDU

a point is data dependent and corresponds to the externality imposed by the point in explaining the remainder of the
data. We extend this notion of externality to handle “outlier
masking” that often arises from duplicates and near duplicate records. Note that the notion of model complexity has
to be amenable to efﬁcient computation in dynamic data
streams. This relates question (1) to question (2) which we
discuss in greater detail next. However it is worth noting
that anomaly detection is not well understood even in the
simpler context of static batch processing and (2) remains
relevant in the batch setting as well.
For question (2), we explore a randomized approach, akin
to (Liu et al., 2012), due in part to the practical success reported in (Emmott et al., 2013). Randomization is a powerful tool and known to be valuable in supervised learning (Breiman, 2001). But its technical exploration in the
context of anomaly detection is not well-understood and
the same comment applies to the algorithm put forth in (Liu
et al., 2012). Moreover that algorithm has several limitations as described in Section 4.1. In particular, we
show that in the presence of irrelevant dimensions, crucial anomalies are missed. In addition, it is unclear how
to extend this work to a stream. Prior work attempted solutions (Tan et al., 2011) that extend to streaming, however
those were not found to be effective (Emmott et al., 2013).
To address these limitations, we put forward a sketch or
synopsis termed robust random cut forest (RRCF) formally
deﬁned as follows.
Deﬁnition 1 A robust random cut tree (RRCT) on point
set S is generated as follows:
1. Choose a random dimension proportional to i j ,
j
where i = maxx∈S xi − minx∈S xi .
2. Choose Xi ∼ Uniform[minx∈S xi , maxx∈S xi ]
3. Let S1 = {x|x ∈ S, xi ≤ Xi } and S2 = S \ S1 and
recurse on S1 and S2 .

