Training Neural Networks Without Gradients:
A Scalable ADMM Approach

Gavin Taylor1
Ryan Burmeister1
Zheng Xu2
Bharat Singh2
Ankit Patel3
Tom Goldstein2
1
United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, MD USA
2
University of Maryland, College Park, MD USA
3
Rice University, Houston, TX USA

Abstract
With the growing importance of large network
models and enormous training datasets, GPUs
have become increasingly necessary to train neural networks. This is largely because conventional optimization algorithms rely on stochastic
gradient methods that don’t scale well to large
numbers of cores in a cluster setting. Furthermore, the convergence of all gradient methods,
including batch methods, suffers from common
problems like saturation effects, poor conditioning, and saddle points. This paper explores an
unconventional training method that uses alternating direction methods and Bregman iteration
to train networks without gradient descent steps.
The proposed method reduces the network training problem to a sequence of minimization substeps that can each be solved globally in closed
form. The proposed method is advantageous because it avoids many of the caveats that make
gradient methods slow on highly non-convex
problems. The method exhibits strong scaling in
the distributed setting, yielding linear speedups
even when split over thousands of cores.

1. Introduction
As hardware and algorithms advance, neural network performance is constantly improving for many machine learning tasks. This is particularly true in applications where
extremely large datasets are available to train models with
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

TAYLOR @ USNA . EDU
XUZH @ CS . UMD . EDU
BHARAT @ CS . UMD . EDU
ABP 4@ RICE . EDU
TOMG @ CS . UMD . EDU

many parameters. Because big datasets provide results that
(often dramatically) outperform the prior state-of-the-art in
many machine learning tasks, researchers are willing to
purchase specialized hardware such as GPUs, and commit
large amounts of time to training models and tuning hyperparameters.
Gradient-based training methods have several properties
that contribute to this need for specialized hardware. First,
while large amounts of data can be shared amongst many
cores, existing optimization methods suffer when parallelized. Second, training neural nets requires optimizing
highly non-convex objectives that exhibit saddle points,
poor conditioning, and vanishing gradients, all of which
slow down gradient-based methods such as stochastic gradient descent, conjugate gradients, and BFGS. Several mitigating approaches to avoiding this issue have been introduced, including rectified linear units (ReLU) (Nair & Hinton, 2010), Long Short-Term Memory networks (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), RPROP (Riedmiller & Braun,
1993), and others, but the fundamental problem remains.
In this paper, we introduce a new method for training the
parameters of neural nets using the Alternating Direction
Method of Multipliers (ADMM) and Bregman iteration.
This approach addresses several problems facing classical gradient methods; the proposed method exhibits linear
scaling when data is parallelized across cores, and is robust
to gradient saturation and poor conditioning. The method
decomposes network training into a sequence of sub-steps
that are each solved to global optimality. The scalability
of the proposed method, combined with the ability to avoid
local minima by globally solving each substep, can lead to
dramatic speedups.
We begin in Section 2 by describing the mathematical notation and context, and providing a discussion of several

