Faster Eigenvector Computation via Shift-and-Invert Preconditioning

Dan Garber
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago

DGARBER @ TTIC . EDU

Elad Hazan
Princeton University

EHAZAN @ CS . PRINCETON . EDU

Chi Jin
University of California, Berkeley

CHIJIN @ BERKELEY. EDU

Sham M. Kakade
University of Washington

SHAM @ CS . WASHINGTON . EDU

Cameron Musco
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

CNMUSCO @ MIT. EDU

Praneeth Netrapalli
Aaron Sidford
Microsoft Research, New England

Abstract
We give faster algorithms and improved sample complexities for the fundamental problem of
estimating the top eigenvector. Given an explicit matrix A ∈ Rn×d , we show how to compute an  approximate
top eigenvector
of A> A
h
i
d
sr(A)
e nnz(A) +
in time O
· log 1/ . Here
gap2
nnz(A) is the number of nonzeros in A, sr(A) is
the stable rank, and gap is the relative eigengap.
We also consider an online setting in which,
given a stream of i.i.d. samples from a distribution D with covariance matrix Σ and a vector x0
which is an O(gap) approximate top eigenvector
for Σ, we show how
 to refine x0 to an  approxv(D)
imation using O gap·
samples from D. Here
v(D) is a natural notion of variance. Combining our algorithm with previous work to initialize
x0 , we obtain improved sample complexities and
runtimes under a variety of assumptions on D.
We achieve our results via a robust analysis of the
classic shift-and-invert preconditioning method.
This technique lets us reduce eigenvector computation to approximately solving a series of linear
systems with fast stochastic gradient methods.
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

PRANEETH @ MICROSOFT. COM
ASID @ MICROSOFT. COM

1. Introduction
Given A ∈ Rn×d , computing the top eigenvector of A> A
is a fundamental problem in numerical linear algebra, applicable to principal component analysis (Jolliffe, 2002),
spectral clustering and learning (Ng et al., 2002; Vempala
& Wang, 2004), pagerank computation, and many other
graph computations (Page et al., 1999; Koren, 2003; Spielman, 2007). For instance, a degree-k principal component
analysis is nothing more than performing k leading eigenvector computations. Given the ever-growing size of modern datasets, it is thus a key challenge to come up with more
efficient algorithms for this basic computational primitive.
In this work we provide improved algorithms for computing the top eigenvector, both in the offline case, when A is
given explicitly and in the online or statistical case where
we access samples from a distribution D over Rd and wish
to estimate

the top eigenvector of the covariance matrix
Ea∼D aa> . In the offline case, our algorithms are the
fastest to date in a wide and meaningful regime of parameters. Notably, while the running time of most popular methods for eigenvector computations is a product of the size
of the dataset (i.e. number of non-zeros in A) and certain
spectral characteristics of A, which both can be quite large
in practice, we present running times that actually split the
dependency between these two quantities, and as a result
may yield significant speedups. In the online case, our results yield improved sample complexity bounds and allow
for very efficient streaming implementations with memory

