Hierarchical Span-Based Conditional Random Fields for Labeling and
Segmenting Events in Wearable Sensor Data Streams

Roy J. Adams
University of Massachusetts Amherst, 140 Governors Drv, Amherst, MA 01003

RJADAMS @ CS . UMASS . EDU

Nazir Saleheen
University of Memphis, 375 Dunn Hall, Memphis, TN 38152

NSLEHEEN @ MEMPHIS . EDU

Edison Thomaz
The University of Texas at Austin, 110 Inner Campus Drive, Austin, TX 78705

ETHOMAZ @ UTEXAS . EDU

Abhinav Parate
Lumme Inc, 34 Main St, Amherst, MA 01002

APARATE @ CS . UMASS . EDU

Santosh Kumar
University of Memphis, 375 Dunn Hall, Memphis, TN 38152

SKUMAR 4@ MEMPHIS . EDU

Benjamin M. Marlin
University of Massachusetts Amherst, 140 Governors Drv, Amherst, MA 01003

MARLIN @ CS . UMASS . EDU

Abstract
The field of mobile health (mHealth) has the
potential to yield new insights into health and
behavior through the analysis of continuously
recorded data from wearable health and activity
sensors. In this paper, we present a hierarchical span-based conditional random field model
for the key problem of jointly detecting discrete
events in such sensor data streams and segmenting these events into high-level activity sessions.
Our model includes higher-order cardinality factors and inter-event duration factors to capture
domain-specific structure in the label space. We
show that our model supports exact MAP inference in quadratic time via dynamic programming, which we leverage to perform learning
in the structured support vector machine framework. We apply the model to the problems of
smoking and eating detection using four real data
sets. Our results show statistically significant
improvements in segmentation performance relative to a hierarchical pairwise CRF.

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
A small number of behaviors including physical inactivity, poor diet, tobacco use, and alcohol consumption are
key risk factors in a wide array of chronic conditions including obesity, cancer, diabetes and cardiovascular disease (McGinnis et al., 2002; Mokdad et al., 2004; DeVol
et al., 2007). These behaviors have traditionally been studied using self-report data; however, self-report has wellknown limitations including data sparsity, recall bias, and
high burden on study subjects (Shiffman et al., 2008). The
emerging field of mobile health (mHealth) seeks to replace
the use of self report data with continuously recorded physiological and activity-related data streams collected using
wearable sensors. While mHealth technologies have the
potential to yield novel insights into health and behavior,
significant data analysis challenges must first be overcome
(Kumar et al., 2013).
In this paper, we address the key problem of detecting discrete events in wearable sensor data streams and segmenting these events into high-level activity sessions. This problem is central to several important mHealth tasks including
smoking detection (Ali et al., 2012; Saleheen et al., 2015)
and eating detection (Parate et al., 2014; Thomaz et al.,
2015). In these domains, the events correspond to individual smoking puffs or eating gestures, the high-level activity
sessions correspond to smoking a complete cigarette or eating a meal, and data streams may be available from a vari-

