The Knowledge Gradient for Sequential Decision Making with Stochastic
Binary Feedbacks

Yingfei Wang
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08540

YINGFEI @ CS . PRINCETON . EDU

Chu Wang
CHUW @ MATH . PRINCETON . EDU
The Program in Applied and Computational Mathematics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544
Warren Powell
POWELL @ PRINCETON . EDU
Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544

Abstract
We consider the problem of sequentially making decisions that are rewarded by “successes”
and “failures” which can be predicted through
an unknown relationship that depends on a partially controllable vector of attributes for each instance. The learner takes an active role in selecting samples from the instance pool. The goal
is to maximize the probability of success, either after the offline training phase or minimizing regret in online learning. Our problem is
motivated by real-world applications where observations are time consuming and/or expensive.
With the adaptation of an online Bayesian linear classifier, we develop a knowledge-gradient
type policy to guide the experiment by maximizing the expected value of information of labeling
each alternative, in order to reduce the number
of expensive physical experiments. We provide
a finite-time analysis of the estimated error and
demonstrate the performance of the proposed algorithm on both synthetic problems and benchmark UCI datasets.

1. Introduction
There are many real-world optimization tasks where observations are time consuming and/or expensive. One example arises in health services, where physicians have to make
medical decisions (e.g. a course of drugs, surgery, and expensive tests). Assume that a doctor faces a discrete set of
medical choices, and that we can characterize an outcome
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

as a success (patient does not need to return for more treatment) or a failure (patient does need followup care such
as repeated operations). Testing a medical decision may
require several weeks to determine the outcome. This creates a situation where experiments are time consuming and
expensive, requiring that we learn from our decisions as
quickly as possible. In contrast to most experimental work
on UCB policies which tends to assume large observation
budgets (which might fit applications such as optimizing
ad-clicks), we argue that the setting of expensive experiments represents a different type of learning challenge.
The problem of deciding which medical decisions to evaluate can be modeled mathematically as a sequential decision
making problem with stochastic binary outcomes. In this
setting, we have a small budget of measurements that we
allocate sequentially to medical decisions so that after the
budget exhausted, we have collected information to maximize our ability to choose the medical decision with the
highest probability of success.
Scientists can draw on an extensive body of literature on
the classic design of experiments (DeGroot, 1970; Wetherill & Glazebrook, 1986; Montgomery, 2008) whose goal is
to decide what observations to make when fitting a function. Yet in our settings, the decisions are guided by a
well-defined utility function (that is, maximize the probability of success). This problem also relates to active learning (Schein & Ungar, 2007; Tong & Koller, 2002; Freund
et al., 1997; Settles, 2010). Our model is most similar to
membership query synthesis where the learner may request
labels for unlabeled instances in the input space to learn a
classifier that accurately predicts the labels of new examples. By contrast, our goal is to maximize a utility function
such as the success of a treatment. Other relevant and yet
different works include budgeted learning to imitate the oracle’s behavior (He et al., 2012), and adaptive selection of

