Collapsed Variational Inference for Sum-Product Networks
Han Zhao†
HAN . ZHAO @ CS . CMU . EDU
Tameem Adel§
T.M.A.A.H ESHAM @ UVA . NL
Geoff Gordon†
GGORDON @ CS . CMU . EDU
Brandon Amos†
BAMOS @ CS . CMU . EDU
†
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
§
Machine Learning Lab, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Radboud University

Abstract
Sum-Product Networks (SPNs) are probabilistic
inference machines that admit exact inference in
linear time in the size of the network. Existing parameter learning approaches for SPNs are
largely based on the maximum likelihood principle and are subject to overfitting compared to
more Bayesian approaches. Exact Bayesian posterior inference for SPNs is computationally intractable. Even approximation techniques such
as standard variational inference and posterior
sampling for SPNs are computationally infeasible even for networks of moderate size due to
the large number of local latent variables per
instance. In this work, we propose a novel
deterministic collapsed variational inference algorithm for SPNs that is computationally efficient, easy to implement and at the same time
allows us to incorporate prior information into
the optimization formulation. Extensive experiments show a significant improvement in accuracy compared with a maximum likelihood based
approach.

1. Introduction
Parameter learning is an important research problem in
Sum-Product Networks (SPNs) (Poon & Domingos, 2011;
Gens & Domingos, 2012). Due to recent progress, we
can locally maximize the likelihood of SPNs, but those approaches overfit for complex models because they do not
retain posterior uncertainty or allow flexible incorporation
of prior information. SPNs are essentially mixture models
with potentially exponentially many components (Zhao &
Poupart, 2015). Exact posterior inference for SPNs is comProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

putationally intractable due to the exponential growth of
the number of mixture components in the posterior distribution. Approximate Bayesian inference for SPNs is challenging, mostly because of the vast number of local latent
variables and their intricate connections. Unlike traditional
mixture models, e.g., LDA (Blei et al., 2003), Gaussian
mixture models, etc., where the number of local latent variables is a small constant per observation, the number of
local latent variables in SPNs is linearly proportional to
the size of the network for each observable instance, often around thousands to millions. This property makes
standard approximate Bayesian inference approaches, including mean-field variational inference (VI) (Wainwright
& Jordan, 2008) and posterior sampling (Casella & Berger,
2002), computationally infeasible even for SPNs with moderate size. In SPNs, the memory overhead incurred by the
number of local variational parameters or the number of local sampling points increases linearly with both the number
of data points, D, and the size of the network, |S|, and so
can easily become prohibitively large.
In this work we propose a collapsed variational inference
algorithm for SPNs that is robust to overfitting and can
be naturally extended into a stochastic variant to scale to
large data sets. We call our algorithm CVB-SPN. CVBSPN is a deterministic approximate Bayesian inference algorithm that is computationally efficient and easy to implement while at the same time allowing us to incorporate
prior information into the design. Like other variational
techniques, CVB-SPN is based on optimization. Unlike
other variational techniques, the number of parameters to
be optimized is only linear in the network size (O(|S|)) and
is independent of the size of the training set, as opposed to
O(D|S|) in ordinary VI. It is worth noting that, different from traditional collapsed variational approaches in the
literature that marginalize out global latent variables (Teh
et al., 2006; 2007), here we consider a complementary approach: instead of marginalizing out the global latent variables in order to spread out the interactions among many
local latent variables, CVB-SPN takes advantage of the fast

