The Label Complexity of Mixed-Initiative Classifier Training

Jina Suh∗
Xiaojin Zhu∗†
Saleema Amershi∗
∗
Microsoft Research. Redmond, WA, USA

JINSUH @ MICROSOFT. COM
JERRYZHU @ CS . WISC . EDU
SAMERSHI @ MICROSOFT. COM
†

University of Wisconsin–Madison. Madison, WI, USA

Abstract
Mixed-initiative classifier training, where the human teacher can choose which items to label
or to label items chosen by the computer, has
enjoyed empirical success but without a rigorous statistical learning theoretical justification.
We analyze the label complexity of a simple
mixed-initiative training mechanism using teaching dimension and active learning. We show that
mixed-initiative training is advantageous compared to either computer-initiated (represented
by active learning) or human-initiated classifier
training. The advantage exists across all human
teaching abilities, from optimal to completely
unhelpful teachers. We further improve classifier
training by educating the human teachers. This is
done by showing, or explaining, optimal teaching
sets to the human teachers. We conduct Mechanical Turk human experiments on two stylistic classifier training tasks to illustrate our approach.

1. Introduction
We study a topic at the intersection of human-computer interaction and statistical learning theory. We contrast three
ways to train a classifier with interactive machine learning: computer-initiated where an active learning algorithm picks a query x and the human answers its label
y, human-initiated where the human picks x and y, and
mixed-initiative where both parties can pick x. Mixedinitiative machine learning has enjoyed success in practice (Wolfman et al., 2001; Fails & Olsen Jr, 2003; Fogarty
et al., 2008), but a theoretical account for its effectiveness
is lacking.

by the following intervals: mixed-initiative [TD, TD +
AL], computer-initiated AL, human-initiated [TD, ∞).
Here TD is the teaching dimension of the hypothesis space
which lower-bounds AL, the corresponding active learning
label complexity. These quantities will be defined precisely
below. Given that often TD  AL, mixed-initiative training is attractive among the three.
In more detail, we place a human teacher in one of
three ability states and provide a guarantee for each state:
(Optimal teacher) The teacher provides the optimal teaching set. The mixed-initiative label complexity is TD. (Seed
teacher) When the teacher is not optimal but can provide at
least one item per positive region, mixed-initiative training
can significantly reduce the active learning label complexity for certain hypothesis spaces. (Naive teacher) For all
other human teachers, even the completely unhelpful ones,
the mixed-initiative label complexity has a fallback guarantee of TD + AL ≤ 2AL, namely no worse than twice the
active learning label complexity.
Our second contribution is a framework for teacher education. The computer can try to move the human to a better
“teacher ability state.” It does so by showing or explaining example optimal teaching sets to the teacher. Although
the computer does not know the target concept, it can automatically compute an example teaching set on hypothetical
target concepts for the purpose of teacher education.

2. Problem Setting and Notations

Our first contribution is a theoretical analysis on the label
complexity of mixed-initiative classifier training, expressed

We consider the standard learning-theoretic setting for classification. Let X be the input space and Y = {−1, 1} be
the label space. It is straightforward to extend our results
to multiple classes. We restrict the interactions between the
human and the computer: they can interact through items
x ∈ X and labels y ∈ Y but not other means (e.g. the
human cannot label features; quantifying such richer interactions is left as future work).

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

There is a fixed test distribution PXY on X ×Y. A classifier
or a hypothesis is a measurable function h : X 7→ Y. For
any h, x ∈ X , y ∈ Y, let 1h(x)6=y be the 0-1 loss function

