Principal Component Projection Without Principal Component Analysis
Roy Frostig
Stanford University

RF @ CS . STANFORD . EDU

Cameron Musco
Christopher Musco
MIT

CNMUSCO @ MIT. EDU
CPMUSCO @ MIT. EDU

Aaron Sidford
Microsoft Research, New England

Abstract
We show how to efficiently project a vector onto
the top principal components of a matrix, without
explicitly computing these components. Specifically, we introduce an iterative algorithm that
provably computes the projection using few calls
to any black-box routine for ridge regression.
By avoiding explicit principal component analysis (PCA), our algorithm is the first with no runtime dependence on the number of top principal components. We show that it can be used to
give a fast iterative method for the popular principal component regression problem, giving the
first major runtime improvement over the naive
method of combining PCA with regression.
To achieve our results, we first observe that ridge
regression can be used to obtain a “smooth projection” onto the top principal components. We
then sharpen this approximation to true projection using a low-degree polynomial approximation to the matrix step function. Step function
approximation is a topic of long-term interest in
scientific computing. We extend prior theory by
constructing polynomials with simple iterative
structure and rigorously analyzing their behavior
under limited precision.

1. Introduction
In machine learning and statistics, it is common—often
essential—to represent data in a concise form that decreases noise and increases efficiency in downstream tasks.
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

ASID @ MICROSOFT. COM

Perhaps the most widespread method for doing so is to
project data onto the linear subspace spanned by its directions of highest variance—that is, onto the span of the top
components given by principal component analysis (PCA).
Computing principal components can be an expensive task,
a challenge that prompts a basic algorithmic question:
Can we project a vector onto the span of a matrix’s top principal components without performing principal component analysis?
This paper answers that question in the affirmative, demonstrating that projection is much easier than PCA itself. We
show that it can be solved using a simple iterative algorithm
based on black-box calls to a ridge regression routine. The
algorithm’s runtime does not depend on the number of top
principal components chosen for projection, a cost inherent to any algorithm for PCA, or even algorithms that just
compute an orthogonal span for the top components.
1.1. Motivation: principal component regression
To motivate our projection problem, consider one of the
most basic downstream applications for PCA: linear regression. Combined, PCA and regression comprise the principal component regression (PCR) problem:
Definition 1.1 (Principal component regression (PCR)).
Let A 2 Rn⇥d be a design matrix whose rows are data
points and let b 2 Rn be a vector of data labels. Let
A 2 Rn⇥d denote the result of projecting each row
of A onto the span of the top principal components of
A, i.e. the eigenvectors of the covariance matrix n1 AT A
whose corresponding eigenvalue exceeds a threshold .
The task of PCR is to find a minimizer of the squared loss
kA x bk22 . In other words, the goal is to compute A† b,
where A† is the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse of A .
PCR is a key regularization method in statistics, numerical

