Cumulative Prospect Theory Meets Reinforcement Learning:
Prediction and Control
Prashanth L.A.
Institute for Systems Research, University of Maryland

PRASHLA @ ISR . UMD . EDU

Cheng Jie
Department of Mathematics, University of Maryland

CJIE @ MATH . UMD . EDU

Michael Fu
Robert H. Smith School of Business & Institute for Systems Research, University of Maryland

MFU @ ISR . UMD . EDU

Steve Marcus
MARCUS @ UMD . EDU
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering & Institute for Systems Research, University of Maryland
Csaba Szepesvári
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta

Abstract
Cumulative prospect theory (CPT) is known to
model human decisions well, with substantial
empirical evidence supporting this claim. CPT
works by distorting probabilities and is more
general than the classic expected utility and coherent risk measures. We bring this idea to a risksensitive reinforcement learning (RL) setting and
design algorithms for both estimation and control. The RL setting presents two particular challenges when CPT is applied: estimating the CPT
objective requires estimations of the entire distribution of the value function and finding a randomized optimal policy. The estimation scheme
that we propose uses the empirical distribution
to estimate the CPT-value of a random variable.
We then use this scheme in the inner loop of a
CPT-value optimization procedure that is based
on the well-known simulation optimization idea
of simultaneous perturbation stochastic approximation (SPSA). We provide theoretical convergence guarantees for all the proposed algorithms
and also illustrate the usefulness of CPT-based
criteria in a traffic signal control application.

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

SZEPESVA @ CS . UALBERTA . CA

1. Introduction
Since the beginning of its history, mankind has been deeply
immersed in designing and improving systems to serve human needs. Policy makers are busy with designing systems
that serve the education, transportation, economic, health
and other needs of the public, while private sector enterprises work hard at creating and optimizing systems to better serve specialized needs of their customers. While it has
been long recognized that understanding human behavior is
a prerequisite to best serving human needs (Simon, 1959),
it is only recently that this approach is gaining a wider
recognition.1
In this paper we consider human-centered reinforcement
learning problems where the reinforcement learning agent
controls a system to produce long term outcomes (“return”)
that are maximally aligned with the preferences of one or
possibly multiple humans, an arrangement shown in Figure 1. As a running example, consider traffic optimization where the goal is to maximize travelers’ satisfaction,
a challenging problem in big cities. In this example, the
outcomes (“return”) are travel times, or delays. To capture
human preferences, the outcomes are mapped to a single
numerical quantity. While preferences of rational agents
facing decisions with stochastic outcomes can be modeled
using expected utilities, i.e., the expectation of a nonlinear
1
As evidence for this wider recognition in the public sector,
we can mention a recent executive order of the White House calling for the use of behavioral science in public policy making, or
the establishment of the “Committee on Traveler Behavior and
Values” in the Transportation Research Board in the US.

