Domain Adaptation with Conditional Transferable Components

Mingming Gong1
MINGMING . GONG @ STUDENT. UTS . EDU . AU
Kun Zhang2,3
KUNZ 1@ CMU . EDU
Tongliang Liu1
TLIANG . LIU @ GMAIL . COM
Dacheng Tao1
DACHENG . TAO @ UTS . EDU . AU
Clark Glymour2
CG 09@ ANDREW. CMU . EDU
Bernhard Schölkopf3
BS @ TUEBINGEN . MPG . DE
1
Centre for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems, FEIT, University of Technology Sydney, NSW, Australia
2
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
3
Max Plank Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen 72076, Germany

Abstract
Domain adaptation arises in supervised learning when the training (source domain) and test
(target domain) data have different distributions. Let X and Y denote the features and target,
respectively, previous work on domain adaptation mainly considers the covariate shift situation where the distribution of the features P (X)
changes across domains while the conditional
distribution P (Y |X) stays the same. To reduce domain discrepancy, recent methods try to
find invariant components T (X) that have similar P (T (X)) on different domains by explicitly minimizing a distribution discrepancy measure. However, it is not clear if P (Y |T (X)) in
different domains is also similar when P (Y |X)
changes. Furthermore, transferable components
do not necessarily have to be invariant. If the
change in some components is identifiable, we
can make use of such components for prediction
in the target domain. In this paper, we focus on
the case where P (X|Y ) and P (Y ) both change
in a causal system in which Y is the cause for X.
Under appropriate assumptions, we aim to extract conditional transferable components whose
conditional distribution P (T (X)|Y ) is invariant
after proper location-scale (LS) transformations, and identify how P (Y ) changes between domains simultaneously. We provide theoretical
analysis and empirical evaluation on both synthetic and real-world data to show the effectiveness of our method.
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Standard supervised learning relies on the assumption that
both training and test data are drawn from the same distribution. However, this assumption is likely to be violated in
practice if the training and test data are sampled under different conditions. Considering the problem of object recognition, images in different datasets are taken with different
cameras or in different imaging conditions (e.g., pose and
illumination). In the indoor WiFi localization problem, signals collected during different time periods have different
distributions, and one may want to adapt a model trained
on the signals received from one time period to the signals
collected during other time periods. Domain adaptation approaches aim to solve this kind of problems by transferring
knowledge between domains (Pan & Yang, 2010; Jiang,
2008).
To perform domain adaptation, certain assumptions must
be imposed in how the distribution changes across
domains. For instance, many existing domain adaptation
methods consider the covariate shift situation where the
distributions on two domains only differ in the marginal
distribution of the features P (X), while the conditional
distribution of the target given the features P (Y |X) does
not change. In this case, one can match the feature distribution P (X) on source and target domains by importance
reweighting methods if the source domain is richer than the
target domain (Shimodaira, 2000; Sugiyama et al., 2008;
Huang et al., 2007). The weights are defined as the density ratio between the source and target domain features
and can be efficiently estimated by various methods such
as the kernel mean matching procedure (KMM) (Huang
et al., 2007). Theoretical analysis of importance reweighting methods for correcting covariate shift has also been studied in (Cortes et al., 2010; Yu & Szepesvári, 2012).
In addition to instance reweighting methods, several state-

