DR-ABC: Approximate Bayesian Computation with
Kernel-Based Distribution Regression

Jovana Mitrovic
Dino Sejdinovic
Yee Whye Teh
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford

Abstract
Performing exact posterior inference in complex
generative models is often difficult or impossible due to an expensive to evaluate or intractable
likelihood function. Approximate Bayesian computation (ABC) is an inference framework that
constructs an approximation to the true likelihood based on the similarity between the observed and simulated data as measured by a
predefined set of summary statistics. Although
the choice of informative problem-specific summary statistics crucially influences the quality of
the likelihood approximation and hence also the
quality of the posterior sample in ABC, there are
only few principled general-purpose approaches
to the selection or construction of such summary statistics. In this paper, we develop a novel
framework for solving this problem. We model
the functional relationship between the data and
the optimal choice (with respect to a loss function) of summary statistics using kernel-based
distribution regression. Furthermore, we extend
our approach to incorporate kernel-based regression from conditional distributions, thus appropriately taking into account the specific structure of the posited generative model. We show
that our approach can be implemented in a computationally and statistically efficient way using the random Fourier features framework for
large-scale kernel learning. In addition to that,
our framework outperforms related methods by a
large margin on toy and real-world data, including hierarchical and time series models.

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

MITROVIC @ STATS . OX . AC . UK
DINO . SEJDINOVIC @ STATS . OX . AC . UK
Y. W. TEH @ STATS . OX . AC . UK

1. Introduction
Complex generative models arise in many application domains, e.g. when we are interested in modeling population
dynamics in ecology (Wood, 2010; Lopes & Boessenkool,
2010), performing phylogenetic inference and disease dynamics modeling in epidemiology (?Tanaka et al., 2006)
or modeling galaxy demographics in cosmology (Weyant
et al., 2013; Cameron & Pettitt, 2012). In these models,
it is often difficult or impossible to perform exact posterior inference due to an expensive to evaluate or intractable
likelihood function. Approximate Bayesian computation
(ABC) (Beaumont et al., 2002) is an inference framework
that approximates the true likelihood based on the similarity between the observed and simulated data as measured
by a predefined set of summary statistics. Unless the chosen summary statistics are sufficient, there is an information loss associated with the projection of the data onto
the lower-dimensional subspace of the summary statistics.
This results in an approximation bias in the likelihood and
subsequently in the posterior sample that is difficult to estimate. More precisely, this information loss implies that
ABC performs inference on the partial posterior of the
model parameters given the summary statistics of the observed data p(θ|s(y ∗ )) in lieu of doing it on the full posterior p(θ|y ∗ ). Thus, the choice of informative problemspecific summary statistics is of crucial importance for the
quality of posterior inference in ABC.
Several methods exist in the literature for the selection or
construction of summary statistics. A number of these
methods can be assembled around the idea of constructing
summary statistics by linear or non-linear regression from
the full dataset or a set of candidate statistics. In addition
to considerations about the sufficiency of the derived summary statistics, all of these methods require either expert
knowledge for the selection of the set of candidate statistics, e.g. Nakagome et al. (2013), or perform complex and
high-dimensional regression by using the full dataset, e.g.
Fearnhead & Prangle (2012).

