A Neural Autoregressive Approach to Collaborative Filtering

Yin Zheng
Bangsheng Tang
Wenkui Ding
Hanning Zhou
Hulu LLC., Beijing, 100084

Abstract
This paper proposes CF-NADE, a neural autoregressive architecture for collaborative filtering
(CF) tasks, which is inspired by the Restricted
Boltzmann Machine (RBM) based CF model and
the Neural Autoregressive Distribution Estimator
(NADE). We first describe the basic CF-NADE
model for CF tasks. Then we propose to improve
the model by sharing parameters between different ratings. A factored version of CF-NADE
is also proposed for better scalability. Furthermore, we take the ordinal nature of the preferences into consideration and propose an ordinal
cost to optimize CF-NADE, which shows superior performance. Finally, CF-NADE can be extended to a deep model, with only moderately increased computational complexity. Experimental
results show that CF-NADE with a single hidden
layer beats all previous state-of-the-art methods
on MovieLens 1M, MovieLens 10M, and Netflix
datasets, and adding more hidden layers can further improve the performance.

1. Introduction
Collaborative filtering (CF) is a class of methods for predicting a user’s preference or rating of an item, based on
his/her previous preferences or ratings and decisions made
by similar users. CF lies at the core of most recommender
systems and has attracted increasing attention along with
the recent boom of e-commerce and social network systems. The premise of CF is that a person’s preference does
not change much over time. A good CF algorithm helps
a user discover products or services that suit his/her taste
efficiently.
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

YIN . ZHENG @ HULU . COM
BANGSHENG @ HULU . COM
WENKUI . DING @ HULU . COM
ERIC . ZHOU @ HULU . COM

Generally speaking, there is a dichotomy of CF methods: Memory-based CF and Model-based CF. Memorybased CF usually computes the similarities between users
or items directly from the rating data, which are then used
for recommendation. The explainatbility of the recommended results as well as the easy-to-implement nature of
memory-based CF ensured its popularity in early recommender systems (Resnick et al., 1994). However, memorybased CF has faded out due to its poor performance on reallife large-scale and sparse data.
Distinct from memory-based CF, model-based CF learns
a model from historical data and then uses the model to
predict preferences of users. The models are usually developed with machine learning algorithms, such as Bayesian
networks, clustering models and latent semantic models.
Complex preference patterns can be recognized by these
models, allowing model-based CF to perform better for
preference prediction tasks. Among all these models, matrix factorization is most popular and successful, c.f. (Koren et al., 2009; Salakhutdinov & Mnih, 2008; Mackey
et al., 2011; Gopalan et al., 2013).
With the recent development of deep learning (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012; Szegedy et al., 2014; He et al., 2015), neural network based CF, a subclass of model-based CF, has
gained enormous attention. A prominent example is RBMbased CF (RBM-CF) (Salakhutdinov et al., 2007). RBMCF is a two-layer undirected generative graph model which
generalizes Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) to modeling the distribution of tabular data, such as user’s ratings
of movies. RBM-CF has shown its power in Netflix prize
challenge. However, RBM-CF suffers from inaccuracy and
impractically long training time, since training RBM-CF is
intractable and one has to rely on variational approximation
or MCMC sampling.
Recently, a good alternative to RBM has been proposed by
Larochelle & Murray (2011). The so-called Neural Autoregressive Distribution Estimator (NADE) is a tractable
distribution estimator for high dimensional binary vectors.
NADE computes the conditional probabilities of each el-

