Neural Variational Inference for Text Processing

Yishu Miao1
Lei Yu1
Phil Blunsom12
1
University of Oxford, 2 Google Deepmind

Abstract
Recent advances in neural variational inference
have spawned a renaissance in deep latent variable models. In this paper we introduce a generic
variational inference framework for generative
and conditional models of text. While traditional
variational methods derive an analytic approximation for the intractable distributions over latent
variables, here we construct an inference network
conditioned on the discrete text input to provide the variational distribution. We validate this
framework on two very different text modelling
applications, generative document modelling and
supervised question answering. Our neural variational document model combines a continuous
stochastic document representation with a bagof-words generative model and achieves the lowest reported perplexities on two standard test corpora. The neural answer selection model employs a stochastic representation layer within an
attention mechanism to extract the semantics between a question and answer pair. On two question answering benchmarks this model exceeds
all previous published benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Probabilistic generative models underpin many successful
applications within the field of natural language processing (NLP). Their popularity stems from their ability to use
unlabelled data effectively, to incorporate abundant linguistic features, and to learn interpretable dependencies among
data. However these successes are tempered by the fact that
as the structure of such generative models becomes deeper
and more complex, true Bayesian inference becomes intractable due to the high dimensional integrals required.
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) (Neal, 1993; Andrieu
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

YISHU . MIAO @ CS . OX . AC . UK
LEI . YU @ CS . OX . AC . UK
PHIL . BLUNSOM @ CS . OX . AC . UK

et al., 2003) and variational inference (Jordan et al., 1999;
Attias, 2000; Beal, 2003) are the standard approaches for
approximating these integrals. However the computational
cost of the former results in impractical training for the
large and deep neural networks which are now fashionable, and the latter is conventionally confined due to the
underestimation of posterior variance. The lack of effective and efficient inference methods hinders our ability to
create highly expressive models of text, especially in the
situation where the model is non-conjugate.
This paper introduces a neural variational framework for
generative models of text, inspired by the variational autoencoder (Rezende et al., 2014; Kingma & Welling, 2014).
The principle idea is to build an inference network, implemented by a deep neural network conditioned on text, to approximate the intractable distributions over the latent variables. Instead of providing an analytic approximation, as in
traditional variational Bayes, neural variational inference
learns to model the posterior probability, thus endowing
the model with strong generalisation abilities. Due to the
flexibility of deep neural networks, the inference network
is capable of learning complicated non-linear distributions
and processing structured inputs such as word sequences.
Inference networks can be designed as, but not restricted
to, multilayer perceptrons (MLP), convolutional neural networks (CNN), and recurrent neural networks (RNN), approaches which are rarely used in conventional generative
models. By using the reparameterisation method (Rezende
et al., 2014; Kingma & Welling, 2014), the inference network is trained through back-propagating unbiased and low
variance gradients w.r.t. the latent variables. Within this
framework, we propose a Neural Variational Document
Model (NVDM) for document modelling and a Neural Answer Selection Model (NASM) for question answering, a
task that selects the sentences that correctly answer a factoid question from a set of candidate sentences.
The NVDM (Figure 1) is an unsupervised generative model
of text which aims to extract a continuous semantic latent
variable for each document. This model can be interpreted
as a variational auto-encoder: an MLP encoder (inference

