Markov Latent Feature Models
Aonan Zhang
John Paisley
Department of Electrical Engineering & Data Science Institute
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA

Abstract
We introduce Markov latent feature models
(MLFM), a sparse latent feature model that arises
naturally from a simple sequential construction.
The key idea is to interpret each state of a sequential process as corresponding to a latent feature, and the set of states visited between two
null-state visits as picking out features for an
observation. We show that, given some natural
constraints, we can represent this stochastic process as a mixture of recurrent Markov chains. In
this way we can perform correlated latent feature modeling for the sparse coding problem. We
demonstrate two cases in which we define finite and infinite latent feature models constructed
from first-order Markov chains, and derive their
associated scalable inference algorithms. We
show empirical results on a genome analysis task
and an image denoising task.

1. Introduction
Latent feature models learn the unobserved factors that are
shared among a collection of objects. Often a small fraction
of these latent features can be used to jointly describe, or
“sparsely code,” a single object. This assumption is often
made for a wide range of tasks (Ghahramani et al., 2007).
For example, each DNA sequence can be assigned features
that measure repeating patterns of certain base pairs, or
each image can be assigned features that correspond to the
items it contains.
The process for making latent feature assignments can be
thought of as generating a 0-1 matrix where the 1-elements
in each row index the latent features assigned to the object.
For example, the Indian buffet process (IBP) (Griffiths &
Ghahramani, 2011) defines a feature allocation whereby
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

AZ 2385@ COLUMBIA . EDU
JPAISLEY @ COLUMBIA . EDU

features are independently assigned according to a richget-richer scheme. The IBP is a Bayesian nonparametric
model in which the number of latent features can grow to
infinity with data. It also assumes exchangeability among
objects, meaning the order of the data does not affect the
feature assignment probabilities. With such assumptions
there always exists a mixing measure (de Finetti’s measure) by which feature allocation scheme for different objects are conditionally independent. For example, the mixing measure for the IBP is the beta process (Thibaux &
Jordan, 2007). Employing such representations allows for
simple variational inference algorithms that can easily scale
to large data sets (Hoffman et al., 2013; Sertoglu & Paisley,
2015; Shah et al., 2015).
Models based on the IBP and beta process assume independence among the latent features allocated to an object,
but in many cases these latent features may have dependencies. For example, in a natural image a car is more
likely to co-occur with a bus rather than a whale. Several
methods have been developed for modeling dependencies
among latent features or clusters. For example, beta diffusion trees (Heaukulani et al., 2014) organize latent features in a tree to learn a multi-resolution feature structure.
Other tree models, such as the nested Chinese restaurant
processes (Blei et al., 2010) and the nested hierarchical
Dirichlet processes (Paisley et al., 2015), use a discretepath based tree structure to select latent features for each
object. To avoid the rigid structure of trees in a mixedmembership framework, Markov mixed-membership models (Zhang & Paisley, 2015) propose instead modeling the
pair-wise correlation of latent clusters with a Markov random walk on a fully-connected, finite graph.
We propose a Markov latent feature model (MLFM), which
extends the idea of using Markov random walks to latent
factor modeling problems such as those addressed by the
IBP and beta process. The main novelty in this new framework is that we use a sequential block—a subsequence between two adjacent visits to a “null state”—to define the
feature allocation process (Section 2). Since only a subset
of states will be visited prior to returning to the null state,

