Generalization and Exploration via Randomized Value Functions
Ian Osband1,2
Benjamin Van Roy1
Zheng Wen1,3
1
Stanford University, 2 Google Deepmind, 3 Adobe Research

Abstract
We propose randomized least-squares value iteration (RLSVI) – a new reinforcement learning algorithm designed to explore and generalize efficiently via linearly parameterized value functions. We explain why versions of least-squares
value iteration that use Boltzmann or ✏-greedy
exploration can be highly inefficient, and we
present computational results that demonstrate
dramatic efficiency gains enjoyed by RLSVI.
Further, we establish an upper bound on the expected regret of RLSVI that demonstrates nearoptimality in a tabula rasa learning context.
More broadly, our results suggest that randomized value functions offer a promising approach
to tackling a critical challenge in reinforcement
learning: synthesizing efficient exploration and
effective generalization.

1. Introduction
The design of reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms that
explore intractably large state-action spaces efficiently remains an important challenge. In this paper, we propose
randomized least-squares value iteration (RLSVI), which
generalizes using a linearly parameterized value function.
Prior RL algorithms that generalize in this way require, in
the worst case, learning times exponential in the number
of model parameters and/or the planning horizon. RLSVI
aims to overcome these inefficiencies.
RLSVI operates in a manner similar to least-squares value
iteration (LSVI) and also shares much of the spirit of other
closely related approaches such as TD, LSTD, and SARSA
(see, e.g., (Sutton & Barto, 1998; Szepesvári, 2010)). What
fundamentally distinguishes RLSVI is that the algorithm
explores through randomly sampling statistically plausible
value functions, whereas the aforementioned alternatives
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

IOSBAND @ STANFORD . EDU
BVR @ STANFORD . EDU

ZWEN @ ADOBE . COM

are typically applied in conjunction with action-dithering
schemes such as Boltzmann or ✏-greedy exploration, which
lead to highly inefficient learning. The concept of exploring by sampling statistically plausible value functions is
broader than any specific algorithm, and beyond our proposal and study of RLSVI. We view an important role of
this paper is to establish this broad concept as a promising
approach to tackling a critical challenge in RL: synthesizing efficient exploration and effective generalization.
We will present computational results comparing RLSVI
to LSVI with action-dithering schemes. In our case studies, these algorithms generalize using identical linearly parameterized value functions but are distinguished by how
they explore. The results demonstrate that RLSVI enjoys
dramatic efficiency gains. Further, we establish a bound
on the expected regret for an episodic tabula rasa learning
context, where the agent has virtually
p no prior information
about the MDP. Our bound is Õ( H 3 SAT ), where S and
A denote the cardinalities of the state and action spaces, T
denotes time elapsed, and H denotes the episode duration.
This matches the worst case lower bound for this problem
up to logarithmic factors (Jaksch et al.,p2010). It is interesting to contrast this against known Õ( H 3 S 2 AT ) bounds
for other provably efficient tabula rasa RL algorithms (e.g.,
UCRL2 (Jaksch et al., 2010)) adapted to this context. To
our knowledge, our results establish RLSVI as the first RL
algorithm that is provably efficient in a tabula rasa context
and also demonstrates efficiency when generalizing via linearly parameterized value functions.
There is a sizable literature on RL algorithms that are provably efficient in tabula rasa contexts (Brafman & Tennenholtz, 2002; Kakade, 2003; Ortner & Ryabko, 2012; Osband et al., 2013; Strehl et al., 2006). The literature on RL
algorithms that generalize and explore in a provably efficient manner is sparser. There is work on model-based RL
algorithms (Abbasi-Yadkori & Szepesvári, 2011; Osband
& Van Roy, 2014a;b; Gopalan & Mannor, 2014), which apply to specific model classes and become computationally
intractable for problems of practical scale. Value function
generalization approaches have the potential to overcome
those computational challenges and offer practical means

