Slice Sampling on Hamiltonian Trajectories

Benjamin Bloem-Reddy
John P. Cunningham
Department of Statistics, Columbia University

Abstract
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo and slice sampling
are amongst the most widely used and studied classes of Markov Chain Monte Carlo samplers. We connect these two methods and present
Hamiltonian slice sampling, which allows slice
sampling to be carried out along Hamiltonian
trajectories, or transformations thereof. Hamiltonian slice sampling clarifies a class of model
priors that induce closed-form slice samplers.
More pragmatically, inheriting properties of slice
samplers, it offers advantages over Hamiltonian
Monte Carlo, in that it has fewer tunable hyperparameters and does not require gradient information. We demonstrate the utility of Hamiltonian slice sampling out of the box on problems ranging from Gaussian process regression
to Pitman-Yor based mixture models.

1. Introduction
After decades of work in approximate inference and numerical integration, Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
techniques remain the gold standard for working with intractable probabilistic models, throughout statistics and
machine learning. Of course, this gold standard also
comes with sometimes severe computational requirements,
which has spurred many developments for increasing the
efficacy of MCMC. Accordingly, numerous MCMC algorithms have been proposed in different fields and with different motivations, and perhaps as a result the similarities
between some popular methods have not been highlighted
or exploited. Here we consider two important classes of
MCMC methods: Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) (Neal,
2011) and slice sampling (Neal, 2003).
HMC considers the (negative log) probability of the intractable distribution as the potential energy of a HamilProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

REDDY @ STAT. COLUMBIA . EDU
JPC 2181@ COLUMBIA . EDU

tonian system, and samples a new point from the distribution by simulating a dynamical trajectory from the current
sample point. With careful tuning, HMC exhibits favorable
mixing properties in many situations, particularly in high
dimensions, due to its ability to take large steps in sample space if the dynamics are simulated for long enough.
Proper tuning of HMC parameters can be difficult, and
there has been much interest in automating it; examples include Wang et al. (2013); Hoffman & Gelman (2014). Furthermore, better mixing rates associated with longer trajectories can be computationally expensive because each simulation step requires an evaluation or numerical approximation of the gradient of the distribution.
Similar in objective but different in approach is slice sampling, which attempts to sample uniformly from the volume
under the target density. Slice sampling has been employed
successfully in a wide range of inference problems, in large
part because of its flexibility and relative ease of tuning
(very few if any tunable parameters). Although efficiently
slice sampling from univariate distributions is straightforward, in higher dimensions it is more difficult. Previous approaches include slice sampling each dimension individually, amongst others. One particularly successful approach
is to generate a curve, parameterized by a single scalar
value, through the high-dimensional sample space. Elliptical slice sampling (ESS) (Murray et al., 2010) is one such
approach, generating ellipses parameterized by θ ∈ [0, 2π].
As we show in section 2.2, ESS is a special case of our
proposed sampling algorithm.
In this paper, we explore the connections between HMC
and slice sampling by observing that the elliptical trajectory
used in ESS is the Hamiltonian flow of a Gaussian potential. This observation is perhaps not surprising – indeed it
appears at least implicitly in Neal (2011); Pakman & Paninski (2013); Strathmann et al. (2015) – but here we leverage
that observation in a way not previously considered. To wit,
this connection between HMC and ESS suggests that we
might perform slice sampling along more general Hamiltonian trajectories, a method we introduce under the name
Hamiltonian slice sampling (HSS). HSS is of theoretical interest, allowing us to consider model priors that will induce

