Doubly Decomposing Nonparametric Tensor Regression

Masaaki Imaizumi
University of Tokyo

INSOU 11@ HOTMAIL . COM

Kohei Hayashi
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology,
JST, ERATO, Kawarabayashi Large Graph Project

Abstract

imagines finger tapping) from brain activities. Electroencephalography (EEG) measures brain activities as electric
signals at several points (channels) on the scalp, giving
channel × time matrices as covariates. Functional magnetic resonance imaging captures blood flow in the brain as
three-dimensional voxels, giving X-axis × Y-axis × Z-axis
× time tensors.

Nonparametric extension of tensor regression is
proposed. Nonlinearity in a high-dimensional
tensor space is broken into simple local functions
by incorporating low-rank tensor decomposition.
Compared to naive nonparametric approaches,
our formulation considerably improves the convergence rate of estimation while maintaining
consistency with the same function class under
specific conditions. To estimate local functions,
we develop a Bayesian estimator with the Gaussian process prior. Experimental results show
its theoretical properties and high performance in
terms of predicting a summary statistic of a real
complex network.

There are primarily two approaches to the tensor regression
problem. One is assuming linearity to f as
f (Xi ) = hB, Xi i,

(2)

I1 ×...×IK

1. Introduction
Tensor regression deals with matrices or tensors (i.e., multidimensional arrays) as covariates (inputs) to predict scalar
responses (outputs) (Wang et al., 2014; Hung & Wang,
2013; Zhao et al., 2014; Zhou et al., 2013; Tomioka et al.,
2007; Suzuki, 2015; Guhaniyogi et al., 2015). Suppose
we have a set of n observations Dn = {(Yi , Xi )}ni=1 ;
Yi ∈ Y is a respondent variable in the space Y ⊂ R and
Xi ∈ X is a covariate with Kth-order tensor form in the
space X ⊂ RI1 ×...×IK , where Ik is the dimensionality of
order k. With the above setting, we consider the regression
problem of learning a function f : X → Y as
Yi = f (Xi ) + ui ,

HAYASHI . KOHEI @ GMAIL . COM

(1)

where ui is zero-mean Gaussian noise with variance σ 2 .
Such problems can be found in several applications. For example, studies on brain-computer interfaces attempt to predict human intentions (e.g., determining whether a subject
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

where B ∈ R
is a weight parameter
with the same dimensionalities as X and hB, Xi =
PI1 ,...,IK
j1 ,...,jK =1 Bj1 ...jK Xj1 ...jK denotes the inner product.
Since B is very high-dimensional in general, several authors have incorporated a low-rank structure to B (Dyrholm
et al., 2007; Zhou et al., 2013; Hung & Wang, 2013; Wang
et al., 2014; Suzuki, 2015; Guhaniyogi et al., 2015). We
collectively refer to the linear models (2) with low-rank B
as tensor linear regression (TLR). As an alternative, a nonparametric approach has been proposed (Zhao et al., 2013;
Hou et al., 2015). When f (X) belongs to a proper functional space, with an appropriately choosing kernel function, the nonparametric method can estimate f perfectly
even if f is nonlinear.
In terms of both theoretical and practical aspects, the biasvariance tradeoff is a central issue. In TLR, the function
class that the model can represent is critically restricted due
to its linearity and the low-rank constraint, implying that
the variance error is low but the bias error is high if the
true function is either nonlinear or full rank. In contrast,
the nonparametric method can represent a wide range of
functions and the bias error can be close to zero. However,
at the expense of the flexibility, the variance error will be
high due to the high dimensionality, the notorious nature
of tensors. Generally, the optimal convergence rate of nonparametric models is given by
O(n−β/(2β+d) ),

(3)

