Tensor Decomposition via Joint Matrix Schur Decomposition

Nicolò Colombo
NICOLO . COLOMBO @ UNI . LU
Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine, University of Luxembourg, Esch-sur Alzette, Luxembourg
Nikos Vlassis
Adobe Research, San Jose, CA

VLASSIS @ ADOBE . COM

Abstract

in (1) is not too large (Kruskal, 1977; Sidiropoulos & Bro,
2000; Comon, 2014).

We describe an approach to tensor decomposition that involves extracting a set of observable
matrices from the tensor and applying an approximate joint Schur decomposition on those matrices, and we establish the corresponding firstorder perturbation bounds. We develop a novel
iterative Gauss-Newton algorithm for joint matrix Schur decomposition, which minimizes a
nonconvex objective over the manifold of orthogonal matrices, and which is guaranteed to converge to a global optimum under certain conditions. We empirically demonstrate that our algorithm is faster and at least as accurate and robust
than state-of-the-art algorithms for this problem.

1. Introduction
Tensors are ubiquitous in the mathematical sciences, with
important applications in physics, signal processing, and
machine learning (Comon, 2014). The fundamental problem of tensor decomposition amounts to writing a given
tensor as a sum of simpler tensors that can carry useful interpretation. For instance, the classical CP decomposition
of an order-3 tensor reads
T =

R
X

wr xr ◦ yr ◦ zr ,

(1)

r=1

where wr are scalar weights and the vectors xr , yr , zr are
the factors of the decomposition (◦ denotes outer product).
The smallest R for which (1) holds is the rank of the tensor. Tensors enjoy widespread use because of their capacity
to model higher-order statistics but also their identifiability
properties: Contrary to the matrix case, tensor decomposition is unique under mild conditions, for instance when R
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

In machine learning we are typically dealing with tensors
that are noisy versions of (1), corresponding to empirical
high-order moments (Anandkumar et al., 2014b). In that
case a problem of interest is approximate tensor decomposition under a low-rank constraint: Given an ‘empirical’
tensor T̂ , and a desired rank R, find a CP-decomposable
‘ground-truth’ tensor T that approximates T̂ in a certain
sense. Our approach belongs to the class of semi-algebraic
methods, in which an estimation of T is obtained by exploiting a series of algebraic conditions that are satisfied
exactly by T but only hold approximately for T̂ . Specifically, we build on a line of research that reduces tensor decomposition to a (joint) matrix diagonalization problem (Harshman, 1970; Leurgans et al., 1993; Chang, 1996;
Mossel & Roch, 2006; De Lathauwer, 2006; Anandkumar et al., 2014b; Montanari & Richard, 2014; Vempala &
Xiao, 2015; Kuleshov et al., 2015). The underlying idea of
this ‘matricization’ approach to tensor decomposition is to
extract a set of ‘observable’ matrices from the tensor, and
then estimate the tensor factors through the eigenstructure
of this set. The observable matrices are typically obtained
by random contractions of the tensor slices, followed by an
approximate joint matrix diagonalization step. For the latter, first-order perturbation bounds are available (Cardoso,
1994; Afsari, 2008; Kuleshov et al., 2015), which reveal
a much milder dependence on the eigengaps that plagued
earlier analyses (Mossel & Roch, 2006).
We depart from the above literature in three key aspects:
(1) We describe a way to extract observable matrices
from the tensor that does not involve random contractions.
(2) We propose an approach for diagonalizing the set of
observable matrices via an approximate joint Schur decomposition, and we establish a first-order perturbation bound
drawing on the proof technique of Cardoso (1994). (3) We
describe a novel Gauss-Newton algorithm for approximate
joint Schur decomposition that minimizes a nonconvex objective on the manifold of orthogonal matrices. The fact

