Improved SVRG for Non-Strongly-Convex or Sum-of-Non-Convex Objectives

Zeyuan Allen-Zhu
Princeton University

ZEYUAN @ CSAIL . MIT. EDU

Yang Yuan
Cornell University

YANGYUAN @ CS . CORNELL . EDU

Abstract
Many classical algorithms are found until several
years later to outlive the confines in which they
were conceived, and continue to be relevant in
unforeseen settings. In this paper, we show that
SVRG is one such method: being originally designed for strongly convex objectives, it is also
very robust in non-strongly convex or sum-ofnon-convex settings.
More precisely, we provide new analysis to improve the state-of-the-art running times in both
settings by either applying SVRG or its novel
variant. Since non-strongly convex objectives include important examples such as Lasso or logistic regression, and sum-of-non-convex objectives
include famous examples such as stochastic PCA
and is even believed to be related to training deep
neural nets, our results also imply better performances in these applications.1

1. Introduction
The fundamental algorithmic problem in optimization is
to design efficient algorithms for solving certain classes
of problems. By distinguishing between smooth and nonsmooth functions, between weakly-convex and stronglyconvex functions, between proximal and non-proximal
functions, or even between convex and non-convex functions, the number of classes grows exponentially and it may
be unrealistic to design a new algorithm for each specific
class. Taking into account such “design complexity”, it is
beneficial to design a single method the works for multiple
classes, or perhaps even more beneficial if this method is
1

The full version of this paper can be found on http://
arxiv.org/abs/1506.01972.
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

already widely used and happens to outlive the confines
it was originally designed for. Easier done in practice,
providing a support theory unifying the underlying classes
for a specific method is particularly exciting, challenging,
and sometimes even enlightening: the theoretical findings
may further suggest experimentalists regarding how such a
method should be best tuned in practice.
In this paper, we revisit the SVRG method by Johnson and
Zhang (Johnson & Zhang, 2013) and explore its applications to either a non-strongly convex objective, or a sumof-non-convex objective, or even both. We show faster convergence results for minimizing such objectives by either
directly applying SVRG or modifying it in a novel manner.
Consider the following composite convex minimization:
n
n
o
X
def
def 1
min F (x) = f (x) + Ψ(x) =
fi (x) + Ψ(x) .
n i=1
x∈Rd
(1.1)
Pn
Here, f (x) = n1 i=1 fi (x) is a convex function that
is written as a finite average of n smooth functions
fi (x),2 and Ψ(x) is a relatively simple (but possibly nondifferentiable) convex function, sometimes referred to as
the proximal function. Suppose we are interested in finding an approximate minimizer x ∈ Rd satisfying F (x) ≤
F (x∗ ) + ε, where x∗ is a minimizer of F (x).
Examples. Problems of this form arise in many places
in machine learning, statistics, and operations research.
For instance, many regularized empirical risk minimization (ERM) problems fall into this category with convex
fi (·). In such problems, we are given n training examples
{(a1 , `1 ), . . . (an , `n )}, where each ai ∈ Rd is the feature
vector of example i, and each `i ∈ R is the label of example i. The following classification and regression problems
are well-known examples of ERM:
• Ridge Regression: fi (x) = 21 (hai , xi − `i )2 + σ2 kxk22
and Ψ(x) = 0.
2
In fact, even if each fi (x) is not smooth but only Lipschitz
continuous, standard smoothing techniques such as Chapter 2.3
of (Hazan, 2015) can make each fi (x) smooth without sacrificing
too much accuracy.

