The Arrow of Time in Multivariate Time Series
Stefan Bauer
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich 8092 Zurich, Switzerland

STEFAN . BAUER @ INF. ETHZ . CH

Bernhard Schölkopf
Jonas Peters
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, 72076 Tübingen, Germany

BS @ TUEBINGEN . MPG . DE
JONAS . PETERS @ TUEBINGEN . MPG . DE

Abstract
We prove that a time series satisfying a (linear) multivariate autoregressive moving average
(VARMA) model satisfies the same model assumption in the reversed time direction, too, if
all innovations are normally distributed. This
reversibility breaks down if the innovations
are non-Gaussian. This means that under the
assumption of a VARMA process with nonGaussian noise, the arrow of time becomes detectable. Our work thereby provides a theoretic
justification of an algorithm that has been used
for inferring the direction of video snippets. We
present a slightly modified practical algorithm
that estimates the time direction for a given sample and prove its consistency. We further investigate how the performance of the algorithm depends on sample size, number of dimensions of
the time series and the order of the process. An
application to real world data from economics
shows that considering multivariate processes instead of univariate processes can be beneficial
for estimating the time direction. Our result extends earlier work on univariate time series. It
relates to the concept of causal inference, where
recent methods exploit non-Gaussianity of the error terms for causal structure learning.

1. Introduction
The goal of this work is to infer the direction of a given
multivariate time series. Figure 1 shows an example of
a time series in forward and backward direction. The
task is to decide, which of both direction corresponds to
the correct time direction. This question is mainly acaProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Quarterly growth rates in percentage of real gross domestic products for the United Kingdom, Canada and USA (Tsay,
2014). While the correct time direction is on the left, the time series on the right is reversed. The goal of this work is to investigate
when the correct time direction becomes identifiable, without using any additional prior knowledge of the data domain.

demic but has received a lot of attention in literature, especially in physics, see Reichenbach (1956) or Price (1996).
Hernández-Lobato et al. (2011), Morales-Mombiela et al.
(2013) and Hernández-Lobato et al. (2014) discuss the
derivation and application of Gaussianity measures to detect the direction of causal time series. However, their
approach is based on the empirical observation that the
residuals of a linear fit in the forward direction are less
Gaussian than the residuals in the backward direction. We
are not aware of any theoretical result that clarifies under
which assumption this heuristic holds. The main thrust of
the present paper is to provide such identifiability results.
Pickup et al. (2014) estimate the direction of a video snippet that is played either forwards or backwards. Although
the authors use an algorithm that is similar to the one we
present in here, they do not provide a theoretical justification for their approach and refer to the univariate version
of this problem (Peters et al., 2009). Our work provides
a post hoc justification of Pickup et al. (2014) by proving
identifiability statements. It further provides a consistency
result for a version of the algorithm first derived in Peters
et al. (2009); consistency was unknown both in the univariate and the multivariate case. The question of timereversibility is furthermore interesting from a causal point

