Learning Granger Causality for Hawkes Processes

Hongteng Xu
School of ECE, Georgia Institute of Technology

HXU 42@ GATECH . EDU

Mehrdad Farajtabar
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology

MEHRDAD @ GATECH . EDU

Hongyuan Zha
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology

ZHA @ CC . GATECH . EDU

Abstract
Learning Granger causality for general point processes is a very challenging task. In this paper, we propose an effective method, learning
Granger causality, for a special but significant
type of point processes — Hawkes process. According to the relationship between Hawkes process’s impact function and its Granger causality
graph, our model represents impact functions using a series of basis functions and recovers the
Granger causality graph via group sparsity of the
impact functions’ coefficients. We propose an
effective learning algorithm combining a maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) with a sparsegroup-lasso (SGL) regularizer. Additionally, the
flexibility of our model allows to incorporate
the clustering structure event types into learning
framework. We analyze our learning algorithm
and propose an adaptive procedure to select basis functions. Experiments on both synthetic and
real-world data show that our method can learn
the Granger causality graph and the triggering
patterns of the Hawkes processes simultaneously.

1. Introduction
In many practical situations, we need to deal with a large
amount of irregular and asynchronous sequential data observed in continuous time. The applications include the
user viewing records in an IPTV system (when and which
TV programs are viewed), and the patient records in hospitals (when and what diagnoses and treatments are given),
among many others. All of these data can be viewed
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

as event sequences containing multiple event types and
modeled via multi-dimensional point processes. A significant task for a multi-dimensional point process is to
learn the so-called Granger causality. From the viewpoint of graphical models, it means to construct a directed
graph called Granger causality graph (or local independence graph) (Didelez, 2008) over the dimensions (i.e., the
event types) of the process. The arrow connecting two
nodes indicates that the event of the dimension corresponding to the destination node is dependent on the historical events of the dimension corresponding to the source
node. Learning Granger causality for multi-dimensional
point processes is meaningful for many practical applications. Take our previous two examples: the Granger causality among IPTV programs reflects users’ viewing preferences and patterns, which is important for personalized
program recommendation and IPTV system simulation; the
Granger causality among diseases helps us to construct a
disease network, which is beneficial to predict potential
diseases for patients and leads to more effective treatments.
Unfortunately, learning Granger causality for general
multi-dimensional point processes is very challenging. Existing works mainly focus on learning Granger causality for
time series (Arnold et al., 2007; Eichler, 2012; Basu et al.,
2015), where the Granger causality is captured via the socalled vector auto-regressive (VAR) model (Han & Liu,
2013) based on discrete time-lagged variables. For point
processes, on the contrary, the event sequence is in continuous time and no fixed time-lagged observation is available.
Therefore, it is hard to find a universal and tractable representation of the complicated historical events to describe
Granger causality for the process. A potential solution is
to construct features for various dimensions from historical events and learn Granger causality via feature selection (Lian et al., 2015). However, this method is highly dependent on the specific feature construction method used,
resulting in dubious Granger causality.

