Linking losses for density ratio and class-probability estimation
Aditya Krishna Menon
Cheng Soon Ong
Data61 and the Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia

Abstract
Given samples from two densities p and q, density ratio estimation (DRE) is the problem of estimating the ratio p/q. In this paper, we formally relate DRE and class-probability estimation (CPE), and theoretically justify the use of
existing losses from one problem for the other.
In the CPE to DRE direction, we show that essentially any CPE loss (e.g. logistic, exponential)
minimises a Bregman divergence to the true density ratio, and thus can be used for DRE. We also
show how different losses focus on accurately
modelling different ranges of the density ratio,
and use this to design new CPE losses for DRE.
In the DRE to CPE direction, we argue that the
least squares importance fitting method has potential use for bipartite ranking of instances with
maximal accuracy at the head of the ranking. Our
analysis relies on a novel Bregman divergence
identity that may be of independent interest.

1. Density ratio estimation
Suppose we have samples from two densities p and q over
an instance space X. Density ratio estimation (DRE) is concerned with estimating from these samples the density ratio
r : x 7→ p(x)/q(x). A canonical application of these estimates is in the covariate shift problem (Shimodaira, 2000;
Sugiyama & Kawanabe, 2012), where one’s training and
test samples have different marginal distributions over instances: the density ratio between these distributions can
be used to re-weight training instances so as to correctly
adapt to the test distribution. Other applications of these
estimates include outlier detection, independent component
analysis, and hypothesis testing (Sugiyama et al., 2012b).
A conceptually simple solution to DRE is to compute kernel density estimates p̂ and q̂, and then compute the raProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

ADITYA . MENON @ DATA 61. CSIRO . AU
CHENGSOON . ONG @ ANU . EDU . AU

tio p̂/q̂ (Shimodaira, 2000; Sugiyama & Müller, 2005).
This suffers from the curse of dimensionality, which has
motivated discriminative approaches to the problem, starting with the seminal mean matching work of Huang et al.
(2007). Mean matching is however limited by the lack of
a principled model selection scheme; two popular subsequent approaches affording model selection are KL importance estimation (KLIEP) (Sugiyama et al., 2008), and least
squares importance fitting (LSIF) (Kanamori et al., 2009).
In this paper, we formally relate the DRE and classprobability estimation (CPE) problems, and theoretically
justify the use of existing losses from one problem for
the other. In the CPE to DRE direction, we first observe (Lemma 1) that KLIEP and LSIF both employ losses
belonging to the proper composite family, which are the
fundamental losses of CPE (Buja et al., 2005; Reid &
Williamson, 2010). Motivated by this, we show that essentially any CPE loss (e.g. logistic, exponential) minimises
a Bregman divergence to the true density ratio (Proposition
3), and thus is suitable for DRE; analyse how different CPE
losses focus on accurately modelling different ranges of the
density ratio (Lemma 4); and use this to design new CPE
losses for DRE (§6.2). In the DRE to CPE direction, we
argue that LSIF has potential use in bipartite ranking problems where one desires maximal accuracy at the head of
the ranking (§7). Our analysis relies on a novel Bregman
identity (Lemma 2) that may be of independent interest.
The basic link between DRE and CPE is not new. Specific
CPE methods such as logistic regression have been previously employed for covariate shift adaptation (Bickel et al.,
2009, Section 7); the link between the problems has been
exploited for semiparametric density estimation, where the
form of the density ratio is known (Qin, 1998; Cheng &
Chu, 2004); and a variant of LSIF has been applied to the
task of class-probability estimation (Sugiyama et al., 2010;
Sugiyama, 2010). However, on the DRE side, we are not
aware of a formal analysis of the quality of the density ratio
estimates produced by a general CPE method in the sense
of Proposition 3. On the CPE side, we are unaware of any
analysis of the tradeoffs implicit in the LSIF loss, nor any
discussion of its potential value for ranking problems.

