Greedy Column Subset Selection:
New Bounds and Distributed Algorithms

Jason Altschuler
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544

JASONMA @ PRINCETON . EDU

Aditya Bhaskara
School of Computing, 50 S. Central Campus Drive, Salt Lake City, UT 84112

BHASKARA @ CS . UTAH . EDU

Gang (Thomas) Fu
Vahab Mirrokni
Afshin Rostamizadeh
Morteza Zadimoghaddam
Google, 76 9th Avenue, New York, NY 10011

THOMASFU @ GOOGLE . COM
MIRROKNI @ GOOGLE . COM
ROSTAMI @ GOOGLE . COM
ZADIM @ GOOGLE . COM

Abstract
The problem of column subset selection has recently attracted a large body of research, with
feature selection serving as one obvious and important application. Among the techniques that
have been applied to solve this problem, the
greedy algorithm has been shown to be quite effective in practice. However, theoretical guarantees on its performance have not been explored
thoroughly, especially in a distributed setting. In
this paper, we study the greedy algorithm for the
column subset selection problem from a theoretical and empirical perspective and show its effectiveness in a distributed setting. In particular, we
provide an improved approximation guarantee
for the greedy algorithm which we show is tight
up to a constant factor, and present the first distributed implementation with provable approximation factors. We use the idea of randomized
composable core-sets, developed recently in the
context of submodular maximization. Finally, we
validate the effectiveness of this distributed algorithm via an empirical study.

1. Introduction
Recent technological advances have made it possible to
collect unprecedented amounts of data. However, extracting patterns of information from these high-dimensional
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

massive datasets is often challenging. How do we automatically determine, among millions of measured features
(variables), which are informative, and which are irrelevant
or redundant? The ability to select such features from highdimensional data is crucial for computers to recognize patterns in complex data in ways that are fast, accurate, and
even human-understandable (Guyon & Elisseeff, 2003).
An efficient method for feature selection receiving increasing attention is Column Subset Selection (CSS). CSS is a
constrained low-rank-approximation problem that seeks to
approximate a matrix (e.g. instances by features matrix)
by projecting it onto a space spanned by only a few of
its columns (features). Formally, given a matrix A with
n columns, and a target rank k < n, we wish to find a sizek subset S of A’s columns such that each column Ai of A
(i ∈ {1, . . . , n}) is contained as much as possible in the
subspace span(S), in terms of the Frobenius norm:
arg maxS contains k of A’s columns

n
X

kproj(Ai | span(S))k22

i=1

While similar in spirit to general low-rank approximation,
some advantages with CSS include flexibility, interpretability and efficiency during inference. CSS is an unsupervised
method and does not require labeled data, which is especially useful when labeled data is sparse. We note, on the
other hand, unlabeled data is often very abundant and therefore scalable methods, like the one we present, are often
needed. Furthermore, by subselecting features, as opposed
to generating new features via an arbitrary function of the
input features, we keep the semantic interpretation of the
features intact. This is especially important in applications
that require interpretable models. A third important advan-

