Correcting Forecasts with Multifactor Neural Attention

Matthew Riemer
Aditya Vempaty
Flavio P. Calmon
Fenno F. Heath III
Richard Hull
Elham Khabiri
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, NY, USA

MDRIEMER @ US . IBM . COM
AVEMPAT @ US . IBM . COM
FDCALMON @ US . IBM . COM
THEATH @ US . IBM . COM
HULL @ US . IBM . COM
EKHABIRI @ US . IBM . COM

Abstract
Automatic forecasting of time series data is a
challenging problem in many industries. Current forecast models adopted by businesses do
not provide adequate means for including data
representing external factors that may have a
significant impact on the time series, such as
weather, national events, local events, social media trends, promotions, etc. This paper introduces a novel neural network attention mechanism that naturally incorporates data from multiple external sources without the feature engineering needed to get other techniques to work. We
demonstrate empirically that the proposed model
achieves superior performance for predicting the
demand of 20 commodities across 107 stores of
one of America’s largest retailers when compared to other baseline models, including neural networks, linear models, certain kernel methods, Bayesian regression, and decision trees. Our
method ultimately accounts for a 23.9% relative
improvement as a result of the incorporation of
external data sources, and provides an unprecedented level of descriptive ability for a neural
network forecasting model.

1. Introduction
Univariate forecasting techniques, such as Holt-Winters
(Holt, 1957), (Winters, 1960) and ARIMA (Box & Jenkins,
1990), are widely adopted in industry. These methods are
used for performing predictions that are crucial for supporting logistical needs, such as product demand and consumer
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

Figure 1. An example of an anomaly partially predicted a week
ahead by our forecasting model, but not by a traditional model.
The embedded charts include an explanation of the neural network’s judgment for why it believes there will be an increase in
demand at a number of hierarchical levels that may be interesting
to a human analyst. The primary external factor that was influencing the prediction a week in advance was expected weather.
There is a spike in temperature projected on Monday and Tuesday followed by wind speeds of 37 mph and gusts of 47 mph on
Friday.

behavior. However, univariate forecasting techniques, by
definition, do not take into account multiple data sources,
and often come short of providing a fully automatic forecasting method. In fact, (Franses & Legerstee, 2009) conducted a case study where 90% of all forecasts were found
to be manually adjusted. Sales for most products seems to
vary wildly based on external influences.

