Nonparametric Canonical Correlation Analysis

Tomer Michaeli
Technion–Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel

TOMER . M @ EE . TECHNION . AC . IL

Weiran Wang
TTI-Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA

WEIRANWANG @ TTIC . EDU

Karen Livescu
TTI-Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA

KLIVESCU @ TTIC . EDU

Abstract
Canonical correlation analysis (CCA) is a classical representation learning technique for finding
correlated variables in multi-view data. Several
nonlinear extensions of the original linear CCA
have been proposed, including kernel and deep
neural network methods. These approaches seek
maximally correlated projections among families
of functions, which the user specifies (by choosing a kernel or neural network structure), and are
computationally demanding. Interestingly, the
theory of nonlinear CCA, without functional restrictions, had been studied in the population setting by Lancaster already in the 1950s, but these
results have not inspired practical algorithms.
We revisit Lancaster’s theory to devise a practical algorithm for nonparametric CCA (NCCA).
Specifically, we show that the solution can be expressed in terms of the singular value decomposition of a certain operator associated with the joint
density of the views. Thus, by estimating the
population density from data, NCCA reduces to
solving an eigenvalue system, superficially like
kernel CCA but, importantly, without requiring
the inversion of any kernel matrix. We also derive a partially linear CCA (PLCCA) variant in
which one of the views undergoes a linear projection while the other is nonparametric. Using
a kernel density estimate based on a small number of nearest neighbors, our NCCA and PLCCA
algorithms are memory-efficient, often run much
faster, and perform better than kernel CCA and
comparable to deep CCA.
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
A common task in data analysis is to reveal the common variability in multiple views of the same phenomenon, while suppressing view-specific noise factors. Canonical correlation analysis (CCA) (Hotelling, 1936) is a classical statistical technique that targets this goal. In CCA,
linear projections of two random vectors are sought, such
that the resulting low-dimensional vectors are maximally
correlated. This tool has found widespread use in various fields, including recent application to natural language processing (Dhillon et al., 2011), speech recognition
(Arora & Livescu, 2013), genomics (Witten & Tibshirani,
2009), and cross-modal retrieval (Gong et al., 2014).
One of the shortcomings of CCA is its restriction to linear mappings, since many real-world multi-view datasets
exhibit highly nonlinear relationships. To overcome this
limitation, several extensions of CCA have been proposed for finding maximally correlated nonlinear projections. In kernel CCA (KCCA) (Akaho, 2001; Melzer et al.,
2001; Bach & Jordan, 2002; Hardoon et al., 2004), these
nonlinear mappings are chosen from two reproducing
kernel Hilbert spaces (RKHS). In deep CCA (DCCA)
(Andrew et al., 2013), the projections are obtained from
two deep neural networks that are trained to output maximally correlated vectors. Nonparametric CCA-type methods, which are not limited to specific function classes, include the alternating conditional expectations (ACE) algorithm (Breiman & Friedman, 1985) and its extensions
(Balakrishnan et al., 2012; Makur et al., 2015). Nonlinear
CCA methods are advantageous over linear CCA in a range
of applications (Hardoon et al., 2004; Melzer et al., 2001;
Wang et al., 2015b). However, existing nonlinear CCA approaches are very computationally demanding, and are often impractical to apply on large data.

