Beyond Parity Constraints: Fourier Analysis of Hash Functions for Inference
Tudor Achim
Stanford University, 353 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305

TACHIM @ CS . STANFORD . EDU

Ashish Sabharwal
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence, 2157 N Northlake Way, Seattle, WA 98103
Stefano Ermon
Stanford University, 353 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305

A SHISH S@ ALLENAI . ORG
ERMON @ CS . STANFORD . EDU

Abstract

mal guarantees about the quality of their approximations.

Random projections have played an important
role in scaling up machine learning and data mining algorithms. Recently they have also been applied to probabilistic inference to estimate properties of high-dimensional distributions; however, they all rely on the same class of projections
based on universal hashing. We provide a general
framework to analyze random projections which
relates their statistical properties to their Fourier
spectrum, which is a well-studied area of theoretical computer science. Using this framework we
introduce two new classes of hash functions for
probabilistic inference and model counting that
show promising performance on synthetic and
real-world benchmarks.

More recently, a new class of approximate inference
algorithms has been introduced (Gomes et al., 2006a;
2007; 2006b; Chakraborty et al., 2013a;b; Ermon et al.,
2014; Ivrii et al., 2015; Achlioptas & Jiang, 2015; Belle
et al., 2015; Zhao et al., 2016; Asteris & Dimakis, 2016;
Hsu et al., 2016) based on projecting complex, highdimensional distributions into lower dimensional spaces
where their properties are easier to analyze. For the approach to work, the random projection needs to satisfy two
properties. First, it has to “preserve” the key properties of
the original distribution, at least probabilistically. Second,
the resulting lower-dimensional distribution should be easier to analyze. Currently, all these algorithms are based on
hash functions implemented using random (low-density)
parity check codes (Zhao et al., 2016; Asteris & Dimakis,
2016). These hash functions have excellent statistical properties, in the sense that to a large extent the projection preserves the properties of the original distribution with high
probability. Parity-based projections, however, are highly
oscillatory and have a non-convex nature, leading to probability distributions that although lower-dimensional, can
still be difficult to analyze.

1 Introduction
Probabilistic inference is a fundamental task in machine
learning and Bayesian statistics (Koller & Friedman, 2009).
Inference problems like computing expectations and normalization constants of probabilistic models involve the
computation of high-dimensional integrals, which are generally intractable to compute exactly. Instead, these integrals are approximated using two main classes of algorithms: sampling methods like Markov Chain Monte
Carlo (Jerrum & Sinclair, 1997), which explore the intractable distribution using local moves, and variational inference (Wainwright & Jordan, 2008; Jordan et al., 1999),
which uses tractable probability distributions to approximate the original, complex distribution. These approaches
are widely used in practice, but rarely provide general forProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

A natural question is whether there exists other classes of
hash functions that can be employed for approximate inference. A wide variety of random projections are known for
traditional machine learning applications, and their properties are well understood (Achlioptas et al., 2002; Blum,
2005; Rajaraman & Ullman, 2011). However, current analyses in the context of statistical inference are ad-hoc and
rely on specific properties of parity constraints, and are thus
unsuitable for studying new candidate hash functions.
In this paper we address this theoretical gap by showing a connection between the Fourier spectra of arbitrary
(discrete) functions and the statistical properties of their
corresponding hash families. Because the Fourier spec-

