Deep Structured Energy Based Models for Anomaly Detection

Shuangfei Zhai∗†
Yu Cheng∗§
Weining Lu‡
Zhongfei (Mark) Zhang†
†
Binghamton Univeristy, Vestal, NY 13902, USA.
§
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA.
‡
Tsinghua University, Beijing 10084, China.
∗
Equal contribution

Abstract
In this paper, we attack the anomaly detection
problem by directly modeling the data distribution with deep architectures. We propose
deep structured energy based models (DSEBMs),
where the energy function is the output of a deterministic deep neural network with structure.
We develop novel model architectures to integrate EBMs with different types of data such as
static data, sequential data, and spatial data, and
apply appropriate model architectures to adapt to
the data structure. Our training algorithm is built
upon the recent development of score matching (Hyvärinen, 2005), which connects an EBM
with a regularized autoencoder, eliminating the
need for complicated sampling method. Statistically sound decision criterion can be derived
for anomaly detection purpose from the perspective of the energy landscape of the data distribution. We investigate two decision criteria for
performing anomaly detection: the energy score
and the reconstruction error. Extensive empirical
studies on benchmark tasks demonstrate that our
proposed model consistently matches or outperforms all the competing methods.

SZHAI 2@ BINGHAMTON . EDU
CHENGYU @ US . IBM . COM
LUWN 14@ MAILS . TSINGHUA . EDU . CN
ZHONGFEI @ CS . BINGHAMTON . EDU

ing to the normal profile as outliers, or explicitly isolate
outliers based on statistical or geometric measures of abnormality. A variety of methods can be found in the survey (Zimek et al., 2012). Anomaly detection is to correctly
characterize data distribution in nature, so the normality of
the data characteristic can be characterized as a distribution
and any future data can be benchmarked against the normality. Apparently, the statistical power and accuracy of
the anomaly detection methods depend on the capacity of
the model that is used to characterize the data distribution.
Our work is inspired by the extraordinary capacity of deep
models which are able to capture the complex distributions
in real-world applications. Recent empirical and theoretical
studies indicate that deep architectures are able to achieve
better generalization ability compared to the shallow counterparts on challenging recognition tasks (Bengio, 2009).
The key ingredient to the success of deep learning is its
ability to learn multiple levels of representations with increasing abstraction. For example, it is shown that properly regularized autoencoders (Vincent et al., 2010; Rifai
et al., 2011) are able to effectively characterize the data
distribution and learn useful representations, which are not
achieved by shallow methods such as PCA or K-Means.

Anomaly detection (also called novelty or outlier detection)
is to identify patterns that do not conform to the expected
normal patterns (Chandola et al., 2009). Existing methods
for outlier detection either construct a profile for normal
data examples and then identify the examples not conform-

However, deep models have not been systematically studied and developed for anomaly detection. Central questions critical to this development include: 1) how to effectively model the data generating distribution with a deep
model? 2) how to generalize a model to a range of data
structures such as static data, sequential data, and spatial
data? 3) how to develop computationally efficient training
algorithms to make them scalable? and 4) how to derive
statistically sound decision criteria for anomaly detection
purpose?

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

To answer these questions in a systematic manner, in this
work, we propose deep structured energy based models
(DSEBMs). Our approach falls into the category of en-

1. Introduction

