Data-Efficient Off-Policy Policy Evaluation for Reinforcement Learning

Philip S. Thomas
Emma Brunskill

PHILIPT @ CS . CMU . EDU
EBRUN @ CS . CMU . EDU

Abstract
In this paper we present a new way of predicting
the performance of a reinforcement learning policy given historical data that may have been generated by a different policy. The ability to evaluate a policy from historical data is important for
applications where the deployment of a bad policy can be dangerous or costly. We show empirically that our algorithm produces estimates
that often have orders of magnitude lower mean
squared error than existing methods—it makes
more efficient use of the available data. Our new
estimator is based on two advances: an extension of the doubly robust estimator (Jiang & Li,
2015), and a new way to mix between model
based and importance sampling based estimates.

1. Introduction
The ability to predict the performance of a policy without actually having to use it is crucial to the responsible
use of reinforcement learning algorithms. Consider the
setting where the user of a reinforcement learning algorithm has already deployed some policy, e.g., for determining which advertisement to show a user visiting a website
(Theocharous et al., 2015), for determining which medical
treatment to suggest for a patient (Thapa et al., 2005), or for
suggesting a personalized curriculum for a student (Mandel
et al., 2014). In these examples, using a bad policy can be
costly or dangerous, so it is important that the user of a reinforcement learning algorithm be able to predict how well
a new policy will perform without having to deploy it.
In this paper we propose a new algorithm for tackling this
performance prediction problem, which is called the offpolicy policy evaluation (OPE) problem. The primary objective in OPE problems is to produce estimates that minimize some notion of error. We select mean squared error, a
popular notion of error for estimators, as our loss function.
This is in line with previous works that all use (root) mean
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

squared error when empirically validating their methods
(Precup et al., 2000; Dudı́k et al., 2011; Mahmood et al.,
2014; Thomas, 2015b; Jiang & Li, 2015).
Given this goal, an estimator should be strongly
consistent—its mean squared error should converge almost
surely to zero as the amount of available data increases.1 In
this paper we introduce a new strongly consistent estimator, MAGIC, that directly optimizes mean squared error.
Our empirical results show that MAGIC can produce estimates with orders of magnitude lower mean squared error
than the estimates produced by existing algorithms.
Our new algorithm comes from the synthesis of two new
ideas. The first is an extension of the recently proposed
doubly robust (DR) OPE algorithm (Jiang & Li, 2015).
We present a novel derivation of the DR algorithm that removes the assumption that the horizon is finite and known.
We also give conditions under which the DR estimator is
strongly consistent. We then show how we can reduce the
variance of the DR estimator by introducing a small amount
of bias—an effective trade-off when minimizing the mean
squared error of the estimates. We call our extension of the
DR estimator the weighted doubly robust (WDR) estimator.
Our second major contribution is a new estimator, which
we call the blending IS and model (BIM) estimator, that
combines two different OPE estimators not just by selecting between them, but by blending them together in a way
that minimizes the mean squared error. The combination
of these two contributions results in a particularly powerful new OPE algorithm that we call the model and guided
importance sampling combined (MAGIC) estimator, which
uses BIM to combine a purely model-based estimator with
WDR. In our simulations, MAGIC has the best general performance, often exhibiting orders of magnitude lower mean
squared error than prior state-of-the-art estimators.
The research reported here was supported by a NSF CAREER grant 1350984 and by the Institute of Education Sciences,
U.S. Department of Education, through Grant R305A130215 to
Carnegie Mellon University. The opinions expressed are those of
the authors and do not represent views of the Institute or the U.S.
Department of Education.
1
In Appendix A we define strong consistency and present
Lemma 3, which elucidates its connection to mean squared error.

