How to Fake Multiply by a Gaussian Matrix

Michael Kapralov
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland

MICHAEL . KAPRALOV @ EPFL . CH

Vamsi K. Potluru
Comcast Cable, Washington DC, USA 20005

VAMSI POTLURU @ CABLE . COMCAST. COM

David P. Woodruff
IBM Research, Almaden, San Jose, CA USA

DPWOODRU @ US . IBM . COM

Abstract
Have you ever wanted to multiply an n × d matrix X, with n  d, on the left by an m × n
matrix G̃ of i.i.d. Gaussian random variables,
but could not afford to do it because it was too
slow? In this work we propose a new randomized m × n matrix T , for which one can compute
T · X in only O(nnz(X)) + Õ(m1.5 · d3 ) time,
for which the total variation distance between the
distributions T · X and G̃ · X is as small as desired, i.e., less than any positive constant. Here
nnz(X) denotes the number of non-zero entries
of X. Assuming nnz(X)  m1.5 · d3 , this is a
significant savings over the naı̈ve O(nnz(X)m)
time to compute G̃ · X. Moreover, since the total variation distance is small, we can provably
use T · X in place of G̃ · X in any application
and have the same guarantees as if we were using G̃ · X, up to a small positive constant in error
probability. We apply this transform to nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) and support vector machines (SVM).

applied to speed up least squares regression and have been
implemented with remarkable success (Avron et al., 2010).
This is impressive considering the fact that these solvers
have been highly optimized over the last few decades, exploiting both algorithmic improvements and machine dependent optimizations.
Many of these works rely on fast projection matrices, such
as the Subsampled Randomized Hadamard Transform or
the CountSketch, the latter being particularly well-suited
for sparse data (see, e.g., (Woodruff, 2014) and references
therein). However, there are certain applications for which
multiplying by a Gaussian matrix is the only way that is
known to reduce the dimensionality of the data. This arises
mainly because the application requires rotational symmetry, which is often not preserved by other fast transforms,
or because additional properties, such as spreading out a
sparse vector to a vector with non-spiky elements, do not
hold for transforms like CountSketch (some of these hold
for the Fast Hadamard Transform, but the latter are not
known to be able to exploit sparsity). We give two such
applications below, one to nonnegative matrix factorization
(NMF), and one to support vector machines (SVM).
1.1. Our Results

1. Introduction
One approach to handle high dimensional data, often in the
form of a matrix, is to first project the data to a much lower
dimensional subspace. This is an example of sketching and
the last decade has seen a systematic study of this approach.
A linear sketch of a matrix replaces the original matrix by
a smaller matrix which is often obtained by a random projection of the original matrix (see, e.g., (Woodruff, 2014)
for a survey). Random projections have been successfully
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

A New Randomized Transform. In this work we propose
a new randomized transform T , which we call the CountGauss. It is simply a product of a CountSketch matrix and a
Gaussian matrix. That is, given an n×d matrix X which we
would like to multiply by an m × n matrix G̃ of Gaussians,
we instead let T = G · S, where S is a B × d CountSketch
matrix where B = Õ(d2 m.5 ), and G̃ is an m × B matrix of
i.i.d. Gaussians. Recall that a CountSketch matrix S satisfies that each column of S has only a single non-zero entry
chosen in a uniformly random position. That non-zero is
1 with probability 1/2, and −1 with probability 1/2. The
columns of S are independent of each other. Importantly,
computing S · X can be done in O(nnz(X)) time, and this

