Noisy Activation Functions

Caglar Gulcehre†]
Marcin Moczulski†
Misha Denil†
Yoshua Bengio†]
†]
University of Montreal
†

GULCEHRC @ IRO . UMONTREAL . CA
MARCIN . MOCZULSKI @ STCATZ . OX . AC . UK
MISHA . DENIL @ GMAIL . COM
BENGIOY @ IRO . UMONTREAL . CA

University of Oxford

Abstract
Common nonlinear activation functions used in
neural networks can cause training difficulties
due to the saturation behavior of the activation
function, which may hide dependencies that
are not visible to vanilla-SGD (using first order
gradients only). Gating mechanisms that use
softly saturating activation functions to emulate
the discrete switching of digital logic circuits are
good examples of this. We propose to exploit the
injection of appropriate noise so that the gradients
may flow easily, even if the noiseless application of
the activation function would yield zero gradients.
Large noise will dominate the noise-free gradient
and allow stochastic gradient descent to explore
more. By adding noise only to the problematic
parts of the activation function, we allow the
optimization procedure to explore the boundary
between the degenerate (saturating) and the
well-behaved parts of the activation function. We
also establish connections to simulated annealing,
when the amount of noise is annealed down,
making it easier to optimize hard objective functions. We find experimentally that replacing such
saturating activation functions by noisy variants
helps optimization in many contexts, yielding
state-of-the-art or competitive results on different
datasets and task, especially when training seems
to be the most difficult, e.g., when curriculum
learning is necessary to obtain good results.

1. Introduction
The introduction of the piecewise-linear activation functions
such as ReLU and Maxout (Goodfellow et al., 2013) units
had a profound effect on deep learning, and was a major
catalyst in allowing the training of much deeper networks. It
is thanks to ReLU that for the first time it was shown (Glorot
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume 48.
Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

et al., 2011) that deep purely supervised networks can be
trained, whereas using tanh nonlinearity only allowed to
train shallow networks. A plausible hypothesis about the
recent surge of interest on these piecewise-linear activation
functions (Glorot et al., 2011), is due to the fact that they
are easier to optimize with SGD and backpropagation than
smooth activation functions, such as sigmoid and tanh. The
recent successes of piecewise linear functions is particularly
evident in computer vision, where the ReLU has become the
default choice in convolutional networks.
We propose a new technique to train neural networks with
activation functions which strongly saturate when their input
is large. This is mainly achieved by injecting noise to the
activation function in its saturated regime and learning the
level of noise. Using this approach, we have found that it
was possible to train neural networks with much wider family
of activation functions than previously. Adding noise to the
activation function has been considered for ReLU units and
was explored in (Bengio et al., 2013; Nair & Hinton, 2010) for
feed-forward networks and Boltzmann machines to encourage
units to explore more and make the optimization easier.
More recently there has been a resurgence of interest in more
elaborated “gated” architectures such as LSTMs (Hochreiter
& Schmidhuber, 1997) and GRUs (Cho et al., 2014), but also
encompassing neural attention mechanisms that have been
used in the NTM (Graves et al., 2014), Memory Networks
(Weston et al., 2014), automatic image captioning (Xu et al.,
2015b), video caption generation (Yao et al., 2015) and wide
areas of applications (LeCun et al., 2015). A common thread
running through these works is the use of soft-saturating
non-linearities, such as the sigmoid or softmax, to emulate
the hard decisions of digital logic circuits. In spite of its
success, there are two key problems with this approach.
1. Since the non-linearities still saturate there are problems
with vanishing gradient information flowing through the
gates; and
2. since the non-linearities only softly saturate they do not
allow one to take hard decisions.
Although gates often operate in the soft-saturated regime
(Karpathy et al., 2015; Bahdanau et al., 2014; Hermann et al.,

