Low-rank Solutions of Linear Matrix Equations
via Procrustes Flow
{STEPHENT, BOCZAR , MSIMCHOW}@ BERKELEY. EDU

Stephen Tu, Ross Boczar, Max Simchowitz
EECS Department, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA.

Mahdi Soltanolkotabi
Ming Hsieh Department of Electrical Engineering, USC, Los Angeles, CA.

SOLTANOL @ USC . EDU

Benjamin Recht
EECS Department, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA.

BRECHT @ BERKELEY. EDU

k-th entry of A(X) is hAk , Xi := Tr(AT
k X), where each
Ak ∈ Rn1 ×n2 .

Abstract
In this paper we study the problem of recovering a low-rank matrix from linear measurements. Our algorithm, which we call Procrustes
Flow, starts from an initial estimate obtained by
a thresholding scheme followed by gradient descent on a non-convex objective. We show that
as long as the measurements obey a standard
restricted isometry property, our algorithm converges to the unknown matrix at a geometric rate.
In the case of Gaussian measurements, such convergence occurs for a n1 × n2 matrix of rank
r when the number of measurements exceeds a
constant times (n1 + n2 )r.

Since the early seventies, a popular heuristic for solving
such problems has been to replace M with a low-rank factorization M = U V T and solve matrix bilinear equations
of the form
find

U ∈Rn1 ×r ,V ∈Rn2 ×r

Low rank models are ubiquitous in machine learning, and
over a decade of research has been dedicated to determining when such models can be efficiently recovered from
partial information (Fazel, 2002; Rennie & Srebro, 2005;
Candès & Recht, 2009). See (Davenport & Romberg,
2016) for an extended survey on this topic. The simplest
such recovery problem concerns how can we can find a
low-rank matrix obeying a set of linear equations? What is
the computational complexity of such an algorithm? More
specifically, we are interested in solving problems of the
form
min

rank(M ) s.t.

A(M ) = b ,

A(U V T ) = b,

(1.2)

via a local search heuristic (Ruhe, 1974). Many researchers
have demonstrated that such heuristics work well in practice for a variety of problems (Rennie & Srebro, 2005;
Funk, 2006; Lee et al., 2010; Recht & Ré, 2013). However, these procedures lack strong guarantees associated
with convex programming heuristics for solving (1.1).

1. Introduction

M ∈Rn1 ×n2

s.t.

(1.1)

where A : Rn1 ×n2 −→ Rm is a known affine transformation that maps matrices to vectors. More specifically, the
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

In this paper we show that a local search heuristic solves
(1.2) under standard restricted isometry assumptions on the
linear map A. For standard ensembles of equality constraints, we demonstrate that M can be estimated by such
heuristics as long as we have Ω((n1 + n2 )r) equations.1
This is merely a constant factor more than the number of
parameters needed to specify a n1 × n2 rank r matrix. Specialized to a random Gaussian model and positive semidefinite matrices, our work improves upon recent independent
work by Zheng and Lafferty (Zheng & Lafferty, 2015).

2. Algorithms
In this paper we study a local search heuristic for solving
matrix bilinear equations of the form (1.2) which consists
of two components: (1) a careful initialization obtained by
a projected gradient scheme on n1 × n2 matrices, and (2) a
series of successive refinements of this initial solution via a
1

Here and throughout we use f (x) = Ω(g(x)) if there is a
positive constant C such that f (x) ≥ Cg(x) for all x sufficiently
large.

