Asymmetric Multi-task Learning Based on Task Relatedness and Loss

Giwoong Lee
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, UNIST, Ulsan, South Korea
Eunho Yang
School of Computing, KAIST, Daejon, South Korea

EUNHOY @ CS . KAIST. AC . KR

Sung Ju Hwang
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, UNIST, Ulsan, South Korea

Abstract
We propose a novel multi-task learning method
that minimizes the effect of negative transfer by
allowing asymmetric transfer between the tasks
based on task relatedness as well as the amount
of individual task losses, which we refer to as
Asymmetric Multi-task Learning (AMTL). To
tackle this problem, we couple multiple tasks via
a sparse, directed regularization graph, that enforces each task parameter to be reconstructed
as a sparse combination of other tasks selected
based on the task-wise loss. We present two different algorithms that jointly learn the task predictors as well as the regularization graph. The
first algorithm solves for the original learning
objective using alternative optimization, and the
second algorithm solves an approximation of it
using curriculum learning strategy, that learns
one task at a time. We perform experiments on
multiple datasets for classification and regression, on which we obtain significant improvements in performance over the single task learning and existing multitask learning models.

1. Introduction
Multi-task learning (Argyriou et al., 2008; Caruana, 1997;
Kang et al., 2011; Kumar & Daume III, 2012) aims to improve the generalization ability of the learners for different
tasks by jointly training them. While multi-task learning
has shown to outperform single-task learning in most cases,
the performance gain is usually small since not all tasks
benefit from the joint learning, which makes some of the
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

SOPP 0002@ UNIST. AC . KR

SJHWANG @ UNIST. AC . KR

participating learners to suffer from performance degeneration. This problem is known as ‘negative transfer’, and
is caused by the main assumption in most MTL methods,
which assumes that the information transfer will be symmetric between any two participating tasks that are coupled by the joint learning; that is, the information transfer
from task a to b will be the same as the information transfer
from task b to a, if they are related. However, this symmetry assumption will not be always beneficial for joint learning, since some tasks will be easier implying lower training
task-specific loss while some others will be more difficult
with higher training loss. For example, suppose that the
task a is to predict whether a visual instance ‘has wheels’
or not, and task b is to predict if a given visual object ‘is
fast’. Obviously the former will be much easier since it
can be easily predicted from the visual features, while the
predicting the latter from visual information is not straightforward. This resulting in learning a more confident predictor for task a, and we would only want to regularize the
learning of task b with the task a, although the two tasks
are related. Still, a conventional multitask learning method
will consider the two tasks as equal, which will result in the
former classifier suffering from negative transfer.
To overcome this intrinsic limitation of conventional symmetric multi-task learning methods, we need to allow for
asymmetric information transfer between the tasks, such
that the amount of information transfer from a confident
predictor to a less confident one is larger than the other
way around. We can achieve this objective by learning a
weighted directed regularization graph between the tasks,
such that more confident learners regularize the learning of
less confident ones, but not vice versa. Further, the graph
should be sparse since we do not want transfer to happen
between unrelated tasks. Based on these two ideas, we
propose Asymmetric Multi-task Learning (AMTL), which
simultaneously learns such sparse directed regularization
graph along with the predictors for each task. To this end,

