Faster Convex Optimization:
Simulated Annealing with an Efficient Universal Barrier
Jacob Abernethy
Computer Science & Engineering, University of Michigan
Elad Hazan
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University

Abstract
This paper explores a surprising equivalence between two seemingly-distinct convex optimization methods. We show that simulated annealing, a well-studied random walk algorithms, is
directly equivalent, in a certain sense, to the central path interior point algorithm for the the entropic universal barrier function. This connection
exhibits several benefits. First, we are able improve the state of the art time complexity for convex optimization under the membership oracle
model by devising a new temperature schedule
for simulated annealing motivated by central path
following interior point methods. Second, we
get an efficient randomized interior point method
with an efficiently computable universal barrier
for any convex set described by a membership
oracle. Previously, efficiently computable barriers were known only for particular convex sets.

1. Introduction
Convex optimization is a well established field and a cornerstone of the fields of algorithms and machine learning.
Poly-time methods for convex optimization belong to relatively few classes: the oldest and perhaps most general
is the ellipsoid method with roots back to Kachiyan in the
50s (see Grötschel et al. (1993)). Despite its simplicity, the
ellipsoid method tends to perform poorly in practice.
A more recent family of algorithms are the celebrated
interior point methods, initially developed by Karmarkar
in the context of linear programming, and generalized
in the seminal work of Nesterov & Nemirovskii (1994).
These methods are known to perform well in practice
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

JABERNET @ UMICH . EDU

EHAZAN @ PRINCETON . EDU

and come with rigorous theoretical guarantees of polynomial running time, but with a significant catch: the underlying constraints must admit an efficiently-computable
self-concordant barrier function. Barrier functions satisfy
specific differential inequality conditions which facilitate
the path-following scheme developed by Nesterov & Nemirovskii (1994), in particular it guarantees that the Newton step procedure maintains feasibility of the iterates. Indeed the iterative path following scheme essentially reduces the optimization problem to the construction of a barrier function, and in many nice scenarios a self-concordant
barrier is easy to obtain; for polytopes the simple logarithmic barrier suffices. Yet at present there is no known universal efficient construction of a barrier for any convex set.
The problem is seemingly even more difficult in the membership oracle model where our access to the convex set K
is given only via queries of the form “is x 2 K?”.

Recently proposed algorithms for optimization use random
walks, pioneered in the work of Dyer et al. (1991) and
greatly advanced by Lovász & Vempala (2006). These algorithms apply in full generality of convex optimization
and require only a membership oracle. The state of the
art in polynomial time convex optimization is the randomwalk based algorithm of simulated annealing and the specific temperature schedule analyzed in the breakthrough of
Kalai & Vempala (2006). Improvements have been given
in certain cases, most notably in the work of Narayanan &
Rakhlin (2010) where barrier functions were utilized.
In this paper we tie together two of the three known
methodologies for convex optimization, give an efficiently
computable universal barrier for interior point methods,
and derive a faster algorithm for convex optimization in the
membership oracle model. Specifically,
1. We define the heat path of a simulated annealing
method as the (determinisitc) curve formed by the mean
of the annealing distribution as the temperature parameter is continuously decreased. We show that the heat

