Diversity-Promoting Bayesian Learning of Latent Variable Models

Pengtao Xie†
PENGTAOX @ CS . CMU . EDU
Jun Zhu†‡
DCSZJ @ TSINGHUA . EDU . CN
Eric P. Xing†
EPXING @ CS . CMU . EDU
†
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
‡
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., State Key Lab of Intell. Tech. & Sys., TNList, CBICR Center, Tsinghua University, China

Abstract
In learning latent variable models (LVMs), it is
important to effectively capture infrequent patterns and shrink model size without sacrificing
modeling power. Various studies have been done
to “diversify” a LVM, which aim to learn a diverse set of latent components in LVMs. Most
existing studies fall into a frequentist-style regularization framework, where the components
are learned via point estimation. In this paper, we investigate how to “diversify” LVMs in
the paradigm of Bayesian learning, which has
advantages complementary to point estimation,
such as alleviating overfitting via model averaging and quantifying uncertainty. We propose
two approaches that have complementary advantages. One is to define diversity-promoting mutual angular priors which assign larger density to
components with larger mutual angles based on
Bayesian network and von Mises-Fisher distribution and use these priors to affect the posterior via Bayes rule. We develop two efficient approximate posterior inference algorithms based
on variational inference and Markov chain Monte
Carlo sampling. The other approach is to impose
diversity-promoting regularization directly over
the post-data distribution of components. These
two methods are applied to the Bayesian mixture
of experts model to encourage the “experts” to be
diverse and experimental results demonstrate the
effectiveness and efficiency of our methods.

1. Introduction
Latent variable models (LVMs) (Bishop, 1998; Knott &
Bartholomew, 1999; Blei, 2014) are a major workhorse in
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

machine learning (ML) to extract latent patterns underlying data, such as themes behind documents and motifs hidden in genome sequences. To properly capture these patterns, LVMs are equipped with a set of components, each
of which is aimed to capture one pattern and is usually
parametrized by a vector. For instance, in topic models
(Blei et al., 2003), each component (referred to as topic)
is in charge of capturing one theme underlying documents
and is represented by a multinomial vector.
While existing LVMs have demonstrated great success,
they are less capable in addressing two new problems
emerged due to the growing volume and complexity of
data. First, it is often the case that the frequency of patterns is distributed in a power-law fashion (Wang et al.,
2014; Xie et al., 2015) where a handful of patterns occur
very frequently whereas most patterns are of low frequency
(Figure 1 shows an example). Existing LVMs lack capability to capture infrequent patterns, which is possibly due to
the design of LVMs’ objective function used for training.
For example, a maximum likelihood estimator would reward itself by modeling the frequent patterns well as they
are the major contributors of the likelihood function. On
the other hand, infrequent patterns contribute much less to
the likelihood, thereby it is not very rewarding to model
them well and LVMs tend to ignore them. Infrequent patterns often carry valuable information, thus should not be
ignored. For instance, in a topic modeling based recommendation system, an infrequent topic (pattern) like losing weight is more likely to improve the click-through rate
than a frequent topic like politics. Second, the number of
components K strikes a tradeoff between model size (complexity) and modeling power. For a small K, the model is
not expressive enough to sufficiently capture the complex
patterns behind data; for a large K, the model would be
of large size and complexity, incurring high computational
overhead. How to reduce model size while preserving modeling power is a challenging issue.
To cope with the two problems, several studies (Zou &
Adams, 2012; Xie et al., 2015; Xie, 2015) propose a “diver-

