Correlation Clustering and Biclustering with Locally Bounded Errors

Gregory J. Puleo
PULEO @ ILLINOIS . EDU
Coordinated Science Lab, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801 USA
Olgica Milenkovic
MILENKOV @ ILLINOIS . EDU
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801 USA

Abstract
We consider a generalized version of the correlation clustering problem, defined as follows.
Given a complete graph G whose edges are labeled with + or −, we wish to partition the
graph into clusters while trying to avoid errors:
+ edges between clusters or − edges within
clusters. Classically, one seeks to minimize the
total number of such errors. We introduce a
new framework that allows the objective to be a
more general function of the number of errors at
each vertex (for example, we may wish to minimize the number of errors at the worst vertex)
and provide a rounding algorithm which converts
“fractional clusterings” into discrete clusterings
while causing only a constant-factor blowup in
the number of errors at each vertex. This rounding algorithm yields constant-factor approximation algorithms for the discrete problem under a
wide variety of objective functions.

1. Introduction
Correlation clustering is a clustering model first introduced
by Bansal, Blum, and Chawla (Bansal et al., 2002; 2004).
The basic form of the model is as follows. We are given
a collection of objects and, for some pairs of objects, we
are given a judgment of whether the objects are similar
or dissimilar. This information is represented as a labeled
graph, with edges labeled + or − according to whether the
endpoints are similar or dissimilar. Our goal is to cluster
the graph so that + edges tend to be within clusters and −
edges tend to go across clusters. The number of clusters is
not specified in advance; determining the optimal number
of clusters is instead part of the optimization problem.
Given a solution clustering, an error is a + edge whose
endpoints lie in different clusters or a − edge whose endProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

points lie in the same cluster. In the original formulation
of the correlation clustering, the goal is to minimize the total number of errors; this formulation of the optimization
problem is called M IN D ISAGREE. Finding an exact optimal solution is NP-hard even when the input graph is complete (Bansal et al., 2002; 2004). Furthermore, if the input
graph is allowed to be arbitrary, the best known approximation ratio is O(log n), obtained by (Charikar et al., 2003;
2005; Demaine et al., 2006). Assuming the Unique Games
Conjecture of Khot (Khot, 2002), no constant-factor approximation for M IN D ISAGREE on arbitrary graphs is possible; this follows from the results of (Chawla et al., 2006;
Steurer & Vishnoi, 2009) concerning the minimum multicut problem and the connection between correlation clustering and minimum multicut described in (Charikar et al.,
2003; 2005; Demaine et al., 2006).
Since theoretical barriers appear to preclude constantfactor approximations on arbitrary graphs, much research
has focused on special graph classes such as complete
graphs and complete bipartite graphs, which are the
graph classes we consider here. Ailon, Charikar, and
Newman (Ailon et al., 2005; 2008) gave a very simple randomized 3-approximation algorithm for M IN D IS AGREE on complete graphs. This algorithm was derandomized by van Zuylen and Williamson (van Zuylen &
Williamson, 2009), and a parallel version of the algorithm was studied by Pan, Papailiopoulos, Recht, Ramchandran, and Jordan (Pan et al., 2015). More recently, a
2.06-approximation algorithm was announced by Chawla,
Makarychev, Schramm and Yaroslavtsev (Chawla et al.,
2014). Similar results have been obtained for complete
bipartite graphs. The first constant approximation algorithm for correlation clustering on complete bipartite
graphs was described by Amit (Amit, 2004), who gave an
11-approximation algorithm. This ratio was improved by
Ailon, Avigdor-Elgrabli, Liberty and van Zuylen (Ailon
et al., 2012), who obtained a 4-approximation algorithm.
Chawla, Makarychev, Schramm and Yaroslavtsev (Chawla
et al., 2014) announced a 3-approximation algorithm for
correlation clustering on complete k-partite graphs, for
arbitrary k, which includes the complete bipartite case.
Bipartite clustering has also been studied, outside the

