Recycling Randomness with Structure for Sublinear time Kernel Expansions

Krzysztof Choromanski
Vikas Sindhwani

KCHORO @ GOOGLE . COM
SINDHWANI @ GOOGLE . COM

Abstract

nel (Rahimi & Recht, 2007), while the rectified linear function (ReLU), s(x) = max(x, 0), leads to the Arc-cosine
kernel (Cho & Saul, 2009).

We propose a scheme for recycling Gaussian
random vectors into structured matrices to approximate various kernel functions in sublinear time via random embeddings. Our framework includes the Fastfood construction of Le
et al. (2013) as a special case, but also extends to Circulant, Toeplitz and Hankel matrices, and the broader family of structured matrices that are characterized by the concept of lowdisplacement rank. We introduce notions of coherence and graph-theoretic structural constants
that control the approximation quality, and prove
unbiasedness and low-variance properties of random feature maps that arise within our framework. For the case of low-displacement matrices, we show how the degree of structure and
randomness can be controlled to reduce statistical variance at the cost of increased computation and storage requirements. Empirical results
strongly support our theory and justify the use of
a broader family of structured matrices for scaling up kernel methods using random features.

In recent years, such random feature maps have been used
to dramatically accelerate the training time and inference
speed of kernel methods (Schölkopf & Smola, 2002) across
a variety of statistical modeling problems (Rahimi & Recht,
2007; Xie et al., 2015) and applications (Huang et al., 2014;
Vedaldi & Zisserman, 2012). Standard linear techniques
applied to random nonlinear embeddings of data are equivalent to learning with approximate kernels. To quantify
the benefits, consider solving a kernel ridge regression task
given l training examples. With traditional kernel methods,
dense linear algebra operations on the Gram matrix associated with the exact kernel function imply that the training
complexity grows as O(l3 + l2 n) and the time to make a
prediction on a test sample grows as O(ln). By contrast,
random feature approximations reduce training complexity
to O(lk 2 + lkn) and test speed to O(kn). This is a major
win on big datasets where l is very large, provided that a
small value of k can provide a good approximation to the
kernel function.

1. Introduction
Consider a k-dimensional feature map of the form,
1
Ψ(x) = √ s(Mx)
k

(1)

where the input data vector x is drawn from Rn , s(·)
denotes a real-valued or complex-valued pointwise nonlinearity (activation function), and M is a k × n Gaussian random matrix. It is well known that as a function of a pair of data vectors, the Euclidean inner product
Ψ(x)T Ψ(z), converges to a positive definite kernel function K(x, z) depending on the choice of the scalar nonlinearity, as k → ∞. For example, the complex exponential
x
nonlinearity s(x) = e−i σ corresponds to the Gaussian kerProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

In practice, though, the optimal value of k is often large,
albeit still much smaller than l. For example, in a speech
recognition application (Huang et al., 2014) involving
around two million training examples, about hundred thousand random features are required to achieve state of the
art results. In such settings, the time to construct the
random feature map is dominated by matrix multiplication against the dense Gaussian random matrix, which becomes the new computational bottleneck. To alleviate this
bottleneck, (Le et al., 2013) introduce the “Fastfood” approach where Gaussian random matrices are replaced by
Hadamard matrices combined with diagonal matrices with
Gaussian distributed diagonal entries. It was shown in (Le
et al., 2013) that for the specific case of the complex exponential nonlinearity, the Fastfood feature maps provide
unbiased estimates for the Gaussian kernel function, at the
expense of additional statistical variance, but with the computational benefit of reducing the feature map construction time from O(kn) to O(k log n) by using the Fast
Walsh-Hadamard transform for matrix multiplication. The
Fastfood construction for kernel approximations is akin to

