Fast methods for estimating the Numerical rank of large matrices

Shashanka Ubaru
UBARU 001@ UMN . EDU
Yousef Saad
SAAD @ CS . UMN . EDU
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota, Twin Cities, MN USA

Abstract
We present two computationally inexpensive
techniques for estimating the numerical rank of
a matrix, combining powerful tools from computational linear algebra. These techniques exploit
three key ingredients. The first is to approximate
the projector on the non-null invariant subspace
of the matrix by using a polynomial filter. Two
types of filters are discussed, one based on Hermite interpolation and the other based on Chebyshev expansions. The second ingredient employs
stochastic trace estimators to compute the rank of
this wanted eigen-projector, which yields the desired rank of the matrix. In order to obtain a good
filter, it is necessary to detect a gap between the
eigenvalues that correspond to noise and the relevant eigenvalues that correspond to the non-null
invariant subspace. The third ingredient of the
proposed approaches exploits the idea of spectral density, popular in physics, and the Lanczos
spectroscopic method to locate this gap.

1. Introduction
In many machine learning, data analysis, scientific computations and signal processing applications, the high dimensional data encountered generally have intrinsically low
dimensional representations. A widespread tool used in
these applications to exploit this low dimensional nature
of data is the Principal Component Analysis (PCA) (Jolliffe, 2002). PCA essentially takes the initial data matrix
X ∈ Rd×n and replaces it by a rank-k version (a lower
dimensional matrix), which has the effect of capturing the
intrinsic information of X. Other well known techniques
such as randomized low rank approximations (Halko et al.,
2011; Ubaru et al., 2015) and low rank subspace estimations (Comon & Golub, 1990; Doukopoulos & Moustakides, 2008) also exploit the ubiquitous low rank characProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

ter of data. However, a difficulty with these approaches that
is well-recognized in the literature is that, it is not known
in advance how to select the reduced rank k. This problem is aggravated in the applications of algorithms such as
online PCA (Crammer et al., 2006), stochastic approximation algorithms for PCA (Arora et al., 2012) and subspace
tracking (Doukopoulos & Moustakides, 2008), where the
dimension of the subspace of interest changes frequently.
The rank estimation problem also arises in many useful
methods employed in fields such as machine learning for
example, where the data matrix X ∈ Rd×n is replaced
with a factorization of the form U V > , where U ∈ Rd×k
and V ∈ Rn×k . In these methods, the original problem
is solved by fixing the rank of the unknown matrix to a
preselected value k (Haldar & Hernando, 2009). Similar
rank estimation problems are encountered in reduced rank
regression (Reinsel & Velu, 1998), when solving numerically rank deficient linear systems of equations (Hansen,
1998), and in numerical methods for eigenvalue problems
that are used to compute the dominant subspace of a matrix,
for e.g., subspace iteration (Saad, 2016).
In the most common situation, the rank k required as input
in the above applications is typically selected in an ad-hoc
way. This is because standard rank estimation methods in
the existing literature rely on expensive matrix factorizations such as the QR (Chan, 1987), LDLT or SVD (Golub
& Van Loan, 2012). Other methods also assume certain
asymptotic behavior such as normal responses, for the input matrices (Camba-Méndez & Kapetanios, 2008; Perry
& Wolfe, 2010). Many of the rank estimation methods proposed in the literature focus on specific applications, e.g., in
econometrics and statistics (Camba-Méndez & Kapetanios,
2008), statistical signal processing (Kritchman & Nadler,
2009; Perry & Wolfe, 2010), reduced-rank regression (Bura
& Cook, 2003), estimating the dimension of linear systems
(Hannan, 1981) and others.
Powerful and inexpensive tools from computational linear
algebra can be developed to estimate the approximate ranks
of large matrices. The goal of this paper is to present examples of such methods. These methods require only matrixvector products (‘matvecs’) and are inexpensive compared

