PD-Sparse : A Primal and Dual Sparse Approach to
Extreme Multiclass and Multilabel Classification
Ian E. H. Yen 1 *
IANYEN @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU
Xiangru Huang 1 *
XRHUANG @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU
Kai Zhong 2
ZHONGKAI @ ICES . UTEXAS . EDU
Pradeep Ravikumar 1,2
PRADEEPR @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU
Inderjit S. Dhillon 1,2
INDERJIT @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU
*
Both authors contributed equally.
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at Austin, TX 78712, USA.
2
Institute for Computational Engineering and Sciences, University of Texas at Austin, TX 78712, USA.

Abstract
We consider Multiclass and Multilabel classification with extremely large number of classes, of
which only few are labeled to each instance. In
such setting, standard methods that have training,
prediction cost linear to the number of classes become intractable. State-of-the-art methods thus
aim to reduce the complexity by exploiting correlation between labels under assumption that
the similarity between labels can be captured by
structures such as low-rank matrix or balanced
tree. However, as the diversity of labels increases in the feature space, structural assumption can be easily violated, which leads to degrade in the testing performance. In this work,
we show that a margin-maximizing loss with `1
penalty, in case of Extreme Classification, yields
extremely sparse solution both in primal and in
dual without sacrificing the expressive power of
predictor. We thus propose a Fully-Corrective
Block-Coordinate Frank-Wolfe (FC-BCFW) algorithm that exploits both primal and dual sparsity to achieve a complexity sublinear to the number of primal and dual variables. A bi-stochastic
search method is proposed to further improve the
efficiency. In our experiments on both Multiclass
and Multilabel problems, the proposed method
achieves significant higher accuracy than existing
approaches of Extreme Classification with very
competitive training and prediction time.

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Extreme Classification considers Multiclass and Multilabel
problems with huge number of classes or labels. Problems
of this kind are prevalent in real-world applications such as
text, image or video annotation, where one aims to learn
a predictor that tags data point with the most relevant labels out of a huge collection. In Multiclass setting, we are
given the fact that only one label is correct, while in the
Multilabel setting, labels of any combination is allowed.
In the setting, standard approaches such as one-versusall or one-versus-one become intractable both in training
and prediction due to the large number of models required
(Deng et al., 2010). Recently several approaches have been
proposed to exploit structural relations between labels to
reduce both training and prediction time. A natural approach is trying to find an embedding so the huge number
of labels can be project to an underlying low-dimensional
space, so the training cost can be also reduced to that of
low dimension (Chen & Lin, 2012; Yu et al., 2013; Kapoor
et al., 2012). However, in real applicatoins, the data is not
of low-rank, and the low-rank approach often suffers from
lower accuracy. On the other hand, for high-dimensional
data of sparse features, the model learned from low-rank
approach can project sparse features into dense vector that
results in even higher prediction cost than a simple linear
classifer.
Another recent thread of research has investigated treebased methods that partitions labels into tree-structured
groups, so in both training and prediction phase, one can
follow the tree to avoid accessing irrelevant models (Prabhu
& Varma, 2014; Choromanska & Langford, 2015; Choromanska et al., 2013). However, finding balanced tree structure that partitions labels effectively in the feature space
is a problem difficult by itself, while many heuristics have

