Sequence to Sequence Training of CTC-RNNs with Partial Windowing

Kyuyeon Hwang
Wonyong Sung
Seoul National University, 1, Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul, 08826 Korea

Abstract
Connectionist temporal classification (CTC)
based supervised sequence training of recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) has shown great success
in many machine learning areas including endto-end speech and handwritten character recognition. For the CTC training, however, it is
required to unroll (or unfold) the RNN by the
length of an input sequence. This unrolling requires a lot of memory and hinders a small footprint implementation of online learning or adaptation. Furthermore, the length of training sequences is usually not uniform, which makes parallel training with multiple sequences inefficient
on shared memory models such as graphics processing units (GPUs). In this work, we introduce an expectation-maximization (EM) based
online CTC algorithm that enables unidirectional
RNNs to learn sequences that are longer than
the amount of unrolling. The RNNs can also
be trained to process an infinitely long input sequence without pre-segmentation or external reset. Moreover, the proposed approach allows efficient parallel training on GPUs. Our approach
achieves 20.7% phoneme error rate (PER) on the
very long input sequence that is generated by
concatenating all 192 utterances in the TIMIT
core test set. In the end-to-end speech recognition task on the Wall Street Journal corpus, a
network can be trained with only 64 times of unrolling with little performance loss.

1. Introduction
Supervised sequence learning is a regression task where the
objective is to learn a mapping function from the input sequence x to the corresponding output sequence z for all
(x, z) ∈ S with the given training set S, where x and z
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

KYUYEON . HWANG @ GMAIL . COM
WYSUNG @ SNU . AC . KR

can have different lengths. When combined with recurrent
neural networks (RNNs), supervised sequence learning has
shown great success in many applications including machine translation (Bahdanau et al., 2014; Sutskever et al.,
2014; Cho et al., 2014), speech recognition (Fernández
et al., 2007; Graves et al., 2013; Graves & Jaitly, 2014;
Hannun et al., 2014; Bahdanau et al., 2015; Chorowski
et al., 2015; Chan et al., 2015; Maas et al., 2015; Miao
et al., 2015; Hwang & Sung, 2016), and handwritten character recognition (Graves et al., 2008; Frinken et al., 2012).
Although several attention-based models have been introduced recently, connectionist temporal classification (CTC)
(Graves et al., 2006) is still one of the most successful techniques in practice, especially for end-to-end speech and
character recognition tasks (Graves & Jaitly, 2014; Hannun
et al., 2014; Maas et al., 2015; Miao et al., 2015; Hwang &
Sung, 2016; Graves et al., 2008; Frinken et al., 2012).
The CTC based sequence training is usually applied to
bidirectional RNNs (Graves & Schmidhuber, 2005), where
both the past and the future information is considered for
generating the output at each frame. However, the output
of the bidirectional RNNs is available after all of the frames
in the input sequence are fed into the RNNs because the future information is backward propagated from the end of
the sequence. Therefore, the bidirectional RNNs cannot be
employed for low-latency online applications such as incremental speech recognition (ISR) (Fink et al., 1998; Hwang
& Sung, 2016). On the other hand, unidirectional RNNs
only make use of the past information and are suitable for
the low-latency applications at the cost of a little accuracy
loss. Moreover, the CTC-trained unidirectional RNNs do
not need to be unrolled (or unfolded) at the test time. It is
shown by Graves et al. (2012) that CTC can also be employed for sequence training of unidirectional RNNs on a
phoneme recognition task. In this case, the unidirectional
RNN also learns the suitable amount of the output delay
that is required to accurately process the input sequence.
Hwang et al. (2015) reports that when a CTC-trained unidirectional RNN is employed for online spoken term detection, the detection latency becomes around 200 ms, which
is similar to human response time to speech stimuli (Fry,
1975).

