Optimality of Belief Propagation for Crowdsourced Classification

Jungseul Ok∗
OCKJS @ KAIST. AC . KR
Sewoong Oh†
SWOH @ ILLINOIS . EDU
Jinwoo Shin∗
JINWOOS @ KAIST. AC . KR
∗
Yung Yi
YIYUNG @ KAIST. AC . KR
∗
EE Department, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon 34141 South Korea
†
IESE Department, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801 USA

Abstract
Crowdsourcing systems are popular for solving
large-scale labelling tasks with low-paid (or even
non-paid) workers. We study the problem of recovering the true labels from noisy crowdsourced
labels under the popular Dawid-Skene model.
To address this inference problem, several algorithms have recently been proposed, but the best
known guarantee is still significantly larger than
the fundamental limit. We close this gap under a simple but canonical scenario where each
worker is assigned at most two tasks. In particular, we introduce a tighter lower bound on the
fundamental limit and prove that Belief Propagation (BP) exactly matches this lower bound. The
guaranteed optimality of BP is the strongest in
the sense that it is information-theoretically impossible for any other algorithm to correctly label a larger fraction of the tasks. In the general
setting, when more than two tasks are assigned
to each worker, we establish the dominance result on BP that it outperforms other existing algorithms with known provable guarantees. Experimental results suggest that BP is close to optimal
for all regimes considered, while existing stateof-the-art algorithms exhibit suboptimal performances.

1. Introduction
Crowdsourcing platforms provide scalable human-powered
solutions to labelling large-scale datasets at minimal cost.
They are particularly popular in domains where the task
is easy for humans but hard for machines, e.g., computer
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

vision and natural language processing. For example, the
CAPTCHA system (Completely Automated Public Turing
test to tell Computers and Humans Apart, 2000) uses a
pair of scanned images of English words, one for authenticating the user and the other for the purpose of getting
high-quality character recognitions to be used in digitizing
books. However, because the tasks are tedious and the pay
is low, one of the major issues is the labelling quality. Errors are common even among those who put in efforts. In
real-world systems, spammers are abundant, who submit
random answers rather than good-faith attempts to label,
and there are adversaries, who may deliberately give wrong
answers.
A common and powerful strategy to improve reliability is
to add redundancy: assigning each task to multiple workers and aggregating their answers by some algorithm such
as majority voting. Although majority voting is widely
used in practice, several novel approaches, which outperforms majority voting, have been recently proposed, e.g.
(Smyth et al., 1995; Jin & Ghahramani, 2003; Whitehill
et al., 2009; Welinder et al., 2010; Raykar et al., 2010).
The key idea is to identify the good workers and give more
weights to the answers from those workers. Although the
ground truth may never be exactly known, one can compare one worker’s answers to those from other workers on
the same tasks, and infer how reliable or trustworthy each
worker is.
The standard probabilistic model for representing the noisy
answers in labelling tasks is the model of (Dawid & Skene,
1979). Under this model, the core problem of interest is
how to aggregate the answers to maximize the accuracy of
the estimated labels. This is naturally posed as a statistical inference problem that we call the crowdsourced classification problem. Due to the combinatorial nature of the
problem, the Maximum A Posteriori (MAP) estimate is optimal but computationally intractable. Several algorithms
have recently been proposed as approximations, and their
performances are demonstrated only by numerical experi-

