Preconditioning Kernel Matrices

Kurt Cutajar
EURECOM, Department of Data Science

KURT. CUTAJAR @ EURECOM . FR

Michael A. Osborne
University of Oxford, Department of Engineering Science

MOSB @ ROBOTS . OX . AC . UK

John P. Cunningham
Columbia University, Department of Statistics

JPC 2181@ COLUMBIA . EDU

Maurizio Filippone
EURECOM, Department of Data Science

Abstract
The computational and storage complexity of
kernel machines presents the primary barrier to
their scaling to large, modern, datasets. A common way to tackle the scalability issue is to use
the conjugate gradient algorithm, which relieves
the constraints on both storage (the kernel matrix need not be stored) and computation (both
stochastic gradients and parallelization can be
used). Even so, conjugate gradient is not without its own issues: the conditioning of kernel matrices is often such that conjugate gradients will
have poor convergence in practice. Preconditioning is a common approach to alleviating this
issue. Here we propose preconditioned conjugate gradients for kernel machines, and develop a
broad range of preconditioners particularly useful for kernel matrices. We describe a scalable
approach to both solving kernel machines and
learning their hyperparameters. We show this
approach is exact in the limit of iterations and
outperforms state-of-the-art approximations for a
given computational budget.

1. Introduction
Kernel machines, in enabling flexible feature space representations of data, comprise a broad and important class
of tools throughout machine learning and statistics; prominent examples include support vector machines (Schölkopf
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

MAURIZIO . FILIPPONE @ EURECOM . FR

& Smola, 2001) and Gaussian processes (GPs) (Rasmussen
& Williams, 2006). At the core of most kernel machines is
the need to solve linear systems involving the Gram matrix K = {k(xi , xj | θ)}i,j=1,...,n , where the kernel function k, parameterized by θ, implicitly specifies the feature
space representation of data points xi . Because K grows
with the number of data points n, a fundamental computational bottleneck exists: storing K is O(n2 ), and solving
a linear system with K is O(n3 ). As the need for largescale kernel machines grows, much work has been directed
towards this scaling issue.
Standard approaches to kernel machines involve a factorization (typically Cholesky) of K, which is efficient and
exact but maintains the quadratic storage and cubic runtime costs. This cost is particularly acute when adapting
(or learning) hyperparameters θ of the kernel function, as
K must then be factorized afresh for each θ. To alleviate
this burden, numerous works have turned to approximate
methods (Candela & Rasmussen, 2005; Snelson & Ghahramani, 2007; Rahimi & Recht, 2008) or methods that exploit structure in the kernel (Gilboa et al., 2015). Approximate methods can achieve attractive scaling, often through
the use of low-rank approximations to K, but they can incur a potentially severe loss of accuracy. An alternative
to factorization is found in the conjugate gradient method
(CG), which is used to directly solve linear systems via a
sequence of matrix-vector products. Any kernel structure
can then be exploited to enable fast multiplications, driving
similarly attractive runtime improvements, and eliminating
the storage burden (neither K nor its factors need be represented in memory). Unfortunately, in the absence of special
structure that accelerates multiplications, CG performs no
better than O(n3 ) in the worst case, and in practice finite
numerical precision often results in a degradation of run-

