A Distributed Variational Inference Framework for Unifying
Parallel Sparse Gaussian Process Regression Models
Trong Nghia Hoang§
IDMHTN @ NUS . EDU . SG
Quang Minh Hoang†
HQMINH @ COMP. NUS . EDU . SG
Bryan Kian Hsiang Low†
LOWKH @ COMP. NUS . EDU . SG
†
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore
§
Interactive and Digital Media Institute, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore

Abstract
This paper presents a novel distributed variational inference framework that unifies many parallel sparse Gaussian process regression (SGPR)
models for scalable hyperparameter learning
with big data. To achieve this, our framework exploits a structure of correlated noise process model that represents the observation noises
as a finite realization of a high-order Gaussian
Markov random process. By varying the Markov
order and covariance function for the noise process model, different variational SGPR models
result. This consequently allows the correlation
structure of the noise process model to be characterized for which a particular variational SGPR
model is optimal. We empirically evaluate the
predictive performance and scalability of the distributed variational SGPR models unified by our
framework on two real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
The rich class of Bayesian non-parametric Gaussian process (GP) models has recently established itself as a leading approach to probabilistic non-linear regression due to
its capability of representing highly complex correlation
structure underlying the data. However, the full-rank GP
regression (FGPR) model incurs a cost of cubic time in the
data size for computing the predictive distribution and in
each iteration of gradient ascent to refine the estimate of
its hyperparameters to improve the log-marginal likelihood
(Rasmussen & Williams, 2006), hence limiting its usage to
only small datasets in practice.
To boost its scalability, a wealth of sparse GPR (SGPR)
models (Lázaro-Gredilla et al., 2010; Low et al., 2015;
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

Quiñonero-Candela & Rasmussen, 2005; Snelson &
Ghahramani, 2007) utilizing varying low-rank approximate
representations of FGPR have been proposed, many of
which are spanned by the unifying view of QuiñoneroCandela & Rasmussen (2005) based on the notion of inducing variables (Section 3) such as the subset of regressors (SoR) (Smola & Bartlett, 2001), deterministic training conditional (DTC) (Seeger et al., 2003), fully independent training conditional (FITC) (Snelson & Gharahmani, 2005), fully independent conditional (FIC), partially
independent training conditional (PITC) (Schwaighofer &
Tresp, 2003), and partially independent conditional (PIC)
(Snelson & Ghahramani, 2007) approximations. Consequently, they incur linear time in the data size, which
is still prohibitively expensive for training with millionsized datasets. To scale up these SGPR models further for
performing real-time predictions necessary in many timecritical applications and decision support systems (e.g., environmental sensing (Cao et al., 2013; Dolan et al., 2009;
Ling et al., 2016; Low et al., 2008; 2009; 2011; 2012;
Podnar et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2016), traffic monitoring (Chen et al., 2012; 2013b; 2015; Hoang et al., 2014a;b;
Low et al., 2014a;b; Ouyang et al., 2014; Xu et al., 2014;
Yu et al., 2012)), a number of these models have been
parallelized (e.g., FITC, FIC, PITC, and PIC (Chen et al.,
2013a), and low-rank-cum-Markov approximation (LMA)
(Low et al., 2015) unifying a spectrum of SGPR models with PIC and FGPR at the two extremes), but the resulting parallel SGPR models do not readily extend to include hyperparameter learning. The work of Deisenroth &
Ng (2015) has recently introduced a practical product-ofexpert (PoE) paradigm for GP which imposes a factorized
structure on the marginal likelihood that allows it to be optimized effectively in a parallel/distributed fashion.
However, the main criticism of the above approximation
paradigms is their lack of a rigorous approximation since
they do not require optimizing some loss criterion incurred
by an approximation model (Titsias, 2009b). To resolve
this, the work of Titsias (2009a) has introduced an alterna-

