PHOG: Probabilistic Model for Code
Pavol Bielik
Veselin Raychev
Martin Vechev
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Switzerland

Abstract
We introduce a new generative model for
code called probabilistic higher order grammar
(PHOG). PHOG generalizes probabilistic context free grammars (PCFGs) by allowing conditioning of a production rule beyond the parent
non-terminal, thus capturing rich contexts relevant to programs. Even though PHOG is more
powerful than a PCFG, it can be learned from
data just as efficiently. We trained a PHOG
model on a large JavaScript code corpus and
show that it is more precise than existing models, while similarly fast. As a result, PHOG can
immediately benefit existing programming tools
based on probabilistic models of code.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen an emerging interest in new kinds
of software tools that learn probabilistic models from large
codebases (e.g., GitHub) and use these models to provide
probabilistic solutions to important programming tasks including code completion (Nguyen et al., 2013; Tu et al.,
2014; Raychev et al., 2014; 2016; Nguyen & Nguyen,
2015), statistical deobfuscation (Raychev et al., 2015),
patch generation (Long & Rinard, 2016), translation between languages (Allamanis et al., 2015b; Gvero & Kuncak, 2015a; Karaivanov et al., 2014), and others.
The core component underlying many of these tools is
a probabilistic model of source code used to score the predictions. So far, most tools have focused on using either generic but relatively naive models such as PCFGs
and n-grams (Gvero & Kuncak, 2015b; Raychev et al.,
2014) which can suffer from loss of precision, or have built
task-specific, carefully engineered (usually discriminative)
models, with limited applicability and reuse across tasks
(Long & Rinard, 2016; Raychev et al., 2015).
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

PAVOL . BIELIK @ INF. ETHZ . CH
VESELIN . RAYCHEV @ INF. ETHZ . CH
MARTIN . VECHEV @ INF. ETHZ . CH

This Work We present a generative probabilistic model
of code which addresses a key challenge of coming up with
scalable and precise probabilistic models that are reusable
across different tasks and programming languages. The
model is based on a new concept we call a probabilistic
higher order grammar (PHOG). PHOG cleanly generalizes
PCFGs by conditioning the production rules not only on a
(static) parent non-terminal, but also on a context that is
dynamically obtained by navigating an abstract syntax tree.
This navigation takes place by executing a function on the
current tree, where the function itself is learned from data.
PHOG has a number of benefits:
Efficient Learning: Even though PHOG generalizes
PCFGs, it can be trained just as efficiently as PCFGs
and n-gram models (by simply counting production rules).
PHOG provides a valid probability distribution without an
expensive to compute partition function.
Flexible Representation: Because the rules of PHOG are
parameterized on a (learned) function, it means that for
each program, the representation upon which the prediction
is made is determined dynamically and is not hard-coded
as in prior work (Raychev et al., 2014; Hindle et al., 2012).
This is important, as finding the right program representation over which the probabilistic model is learned is key
to the overall model precision. That is, at prediction time,
PHOG is able to automatically select the suitable features.
Widely Applicable: As PHOG operates on parse trees it can
be learned over any programming language that provides
a parser and we believe that it has the potential to be useful
even in scenarios beyond programs (e.g., natural language).
We provide a two-step training procedure that first learns
the underlying HOG followed by maximum likelihood estimation (via counting) to generate its probabilistic version
(PHOG). We evaluate PHOG on a large and diverse corpus
of JavaScript code containing 150,000 files and find PHOG
to perform better than widely-used state-of-the-art models
by: (i) assigning higher probabilities to existing JavaScript
programs outside our training set, and (ii) achieving lower
error rate on specific tasks (e.g., code completion).

