Evasion and Hardening of Tree Ensemble Classifiers

Alex Kantchelian
J. D. Tygar
Anthony D. Joseph
University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
Classifier evasion consists in finding for a given
instance x the “nearest” instance x0 such that the
classifier predictions of x and x0 are different.
We present two novel algorithms for systematically computing evasions for tree ensembles such
as boosted trees and random forests. Our first
algorithm uses a Mixed Integer Linear Program
solver and finds the optimal evading instance under an expressive set of constraints. Our second
algorithm trades off optimality for speed by using symbolic prediction, a novel algorithm for
fast finite differences on tree ensembles. On a
digit recognition task, we demonstrate that both
gradient boosted trees and random forests are
extremely susceptible to evasions. Finally, we
harden a boosted tree model without loss of predictive accuracy by augmenting the training set
of each boosting round with evading instances, a
technique we call adversarial boosting.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNN) represent a prominent success of machine learning. These models can successfully
and accurately address difficult learning problems, including classification of audio, video, and natural language possible where previous approaches have failed. Yet, the existence of evading instances for the current incarnation of
DNNs (Szegedy et al., 2013) shows a perhaps surprising
brittleness: for virtually any instance x that the model classifies correctly, it is possible to find a negligible perturbation δ such that x + δ evades being correctly classified, that
is, receives a (sometimes widely) inaccurate prediction.
The general study of the evasion problem matters on both
conceptual and practical grounds. First, we expect a highProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

AKANT @ CS . BERKELEY. EDU
TYGAR @ CS . BERKELEY. EDU
ADJ @ CS . BERKELEY. EDU

performance learning algorithm to generalize well and be
hard to evade: only a “large enough” perturbation δ should
be able to alter its decision. The existence of small-δ evading instances shows a defect in the generalization ability of
the model, and hints at improper model class and/or insufficient regularization. Second, machine learning is becoming
the workhorse of security-oriented applications, the most
prominent example being unwanted content filtering. In
those applications, the attacker has a large incentive for
finding evading instances. For example, spammers look
for small, cost-effective changes to their online content to
avoid detection and removal.
While prior work extensively studies the evasion problem
on differentiable models by means of gradient descent,
those results are reported in an essentially qualitative fashion, implicitly defaulting the choice of metric for measuring δ to the L2 norm. Further, non-differentiable, noncontinuous models have received very little attention. Tree
sum-ensembles as produced by boosting or bagging are
perhaps the most important models from this class as they
are often able to achieve competitive performance and enjoy good adoption rates in both industrial and academic
contexts.
In this paper, we develop two novel exact and approximate
evasion algorithms for sum-ensemble of trees. Our exact
(or optimal) evasion algorithm computes the smallest δ according to the Lp norm for p = 0, 1, 2, ∞ such that the
model misclassifies x + δ. The algorithm relies on a Mixed
Integer Linear Program solver and enables precise quantitative robustness statements. We benchmark the robustness
of boosted trees and random forests on a concrete handwritten digit classification task by comparing the minimal
required perturbation δ across many representative models.
Those models include L1 and L2 regularized logistic regression, max-ensemble of linear classifiers (shallow maxout network), a 3-layer deep neural network and a classic
RBF-SVM. The comparison shows that for this task, despite their competitive accuracies, tree ensembles are consistently the most brittle models across the board.
Finally, our approximate evasion algorithm is based on

