Discrete Distribution Estimation under Local Privacy

Peter Kairouz ∗†
Keith Bonawitz ∗
Daniel Ramage ∗
∗ Google, 1600 Amphitheatre Parkway, Mountain View, CA 94043,
† University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, 1308 W Main St, Urbana, IL 61801

KAIROUZ 2@ ILLINOIS . EDU
BONAWITZ @ GOOGLE . COM
DRAMAGE @ GOOGLE . COM

Abstract

datasets have the potential to become privacy problems.

The collection and analysis of user data drives
improvements in the app and web ecosystems,
but comes with risks to privacy. This paper examines discrete distribution estimation under local privacy, a setting wherein service providers
can learn the distribution of a categorical statistic
of interest without collecting the underlying data.
We present new mechanisms, including hashed
k-ary Randomized Response (k-RR), that empirically meet or exceed the utility of existing mechanisms at all privacy levels. New theoretical results demonstrate the order-optimality of k-RR
and the existing R APPOR mechanism at different
privacy regimes.

Fortunately, mathematical formulations exist that can give
the benefits of population-level statistics without the collection of raw data. Local differential privacy (Duchi et al.,
2013a;b) is one such formulation, requiring each device (or
session for a cloud service) to share only a noised version of
its raw data with the service provider’s logging mechanism.
No matter what computation is done to the noised output of
a locally differentially private mechanism, any attempt to
impute properties of a single record will have a significant
probability of error. But not all differentially private mechanisms are equal when it comes to utility: some mechanisms have better accuracy than others for a given analysis,
amount of data, and desired privacy level.

1. Introduction
Software and service providers increasingly see the collection and analysis of user data as key to improving their services. Datasets of user interactions give insight to analysts
and provide training data for machine learning models. But
the collection of these datasets comes with risk—can the
service provider keep the data secure from unauthorized
access? Misuse of data can violate the privacy of users and
substantially tarnish the provider’s reputation.
One way to minimize risk is to store less data: providers
can methodically consider what data to collect and how
long to store it. However, even a carefully processed
dataset can compromise user privacy. In a now famous
study, (Narayanan & Shmatikov, 2008) showed how to deanonymize watch histories released in the Netflix Prize,
a public recommender system competition. While most
providers do not intentionally release anonymized datasets,
security breaches can mean that even internal, anonymized
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

Private distribution estimation. This paper investigates
the fundamental problem of discrete distribution estimation under local differential privacy. We focus on discrete
distribution estimation because it enables a variety of useful capabilities, including usage statistics breakdowns and
count-based machine learning models, e.g. naive Bayes
(McCallum et al., 1998). We consider empirical, maximum
likelihood, and minimax distribution estimation, and study
the price of local differential privacy under a variety of loss
functions and privacy regimes. In particular, we compare
the performance of two recent local privacy mechanisms:
(a) the Randomized Aggregatable Privacy-Preserving Ordinal Response (R APPOR) (Erlingsson et al., 2014), and
(b) the k-ary Randomized Response (k-RR) (Kairouz et al.,
2014) from a theoretical and empirical perspective.
Our contributions are:
1. For binary alphabets, we prove that Warner’s randomized response model (Warner, 1965) is globally optimal
for any loss function and any privacy level (Section 3).
2. For k-ary alphabets, we show that R APPOR is order optimal in the high privacy regime and strictly sub-optimal
in the low privacy regime for `1 and `2 losses using an
empirical estimator. Conversely, k-RR is order optimal
in the low privacy regime and strictly sub-optimal in the

