Horizontally Scalable Submodular Maximization
Mario Lucic1
Olivier Bachem1
Morteza Zadimoghaddam2
Andreas Krause1
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
2
Google Research, New York

Abstract
A variety of large-scale machine learning problems can be cast as instances of constrained submodular maximization. Existing approaches for
distributed submodular maximization have a critical drawback: The capacity – number of instances that can fit in memory – must grow with
the data set size. In practice, while one can
provision many machines, the capacity of each
machine is limited by physical constraints. We
propose a truly scalable approach for distributed
submodular maximization under fixed capacity.
The proposed framework applies to a broad class
of algorithms and constraints and provides theoretical guarantees on the approximation factor
for any available capacity. We empirically evaluate the proposed algorithm on a variety of data
sets and demonstrate that it achieves performance
competitive with the centralized greedy solution.

1. Introduction
Submodularity is a powerful concept that captures the natural notion of diminishing returns. As such, many important machine learning problems can be formulated as
constrained submodular maximization. Examples include
influence maximization (Kempe et al., 2003), document
summarization (Lin & Bilmes, 2011), and active learning (Golovin & Krause, 2011). Solving these optimization
problems on a massive scale is a great challenge and trading
off computational resources and the approximation quality
becomes paramount.
Consequently, distributed computing has received a great
deal of interest. One of the most desirable properties of disProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

LUCIC @ INF. ETHZ . CH
OLIVIER . BACHEM @ INF. ETHZ . CH
ZADIM @ GOOGLE . COM
KRAUSEA @ ETHZ . CH

tributed algorithms is horizontal scaling – scaling to larger
instances by adding more machines of fixed capacity.
Prominent approaches in distributed submodular optimization are often based on a two-round divide and conquer
strategy. In the first round, the data is partitioned so that
each partition can fit on one machine. Then, the subproblems are solved for each partition in parallel. In the
second round, the partial solutions are collected on one machine and used to calculate the final solution. It was recently shown that this class of algorithms enjoys good empirical and theoretical performance, often matching those
of the centralized solution (Mirzasoleiman et al., 2013).
However, existing algorithms for distributed submodular
maximization are not truly horizontally scalable. In fact,
they rely on the implicit assumption that the capacity of
each machine grows with the data set size. Consider the
submodular maximization problem with a large ground
set of size n and cardinality constraint k. Existing approaches perform well in distributing computation in the
initial round. However, problems materialize when the size
of the union of all solutions computed across the cluster exceeds the capacity of a single machine. At that point, one
cannot scale the existing approaches by adding more machines and they will simply break down. For the popular
G REE
p DI algorithm, this occurs if the capacity is less than
O( nk) (Mirzasoleiman et al., 2013). Since this will invariably happen as n grows, this aspect is critical for true
horizontal scaling and cannot be neglected.
Our contribution. We investigate and address the problems arising from fixed machine capacity. To the best
of our knowledge, we present the first horizontally scalable framework for constrained submodular maximization.
For a broad class of underlying algorithms, it enables distributed submodular maximization under cardinality constraints. For the popular greedy algorithm, the results extend to hereditary constraints. We empirically evaluate the
proposed approach and demonstrate that it achieves performance close to the centralized greedy solution.

