Autoencoding beyond pixels using a learned similarity metric
Anders Boesen Lindbo Larsen1
ABLL @ DTU . DK
Søren Kaae Sønderby2
SKAAESONDERBY @ GMAIL . COM
Hugo Larochelle3
HLAROCHELLE @ TWITTER . COM
Ole Winther1,2
OLWI @ DTU . DK
1
Department for Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark
2
Bioinformatics Centre, Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Denmark
3
Twitter, Cambridge, MA, USA

Abstract
We present an autoencoder that leverages learned
representations to better measure similarities in
data space. By combining a variational autoencoder (VAE) with a generative adversarial network (GAN) we can use learned feature representations in the GAN discriminator as basis for
the VAE reconstruction objective. Thereby, we
replace element-wise errors with feature-wise errors to better capture the data distribution while
offering invariance towards e.g. translation. We
apply our method to images of faces and show
that it outperforms VAEs with element-wise similarity measures in terms of visual fidelity. Moreover, we show that the method learns an embedding in which high-level abstract visual features
(e.g. wearing glasses) can be modified using simple arithmetic.

1. Introduction
Deep architectures have allowed a wide range of discriminative models to scale to large and diverse datasets. However, generative models still have problems with complex
data distributions such as images and sound. In this work,
we show that currently used similarity metrics impose a
hurdle for learning good generative models and that we can
improve a generative model by employing a learned similarity measure.
When learning models such as the variational autoencoder
(Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014), the
choice of similarity metric is central as it provides the main
part of the training signal via the reconstruction error objecProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

z
encoder

decoder/generator
x̃
x discriminator

x
AE

REAL / GEN

GAN

Figure 1. Overview of our network. We combine a VAE with a
GAN by collapsing the decoder and the generator into one.

tive. For this task, element-wise measures like the squared
error are the default. Element-wise metrics are simple but
not very suitable for image data, as they do not model the
properties of human visual perception. E.g. a small image
translation might result in a large pixel-wise error whereas
a human would barely notice the change. Therefore, we argue in favor of measuring image similarity using a higherlevel and sufficiently invariant representation of the images.
Rather than hand-engineering a suitable measure to accommodate the problems of element-wise metrics, we want to
learn a function for the task. The question is how to learn
such a similarity measure? We find that by jointly training
a VAE and a generative adversarial network (Goodfellow
et al., 2014) we can use the GAN discriminator to measure sample similarity. We achieve this by combining a
VAE with a GAN as shown in Fig. 1. We collapse the VAE
decoder and the GAN generator into one by letting them
share parameters and training them jointly. For the VAE
training objective, we replace the typical element-wise reconstruction metric with a feature-wise metric expressed in
the discriminator.
1.1. Contributions
Our contributions are:

