The Information Sieve
Greg Ver Steeg
University of Southern California, Information Sciences Institute, Marina del Rey, CA 90292 USA

GREGV @ ISI . EDU

Aram Galstyan
GALSTYAN @ ISI . EDU
University of Southern California, Information Sciences Institute, Marina del Rey, CA 90292 USA

Abstract
We introduce a new framework for unsupervised
learning of representations based on a novel hierarchical decomposition of information. Intuitively, data is passed through a series of progressively fine-grained sieves. Each layer of the
sieve recovers a single latent factor that is maximally informative about multivariate dependence
in the data. The data is transformed after each
pass so that the remaining unexplained information trickles down to the next layer. Ultimately,
we are left with a set of latent factors explaining all the dependence in the original data and
remainder information consisting of independent
noise. We present a practical implementation of
this framework for discrete variables and apply it
to a variety of fundamental tasks in unsupervised
learning including independent component analysis, lossy and lossless compression, and predicting missing values in data.

The hope of finding a succinct principle that elucidates the
brain’s information processing abilities has often kindled
interest in information-theoretic ideas (Barlow, 1989; Simoncelli & Olshausen, 2001). In machine learning, on
the other hand, the past decade has witnessed a shift in
focus toward expressive, hierarchical models, with successes driven by increasingly effective ways to leverage labeled data to learn rich models (Schmidhuber, 2015; Bengio et al., 2013). Information-theoretic ideas like the venerable InfoMax principle (Linsker, 1988; Bell & Sejnowski,
1995) can be and are applied in both contexts with empirical success but they do not allow us to quantify the information value of adding depth to our representations. We introduce a novel incremental and hierarchical decomposition of
information and show that it defines a framework for unsuProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

pervised learning of deep representations in which the information contribution of each layer can be precisely quantified. Moreover, this scheme automatically determines the
structure and depth among hidden units in the representation based only on local learning rules.
The shift in perspective that enables our information decomposition is to focus on how well the learned representation explains multivariate mutual information in the
data (a measure originally introduced as “total correlation” (Watanabe, 1960)). Intuitively, our approach constructs a hierarchical representation of data by passing it
through a sequence of progressively fine-grained sieves. At
the first layer of the sieve we learn a factor that explains as
much of the dependence in the data as possible. The data is
then transformed into the “remainder information”, which
has this dependence extracted. The next layer of the sieve
looks for the largest source of dependence in the remainder
information, and the cycle repeats. At each step, we obtain
a successively tighter upper and lower bound on the multivariate information in the data, with convergence between
the bounds obtained when the remaining information consists of nothing but independent factors. Because we end up
with independent factors, one can also view this decomposition as a new way to do independent component analysis
(ICA) (Comon, 1994; Hyvärinen & Oja, 2000). Unlike traditional methods, we do not assume a specific generative
model of the data (i.e., that it consists of a linear transformation of independent sources) and we extract independent factors incrementally rather than all at once. The implementation we develop here uses only discrete variables
and is therefore most relevant for the challenging problem
of ICA with discrete variables, which has applications to
compression (Painsky et al., 2014).
After providing some background in Sec. 1, we introduce
a new way to iteratively decompose the information in data
in Sec. 2, and show how to use these decompositions to
define a practical and incremental framework for unsupervised representation learning in Sec. 3. We demonstrate the
versatility of this framework by applying it first to independent component analysis (Sec. 4). Next, we use the sieve

