Efficient Algorithms for Adversarial Contextual Learning

Vasilis Syrgkanis
Microsoft Research, 641 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10011 USA

VASY @ MICROSOFT. COM

Akshay Krishnamurthy
Microsoft Research, 641 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10011 USA

AKSHAYKR @ CS . CMU . EDU

Robert E. Schapire
Microsoft Research, 641 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10011 USA

SCHAPIRE @ MICROSOFT. COM

Abstract
We provide the first oracle efficient sublinear regret algorithms for adversarial versions of the
contextual bandit problem. In this problem, the
learner repeatedly makes an action on the basis of
a context and receives reward for the chosen action, with the goal of achieving reward competitive with a large class of policies. We analyze two
settings: i) in the transductive setting the learner
knows the set of contexts a priori, ii) in the small
separator setting, there exists a small set of contexts such that any two policies behave differently on one of the contexts in the set. Our algorithms fall into the Follow-The-Perturbed-Leader
family (Kalaip& Vempala, 2005) and achieve regret O(T 3/4 K log(Np
)) in the transductive set2/3 3/4
ting and O(T d K log(N )) in the separator setting, where T is the number of rounds, K is
the number of actions, N is the number of baseline policies, and d is the size of the separator.
We actually solve the more general adversarial
contextual semi-bandit linear optimization problem, whilst in the full information setting we address the even more general contextual combinatorial optimization. We provide several extensions and implications of our algorithms, such as
switching regret and efficient learning with predictable sequences.

1. Introduction
We study contextual online learning, a powerful framework
that encompasses a wide range of sequential decision makProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

ing problems. Here, on every round, the learner receives
contextual information which can be used as an aid in selecting an action. In the full-information version of the
problem, the learner then observes the loss that would have
been suffered for each of the possible actions, while in the
more challenging bandit version, only the loss that was actually incurred (i.e. for the chosen action) is observed. The
goal is to achieve low loss over several rounds. The contextual bandit problem is of particular practical relevance,
with applications to personalized recommendations, clinical trials, and targeted advertising.
Algorithms for contextual learning,
such as
Hedge (Freund & Schapire, 1997; Cesa-Bianchi et al.,
1997) and Exp4 (Auer et al., 1995), are well-known to
have remarkable theoretical properties, being effective
even in adversarial, non-stochastic environments and
capable of performing almost as well as the best among
an exponentially large family of policies, or rules for
choosing actions. However, the space requirements and
running time of these algorithms are generally linear in
the number of policies, which is far too expensive for
a the many applications that call for an extremely large
policy space. In this paper, we address this gap between
the statistical and computational complexity of contextual
online learning in an adversarial setting.
As an approach to solving online learning problems, we
posit that the corresponding batch version is solvable. In
other words, we assume access to a certain optimization
oracle for solving a batch-learning problem. Concrete instances of such an oracle include empirical risk minimization procedures for supervised learning, algorithms for the
shortest paths problem, and dynamic programming.
Such an oracle is central to the Follow-the-PerturbedLeader algorithms of Kalai & Vempala (2005), although
these algorithms are not generally efficient since they require separately “perturbing” each policy in the entire

