Estimating Accuracy from Unlabeled Data: A Bayesian Approach

Emmanouil Antonios Platanios
Avinava Dubey
Tom Mitchell
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA

Abstract
We consider the question of how unlabeled data
can be used to estimate the true accuracy of
learned classifiers, and the related question of
how outputs from several classifiers performing
the same task can be combined based on their estimated accuracies. To answer these questions,
we first present a simple graphical model that
performs well in practice. We then provide two
nonparametric extensions to it that improve its
performance. Experiments on two real-world
data sets produce accuracy estimates within a few
percent of the true accuracy, using solely unlabeled data. Our models also outperform existing
state-of-the-art solutions in both estimating accuracies, and combining multiple classifier outputs.

1. Introduction
Estimating accuracy of classifiers is central to machine
learning and many other fields. Accuracy is defined as the
probability of a classifier output disagreeing with the true
underlying label, over the true distribution of input data to
that classifier. Most existing approaches to estimating accuracy are supervised, meaning that labeled examples are
required for the estimation. This paper presents an unsupervised approach for estimating accuracies, meaning that
only unlabeled data are required. Being able to estimate
the accuracies of classifiers using only unlabeled data is important for any autonomous learning system that operates
under no supervision. It is also useful in a transfer learning
setting, when classifiers trained using data from one distribution must be applied to data from a new distribution. This
is actually an omnipresent scenario (it is not uncommon for
the data used to train a classifier to be distributed differently
than the data the classifier makes predictions for).
We propose an approach based on a probabilistic graphical
model that allows us to estimate accuracies of classifiers
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

E . A . PLATANIOS @ CS . CMU . EDU
AKDUBEY @ CS . CMU . EDU
TOM . MITCHELL @ CS . CMU . EDU

using only unlabeled data. Our approach further allows us
to infer the posterior distribution of a single label for each
data sample, jointly with the accuracies of our classifiers,
and it can also handle missing data. That is the case with
data samples for which a classifier might not have predicted
any label. This can happen when the classifier does not
have any features for those data samples, for example, and
it is not uncommon in practice (an example of such a case
is the system described in the next paragraph). Moreover,
we propose two nonparametric extensions to that model
that allow sharing of information among different classification problems and different classifiers, that are useful in
the case of limited data. We present experimental results
demonstrating the success of our approaches in estimating
classification accuracies in two diverse domains. Furthermore, we also present results showing that our method outperforms existing methods for combining classifier outputs
into a single label.
We consider a problem setting where we have several different approximations fˆ1 , . . . , fˆN , to some target boolean
classification function, f : X → {0, 1}, and we wish to
know the true accuracies of each of these different approximations, using only unlabeled data. We also want to know
the single most likely output label, meaning the most likely
response of the true underlying function f . These function approximations can be from any source. For example, they can be learned classifiers or even human workers in a crowdsourcing setting. One example of this setting that we consider here is taken from the Never Ending
Language Learning system (NELL) (Carlson et al., 2010;
Mitchell et al., 2015). Out of NELL’s over 2,500 learning tasks, many involve learning classifiers that map noun
phrases (NPs) to boolean categories such as fruit, and food.
For each such boolean classification function, NELL learns
several different approximations based on different views
of the NP. One approximation is based on the orthographic
features of the NP (e.g., a NP ending with the letter string
“burgh” provides statistical evidence that the referenced
entity may be a city), whereas another uses phrases surrounding the NP (e.g., a NP followed by the word sequence
“mayor of” provides statistical evidence that the referenced
entity may be a city). The aim of this paper is to find a way
to estimate the error rates of each one of these approxi-

