Benchmarking Deep Reinforcement Learning for Continuous Control

Yan Duan†
ROCKYDUAN @ EECS . BERKELEY. EDU
Xi Chen†
C . XI @ EECS . BERKELEY. EDU
‡
Rein Houthooft†
REIN . HOUTHOOFT @ UGENT. BE
John Schulman†§
JOSCHU @ EECS . BERKELEY. EDU
Pieter Abbeel†
PABBEEL @ CS . BERKELEY. EDU
†
University of California, Berkeley, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
‡
Ghent University - iMinds, Department of Information Technology
§ OpenAI

Abstract
Recently, researchers have made significant
progress combining the advances in deep learning for learning feature representations with reinforcement learning. Some notable examples include training agents to play Atari games based
on raw pixel data and to acquire advanced manipulation skills using raw sensory inputs. However, it has been difficult to quantify progress
in the domain of continuous control due to the
lack of a commonly adopted benchmark. In this
work, we present a benchmark suite of continuous control tasks, including classic tasks like
cart-pole swing-up, tasks with very high state
and action dimensionality such as 3D humanoid
locomotion, tasks with partial observations, and
tasks with hierarchical structure. We report novel
findings based on the systematic evaluation of a
range of implemented reinforcement learning algorithms. Both the benchmark and reference implementations are released at https://github.com/
rllab/rllab in order to facilitate experimental reproducibility and to encourage adoption by other
researchers.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning addresses the problem of how
agents should learn to take actions to maximize cumulative reward through interactions with the environment. The
traditional approach for reinforcement learning algorithms
requires carefully chosen feature representations, which are
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).
Also available at https://arxiv.org/abs/1604.06778

usually hand-engineered. Recently, significant progress
has been made by combining advances in deep learning for
learning feature representations (Krizhevsky et al., 2012;
Hinton et al., 2012) with reinforcement learning, tracing
back to much earlier work of Tesauro (1995) and Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis (1995). Notable examples are training
agents to play Atari games based on raw pixels (Guo et al.,
2014; Mnih et al., 2015; Schulman et al., 2015a) and to
acquire advanced manipulation skills using raw sensory inputs (Levine et al., 2015; Lillicrap et al., 2015; Watter et al.,
2015). Impressive results have also been obtained in training deep neural network policies for 3D locomotion and
manipulation tasks (Schulman et al., 2015a;b; Heess et al.,
2015b).
Along with this recent progress, the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) (Bellemare et al., 2013) has become a
popular benchmark for evaluating algorithms designed for
tasks with high-dimensional state inputs and discrete actions. However, these algorithms do not always generalize
straightforwardly to tasks with continuous actions, leading
to a gap in our understanding. For instance, algorithms
based on Q-learning quickly become infeasible when naive
discretization of the action space is performed, due to the
curse of dimensionality (Bellman, 1957; Lillicrap et al.,
2015). In the continuous control domain, where actions
are continuous and often high-dimensional, we argue that
the existing control benchmarks fail to provide a comprehensive set of challenging problems (see Section 7 for a
review of existing benchmarks). Benchmarks have played
a significant role in other areas such as computer vision
and speech recognition. Examples include MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998), Caltech101 (Fei-Fei et al., 2006), CIFAR (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009), ImageNet (Deng et al.,
2009), PASCAL VOC (Everingham et al., 2010), BSDS500
(Martin et al., 2001), SWITCHBOARD (Godfrey et al.,
1992), TIMIT (Garofolo et al., 1993), Aurora (Hirsch &
Pearce, 2000), and VoiceSearch (Yu et al., 2007). The lack

