Ask Me Anything:
Dynamic Memory Networks for Natural Language Processing

Ankit Kumar*, Ozan Irsoy*, Peter Ondruska*,
Mohit Iyyer*, James Bradbury, Ishaan Gulrajani*,
Victor Zhong*, Romain Paulus, Richard Socher
{JAMES . BRADBURY, RPAULUS , RSOCHER}@ SALESFORCE . COM
Salesforce Inc., CA USA
*Authors were interns at MetaMind.

Abstract
Most tasks in natural language processing can
be cast into question answering (QA) problems
over language input. We introduce the dynamic
memory network (DMN), a neural network architecture which processes input sequences and
questions, forms episodic memories, and generates relevant answers. Questions trigger an iterative attention process which allows the model to
condition its attention on the inputs and the result
of previous iterations. These results are then reasoned over in a hierarchical recurrent sequence
model to generate answers. The DMN can be
trained end-to-end and obtains state-of-the-art
results on several types of tasks and datasets:
question answering (Facebook’s bAbI dataset),
text classification for sentiment analysis (Stanford Sentiment Treebank) and sequence modeling for part-of-speech tagging (WSJ-PTB). The
training for these different tasks relies exclusively on trained word vector representations and
input-question-answer triplets.

1. Introduction
Question answering (QA) is a complex natural language
processing task which requires an understanding of the
meaning of a text and the ability to reason over relevant
facts. Most, if not all, tasks in natural language processing can be cast as a question answering problem: high
level tasks like machine translation (What is the translation into French?); sequence modeling tasks like named entity recognition (Passos et al., 2014) (NER) (What are the
named entity tags in this sentence?) or part-of-speech tagging (POS) (What are the part-of-speech tags?); classificaProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

I:
I:
I:
I:
I:
Q:
A:
I:
Q:
A:
Q:
A:

Jane went to the hallway.
Mary walked to the bathroom.
Sandra went to the garden.
Daniel went back to the garden.
Sandra took the milk there.
Where is the milk?
garden
It started boring, but then it got interesting.
What’s the sentiment?
positive
POS tags?
PRP VBD JJ , CC RB PRP VBD JJ .

Figure 1. Example inputs and questions, together with answers
generated by a dynamic memory network trained on the corresponding task. In sequence modeling tasks, an answer mechanism
is triggered at each input word instead of only at the end.

tion problems like sentiment analysis (Socher et al., 2013)
(What is the sentiment?); even multi-sentence joint classification problems like coreference resolution (Who does
”their” refer to?).
We propose the Dynamic Memory Network (DMN), a neural network based framework for general question answering tasks that is trained using raw input-question-answer
triplets. Generally, it can solve sequence tagging tasks,
classification problems, sequence-to-sequence tasks and
question answering tasks that require transitive reasoning.
The DMN first computes a representation for all inputs and
the question. The question representation then triggers an
iterative attention process that searches the inputs and retrieves relevant facts. The DMN memory module then reasons over retrieved facts and provides a vector representation of all relevant information to an answer module which
generates the answer.
Fig. 1 provides examples of inputs, questions and answers
for tasks that are evaluated in this paper and for which a
DMN achieves a new level of state-of-the-art performance.

