Discriminative Embeddings of Latent Variable Models for Structured Data

Hanjun Dai, Bo Dai
Le Song
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA

Abstract
Kernel classifiers and regressors designed for
structured data, such as sequences, trees and
graphs, have significantly advanced a number
of interdisciplinary areas such as computational
biology and drug design. Typically, kernels are
designed beforehand for a data type which either
exploit statistics of the structures or make use
of probabilistic generative models, and then a
discriminative classifier is learned based on the
kernels via convex optimization. However, such
an elegant two-stage approach also limited kernel
methods from scaling up to millions of data
points, and exploiting discriminative information
to learn feature representations.
We propose, structure2vec, an effective
and scalable approach for structured data
representation based on the idea of embedding
latent variable models into feature spaces, and
learning such feature spaces using discriminative
information. Interestingly, structure2vec
extracts features by performing a sequence of
function mappings in a way similar to graphical
model inference procedures, such as mean
field and belief propagation. In applications
involving millions of data points, we showed that
structure2vec runs 2 times faster, produces
models which are 10, 000 times smaller, while
at the same time achieving the state-of-the-art
predictive performance.

1. Introduction
Structured data, such as sequences, trees and graphs,
are prevalent in a number of interdisciplinary areas such
as protein design, genomic sequence analysis, and drug
design (Schölkopf et al., 2004). To learn from such
complex data, we have to first transform such data
explicitly or implicitly into some vectorial representations,
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

{HANJUNDAI , BODAI}@ GATECH . EDU
LSONG @ CC . GATECH . EDU

and then apply machine learning algorithms in the resulting
vector space. So far kernel methods have emerged as one
of the most effective tools for dealing with structured data,
and have achieved the state-of-the-art classification and
regression results in many sequence (Leslie et al., 2002a;
Vishwanathan & Smola, 2003) and graph datasets (Gärtner
et al., 2003; Borgwardt, 2007).
The success of kernel methods on structured data relies
crucially on the design of kernel functions — positive
semidefinite similarity measures between pairs of data
points (Schölkopf & Smola, 2002). By designing a
kernel function, we have implicitly chosen a corresponding
feature representation for each data point which can
potentially has infinite dimensions.
Later learning
algorithms for various tasks and with potentially very
different nature can then work exclusively on these
pairwise kernel values without the need to access the
original data points. Such modular structure of kernel
methods has been very powerful, making them the most
elegant and convenient methods to deal with structured
data. Thus designing kernel for different structured objects,
such as strings, trees and graphs, has always been an
important subject in the kernel community. However,
in the big data era, this modular framework has also
limited kernel methods in terms of their ability to scale
up to millions of data points, and exploit discriminative
information to learn feature representations.
For instance, a class of kernels are designed based
on the idea of “bag of structures” (BOS), where each
structured data point is represented as a vector of counts for
elementary structures. The spectrum kernel and variants
for strings (Leslie et al., 2002a), subtree kernel (Ramon
& Gärtner, 2003), graphlet kernel (Shervashidze et al.,
2009) and Weisfeiler-lehman graph kernel (Shervashidze
et al., 2011) all follow this design principle. In other
words, the feature representations of these kernels are
fixed before learning, with each dimension corresponding
to a substructure, independent of the supervised learning
tasks at hand. Since there are many unique substructures
which may or may not be useful for the learning tasks, the
explicit feature space of such kernels typically has very
high dimensions. Subsequently algorithms dealing with

