Shifting Regret, Mirror Descent, and Matrices

András György
A . GYORGY @ IMPERIAL . AC . UK
Dept. of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Imperial College London, London, SW7 2BT, UK
Csaba Szepesvári
Dept. of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, T6G 2E8 CANADA

Abstract
We consider the problem of online prediction in
changing environments. In this framework the
performance of a predictor is evaluated as the
loss relative to an arbitrarily changing predictor,
whose individual components come from a base
class of predictors. Typical results in the literature consider different base classes (experts, linear predictors on the simplex, etc.) separately.
Introducing an arbitrary mapping inside the mirror decent algorithm, we provide a framework
that unifies and extends existing results. As an
example, we prove new shifting regret bounds for
matrix prediction problems.

1. Introduction
In the standard online learning framework, the goal of the
forecaster is to compete with a set of static reference predictors. However, this goal is only meaningful if a static
predictor can be expected to perform well on the given
problem. When the environment changes over time, it
makes more sense to consider dynamic, time-varying reference predictors. In this paper we consider the problem
where the goal of the forecaster is to compete with switching predictors that can switch between elements of a base
predictor class and for each prediction mimic the forecast
of the actually selected base predictor.
This problem received substantial attention in both learning
and information theory, resulting in several algorithms that
can compete with switching predictors. Most of these algorithms are based on variants of the exponentially weighted
average prediction method, bearing different computational
advantages depending on the base predictor class: variants
of the fixed-share algorithm of Herbster & Warmuth (1998)
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

SZEPESVA @ UALBERTA . CA

are used when the base class is small, while variants of the
transition diagram based method of Willems (1996) are applied for large base reference classes that admit efficient
solutions for the static prediction problem. While the algorithms for small expert classes achieve near-optimal behavior in complexity that is linear both in the time horizon
T and the number of experts N , the algorithms for large
classes can typically be implemented with O(T 2 log N ) or
O(T 2 d) complexity, where d is the dimension of the expert
set when it is infinite. Computationally efficient combinations of the two methods have been proposed for large base
predictor classes (Willems & Krom, 1997; Hazan & Seshadhri, 2009; György et al., 2012) whose computational
complexity is almost linear in T and maintain the mild dependence on the size of the expert class, while only slightly
deteriorating performance (see György et al. 2012 for an
overview of tracking algorithms.) In fact, these methods
are general reduction methods that can transform any lowregret algorithm to one with low switching (or tracking)
regret: here the regret scales with the complexity of the
comparator sequence, measured by the number of switches.
Another measure introduced by Hazan & Seshadhri (2009)
considers regret over contiguous time intervals, called the
adaptive regret, while recently a stronger version of the
same concept was introduced by Daniely et al. (2015) (see,
also, Adamskiy et al. 2012). Although strongly adaptive regret and adaptive regret are stronger measures than switching regret, the algorithms developed for these problems are
essentially identical, and can be showed to perform well
under all of these criteria.
A notable case when (near-) optimal performance relative
to switching predictors is achievable with computational
complexity that is linear both in time and the dimension of
the predictors is the case of online linear and convex optimization: Here, Herbster & Warmuth (2001) unified earlier
methods and combined gradient-descent type algorithms
with projections, while Zinkevich (2003) showed that the
mirror descent algorithm (e.g., Nemirovski & Yudin, 1998;
Beck & Teboulle, 2003) with a quadratic regularizer also
enjoys favorable performance guarantees. In these prob-

