The knockoff filter for FDR control in group-sparse and multitask regression

Ran Dai
Department of Statistics, University of Chicago, Chicago IL 60637 USA

RANDAI @ UCHICAGO . EDU

Rina Foygel Barber
Department of Statistics, University of Chicago, Chicago IL 60637 USA

RINA @ UCHICAGO . EDU

Abstract
We propose the group knockoff filter, a method
for false discovery rate control in a linear regression setting where the features are grouped, and
we would like to select a set of relevant groups
which have a nonzero effect on the response. By
considering the set of true and false discoveries
at the group level, this method gains power relative to sparse regression methods. We also apply
our method to the multitask regression problem
where multiple response variables share similar
sparsity patterns across the set of possible features. Empirically, the group knockoff filter successfully controls false discoveries at the group
level in both settings, with substantially more
discoveries made by leveraging the group structure.

1. Introduction
In a high-dimensional regression setting, we are faced with
many potential explanatory variables (features), often with
most of these features having zero or little true effect on the
response. Model selection methods can be applied to find
a small submodel containing the most relevant features, for
instance, via sparse model fitting methods such as the lasso
(Tibshirani, 1996), or in a setting where the sparsity respects a grouping of the features, the group lasso (Yuan
& Lin, 2006). In practice, however, we may not be able to
determine whether the set of features (or set of groups of
features) selected might contain many false positives. For
the (non-grouped) sparse setting, the knockoff filter (Barber & Candès, 2015) creates “knockoff copies” of each
variable to act as a control group, detecting whether the
lasso (or another model selection method) is successfully
controlling the false discovery rate (FDR), and tuning this
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

method to find a model as large as possible while bounding
FDR. In this work, we will extend the knockoff filter to the
group sparse setting, and will find that by considering features, and constructing knockoff copies, at the group-wise
level, we are able to improve the power of this method at
detecting true signals. Our method can also extend to the
multitask regression setting (Obozinski et al., 2006), where
multiple responses exhibit a shared sparsity pattern when
regressed on a common set of features. As for the knockoff
method, our work applies to the setting where n ≥ p.

2. Background
We begin by giving background on several models and
methods underlying our work.
2.1. Group sparse linear regression
We consider a linear regression model, Y = Xβ +z, where
y ∈ Rn is a vector of responses and X ∈ Rn×p is a
known design matrix. In a grouped setting, the p features
are partitioned into m groups of variables, G1 , . . . , Gm ⊆
{1, . . . , p}, with group sizes p1 , · · · , pm . The noise distribution is assumed to be z ∼ N (0, σ 2 In ). We assume
sparsity structure in that only a small portion of βGi ’s are
nonzero, where βGi ∈ Rpi is the subvector of β corresponding to the ith group of features. When not taking
group into consideration, a commonly used method to find
a sparse vector of coefficients β is the lasso (Tibshirani,
1996), an `1 -penalized linear regression, which minimizes
the following objective: function

b
β(λ) = arg min ky − Xβk22 + λkβk1 .
(1)
β

To utilize the feature grouping, so that an entire group of
features is selected simultaneously, Yuan & Lin (2006) proposed following grouped lasso penalties:

b
β(λ)
= arg min ky − Xβk22 + λkβkgroup . (2)
β

Pm
where kβkgroup =
i=1 kβGi k2 . This penalty promotes
sparsity at the group level; for large λ, few groups will

