Beyond CCA: Moment Matching for Multi-View Models

Anastasia Podosinnikova
Francis Bach
Simon Lacoste-Julien
INRIA - École normale supérieure, Paris

Abstract
We introduce three novel semi-parametric extensions of probabilistic canonical correlation analysis with identifiability guarantees. We consider moment matching techniques for estimation in these models. For that, by drawing explicit links between the new models and a discrete version of independent component analysis (DICA), we first extend the DICA cumulant
tensors to the new discrete version of CCA. By
further using a close connection with independent component analysis, we introduce generalized covariance matrices, which can replace the
cumulant tensors in the moment matching framework, and, therefore, improve sample complexity
and simplify derivations and algorithms significantly. As the tensor power method or orthogonal joint diagonalization are not applicable in
the new setting, we use non-orthogonal joint diagonalization techniques for matching the cumulants. We demonstrate performance of the proposed models and estimation techniques on experiments with both synthetic and real datasets.

1. Introduction
Canonical correlation analysis (CCA), originally introduced by Hotelling (1936), is a common statistical tool for
the analysis of multi-view data. Examples of such data include, for instance, representation of some text in two languages (e.g., Vinokourov et al., 2002) or images aligned
with text data (e.g., Hardoon et al., 2004; Gong et al.,
2014). Given two multidimensional variables (or datasets),
CCA finds two linear transformations (factor loading matrices) that mutually maximize the correlations between
the transformed variables (or datasets). Together with its
kernelized version (see, e.g., Shawe-Taylor & Cristianini,
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

ANASTASIA . PODOSINNIKOVA @ INRIA . FR
FRANCIS . BACH @ INRIA . FR
FIRSTNAME . LASTNAME @ INRIA . FR

2004; Bach & Jordan, 2003), CCA has a wide range of applications (see, e.g., Hardoon et al. (2004) for an overview).
Bach & Jordan (2005) provide a probabilistic interpretation
of CCA: they show that the maximum likelihood estimators
of a particular Gaussian graphical model, which we refer
to as Gaussian CCA, is equivalent to the classical CCA by
Hotelling (1936). The key idea of Gaussian CCA is to allow some of the covariance in the two observed variables
to be explained by a linear transformation of common independent sources, while the rest of the covariance of each
view is explained by their own (unstructured) noises. Importantly, the dimension of the common sources is often
significantly smaller than the dimensions of the observations and, potentially, than the dimensions of the noise. Examples of applications and extensions of Gaussian CCA are
the works by Socher & Fei-Fei (2010), for mapping visual
and textual features to the same latent space, and Haghighi
et al. (2008), for machine translation applications.
Gaussian CCA is subject to some well-known unidentifiability issues, in the same way as the closely related factor analysis model (FA; Bartholomew, 1987; Basilevsky,
1994) and its special case, the probabilistic principal component analysis model (PPCA; Tipping & Bishop, 1999;
Roweis, 1998). Indeed, as FA and PPCA are identifiable
only up to multiplication by any rotation matrix, Gaussian
CCA is only identifiable up to multiplication by any invertible matrix. Although this unidentifiability does not affect
the predictive performance of the model, it does affect the
factor loading matrices and hence the interpretability of the
latent factors. In FA and PPCA, one can enforce additional
constraints to recover unique factor loading matrices (see,
e.g., Murphy, 2012). A notable identifiable version of FA is
independent component analysis (ICA; Jutten, 1987; Jutten
& Hérault, 1991; Comon & Jutten, 2010). One of our goals
is to introduce identifiable versions of CCA.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows. We first
introduce for the first time, to the best of our knowledge,
three new formulations of CCA: discrete, non-Gaussian,
and mixed (see Section 2.1). We then provide identifiability guarantees for the new models (see Section 2.2). Then,

