Rich Component Analysis

Rong Ge
Duke University, Computer Science Department, 308 Research Dr, Durham NC 27708
James Zou
Microsoft Research, One Memorial Dr, Cambridge MA 02139

Abstract
In many settings, we have multiple data sets
(also called views) that capture different and
overlapping aspects of the same phenomenon.
We are often interested in finding patterns that
are unique to one or to a subset of the views.
For example, we might have one set of molecular observations and one set of physiological
observations on the same group of individuals,
and we want to quantify molecular patterns that
are uncorrelated with physiology. Despite being
a common problem, this is highly challenging
when the correlations come from complex distributions. In this paper, we develop the general
framework of Rich Component Analysis (RCA)
to model settings where the observations from
different views are driven by different sets of latent components, and each component can be a
complex, high-dimensional distribution. We introduce algorithms based on cumulant extraction
that provably learn each of the components without having to model the other components. We
show how to integrate RCA with stochastic gradient descent into a meta-algorithm for learning
general models, and demonstrate substantial improvement in accuracy on several synthetic and
real datasets in both supervised and unsupervised
tasks. Our method makes it possible to learn latent variable models when we don’t have samples
from the true model but only samples after complex perturbations.

1. Introduction
A hallmark of modern data deluge is the prevalence of complex data that capture different aspects of some common
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

RONGGE @ CS . DUKE . EDU

JAMESYZOU @ GMAIL . COM

phenomena. For example, for a set of patients, it’s common
to have multiple modalities of molecular measurements for
each individual (gene expression, genotyping, etc.) as well
as physiological attributes. Each set of measurements corresponds to a view on the samples. The complexity and the
heterogeneity of the data is such that it’s often not feasible
to build a joint model for all the data. Moreover, if we are
particularly interested in one aspect of the problem (e.g.
patterns that are specific to a subset of genes that are not
shared across all genes), it would be wasteful of computational and modeling resources to model the interactions
across all the data.
More concretely, suppose we have two sets (views) of data,
U and V , on a common collection of samples. We model
this as U = S1 +S2 and V = AS2 +S3 , where S1 captures
the latent component specific to U , S3 is specific to V , and
S2 is common to both U and V and is related in the two
views by an unknown linear transformation A. Each component Si can be a complex, high-dimensional distribution.
The observed samples from U and V are component-wise
linear combinations of the unobserved samples from Si . To
model all the data, we would need to jointly model all three
Si , which can have prohibitive sample/computation complexity and also prone to model misspecification. Ideally,
if we are only interested in the component that’s unique to
the first view, we would simply write down a model for S1
without making any parametric assumptions about S2 and
S3 , except that they are independent.
In this paper, we develop a general framework of
Rich Component Analysis (RCA) to explore such multicomponent, multi-view datasets. Our framework allows for
learning an arbitrarily complex model of a specific component of the data, Si , without having to make parametric
assumptions about other components Sj . This allows the
analyst to focus on the most salient aspect of data analysis. The main conceptual contribution is the development
of new algorithms to learn parameters of complex distributions without any samples from that distribution. In the
two-view example, we do not observe samples from our

