Extreme F-Measure Maximization using Sparse Probability Estimates
Kalina Jasinska
KJASINSKA @ CS . PUT. POZNAN . PL
Krzysztof Dembczyński
KDEMBCZYNSKI @ CS . PUT. POZNAN . PL
Institute of Computing Science, Poznań University of Technology, 60-965 Poznań, Poland
Róbert Busa-Fekete
Karlson Pfannschmidt
Timo Klerx
Eyke Hüllermeier
Department of Computer Science, Paderborn University, 33098 Paderborn, Germany

Abstract
We consider the problem of (macro) F-measure
maximization in the context of extreme multi-label
classification (XMLC), i.e., multi-label classification with extremely large label spaces. We investigate several approaches based on recent results on
the maximization of complex performance measures in binary classification. According to these
results, the F-measure can be maximized by properly thresholding conditional class probability estimates. We show that a naı̈ve adaptation of this approach can be very costly for XMLC and propose
to solve the problem by classifiers that efficiently
deliver sparse probability estimates (SPEs), that is,
probability estimates restricted to the most probable labels. Empirical results provide evidence for
the strong practical performance of this approach.

1. Introduction
Extreme classification refers to multi-class and multi-label
learning problems that involve hundreds of thousands (Deng
et al., 2009; Partalas et al., 2015) or even millions of
labels (Agrawal et al., 2013). Applications of that kind
can be found in image classification (Deng et al., 2011),
text document classification (Dekel & Shamir, 2010),
on-line advertising (Beygelzimer et al., 2009a), and
video recommendation (Weston et al., 2013). Several
approaches for efficient extreme classification have recently
been proposed, including FAST XML (Prabhu & Varma,
2014), L OM T REES (Choromanska & Langford, 2015),
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume 48.
Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

BUSAROBI @ GMAIL . COM
KIUDEE @ MAIL . UPB . DE
TIMOK @ UPB . DE
EYKE @ UPB . DE

SLEEC (Bhatia et al., 2015), robust Bloom filters (Cisse
et al., 2013), label partitioning (Weston et al., 2013), and fast
label embeddings (Mineiro & Karampatziakis, 2015).
These algorithms have been mainly evaluated in terms of
ranking-based measures such as Precision@K or NDCG@K.
In this work, we focus on extreme multi-label classification
(XMLC) and turn our attention to the (macro) F-measure,
which is a commonly used performance measure in
multi-label classification as well as other fields, such as
natural language processing. A variant of this measure has
also been used in the Kaggle’s LSHTC competition (Partalas
et al., 2015); see https://www.kaggle.com/c/lshtc.
We tackle the learning problem within the Empirical Utility
Maximization (EUM) framework for F-measure maximization. As shown recently, maximizing the F-measure in EUM
can be accomplished by properly tuning a threshold ⌧ on
class probability estimates (CPEs), that is, using a suitably
chosen threshold ⌧ to separate between positive and negative
predictions (Koyejo et al., 2014; Narasimhan et al., 2014;
Kotłowski & Dembczynski, 2015). In the extreme learning
scenario, both probability estimation and threshold tuning
are challenging tasks; in particular, tuning the threshold for
each label through exhaustive search is computationally infeasible. In this paper, we aim at extending existing threshold
tuning methods for optimizing the F-measure in binary classification, so as to make them amenable to the optimization
of the macro F-measure in the XMLC setting. To this end,
we propose the idea of sparse probability estimates (SPEs).
Following a formal description of the macro F-measure and
the EUM approach in Section 2 and 3, respectively, we adapt
threshold tuning methods to the XMLC setting by exploting
the idea of SPEs in Section 4. In Section 5, we discuss two
concrete methods for delivering SPEs. The combination
of these methods with threshold optimization approaches
is evaluated experimentally in Section 6.

