Structured Prediction Energy Networks
David Belanger
Andrew McCallum
College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst

Abstract
We introduce structured prediction energy networks (SPENs), a flexible framework for structured prediction. A deep architecture is used
to define an energy function of candidate labels,
and then predictions are produced by using backpropagation to iteratively optimize the energy
with respect to the labels. This deep architecture
captures dependencies between labels that would
lead to intractable graphical models, and performs structure learning by automatically learning discriminative features of the structured output. One natural application of our technique is
multi-label classification, which traditionally has
required strict prior assumptions about the interactions between labels to ensure tractable learning and prediction. We are able to apply SPENs
to multi-label problems with substantially larger
label sets than previous applications of structured prediction, while modeling high-order interactions using minimal structural assumptions.
Overall, deep learning provides remarkable tools
for learning features of the inputs to a prediction
problem, and this work extends these techniques
to learning features of structured outputs. Our
experiments provide impressive performance on
a variety of benchmark multi-label classification
tasks, demonstrate that our technique can be used
to provide interpretable structure learning, and
illuminate fundamental trade-offs between feedforward and iterative structured prediction.

1. Introduction
Structured prediction is an important problem in a variety
of machine learning domains. Consider an input x and
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

BELANGER @ CS . UMASS . EDU
MCCALLUM @ CS . UMASS . EDU

structured output y, such as a labeling of time steps, a collection of attributes for an image, a parse of a sentence, or
a segmentation of an image into objects. Such problems
are challenging because the number of candidate y is exponential in the number of output variables that comprise it.
As a result, practitioners encounter computational considerations, since prediction requires searching an enormous
space, and also statistical considerations, since learning accurate models from limited data requires reasoning about
commonalities between distinct structured outputs. Therefore, structured prediction is fundamentally a problem of
representation, where the representation must capture both
the discriminative interactions between x and y and also allow for efficient combinatorial optimization over y. With
this perspective, it is unsurprising that there are natural
combinations of structured prediction and deep learning,
a powerful framework for representation learning.
We consider two principal approaches to structured prediction: (a) as a feed-forward function y = f (x), and (b) using
an energy-based viewpoint y = arg miny0 Ex (y 0 ) (LeCun
et al., 2006). Feed-forward approaches include, for example, predictors using local convolutions plus a classification layer (Collobert et al., 2011), fully-convolutional networks (Long et al., 2015), or sequence-to-sequence predictors (Sutskever et al., 2014). Here, end-to-end learning can
be performed easily using gradient descent. In contrast, the
energy-based approach may involve non-trivial optimization to perform predictions, and includes, for example, conditional random fields (CRFs) (Lafferty et al., 2001). From
a modeling perspective, energy-based approaches are desirable because directly parametrizing Ex (·) provides practitioners with better opportunities to utilize domain knowledge about properties of the structured output. Furthermore, such a parametrization may be more parsimonious,
resulting in improved generalization from limited data. On
the other hand, prediction and learning are more complex.
For energy-based prediction, prior applications of deep
learning have mostly followed a two-step construction:
first, choose an existing model structure for which the
search problem y = arg miny0 Ex (y 0 ) can be performed efficiently, and then express the dependence of Ex (·) on x via

