SDCA without Duality, Regularization, and Individual Convexity

Shai Shalev-Shwartz
School of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel

Abstract
Stochastic Dual Coordinate Ascent is a popular
method for solving regularized loss minimization
for the case of convex losses. We describe variants of SDCA that do not require explicit regularization and do not rely on duality. We prove
linear convergence rates even if individual loss
functions are non-convex, as long as the expected
loss is strongly convex.

1. Introduction
We consider the following loss minimization problem:
n

min F (w) :=

w∈Rd

1X
fi (w) .
n i=1

An important sub-class of problems is when each fi can
be written as fi (w) = φi (w) + λ2 kwk2 , where φi is Li smooth and convex. A popular method for solving this
sub-class of problems is Stochastic Dual Coordinate Ascent (SDCA), and (Shalev-Shwartz & Zhang, 2013) established the convergence rate of Õ((Lmax /λ + n) log(1/)),
where Lmax = maxi Li .
As its name indicates, SDCA is derived by considering a
dual problem. In this paper, we consider the possibility of
applying SDCA for problems in which individual fi do not
necessarily have the form φi (w) + λ2 kwk2 , and can even be
non-convex (e.g., deep learning optimization problems, or
problems arising in fast calculation of the top singular vectors (Jin et al., 2015)). In many such cases, the dual problem is meaningless. Instead of directly using the dual problem, we describe and analyze a variant of SDCA in which
only gradients of fi are being used. Following (Johnson
& Zhang, 2013), we show that SDCA is a member of the
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) family of algorithms,
that is, its update is based on an unbiased estimate of the
gradient, but unlike the vanilla SGD, for SDCA the variProceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

SHAIS @ CS . HUJI . AC . IL

ance of the estimation of the gradient tends to zero as we
converge to a minimum.
Our analysis assumes that F is λ-strongly convex and each
fi is Li -smooth. When each fi is also convex we establish
the convergence rate of Õ(L̄/λ+n), where L̄ is the average
of Li and the Õ notation hides logarithmic terms, including the factor log(1/). This matches the best known bound
for SVRG given in (Xiao & Zhang, 2014). Lower bounds
have been derived in (Arjevani et al., 2015; Agarwal & Bottou, 2014). Applying an acceleration technique ((ShalevShwartz & Zhang, 2015;p
Lin et al., 2015)) we obtain the
convergence rate Õ(n1/2 L̄/λ + n). If fi are non-convex
we first prove that SDCA enjoys the rate Õ(L̄2 /λ2 + n).
Finally, we
technique yields the
 showphow the acceleration

3/4
bound Õ n
L̄/λ + n . That is, we have the same
dependency
on
the
square root of the condition number,
p
L̄/λ, but this term is multiplied by n3/4 rather than by
n1/2 . Understanding if this factor can be eliminated is left
to future work.
Related work: In recent years, many randomized methods for optimizing average of functions have been proposed. For example, SAG (Le Roux et al., 2012),
SVRG (Johnson & Zhang, 2013), Finito (Defazio et al.,
2014b), SAGA (Defazio et al., 2014a), S2GD (Konečnỳ &
Richtárik, 2013), and UniVr (Allen-Zhu & Yuan, 2015).
All of these methods have similar convergence rates for
strongly convex and smooth problems. Here we show that
SDCA achieves the best known convergence rate for the
case in which individual loss functions are convex, and a
slightly worse rate for the case in which individual loss
functions are non-convex. A systematic study of the convergence rate of the different methods under non-convex
losses is left to future work.
This version of the paper improves upon a previous unpublished version of the paper (Shalev-Shwartz, 2015)
in three aspects. First, the convergence rate here depends on L̄ as opposed to Lmax in (Shalev-Shwartz,
2015). Second, the version in (Shalev-Shwartz, 2015)
only deals with the regularized case, while here we show
that the same rate can be obtained for unregularized objectives. Last, for the non-convex case, here we derive

