Early and Reliable Event Detection Using Proximity Space Representation

Maxime Sangnier
MAXIME . SANGNIER @ TELECOM - PARISTECH . FR
LTCI, CNRS, Télécom ParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay, 75013, Paris, France
Jérôme Gauthier
LADIS, CEA, LIST, 91191, Gif-sur-Yvette, France

JEROME . GAUTHIER @ CEA . FR

Alain Rakotomamonjy
ALAIN . RAKOTO @ INSA - ROUEN . FR
Normandie Université, UR, LITIS EA 4108, Avenue de l’université, 76801, Saint-Etienne-du-Rouvray, France

Abstract
Let us consider a specific action or situation
(called event) that takes place within a time series. The objective in early detection is to build
a decision function that is able to go off as soon
as possible from the onset of an occurrence of
this event. This implies making a decision with
an incomplete information. This paper proposes
a novel framework that i) guarantees that a detection made with a partial observation will also
occur at full observation of the time-series; ii)
incorporates in a consistent manner the lack of
knowledge about the minimal amount of information needed to make a decision. The proposed
detector is based on mapping the temporal sequences to a landmarking space thanks to appropriately designed similarity functions. As a
by-product, the framework benefits from a scalable training algorithm and a theoretical guarantee concerning its generalization ability. We
also discuss an important improvement of our
framework in which decision function can still
be made reliable while being more expressive.
Our experimental studies provide compelling results on toy data, presenting the trade-off that occurs when aiming at accuracy, earliness and reliability. Results on real physiological and video
datasets show that our proposed approach is as
accurate and early as state-of-the-art algorithm,
while ensuring reliability and being far more efficient to learn.

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Early detection of temporal events is a valuable ability for
automatic systems that serve in many widespread fields.
Common instances of such applications are security (e.g
video surveillance, attack detection and earthquake warning), healthcare (e.g heart failure detection and protection
of the elderly) and entertainment (e.g recognition of gestures and gaming). Concretely, early detection is the capability of detecting as soon as possible an occurrence of
the event of interest (let us say a heart disorder) during an
online sequential analysis of a time-series (an electrocardiogram in this example). This implies making a decision
with the incomplete observation of an occurrence, that is a
partial information. Admitting that the temporal event of
interest is of finite duration, our objective is to build a detector that is able to make a correct decision as soon as an
occurrence appears and obviously before it ends.
Early decision systems got a growing interest from the machine learning community in the last years. This is true for
early classification (Xing et al., 2009; 2012; Parrish et al.,
2013) and detection (Hoai & De la Torre, 2012; 2014). In
these works, two points are noteworthy.
The first important point is earliness. The detector is
learned so as to make a decision with partial observations
but without knowing exactly the sufficient amount of information to collect. A tempting way to achieve earliness is to
force partial observations to be well recognized (Ellis et al.,
2013; Hoai & De la Torre, 2014). This is quite computationally demanding and more importantly a simplistic way
to handle the lack of knowledge about the minimal amount
of information required to make a decision. Indeed, such
a procedure implies considering partial observations as occurrences of the event. However, some of those incomplete
observations should not be considered as positive events
since not enough information has been collected yet. This
may confuse the learning of the recognition system.

