Online Learning with Feedback Graphs Without the Graphs

Alon Cohen
Tamir Hazan
Tomer Koren
Technion—Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel

Abstract
We study an online learning framework introduced by Mannor and Shamir (2011) in which
the feedback is specified by a graph, in a setting where the graph may vary from round to
round and is never fully revealed to the learner.
We show a large gap between the adversarial
and the stochastic cases. In the adversarial case,
we prove that even for dense feedback graphs,
the learner cannot improve upon a trivial regret bound obtained by ignoring any additional
feedback besides her own loss. In contrast, in
the stochastic
√ case we give an algorithm that
e αT ) regret over T rounds, proachieves Θ(
vided that the independence numbers of the hidden feedback graphs are at most α. We also
extend our results to a more general feedback
model, in which the learner does not necessarily
observe her own loss, and show that, even in simple cases, concealing the feedback graphs might
render a learnable problem unlearnable.

1. Introduction
Online learning is a general framework for sequential
decision-making under uncertainty. In its most basic form,
it can be described as follows. A learner has to iteratively
choose an action from a set of K available actions, and
suffer a loss associated with that action. The losses of the
actions on each round are assigned in advance by an arbitrary, possibly adversarial, environment. The learner’s goal
is to minimize her regret over T rounds of the game, which
is the difference between her cumulative loss and that of
the best fixed action in hindsight.
After making each decision, the learner receives some form
of feedback about the losses. Traditionally, the literature

ALON . COHEN @ TECHNION . AC . IL
TAMIR . HAZAN @ TECHNION . AC . IL
TOMERK @ TECHNION . AC . IL

considers two types of feedback: full feedback (Littlestone and Warmuth, 1994; Vovk, 1990; Cesa-Bianchi et al.,
1997), where the learner observes the losses associated
with all of her possible actions, and bandit feedback (Auer
et al., 2002b), where the learner only observes the loss of
the action she has actually taken.
Full feedback and bandit feedback are special cases of
a general framework introduced by Mannor and Shamir
(2011), in which the feedback model is specified by a sequence G1 , . . . , GT of feedback graphs, one for each round
t of the game. Each feedback graph Gt is a directed graph
whose nodes correspond to the learner’s K possible actions; a directed edge u → v in this graph indicates that
whenever the learner chooses action u on round t, in addition to observing the loss of action u, she also gets to
observe the loss associated with the action v on that round.
Online learning with feedback graphs was further studied by several authors. Alon et al. (2013), and subsequently Kocák et al. (2014); Alon et al. (2015),
√ gave
regret-minimization algorithms that achieve e
O( αT ) regret, where α is a bound on the independence numbers of
the graphs G1 , . . . , GT . Up to logarithmic factors, their
results√recover and interpolate between the classic bounds
of O( T log K)
√ with full feedback (Freund and Schapire,
1997) and O( KT ) with bandit feedback √
(Auer et al.,
2002b; Audibert and Bubeck, 2009). The e
O( αT ) bound
turns out to be tight for any feedback graph (when it is fixed
throughout the game and known in advance), in light of a
matching lower bound due to Mannor and Shamir (2011).
However, all of the optimal algorithms mentioned above
require the full structure of the feedback graph in order to
operate. While some require the entire graph Gt for performing their updates only at the end of round t (e.g., Alon
et al., 2013; Kocák et al., 2014; Alon et al., 2015),1 others actually need the description of Gt at the beginning of
the round before making their decision (e.g., Alon et al.,
1

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

More precisely, these algorithms do not need the entire graph
but rather the incoming neighborhood of each of the actions for
which the associated loss has been observed.

