PAC learning of Probabilistic Automaton based on the Method of Moments

Hadrien Glaude
Univ. Lille, CRIStAL, UMR 9189, SequeL Team, Villeneuve d’Ascq, 59650, France

HADRIEN . GLAUDE @ INRIA . FR

Olivier Pietquin1
OLIVIER . PIETQUIN @ UNIV- LILLE 1. FR
Institut Universitaire de France (IUF), Univ. Lille, CRIStAL, UMR 9189, SequeL Team, Villeneuve d’Ascq, 59650, France

Abstract
Probabilitic Finite Automata (PFA) are generative graphical models that define distributions
with latent variables over finite sequences of
symbols, a.k.a. stochastic languages. Traditionally, unsupervised learning of PFA is performed
through algorithms that iteratively improves the
likelihood like the Expectation-Maximization
(EM) algorithm. Recently, learning algorithms
based on the so-called Method of Moments
(MoM) have been proposed as a much faster
alternative that comes with PAC-style guarantees. However, these algorithms do not ensure
the learnt automata to model a proper distribution, limiting their applicability and preventing them to serve as an initialization to iterative algorithms. In this paper, we propose a new
MoM-based algorithm with PAC-style guarantees that learns automata defining proper distributions. We assess its performances on synthetic
problems from the PAutomaC challenge and real
datasets extracted from Wikipedia against previous MoM-based algorithms and EM algorithm.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we address the problem of learning a distribution with latent variables over sequences of symbols from
independent samples drawn from it. In particular, we are
interested in distributions realized by generative graphical
models called Probabilistic Finite Automata (PFA). Traditionally, algorithms to learn PFA rely on iterative procedures that maximize the joint likelihood like the gradient
ascent or EM and its variants. However, these algorithms
do not scale well with the number of samples and latent
variables to the point where obtaining good solutions for
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

large models becomes intractable. In addition, they are
prone to get stuck in local optima. There exist also full
Bayesian methods like variational Bayes or Gibbs sampling, but these methods are computationally expensive and
strongly rely on assumptions made on the prior.
A recent alternative line of work consists in modeling the
distribution at sight by a Multiplicity Automaton (MA),
also called weighted finite automaton (Balle, 2013). MA
are graphical models that realize functions over finite sequences of symbols. Hence, they encompass a large variety of linear sequential systems in addition to stochastic languages (Thon & Jaeger, 2015). For example, when
MA model stochastic processes, they are equivalent to Observable Operator Models (Thon & Jaeger, 2015). When
considering action-observation pairs as symbols, MA can
model controlled processes and are equivalent to Predictive State Representation (Glaude et al., 2014). In fact, MA
are strictly more general and infinitely more compact than
PFA, Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) and Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs). Casting
the learning problem into the one of learning a more general class of models allows using the MoM. This method
leverages the fact that low order moments of distributions
contain most of the distribution information and are typically easy to estimate. MoM-based algorithms have several pros over iterative methods. First, they are extremely
fast. Their complexity is linear in the number of samples
as estimated moments can be computed in one pass on the
training set. The time complexity is also polynomial in the
learnt model size as these algorithms rely only on few linear
algebra operations to recover the parameters. In addition,
MoM-based algorithms are often consistent with theoretical guarantees in the form of finite-sample bounds on the
`1 error between the learnt function and the target distribution. Thus, these algorithms are Probably Approximately
Correct (PAC) in a sense defined by (Kearns et al., 1994),
if we allow the number of samples to depend polynomially
on some parameters measuring the complexity of the target
1

now with Google DeepMind

