Conditional Dependence via Shannon Capacity: Axioms, Estimators and
Applications

Weihao Gao
CSL and Dept. of ECE, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, USA

WGAO 9@ ILLINOIS . EDU

Sreeram Kannan
Dept. of EE, University of Washington, Seattle, USA

KSREERAM @ UW. EDU

Sewoong Oh
CSL and Dept. of IESE, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, USA

SWOH @ ILLINOIS . EDU

Pramod Viswanath
CSL and Dept. of ECE, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, USA

PRAMODV @ ILLINOIS . EDU

Abstract
We consider axiomatically the problem of estimating the strength of a conditional dependence
relationship PY |X from a random variables X to
a random variable Y . This has applications in
determining the strength of a known causal relationship, where the strength depends only on
the conditional distribution of the effect given the
cause (and not on the driving distribution of the
cause). Shannon capacity, appropriately regularized, emerges as a natural measure under these
axioms. We examine the problem of calculating
Shannon capacity from the observed samples and
propose a novel fixed-k nearest neighbor estimator, and demonstrate its consistency. Finally, we
demonstrate an application to single-cell flowcytometry, where the proposed estimators significantly reduce sample complexity.

many areas of scientific learning, where one wants to uncover the cause-effect relationship usually using interventions or sometimes directly from observational data (Pearl,
2009; Richardson & Evans, 2015; Mooij et al., 2015).
In this paper, we are interested in an even simpler question: given a causal relationship, how does one measure the
strength of the relationship. This problem arises in many
contexts, for example, one may know causal genetic pathways but only a subset of these maybe active in a particular
tissue or organ - therefore, deducing how much influence
each causal link exerts becomes necessary.

The axiomatic study of dependence measures on joint distributions between two random variables X and Y has
a long history in statistics (Shannon, 1948; Rényi, 1959;
Csiszár, 2008). In this paper, we study the relatively unexplored terrain of measures that depend only on the conditional distribution PY |X . We are motivated to study conditional dependence measures from a problem in causal
strength estimation. Causal learning is a basic problem in

We focus on a simple model: consider a pair of random
variables (X, Y ) with known causal direction X → Y , and
suppose that there are no confounders - we are interested
in quantifying the causal influence X has on Y . We denote
the causal influence quantity by C(X, Y ). There are two
philosophically distinct ways to model the quantity: the
first one is factual influence, i.e., how much influence does
X exert on Y under the current probability of the cause X.
The second possible way, which one can term as potential
influence measures how much influence X can potentially
exert on Y - without cognizance to the present distribution
of the cause. For example, consider a (hypothetical) city
which has very few smokers, but smoking inevitably leads
to lung-cancer. In such a city, the factual influence of smoking on lung-cancer will be small but the potential influence
is very high. Depending on the setting, one may prefer the
former or the latter. In this paper, we are interested in the
potential influence of a cause on its effect.

Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

We want C(X, Y ) to be invariant to scaling and one-one
transformations of the variables X, Y . This naturally suggests information theoretic metrics as plausible choices of

1. Introduction

