Differentially Private Chi-Squared Hypothesis Testing:
Goodness of Fit and Independence Testing

Marco Gaboardi
University at Buffalo, SUNY
Hyun Woo Lim
University of California, Los Angeles

GABOARDI @ BUFFALO . EDU

LIMHYUN @ G . UCLA . EDU

Ryan Rogers
University of Pennsylvania

RYROGERS @ SAS . UPENN . EDU

Salil P. Vadhan
Harvard University

SALIL @ SEAS . HARVARD . EDU

Abstract
Hypothesis testing is a useful statistical tool in
determining whether a given model should be rejected based on a sample from the population.
Sample data may contain sensitive information
about individuals, such as medical information.
Thus it is important to design statistical tests that
guarantee the privacy of subjects in the data. In
this work, we study hypothesis testing subject to
differential privacy, specifically chi-squared tests
for goodness of fit for multinomial data and independence between two categorical variables.

1. Introduction
Hypothesis testing provides a systematic way to test given
models based on a sample, so that with high confidence a
data analyst may conclude that the model is incorrect or
not. However, these data samples may contain highly sensitive information about the subjects and so the privacy of
individuals can be compromised when the results of a data
analysis are released. For example, in the area of genomewide associaton studies (GWAS) Homer et al. (2008) have
shown that it is possible to identify subjects in a data set
based on publicly available aggregate statistics.
A way to address this concern is by developing new techniques to support privacy-preserving data analysis. An
approach that is gaining more and more attention by the
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

statistics and data analysis community is differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2006b), which originated in theoretical
computer science. In this work, we seek to develop hypothesis tests that are differentially private and that give conclusions similar to standard, non-private hypothesis tests.
We focus here on two classical tests for data drawn from
a multinomial distribution: goodness of fit test, which determines whether the data was in fact drawn from a multinomial distribution with probability vector p0 ; and independence test, which tests whether two categorical random
variables are independent of each other. Both tests depend
on the chi-squared statistic, which is used to determine
whether the data is likely or not under the given model.
To guarantee differential privacy, we consider adding
Laplace and Gaussian noise to the counts of categorical
data. Using the noisy data we can form a private chisquared statistic. It turns out that the classical hypothesis
tests perform poorly when used with this modified statistic
because they ignore the fact that noise was added. To improve this situation, we develop four new tests that account
for the additional noise due to privacy. In particular, we
give two tests based on a Monte Carlo approach to testing
the null hypothesis and two tests based on an asymptotic
distribution of the private chi-squared distribution factoring in the noise distribution.
Our four differentially private tests achieve a target level
1−α significance, i.e. they reject with probability at most α
when the null hypothesis holds (in some cases, we provide
a rigorous proof of this fact and in others, it is experimentally verified). This guarantees limited Type I errors. However, all of our tests do lose power; that is when the null
hypothesis is false, they correctly reject with lower proba-

