Cross-Graph Learning of Multi-Relational Associations

Hanxiao Liu
Yiming Yang
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA

Abstract
Cross-graph Relational Learning (CGRL) refers
to the problem of predicting the strengths or labels of multi-relational tuples of heterogeneous
object types, through the joint inference over
multiple graphs which specify the internal connections among each type of objects. CGRL
is an open challenge in machine learning due
to the daunting number of all possible tuples to
deal with when the numbers of nodes in multiple graphs are large, and because the labeled
training instances are extremely sparse as typical.
Existing methods such as tensor factorization or
tensor-kernel machines do not work well because
of the lack of convex formulation for the optimization of CGRL models, the poor scalability
of the algorithms in handling combinatorial numbers of tuples, and/or the non-transductive nature
of the learning methods which limits their ability to leverage unlabeled data in training. This
paper proposes a novel framework which formulates CGRL as a convex optimization problem,
enables transductive learning using both labeled
and unlabeled tuples, and offers a scalable algorithm that guarantees the optimal solution and
enjoys a linear time complexity with respect to
the sizes of input graphs. In our experiments with
a subset of DBLP publication records and an Enzyme multi-source dataset, the proposed method
successfully scaled to the large cross-graph inference problem, and outperformed other representative approaches significantly.

1. Introduction
Many important problems in multi-source relational learning could be cast as joint learning over multiple graphs
about how heterogeneous types of objects interact with
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

HANXIAOL @ CS . CMU . EDU
YIMING @ CS . CMU . EDU

each other. In literature data analysis, for example, publication records provide rich information about how authors collaborate with each other in a co-authoring graph,
how papers are linked in citation networks, how keywords are related via ontology, and so on. The challenging question is about how to combine such heterogeneous information in individual graphs for the labeling or scoring of the multi-relational associations in tuples like (author,paper,keyword), given some observed instances of such tuples as the labeled training set.
Automated labeling or scoring of unobserved tuples allows us to discover who have been active in the literature on what areas of research, and to predict who would
become influential in which areas in the future. In protein data analysis, as another example, a graph of proteins
with pairwise sequence similarities is often jointly studied with a graph of chemical compounds with their structural similarities for the discovery of interesting patterns
in (compound,protein) pairs. We call the prediction
problem in both examples cross-graph learning of multirelational associations, or simply cross-graph relational
learning (CGRL), where the multi-relational associations
are defined by the tuples of heterogeneous types of objects,
and each object type has its own graph with type-specific
relational structure as a part of the provided data. The task
is to predict the labels or the scores of unobserved multirelational tuples, conditioned on a relatively small set of
labeled instances.
CGRL is an open challenge in machine learning for several reasons. Firstly, the number of multi-relational tuples
grows combinatorially in the numbers of individual graphs
and the number of nodes in each graph. How to make crossgraph inference computationally tractable for large graphs
is a tough challenge. Secondly, how to combine the internal
structures or relations in individual graphs for joint inference in a principled manner is an open question. Thirdly,
supervised information (labeled instances) is typically extremely sparse in CGRL due to the very large number of all
possible combinations of heterogeneous objects in individual graphs. Consequently, the success of cross-graph learning crucially depends on effectively leveraging the massively available unlabeled tuples (and the latent relations

