Community Recovery in Graphs with Locality

Yuxin Chen∗
YXCHEN @ STANFORD . EDU
Govinda M. Kamath∗
GKAMATH @ STANFORD . EDU
Changho Suh†
CHSUH @ KAIST. AC . KR
David Tse∗+
DNTSE @ STANFORD . EDU
∗
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
†
Department of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon 305-701, Korea
+
Department of EECS, University of California, Berkeley CA 94720, USA

Abstract
Motivated by applications in domains such as
social networks and computational biology, we
study the problem of community recovery in
graphs with locality. In this problem, pairwise
noisy measurements of whether two nodes are
in the same community or different communities
come mainly or exclusively from nearby nodes
rather than uniformly sampled between all node
pairs, as in most existing models. We present two
algorithms that run nearly linearly in the number
of measurements and which achieve the information limits for exact recovery.

1. Introduction
Clustering of data is a central problem that is prevalent
across all of science and engineering. One formulation that
has received significant attention in recent years is community recovery (Girvan & Newman, 2002; Fortunato, 2010;
Porter et al., 2009), also referred to as correlation clustering (Bansal et al., 2004) or graph clustering (Jalali et al.,
2011). In this formulation, the objective is to cluster individuals into different communities based on pairwise measurements of their relationships, each of which gives some
noisy information about whether two individuals belong to
the same community or different communities. While this
formulation applies naturally in social networks, it has a
broad range of applications in other domains including protein complex detection (Chen & Yuan, 2006), image segmentation (Shi & Malik, 2000; Globerson et al., 2015),
shape matching (Chen et al., 2014a), etc. See (Abbe &
Wainwright, 2015) for an introduction.
In recent years, there has been a flurry of works on designing community recovery algorithms based on idealised
generative models of the measurement process. A particProceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

ular popular model is the Stochastic Block Model (SBM)
(Holland et al., 1983; Condon & Karp, 2001), where the
n individuals to be clustered are modeled as nodes on a
random graph with statistically more edges between nodes
within the same community than between nodes across
two different communities. A closely related model is the
Censored Block Model (CBM) (Abbe et al., 2015), where
one obtains noisy parity measurements on the edges of an
Erdős-Rényi graph (Durrett, 2007). Both the SBM and
the CBM can be unified into one model with noisy measurements which are randomly sampled on the edges of a
complete graph, with the two models differing only in the
measurement noise model. Thus, a central assumption underlying both models is that it is equally likely to obtain
measurements between any pair of nodes. This is a very
unrealistic assumption in many applications: nodes often
have locality and it is more likely to obtain data on relationships between nearby nodes than far away nodes. For
example, in friendship graphs, individuals that live close by
are more likely to interact than nodes that are far away.
This paper focuses on the community recovery problem
when the measurements are randomly sampled from graphs
with locality structure rather than complete graphs. Our
theory covers a broad range of graphs including rings, lines,
2-D grids, and small-world graphs (Fig. 1). Each of these
graphs is parametrized by a locality radius r such that
nodes within r hops are connected by an edge. We characterize the information limits for community recovery on
these networks, i.e. the minimum number of measurements
needed to exactly recover the communities as the number
of nodes n scales. We propose two algorithms whose complexities are nearly linear in the number of measurements
and which can achieve the information limits of all these
networks for a very wide range of the radius r. In the special case when the radius r is so large that measurements
at all locations are possible, we recover the exact recovery limit identified by (Hajek et al., 2015a) when measurements are randomly sampled from complete graphs.
It is worth emphasizing that various computationally feasible algorithms (Coja-Oghlan, 2010; Chaudhuri et al., 2012;
Chen et al., 2014b; Abbe & Sandon, 2015) have been pro-

