Understanding and Improving Convolutional Neural Networks via
Concatenated Rectified Linear Units
Wenling Shang1,4
WENDY. SHANG @ OCULUS . COM
Kihyuk Sohn2
KSOHN @ NEC - LABS . COM
Diogo Almeida3
DIOGO @ ENLITIC . COM
Honglak Lee1
HONGLAK @ EECS . UMICH . EDU
1
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor; 2 NEC Laboratories America; 3 Enlitic; 4 Oculus VR

Abstract
Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have been used as a powerful tool to solve many
problems of machine learning and computer vision. In this paper, we aim to provide insight
on the property of convolutional neural networks,
as well as a generic method to improve the performance of many CNN architectures. Specifically, we first examine existing CNN models and
observe an intriguing property that the filters in
the lower layers form pairs (i.e., filters with opposite phase). Inspired by our observation, we
propose a novel, simple yet effective activation
scheme called concatenated ReLU (CReLU) and
theoretically analyze its reconstruction property
in CNNs. We integrate CReLU into several
state-of-the-art CNN architectures and demonstrate improvement in their recognition performance on CIFAR-10/100 and ImageNet datasets
with fewer trainable parameters. Our results suggest that better understanding of the properties
of CNNs can lead to significant performance improvement with a simple modification.

1. Introduction
In recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have achieved great success in many problems of machine
learning and computer vision (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014; Szegedy et al., 2015; Girshick et al., 2014). In addition, a wide range of techniques
have been developed to enhance the performance or ease
the training of CNNs (Lin et al., 2013; Zeiler & Fergus,
2013; Maas et al., 2013; Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015). Despite
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Visualization of conv1 filters from AlexNet. Each filter and its pairing filter (wi and w̄i next to each other) appear
surprisingly opposite (in phase) to each other. See text for details.

the great empirical success, fundamental understanding of
CNNs is still lagging behind. Towards addressing this issue, this paper aims to provide insight on the intrinsic property of convolutional neural networks.
To better comprehend the internal operations of CNNs,
we investigate the well-known AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al.,
2012) and thereafter discover that the network learns highly
negatively-correlated pairs of filters for the first few convolution layers. Following our preliminary findings, we
hypothesize that the lower convolution layers of AlexNet
learn redundant filters to extract both positive and negative
phase information of an input signal (Section 2.1). Based
on the premise of our conjecture, we propose a novel, simple yet effective activation scheme called Concatenated
Rectified Linear Unit (CReLU). The proposed activation
scheme preserves both positive and negative phase information while enforcing non-saturated non-linearity. The
unique nature of CReLU allows a mathematical characterization of convolution layers in terms of reconstruction
property, which is an important indicator of how expressive and generalizable the corresponding CNN features are
(Section 2.2).
In experiments, we evaluate the CNN models with CReLU
and make a comparison to models with ReLU and Absolute Value Rectification Units (AVR) (Jarrett et al., 2009)
on benchmark object recognition datasets, such as CIFAR-

