Adaptive Algorithms for Online Convex Optimization
with Long-term Constraints

Rodolphe Jenatton∗ , Jim C. Huang† , Cedric Archambeau∗
Amazon, ∗ Berlin, Germany, † Seattle, USA

Abstract
We present an adaptive online gradient descent
algorithm to solve online convex optimization
problems with long-term constraints, which are
constraints that need to be satisfied when accumulated over a finite number of rounds T , but
can be violated in intermediate rounds. For some
user-defined trade-off parameter β ∈ (0, 1), the
proposed algorithm achieves cumulative regret
bounds of O(T max{β,1−β} ) and O(T 1−β/2 ), respectively for the loss and the constraint violations. Our results hold for convex losses, can
handle arbitrary convex constraints and rely on
a single computationally efficient algorithm. Our
contributions generalize over the best known cumulative regret bounds of Mahdavi et al. (2012a),
which are respectively O(T 1/2 ) and O(T 3/4 )
for general convex domains, and respectively
O(T 2/3 ) and O(T 2/3 ) when the domain is further restricted to be a polyhedral set. We supplement the analysis with experiments validating the
performance of our algorithm in practice.

1. Introduction
Online convex optimization (OCO) plays a key role in machine learning applications, such as adaptive routing in networks (Awerbuch and Kleinberg, 2008) and online display
advertising (Agrawal and Devanur, 2015). An OCO problem can be viewed as a sequential, repeated game between
a learner and an adversary. In each round t, the learner first
plays a vector xt ∈ X ⊆ Rd , where X is a convex set corresponding to the set of possible actions. The learner then
incurs a loss ft (xt ) for playing vector xt . The function
ft : X → R+ is defined by the adversary and can vary in
each round. We say that ft is strongly convex with modulus
σ > 0 if ft (x) ≤ ft (y) + ∇ft (x)> (x − y) − σ2 kx − yk22
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

{JENATTON , HUANGJIM , CEDRICA}@ AMAZON . COM

for any x, y ∈ X , where the notation ∇ft (x) refers to any
(sub-)gradient of ft at x. If σ = 0, we say that ft is convex.
The learner’s objective is to generate a sequence of vectors
xt ∈ X for t = 1, 2, · · · , T that minimizes the cumulative
regret over T rounds relative to the optimal vector x? :
RegretT (x∗ ) ,

T
X
t=1

ft (xt ) −

T
X

ft (x? ).

(1)

t=1

This regret measures the difference between the cumulative loss of the learner’s sequence of vectors {xt }Tt=1 and
the accumulated loss that would be incurred if the sequence
of loss functions ft would be known in advance and the
learner could choose the best vector x? in hindsight. Several algorithms have been developed over the past decade
that achieve sub-linear cumulative regret in the OCO setting. The problem was formalized by Zinkevich (2003),
who introduced an online algorithm based on projected
subgradients (Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis, 1989). The algorithm guarantees a cumulative regret of O(T 1/2 ) when
the set X is convex and the loss functions are Lipschitzcontinuous over X . Hazan et al. (2007) and ShalevShwartz and Kakade (2009) introduced algorithms with
logarithmic regret bounds for strongly convex loss functions, e.g., online gradient descent has an O(log(T )) regret
bound for appropriate choices of the step size.
In the aforementioned works, the constraint on vector xt is
assumed to hold for each round t, such that a projection step
is applied every round to enforce the feasibility of each xt .
For general convex sets X , the projection step may require
solving an auxiliary optimization problem, which can be
computationally expensive (e.g., projections onto the semidefinite cone). More importantly, in practical applications,
the learner may in fact only be concerned with satisfying
long-term constraints, that is, the cumulative constraint violations resulting from the sequence of vectors {xt }Tt=1
should not exceed a certain amount by the final round T .
An example of such an application is in online display advertising, where xt is a vector of ad budget allocations and
the learner is primarily concerned in enforcing the longterm constraint that each ad fully consumes its budget over
the lifetime of the ad. Another example is from wireless

