Provable Non-convex Phase Retrieval with Outliers:
Median Truncated Wirtinger Flow

Huishuai Zhang
Department of EECS, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 13244 USA

HZHAN 23@ SYR . EDU

Yuejie Chi
Department of ECE, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210 USA

CHI .97@ OSU . EDU

Yingbin Liang
Department of EECS, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 13244 USA

Abstract
Solving systems of quadratic equations is a central problem in machine learning and signal processing. One important example is phase retrieval, which aims to recover a signal from only
magnitudes of its linear measurements. This
paper focuses on the situation when the measurements are corrupted by arbitrary outliers, for
which the recently developed non-convex gradient descent Wirtinger flow (WF) and truncated
Wirtinger flow (TWF) algorithms likely fail. We
develop a novel median-TWF algorithm that exploits robustness of sample median to resist arbitrary outliers in the initialization and the gradient
update in each iteration. We show that such a
non-convex algorithm provably recovers the signal from a near-optimal number of measurements
composed of i.i.d. Gaussian entries, up to a logarithmic factor, even when a constant portion of
the measurements are corrupted by arbitrary outliers. We further show that median-TWF is also
robust when measurements are corrupted by both
arbitrary outliers and bounded noise. Our analysis of performance guarantee is accomplished by
development of non-trivial concentration measures of median-related quantities, which may be
of independent interest. We further provide numerical experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of the approach.

1. Introduction
Phase retrieval is a classical problem in machine learning,
signal processing and optical imaging, where one aims to
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

YLIANG 06@ SYR . EDU

recover a signal x ∈ Rn from only observing the magnitudes of its linear measurements:
yi = |hai , xi|2 ,

i = 1, . . . , m.

It has many important applications such as X-ray crystallography (Drenth, 2007), but is known to be notoriously difficult due to the quadratic form of the measurements. Classical methods based on alternating minimization between the signal of interest and the phase information (Fienup, 1982), though computationally simple, are often trapped at local minima and lack rigorous performance
guarantees.
Using the lifting trick, the phase retrieval problem can be
reformulated as estimating a rank-one positive semidefinite
matrix X = xxT from linear measurements (Balan et al.,
2006), to which convex relaxations into semidefinite programming are considered (Waldspurger et al., 2015; Candès et al., 2013; Chen et al., 2015; Demanet & Hand, 2014;
Candès & Li, 2014; Li & Voroninski, 2013). In particular,
when the measurement vectors ai ’s are composed of i.i.d.
Gaussian entries, Phaselift (Candès et al., 2013) perfectly
recovers all x ∈ Rn with high probability as long as the
number m of measurements is on the order of n.
However, the computational cost of Phaselift becomes prohibitive when the signal dimension is large. Appealingly,
a so-called Wirtinger flow (WF) algorithm based on gradient descent was recently proposed in (Candès et al., 2015;
Soltanolkotabi, 2014) and shown to work remarkably well:
it converges to the global optima when properly initialized
using the spectral method. The truncated Wirtinger flow
(TWF) algorithm (Chen & Candès, 2015) further improves
WF by eliminating samples whose contributions to both the
initialization and the search direction are excessively deviated from the sample mean, so that the behavior of each
gradient update is well controlled. TWF is shown to converge globally at a geometric rate as long as m is on the
order of n for i.i.d. Gaussian measurement vectors using
a constant step size. Both WF and TWF algorithms have

