Even Faster Accelerated Coordinate Descent Using Non-Uniform Sampling

Zeyuan Allen-Zhu
Princeton University

ZEYUAN @ CSAIL . MIT. EDU

Zheng Qu
University of Hong Kong

ZHENGQU @ HKU . HK

Peter Richtárik
University of Edinburgh

PETER . RICHTARIK @ ED . AC . UK

Yang Yuan
Cornell University

YANGYUAN @ CS . CORNELL . EDU

Abstract
Accelerated coordinate descent is widely used in
optimization due to its cheap per-iteration cost
and scalability to large-scale problems. Up to a
primal-dual transformation, it is also the same as
accelerated stochastic gradient descent that is one
of the central methods used in machine learning.
In this paper, we improve the best known running time of accelerated
coordinate descent by
√
a factor up to n. Our improvement is based
on a clean, novel non-uniform sampling that selects each coordinate with a probability proportional to the square root of its smoothness parameter. Our proof technique also deviates from
the classical estimation sequence technique used
in prior work. Our speed-up applies to important problems such as empirical risk minimization and solving linear systems, both in theory
and in practice.1

1

Introduction

First-order methods have received extensive attention in the
past two decades due to their ability to handle large-scale
optimization problems. Recently, the development of coordinate versions of first-order methods have pushed their
1

The results of this paper first appeared on arXiv in December
2015. In March 2016, Nesterov and Stich independently obtained
our same results in a technical report (Nesterov & Stich, 2016).
The full version of this paper can be found on http://
arxiv.org/abs/1512.09103.
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

running times even faster. As a notable example, the stateof-the-art algorithm for empirical risk minimization (ERM)
problems, up to a primal-dual transformation, is precisely
accelerated coordinate descent (Lin et al., 2014).
In this paper, we consider the following unconstrained minimization problem2
min f (x)

x∈Rn

(1.1)

where the objective f : Rn → R is continuously differentiable and convex. Below, we assume that f (·) is Li smooth with respect to its i-th coordinate.
Informally, coordinate smoothness means for each input x,
if we add its i-th coordinate by at most δ, the corresponding coordinate gradient ∇i f (x + δei ) differs from ∇i f (x)
by at most Li times |δ|. Under this definition, the larger Li
is, the less smooth f is along the ei direction and therefore
the harder it is to minimize f along the ei direction.3 Intuitively, this implies we should spend more energy (i.e., assign more sampling probability) on coordinates with larger
Li . However, it was unclear what the best design is for such
a distribution. In this paper, we present a clean and novel
non-uniform sampling method which gives a faster convergence rate. Before going into the details, we first draw a
distinction between non-accelerated and accelerated coordinate descent methods.
Non-Accelerated vs. Accelerated Methods. For smooth
2

The results of this paper generalize to the so-called proxidef
mal
Pn case that is to allow an additional separable term ψ(x) =
i=1 ψi (xi ) to be added. The proofs require some non-trivial
changes so we refrain from doing so in this version of the paper.
3
For instance, if the i-th coordinate is selected, most
coordinate-descent methods are only capable of performing an
update x0 ← x − L1i ∇i f (x) with step length inversely proportional to Li .

