Expressiveness of Rectifier Networks

Xingyuan Pan
Vivek Srikumar
The University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA

Abstract
Rectified Linear Units (ReLUs) have been shown
to ameliorate the vanishing gradient problem, allow for efficient backpropagation, and empirically promote sparsity in the learned parameters.
They have led to state-of-the-art results in a variety of applications. However, unlike threshold
and sigmoid networks, ReLU networks are less
explored from the perspective of their expressiveness. This paper studies the expressiveness of
ReLU networks. We characterize the decision
boundary of two-layer ReLU networks by constructing functionally equivalent threshold networks. We show that while the decision boundary of a two-layer ReLU network can be captured
by a threshold network, the latter may require
an exponentially larger number of hidden units.
We also formulate sufficient conditions for a corresponding logarithmic reduction in the number
of hidden units to represent a sign network as a
ReLU network. Finally, we experimentally compare threshold networks and their much smaller
ReLU counterparts with respect to their ability to
learn from synthetically generated data.

1. Introduction
A neural network is characterized by its architecture, the
choices of activation functions, and its parameters. We
see several activation functions in the literature – the most
common ones being threshold, logistic, hyperbolic tangent and rectified linear units (ReLUs). In recent years,
deep neural networks with rectifying neurons – defined as
R (x) = max(0, x) – have shown state-of-the-art performance in several tasks such as image and speech classification (Glorot et al., 2011; Nair & Hinton, 2010; Krizhevsky
et al., 2012; Maas et al., 2013; Zeiler et al., 2013).
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

XPAN @ CS . UTAH . EDU
SVIVEK @ CS . UTAH . EDU

ReLUs possess several attractive computational properties.
First, compared to deep networks with sigmoidal activation
units, ReLU networks are less affected by the vanishing
gradient problem (Bengio et al., 1994; Hochreiter, 1998;
Glorot et al., 2011). Second, rectifying neurons encourage
sparsity in the hidden layers (Glorot et al., 2011). Third,
gradient back propagation is efficient because of the piecewise linear nature of the function. For example, Krizhevsky
et al. (2012) report that a convolutional neural network with
ReLUs is six times faster than an equivalent one with hyperbolic tangent neurons. Finally, they have been empirically been shown to generalize very well.
Despite these clear computational and empirical advantages, the expressiveness of rectifier units is less studied
unlike sigmoid and threshold units. In this paper, we address the following question: Which Boolean functions do
ReLU networks express? We analyze the expressiveness
of shallow ReLU networks by characterizing their equivalent threshold networks. The goal of our analysis is to offer a formal understanding for the successes of ReLUs by
comparing them to threshold functions that are well studied (e.g. Hajnal et al., 1993). To this end, the contributions
of this paper are:
1. We provide a constructive proof that two layer ReLU
networks are equivalent to exponentially larger threshold networks. Furthermore, we show that there exist
two layer ReLU networks that cannot be represented
by any smaller threshold networks.
2. We use this characterization to define a sufficient condition for compressing an arbitrary threshold network
into a logarithmically smaller ReLU network.
3. We identify a relaxation of this condition that is applicable if we treat hidden layer predictions as a multiclass classification, thus requiring equivalence of hidden layer states instead of the output state.
1.1. Expressiveness of Networks: Related Work
From the learning point of view, the choice of an activation function is driven by two related aspects: the expres-

