Train and Test Tightness of LP Relaxations in Structured Prediction
Ofer Meshi
Mehrdad Mahdavi
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago

MESHI @ TTIC . EDU
MAHDAVI @ TTIC . EDU

Adrian Weller
University of Cambridge

AW 665@ CAM . AC . UK

David Sontag
New York University

DSONTAG @ CS . NYU . EDU

Abstract
Structured prediction is used in areas such as
computer vision and natural language processing
to predict structured outputs such as segmentations or parse trees. In these settings, prediction
is performed by MAP inference or, equivalently,
by solving an integer linear program. Because of
the complex scoring functions required to obtain
accurate predictions, both learning and inference
typically require the use of approximate solvers.
We propose a theoretical explanation to the striking observation that approximations based on linear programming (LP) relaxations are often tight
on real-world instances. In particular, we show
that learning with LP relaxed inference encourages integrality of training instances, and that
tightness generalizes from train to test data.

1. Introduction
Many applications of machine learning can be formulated
as prediction problems over structured output spaces (Bakir
et al., 2007; Nowozin et al., 2014). In such problems output variables are predicted jointly in order to take into account mutual dependencies between them, such as highorder correlations or structural constraints (e.g., matchings
or spanning trees). Unfortunately, the improved expressive
power of these models comes at a computational cost, and
indeed, exact prediction and learning become NP-hard in
general. Despite this worst-case intractability, efficient approximations often achieve very good performance in practice. In particular, one type of approximation which has
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

proved effective in many applications is based on linear
programming (LP) relaxation. In this approach the prediction problem is first cast as an integer LP (ILP), and then
the integrality constraints are relaxed to obtain a tractable
program. In addition to achieving high prediction accuracy,
it has been observed that LP relaxations are often tight in
practice. That is, the solution to the relaxed program happens to be optimal for the original hard problem (i.e., an
integral solution is found). This is particularly surprising
since the LPs have complex scoring functions that are not
constrained to be from any tractable family. A major open
question is to understand why these real-world instances
behave so differently from the theoretical worst case.
This paper aims to address this question and to provide a
theoretical explanation for the tightness of LP relaxations
in the context of structured prediction. In particular, we
show that the approximate training objective, although designed to produce accurate predictors, also induces tightness of the LP relaxation as a byproduct. Our analysis also
suggests that exact training may have the opposite effect.
To explain tightness of test instances, we prove a generalization bound for tightness. Our bound implies that if many
training instances are integral, then test instances are also
likely to be integral. Our results are consistent with previous empirical findings, and to our knowledge provide the
first theoretical justification for the wide-spread success of
LP relaxations for structured prediction in settings where
the training data is not linearly separable.

2. Related Work
Many structured prediction problems can be represented
as ILPs (Roth & Yih, 2005; Martins et al., 2009a; Rush
et al., 2010). Despite being NP-hard in general (Roth,
1996; Shimony, 1994), various effective approximations
have been proposed. Those include both search-based

