Predictive Entropy Search for Multi-objective Bayesian Optimization

Daniel Hernández-Lobato
DANIEL . HERNANDEZ @ UAM . ES
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Francisco Tomás y Valiente 11, 28049, Madrid, Spain.
José Miguel Hernández-Lobato
Harvard University, 33 Oxford street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.
Amar Shah
Cambridge University, Trumpington Street, Cambridge CB2 1PZ, United Kingdom.
Ryan P. Adams
Harvard University and Twitter, 33 Oxford street Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

Abstract
We present PESMO, a Bayesian method for identifying the Pareto set of multi-objective optimization problems, when the functions are expensive to evaluate. PESMO chooses the evaluation
points to maximally reduce the entropy of the
posterior distribution over the Pareto set. The
PESMO acquisition function is decomposed as a
sum of objective-specific acquisition functions,
which makes it possible to use the algorithm in
decoupled scenarios in which the objectives can
be evaluated separately and perhaps with different costs. This decoupling capability is useful
to identify difficult objectives that require more
evaluations. PESMO also offers gains in efficiency, as its cost scales linearly with the number
of objectives, in comparison to the exponential
cost of other methods. We compare PESMO with
other methods on synthetic and real-world problems. The results show that PESMO produces
better recommendations with a smaller number
of evaluations, and that a decoupled evaluation
can lead to improvements in performance, particularly when the number of objectives is large.

1. Introduction
We address the problem of optimizing K real-valued
functions f1 (x), . . . , fK (x) over some bounded domain X ⊂ Rd , where d is the dimensionality of the input
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

JMHL @ SEAS . HARVARD . EDU

AS 793@ CAM . AC . UK

RPA @ SEAS . HARVARD . EDU

space. This is a more general, challenging and realistic
scenario than the one considered in traditional optimization
problems where there is a single-objective function. For example, in a complex robotic system, we may be interested
in minimizing the energy consumption while maximizing
locomotion speed (Ariizumi et al., 2014). When selecting
a financial portfolio, it may be desirable to maximize returns while minimizing various risks. In a mechanical design, one may wish to minimize manufacturing cost while
maximizing durability. In each of these multi-objective examples, it is unlikely to be possible to optimize all of the
objectives simultaneously as they may be conflicting: a
fast-moving robot probably consumes more energy, highreturn financial instruments typically carry greater risk,
and cheaply manufactured goods are often more likely to
break. Nevertheless, it is still possible to find a set of optimal points X ? known as the Pareto set (Collette & Siarry,
2003). Rather than a single best point, this set represents
a collection of solutions at which no objective can be improved without damaging one of the others.
In the context of minimization, we say that x Pareto
dominates x0 if fk (x) ≤ fk (x0 ) ∀k, with at least one
of the inequalities being strict. The Pareto set X ? is
then the subset of non-dominated points in X , i.e., the
set such that ∀x? ∈ X ? , ∀x ∈ X , ∃ k ∈ 1, . . . , K for
which fk (x? ) < fk (x). The Pareto set is considered to be
optimal because for each point in that set one cannot improve in one of the objectives without deteriorating some
other objective. Given X ? , the user may choose a point
from this set according to their preferences, e.g., locomotion speed vs. energy consumption. The Pareto set is often
not finite, and most strategies aim at finding a finite set with
which to approximate X ? well.
It frequently happens that there is a high cost to evaluat-

