Complex Embeddings for Simple Link Prediction

Théo Trouillon1,2
THEO . TROUILLON @ XRCE . XEROX . COM
Johannes Welbl3
J . WELBL @ CS . UCL . AC . UK
Sebastian Riedel3
S . RIEDEL @ CS . UCL . AC . UK
Éric Gaussier2
ERIC . GAUSSIER @ IMAG . FR
Guillaume Bouchard3
G . BOUCHARD @ CS . UCL . AC . UK
1
Xerox Research Centre Europe, 6 chemin de Maupertuis, 38240 Meylan, FRANCE
2
Université Grenoble Alpes, 621 avenue Centrale, 38400 Saint Martin d’Hères, FRANCE
3
University College London, Gower St, London WC1E 6BT, UNITED KINGDOM

Abstract
In statistical relational learning, the link prediction problem is key to automatically understand
the structure of large knowledge bases. As in previous studies, we propose to solve this problem
through latent factorization. However, here we
make use of complex valued embeddings. The
composition of complex embeddings can handle
a large variety of binary relations, among them
symmetric and antisymmetric relations. Compared to state-of-the-art models such as Neural
Tensor Network and Holographic Embeddings,
our approach based on complex embeddings is
arguably simpler, as it only uses the Hermitian
dot product, the complex counterpart of the standard dot product between real vectors. Our approach is scalable to large datasets as it remains
linear in both space and time, while consistently
outperforming alternative approaches on standard link prediction benchmarks.1

1. Introduction
Web-scale knowledge bases (KBs) provide a structured
representation of world knowledge, with projects such as
DBPedia (Auer et al., 2007), Freebase (Bollacker et al.,
2008) or the Google Knowledge Vault (Dong et al., 2014).
They enable a wide range of applications such as recommender systems, question answering or automated personal
agents. The incompleteness of these KBs has stimulated
1

Code is currently under clearance review and will be available at: https://github.com/ttrouill/complex
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016. JMLR: W&CP volume
48. Copyright 2016 by the author(s).

research into predicting missing entries, a task known as
link prediction that is one of the main problems in Statistical Relational Learning (SRL, Getoor & Taskar, 2007).
KBs express data as a directed graph with labeled edges
(relations) between nodes (entities). Natural redundancies among the recorded relations often make it possible to fill in the missing entries of a KB. As an example, the relation CountryOfBirth is not recorded for
all entities, but it can easily be inferred if the relation
CityOfBirth is known. The goal of link prediction
is the automatic discovery of such regularities. However, many relations are non-deterministic: the combination of the two facts IsBornIn(John,Athens) and
IsLocatedIn(Athens,Greece) does not always
imply the fact HasNationality(John,Greece).
Hence, it is required to handle other facts involving these
relations or entities in a probabilistic fashion.
To do so, an increasingly popular method is to state the
link prediction task as a 3D binary tensor completion problem, where each slice is the adjacency matrix of one relation type in the knowledge graph. Completion based on
low-rank factorization or embeddings has been popularized
with the Netflix challenge (Koren et al., 2009). A partially
observed matrix or tensor is decomposed into a product
of embedding matrices with much smaller rank, resulting
in fixed-dimensional vector representations for each entity
and relation in the database. For a given fact r(s,o) in which
subject s is linked to object o through relation r, the score
can then be recovered as a multi-linear product between the
embedding vectors of s, r and o (Nickel et al., 2016a).
Binary relations in KBs exhibit various types of patterns: hierarchies and compositions like FatherOf,
OlderThan
or
IsPartOf—with
partial/total,
strict/non-strict orders—and equivalence relations
like IsSimilarTo. As described in Bordes et al.
(2013a), a relational model should (a) be able to learn

