Poincaré Embeddings for
Learning Hierarchical Representations

Maximilian Nickel
Facebook AI Research
maxn@fb.com

Douwe Kiela
Facebook AI Research
dkiela@fb.com

Abstract
Representation learning has become an invaluable approach for learning from symbolic data such as text and graphs. However, state-of-the-art embedding methods
typically do not account for latent hierarchical structures which are characteristic
for many complex symbolic datasets. In this work, we introduce a new approach
for learning hierarchical representations of symbolic data by embedding them into
hyperbolic space – or more precisely into an n-dimensional Poincaré ball. Due to
the underlying hyperbolic geometry, this allows us to learn parsimonious representations of symbolic data by simultaneously capturing hierarchy and similarity.
We present an efficient algorithm to learn the embeddings based on Riemannian
optimization and show experimentally that Poincaré embeddings can outperform
Euclidean embeddings significantly on data with latent hierarchies, both in terms
of representation capacity and in terms of generalization ability.

1

Introduction

Learning representations of symbolic data such as text, graphs and multi-relational data has become
a central paradigm in machine learning and artificial intelligence. For instance, word embeddings
such as WORD 2 VEC [20], G LOV E [27] and FAST T EXT [5, 16] are widely used for tasks ranging
from machine translation to sentiment analysis. Similarly, embeddings of graphs such as latent space
embeddings [15], NODE 2 VEC [13], and D EEP WALK [28] have found important applications for
community detection and link prediction in social networks. Furthermore, embeddings of multirelational data such as R ESCAL [22], T RANS E [7], and Universal Schema [31] are being used for
knowledge graph completion and information extraction.
Typically, the objective of an embedding method is to organize symbolic objects (e.g., words, entities,
concepts) in a way such that their similarity or distance in the embedding space reflects their semantic
similarity. For instance, Mikolov et al. [20] embed words in Rd such that their inner product is
maximized when words co-occur within similar contexts in text corpora. This is motivated by the
distributional hypothesis [14, 11], i.e., that the meaning of words can be derived from the contexts in
which they appear. Similarly, Hoff et al. [15] embed social networks such that the distance between
social actors is minimized if they are connected in the network. This reflects the homophily property
that is characteristic for many networks, i.e. that similar actors tend to associate with each other.
Although embedding methods have proven successful in numerous applications, they suffer from
a fundamental limitation: their ability to model complex patterns is inherently bounded by the
dimensionality of the embedding space. For instance, Nickel et al. [23] showed that linear embeddings
of graphs can require a prohibitively large dimensionality to model certain types of relations. Although
non-linear embeddings can mitigate this problem [8], complex graph patterns can still require a
computationally infeasible embedding dimension. As a consequence, no method yet exists that is
able to compute embeddings of large graph-structured data – such as social networks, knowledge
graphs or taxonomies – without loss of information. Since the ability to express information is a
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

