Multi-Task Learning for Contextual Bandits

Aniket Anand Deshmukh
Department of EECS
University of Michigan Ann Arbor
Ann Arbor, MI 48105
aniketde@umich.edu

Urun Dogan
Microsoft Research
Cambridge CB1 2FB, UK
urun.dogan@skype.net

Clayton Scott
Department of EECS
University of Michigan Ann Arbor
Ann Arbor, MI 48105
clayscot@umich.edu

Abstract
Contextual bandits are a form of multi-armed bandit in which the agent has access
to predictive side information (known as the context) for each arm at each time step,
and have been used to model personalized news recommendation, ad placement,
and other applications. In this work, we propose a multi-task learning framework
for contextual bandit problems. Like multi-task learning in the batch setting, the
goal is to leverage similarities in contexts for different arms so as to improve the
agent’s ability to predict rewards from contexts. We propose an upper confidence
bound-based multi-task learning algorithm for contextual bandits, establish a corresponding regret bound, and interpret this bound to quantify the advantages of
learning in the presence of high task (arm) similarity. We also describe an effective
scheme for estimating task similarity from data, and demonstrate our algorithm’s
performance on several data sets.

1

Introduction

A multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is a sequential decision making problem where, at each time
step, an agent chooses one of several “arms," and observes some reward for the choice it made. The
reward for each arm is random according to a fixed distribution, and the agent’s goal is to maximize
its cumulative reward [4] through a combination of exploring different arms and exploiting those
arms that have yielded high rewards in the past [15, 11].
The contextual bandit problem is an extension of the MAB problem where there is some side
information, called the context, associated to each arm [12]. Each context determines the distribution
of rewards for the associated arm. The goal in contextual bandits is still to maximize the cumulative
reward, but now leveraging the contexts to predict the expected reward of each arm. Contextual
bandits have been employed to model various applications like news article recommendation [7],
computational advertisement [9], website optimization [20] and clinical trials [19]. For example, in
the case of news article recommendation, the agent must select a news article to recommend to a
particular user. The arms are articles and contextual features are features derived from the article and
the user. The reward is based on whether a user reads the recommended article.
One common approach to contextual bandits is to fix the class of policy functions (i.e., functions from
contexts to arms) and try to learn the best function with time [13, 18, 16]. Most algorithms estimate
rewards either separately for each arm, or have one single estimator that is applied to all arms. In
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

