Towards Accurate Binary Convolutional Neural
Network
Xiaofan Lin
Cong Zhao
Wei Pan*
DJI Innovations Inc, Shenzhen, China
{xiaofan.lin, cong.zhao, wei.pan}@dji.com

Abstract
We introduce a novel scheme to train binary convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
– CNNs with weights and activations constrained to {-1,+1} at run-time. It has been
known that using binary weights and activations drastically reduce memory size
and accesses, and can replace arithmetic operations with more efficient bitwise operations, leading to much faster test-time inference and lower power consumption.
However, previous works on binarizing CNNs usually result in severe prediction
accuracy degradation. In this paper, we address this issue with two major innovations: (1) approximating full-precision weights with the linear combination of
multiple binary weight bases; (2) employing multiple binary activations to alleviate information loss. The implementation of the resulting binary CNN, denoted
as ABC-Net, is shown to achieve much closer performance to its full-precision
counterpart, and even reach the comparable prediction accuracy on ImageNet and
forest trail datasets, given adequate binary weight bases and activations.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved state-of-the-art results on real-world applications such as image classification [He et al., 2016] and object detection [Ren et al., 2015], with the
best results obtained with large models and sufficient computation resources. Concurrent to these
progresses, the deployment of CNNs on mobile devices for consumer applications is gaining more
and more attention, due to the widespread commercial value and the exciting prospect.
On mobile applications, it is typically assumed that training is performed on the server and test
or inference is executed on the mobile devices [Courbariaux et al., 2016, Esser et al., 2016]. In
the training phase, GPUs enabled substantial breakthroughs because of their greater computational
speed. In the test phase, however, GPUs are usually too expensive to deploy. Thus improving the
test-time performance and reducing hardware costs are likely to be crucial for further progress,
as mobile applications usually require real-time, low power consumption and fully embeddable.
As a result, there is much interest in research and development of dedicated hardware for deep
neural networks (DNNs). Binary neural networks (BNNs) [Courbariaux et al., 2016, Rastegari et al.,
2016], i.e., neural networks with weights and perhaps activations constrained to only two possible
values (e.g., -1 or +1), would bring great benefits to specialized DNN hardware for three major
reasons: (1) the binary weights/activations reduce memory usage and model size 32 times compared
to single-precision version; (2) if weights are binary, then most multiply-accumulate operations can
be replaced by simple accumulations, which is beneficial because multipliers are the most space
and power-hungry components of the digital implementation of neural networks; (3) furthermore, if
both activations and weights are binary, the multiply-accumulations can be replaced by the bitwise
operations: xnor and bitcount Courbariaux et al. [2016]. This could have a big impact on dedicated
deep learning hardware. For instance, a 32-bit floating point multiplier costs about 200 Xilinx FPGA
slices [Govindu et al., 2004], whereas a 1-bit xnor gate only costs a single slice. Semiconductor
⇤ indicates corresponding author.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

