Gradient Episodic Memory for Continual Learning

David Lopez-Paz and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato
Facebook Artificial Intelligence Research
{dlp,ranzato}@fb.com

Abstract
One major obstacle towards AI is the poor ability of models to solve new problems quicker, and without forgetting previously acquired knowledge. To better
understand this issue, we study the problem of continual learning, where the model
observes, once and one by one, examples concerning a sequence of tasks. First,
we propose a set of metrics to evaluate models learning over a continuum of data.
These metrics characterize models not only by their test accuracy, but also in terms
of their ability to transfer knowledge across tasks. Second, we propose a model
for continual learning, called Gradient Episodic Memory (GEM) that alleviates
forgetting, while allowing beneficial transfer of knowledge to previous tasks. Our
experiments on variants of the MNIST and CIFAR-100 datasets demonstrate the
strong performance of GEM when compared to the state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

The starting point in supervised learning is to collect a training set Dtr = {(xi , yi )}ni=1 , where
each example (xi , yi ) is composed by a feature vector xi ∈ X , and a target vector yi ∈ Y. Most
supervised learning methods assume that each example (xi , yi ) is an identically and independently
distributed (iid) sample from a fixed probability distribution P , which describes a single learning task.
The goal of supervised learning is to construct a model f : X → Y, used to predict the target vectors
y associated to unseen feature vectors x, where (x, y) ∼ P . To accomplish this, supervised learning
methods often employ the Empirical
Risk Minimization (ERM) principle [Vapnik, 1998], where f
P
is found by minimizing |D1tr | (xi ,yi )∈Dtr `(f (xi ), yi ), where ` : Y × Y → [0, ∞) is a loss function
penalizing prediction errors. In practice, ERM often requires multiple passes over the training set.
ERM is a major simplification from what we deem as human learning. In stark contrast to learning
machines, learning humans observe data as an ordered sequence, seldom observe the same example
twice, they can only memorize a few pieces of data, and the sequence of examples concerns different
learning tasks. Therefore, the iid assumption, along with any hope of employing the ERM principle,
fall apart. In fact, straightforward applications of ERM lead to “catastrophic forgetting” [McCloskey
and Cohen, 1989]. That is, the learner forgets how to solve past tasks after it is exposed to new tasks.
This paper narrows the gap between ERM and the more human-like learning description above. In
particular, our learning machine will observe, example by example, the continuum of data
(x1 , t1 , y1 ), . . . , (xi , ti , yi ), . . . , (xn , tn , yn ),

(1)

where besides input and target vectors, the learner observes ti ∈ T , a task descriptor identifying
the task associated to the pair (xi , yi ) ∼ Pti . Importantly, examples are not drawn iid from a fixed
probability distribution over triplets (x, t, y), since a whole sequence of examples from the current
task may be observed before switching to the next task. The goal of continual learning is to construct
a model f : X × T able to predict the target y associated to a test pair (x, t), where (x, y) ∼ Pt . In
this setting, we face challenges unknown to ERM:
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

