Accelerated First-order Methods for Geodesically
Convex Optimization on Riemannian Manifolds

Yuanyuan Liu1 , Fanhua Shang1∗, James Cheng1 , Hong Cheng2 , Licheng Jiao3
1
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Dept. of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
3
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding of Ministry of Education,
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, China
{yyliu, fhshang, jcheng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk; hcheng@se.cuhk.edu.hk;
lchjiao@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an accelerated first-order method for geodesically convex
optimization, which is the generalization of the standard Nesterov’s accelerated
method from Euclidean space to nonlinear Riemannian space. We first derive two
equations and obtain two nonlinear operators for geodesically convex optimization
instead of the linear extrapolation step in Euclidean space. In particular, we analyze
the global convergence properties of our accelerated method for geodesically
strongly-convex problems, which show
p that our method improves the convergence
rate from O((1−µ/L)k ) to O((1− µ/L)k ). Moreover, our method also improves
the global convergence rate on geodesically general convex problems from O(1/k)
to O(1/k 2 ). Finally, we give a specific iterative scheme for matrix Karcher mean
problems, and validate our theoretical results with experiments.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we study the following Riemannian optimization problem:
min f (x) such that x ∈ X ⊂ M,

(1)

where (M, %) denotes a Riemannian manifold with the Riemannian metric %, X ⊂ M is a nonempty,
compact, geodesically convex set, and f : X → R is geodesically convex (G-convex) and geodesically
L-smooth (G-L-smooth). Here, G-convex functions may be non-convex in the usual Euclidean space
but convex along the manifold, and thus can be solved by a global optimization solver. [5] presented
G-convexity and G-convex optimization on geodesic metric spaces, though without any attention
to global complexity analysis. As discussed in [11], the topic of "geometric programming" may be
viewed as a special case of G-convex optimization. [25] developed theoretical tools to recognize
and generate G-convex functions as well as cone theoretic fixed point optimization algorithms.
However, none of these three works provided a global convergence rate analysis for their algorithms.
Very recently, [31] provided the global complexity analysis of first-order algorithms for G-convex
optimization, and designed the following Riemannian gradient descent rule:
xk+1 = Expxk (−η gradf (xk )),
where k is the iterate index, Expxk is an exponential map at xk (see Section 2 for details), η is a
step-size or learning rate, and gradf (xk ) is the Riemannian gradient of f at xk ∈ X .
∗

Corresponding author.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

