Semi-supervised Learning with GANs: Manifold
Invariance with Improved Inference

Abhishek Kumar∗
IBM Research AI
Yorktown Heights, NY
abhishk@us.ibm.com

Prasanna Sattigeri∗
IBM Research AI
Yorktown Heights, NY
psattig@us.ibm.com

P. Thomas Fletcher
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT
fletcher@sci.utah.edu

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning methods using Generative adversarial networks (GANs)
have shown promising empirical success recently. Most of these methods use a
shared discriminator/classifier which discriminates real examples from fake while
also predicting the class label. Motivated by the ability of the GANs generator to
capture the data manifold well, we propose to estimate the tangent space to the data
manifold using GANs and employ it to inject invariances into the classifier. In the
process, we propose enhancements over existing methods for learning the inverse
mapping (i.e., the encoder) which greatly improves in terms of semantic similarity
of the reconstructed sample with the input sample. We observe considerable
empirical gains in semi-supervised learning over baselines, particularly in the cases
when the number of labeled examples is low. We also provide insights into how
fake examples influence the semi-supervised learning procedure.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models (both implicit [11, 23] as well as prescribed [16]) have become widely
popular for generative modeling of data. Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [11] in particular
have shown remarkable success in generating very realistic images in several cases [30, 4]. The
generator in a GAN can be seen as learning a nonlinear parametric mapping g : Z → X to the data
manifold. In most applications of interest (e.g., modeling images), we have dim(Z)  dim(X). A
distribution pz over the space Z (e.g., uniform), combined with this mapping, induces a distribution
pg over the space X and a sample from this distribution can be obtained by ancestral sampling, i.e.,
z ∼ pz , x = g(z). GANs use adversarial training where the discriminator approximates (lower
bounds) a divergence measure (e.g., an f -divergence) between pg and the real data distribution px by
solving an optimization problem, and the generator tries to minimize this [28, 11]. It can also be seen
from another perspective where the discriminator tries to tell apart real examples x ∼ px from fake
examples xg ∼ pg by minimizing an appropriate loss function[10, Ch. 14.2.4] [21], and the generator
tries to generate samples that maximize that loss [39, 11].
One of the primary motivations for studying deep generative models is for semi-supervised learning.
Indeed, several recent works have shown promising empirical results on semi-supervised learning
with both implicit as well as prescribed generative models [17, 32, 34, 9, 20, 29, 35]. Most state-ofthe-art semi-supervised learning methods using GANs [34, 9, 29] use the discriminator of the GAN
as the classifier which now outputs k + 1 probabilities (k probabilities for the k real classes and one
probability for the fake class).
When the generator of a trained GAN produces very realistic images, it can be argued to capture
the data manifold well whose properties can be used for semi-supervised learning. In particular, the
∗

Contributed equally.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

