Dynamic Routing Between Capsules

Sara Sabour

Nicholas Frosst

Geoffrey E. Hinton
Google Brain
Toronto
{sasabour, frosst, geoffhinton}@google.com

Abstract
A capsule is a group of neurons whose activity vector represents the instantiation
parameters of a specific type of entity such as an object or an object part. We use
the length of the activity vector to represent the probability that the entity exists and
its orientation to represent the instantiation parameters. Active capsules at one level
make predictions, via transformation matrices, for the instantiation parameters of
higher-level capsules. When multiple predictions agree, a higher level capsule
becomes active. We show that a discrimininatively trained, multi-layer capsule
system achieves state-of-the-art performance on MNIST and is considerably better
than a convolutional net at recognizing highly overlapping digits. To achieve these
results we use an iterative routing-by-agreement mechanism: A lower-level capsule
prefers to send its output to higher level capsules whose activity vectors have a big
scalar product with the prediction coming from the lower-level capsule.

1

Introduction

Human vision ignores irrelevant details by using a carefully determined sequence of fixation points
to ensure that only a tiny fraction of the optic array is ever processed at the highest resolution.
Introspection is a poor guide to understanding how much of our knowledge of a scene comes from
the sequence of fixations and how much we glean from a single fixation, but in this paper we will
assume that a single fixation gives us much more than just a single identified object and its properties.
We assume that our multi-layer visual system creates a parse tree-like structure on each fixation, and
we ignore the issue of how these single-fixation parse trees are coordinated over multiple fixations.
Parse trees are generally constructed on the fly by dynamically allocating memory. Following Hinton
et al. [2000], however, we shall assume that, for a single fixation, a parse tree is carved out of a fixed
multilayer neural network like a sculpture is carved from a rock. Each layer will be divided into many
small groups of neurons called “capsules” (Hinton et al. [2011]) and each node in the parse tree will
correspond to an active capsule. Using an iterative routing process, each active capsule will choose a
capsule in the layer above to be its parent in the tree. For the higher levels of a visual system, this
iterative process will be solving the problem of assigning parts to wholes.
The activities of the neurons within an active capsule represent the various properties of a particular
entity that is present in the image. These properties can include many different types of instantiation
parameter such as pose (position, size, orientation), deformation, velocity, albedo, hue, texture, etc.
One very special property is the existence of the instantiated entity in the image. An obvious way to
represent existence is by using a separate logistic unit whose output is the probability that the entity
exists. In this paper we explore an interesting alternative which is to use the overall length of the
vector of instantiation parameters to represent the existence of the entity and to force the orientation
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

