Approximate Supermodularity Bounds for
Experimental Design

Luiz F. O. Chamon and Alejandro Ribeiro
Electrical and Systems Engineering
University of Pennsylvania
{luizf,aribeiro}@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
This work provides performance guarantees for the greedy solution of experimental design problems. In particular, it focuses on A- and E-optimal designs, for
which typical guarantees do not apply since the mean-square error and the maximum eigenvalue of the estimation error covariance matrix are not supermodular.
To do so, it leverages the concept of approximate supermodularity to derive nonasymptotic worst-case suboptimality bounds for these greedy solutions. These
bounds reveal that as the SNR of the experiments decreases, these cost functions
behave increasingly as supermodular functions. As such, greedy A- and E-optimal
designs approach (1 − e−1 )-optimality. These results reconcile the empirical success of greedy experimental design with the non-supermodularity of the A- and
E-optimality criteria.

1

Introduction

Experimental design consists of selecting which experiments to run or measurements to observe
in order to estimate some variable of interest. Finding good designs is an ubiquitous problem with
applications in regression, semi-supervised learning, multivariate analysis, and sensor placement [1–
10]. Nevertheless, selecting a set of k experiments that optimizes a generic figure of merit is NPhard [11, 12]. In some situations, however, an approximate solution with optimality guarantees can
be obtained in polynomial time. For example, this is possible when the cost function possesses
a diminishing returns property known as supermodularity, in which case greedy search is nearoptimal. Greedy solutions are particularly attractive for large-scale problems due to their iterative
nature and because they have lower computational complexity than typical convex relaxations [11,
12].
Supermodularity, however, is a stringent condition not met by important performance metrics. For
instance, it is well-known that neither the mean-square error (MSE) nor the maximum eigenvalue of
the estimation error covariance matrix are supermodular [1, 13, 14]. Nevertheless, greedy algorithms
have been successfully used to minimize these functions despite the lack of theoretical guarantees.
The goal of this paper is to reconcile these observations by showing that these figures of merit, used
in A- and E-optimal experimental designs, are approximately supermodular. To do so, it introduces
different measures of approximate supermodularity and derives near-optimality results for these
classes of functions. It then bounds how much the MSE and the maximum eigenvalue of the error
covariance matrix violate supermodularity, leading to performance guarantees for greedy A- and
E-optimal designs. More to the point, the main results of this work are:
1. The greedy solution of the A-optimal design problem is within a multiplicative (1 − e−α )
−1
factor of the optimal with α ≥ [1 + O(γ)] , where γ upper bounds the signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) of the experiments (Theorem 3).
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

