A Minimax Optimal Algorithm for Crowdsourcing

Thomas Bonald
Telecom ParisTech
thomas.bonald@telecom-paristech.fr

Richard Combes
Centrale-Supelec / L2S
richard.combes@supelec.fr

Abstract
We consider the problem of accurately estimating the reliability of workers based
on noisy labels they provide, which is a fundamental question in crowdsourcing.
We propose a novel lower bound on the minimax estimation error which applies
to any estimation procedure. We further propose Triangular Estimation (TE), an
algorithm for estimating the reliability of workers. TE has low complexity, may
be implemented in a streaming setting when labels are provided by workers in real
time, and does not rely on an iterative procedure. We prove that TE is minimax
optimal and matches our lower bound. We conclude by assessing the performance
of TE and other state-of-the-art algorithms on both synthetic and real-world data.

1 Introduction
The performance of many machine learning techniques, and in particular data classification, strongly
depends on the quality of the labeled data used in the initial training phase. A common way to label
new datasets is through crowdsourcing: many workers are asked to label data, typically texts or
images, in exchange of some low payment. Of course, crowdsourcing is prone to errors due to
the difficulty of some classification tasks, the low payment per task and the repetitive nature of the
job. Some workers may even introduce errors on purpose. Thus it is essential to assign the same
classification task to several workers and to learn the reliability of each worker through her past
activity so as to minimize the overall error rate and to improve the quality of the labeled dataset.
Learning the reliability of each worker is a tough problem because the true label of each task, the
so-called ground truth, is unknown; it is precisely the objective of crowdsourcing to guess the true
label. Thus the reliability of each worker must be inferred from the comparison of her labels on
some set of tasks with those of other workers on the same set of tasks.
In this paper, we consider binary labels and study the problem of estimating the workers reliability
based on the answers they provide to tasks. We make two novel contributions to that problem:
(i) We derive a lower bound on the minimax estimation error which applies to any estimator of
the workers reliability. In doing so we identify "hard" instances of the problem, and show that the
minimax error depends on two factors: the reliability of the three most informative workers and the
mean reliability of all workers.
(ii) We propose TE (Triangular Estimation), a novel algorithm for estimating the reliability of each
worker based on the correlations between triplets of workers. We analyze the performance of TE and
prove that it is minimax optimal in the sense that it matches the lower bound we previously derived.
Unlike most prior work, we provide non-asymptotic performance guarantees which hold even for a
finite number of workers and tasks. As our analysis reveals, non-asymptotic performance guarantees
require to use finer concentration arguments than asymptotic ones.
TE has low complexity in terms of memory space and computation time, does not require to store
the whole data set in memory and can be easily applied in a setting in which answers to tasks arrive
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

