Early stopping for kernel boosting algorithms: A
general analysis with localized complexities

Yuting Wei1

Fanny Yang2∗
Martin J. Wainwright1,2
Department of Statistics1
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences2
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
{ytwei, fanny-yang, wainwrig}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Early stopping of iterative algorithms is a widely-used form of regularization
in statistics, commonly used in conjunction with boosting and related gradienttype algorithms. Although consistency results have been established in some
settings, such estimators are less well-understood than their analogues based on
penalized regularization. In this paper, for a relatively broad class of loss functions
and boosting algorithms (including L2 -boost, LogitBoost and AdaBoost, among
others), we exhibit a direct connection between the performance of a stopped
iterate and the localized Gaussian complexity of the associated function class.
This connection allows us to show that local fixed point analysis of Gaussian or
Rademacher complexities, now standard in the analysis of penalized estimators,
can be used to derive optimal stopping rules. We derive such stopping rules in
detail for various kernel classes, and illustrate the correspondence of our theory
with practice for Sobolev kernel classes.

1

Introduction

While non-parametric models offer great flexibility, they can also lead to overfitting, and thus poor
generalization performance. For this reason, procedures for fitting non-parametric models must
involve some form of regularization, most commonly done by adding some type of penalty to the
objective function. An alternative form of regularization is based on the principle of early stopping, in
which an iterative algorithm is terminated after a pre-specified number of steps prior to convergence.
While the idea of early stopping is fairly old (e.g., [31, 1, 35]), recent years have witnessed renewed
interests in its properties, especially in the context of boosting algorithms and neural network training
(e.g., [25, 12]). Over the past decade, a line of work has yielded some theoretical insight into early
stopping, including works on classification error for boosting algorithms [3, 13, 18, 23, 39, 40],
L2 -boosting algorithms for regression [8, 7], and similar gradient algorithms in reproducing kernel
Hilbert spaces (e.g. [11, 10, 34, 39, 26]). A number of these papers establish consistency results for
particular forms of early stopping, guaranteeing that the procedure outputs a function with statistical
error that converges to zero as the sample size increases. On the other hand, there are relatively
few results that actually establish rate optimality of an early stopping procedure, meaning that the
achieved error matches known statistical minimax lower bounds. To the best of our knowledge,
Bühlmann and Yu [8] were the first to prove optimality for early stopping of L2 -boosting as applied
∗

Yuting Wei and Fanny Yang contributed equally to this work.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

