Permutation-based Causal Inference Algorithms
with Interventions
Yuhao Wang
Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems
and Institute for Data, Systems and Society
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
yuhaow@mit.edu
Karren Dai Yang
Institute for Data, Systems and Society
and Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
karren@mit.edu

Liam Solus
Department of Mathematics
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden
solus@kth.se

Caroline Uhler
Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems
and Institute for Data, Systems and Society
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
cuhler@mit.edu

Abstract
Learning directed acyclic graphs using both observational and interventional data is
now a fundamentally important problem due to recent technological developments
in genomics that generate such single-cell gene expression data at a very large
scale. In order to utilize this data for learning gene regulatory networks, efficient
and reliable causal inference algorithms are needed that can make use of both
observational and interventional data. In this paper, we present two algorithms
of this type and prove that both are consistent under the faithfulness assumption.
These algorithms are interventional adaptations of the Greedy SP algorithm and
are the first algorithms using both observational and interventional data with
consistency guarantees. Moreover, these algorithms have the advantage that they
are nonparametric, which makes them useful also for analyzing non-Gaussian data.
In this paper, we present these two algorithms and their consistency guarantees,
and we analyze their performance on simulated data, protein signaling data, and
single-cell gene expression data.

1

Introduction

Discovering causal relations is a fundamental problem across a wide variety of disciplines including
computational biology, epidemiology, sociology, and economics [5, 18, 20, 22]. DAG models can
be used to encode causal relations in terms of a directed acyclic graph (DAG) G, where each node
is associated to a random variable and the arrows represent their causal influences on one another.
The non-arrows of G encode a collection of conditional independence (CI) relations through the socalled Markov properties. While DAG models are extraordinarily popular within the aforementioned
research fields, it is in general a difficult task to recover the underlying DAG G from samples from the
joint distribution on the nodes. In fact, since different DAGs can encode the same set of CI relations,
from observational data alone the underlying DAG G is in general only identifiable up to Markov
equivalence, and interventional data is needed to identify the complete DAG.
In recent years, the new drop-seq technology has allowed obtaining high-resolution observational
single-cell gene expression data at a very large scale [12]. In addition, earlier this year this technology
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

