AdaGAN: Boosting Generative Models

Ilya Tolstikhin
MPI for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
ilya@tue.mpg.de
Olivier Bousquet
Google Brain
Zürich, Switzerland
obousquet@google.com

Sylvain Gelly
Google Brain
Zürich, Switzerland
sylvaingelly@google.com

Carl-Johann Simon-Gabriel
MPI for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
cjsimon@tue.mpg.de

Bernhard Schölkopf
MPI for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
bs@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) are an effective method for training
generative models of complex data such as natural images. However, they are
notoriously hard to train and can suffer from the problem of missing modes where
the model is not able to produce examples in certain regions of the space. We
propose an iterative procedure, called AdaGAN, where at every step we add a new
component into a mixture model by running a GAN algorithm on a re-weighted
sample. This is inspired by boosting algorithms, where many potentially weak
individual predictors are greedily aggregated to form a strong composite predictor.
We prove analytically that such an incremental procedure leads to convergence
to the true distribution in a finite number of steps if each step is optimal, and
convergence at an exponential rate otherwise. We also illustrate experimentally
that this procedure addresses the problem of missing modes.

1

Introduction

Imagine we have a large corpus, containing unlabeled pictures of animals, and our task is to build a
generative probabilistic model of the data. We run a recently proposed algorithm and end up with a
model which produces impressive pictures of cats and dogs, but not a single giraffe. A natural way to
fix this would be to manually remove all cats and dogs from the training set and run the algorithm on
the updated corpus. The algorithm would then have no choice but to produce new animals and, by
iterating this process until there’s only giraffes left in the training set, we would arrive at a model
generating giraffes (assuming sufficient sample size). At the end, we aggregate the models obtained
by building a mixture model. Unfortunately, the described meta-algorithm requires manual work for
removing certain pictures from the unlabeled training set at every iteration.
Let us turn this into an automatic approach, and rather than including or excluding a picture, put
continuous weights on them. To this end, we train a binary classifier to separate “true” pictures of
the original corpus from the set of “synthetic” pictures generated by the mixture of all the models
trained so far. We would expect the classifier to make confident predictions for the true pictures of
animals missed by the model (giraffes), because there are no synthetic pictures nearby to be confused
with them. By a similar argument, the classifier should make less confident predictions for the true
pictures containing animals already generated by one of the trained models (cats and dogs). For each
picture in the corpus, we can thus use the classifier’s confidence to compute a weight which we use
for that picture in the next iteration, to be performed on the re-weighted dataset.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

