Selective Classification for Deep Neural Networks

Yonatan Geifman
Computer Science Department
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
yonatan.g@cs.technion.ac.il

Ran El-Yaniv
Computer Science Department
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
rani@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Selective classification techniques (also known as reject option) have not yet been
considered in the context of deep neural networks (DNNs). These techniques
can potentially significantly improve DNNs prediction performance by trading-off
coverage. In this paper we propose a method to construct a selective classifier
given a trained neural network. Our method allows a user to set a desired risk
level. At test time, the classifier rejects instances as needed, to grant the desired
risk (with high probability). Empirical results over CIFAR and ImageNet convincingly demonstrate the viability of our method, which opens up possibilities to
operate DNNs in mission-critical applications. For example, using our method an
unprecedented 2% error in top-5 ImageNet classification can be guaranteed with
probability 99.9%, and almost 60% test coverage.

1

Introduction

While self-awareness remains an illusive, hard to define concept, a rudimentary kind of self-awareness,
which is much easier to grasp, is the ability to know what you don’t know, which can make you
smarter. The subfield dealing with such capabilities in machine learning is called selective prediction
(also known as prediction with a reject option), which has been around for 60 years [1, 5]. The main
motivation for selective prediction is to reduce the error rate by abstaining from prediction when in
doubt, while keeping coverage as high as possible. An ultimate manifestation of selective prediction
is a classifier equipped with a “dial” that allows for precise control of the desired true error rate
(which should be guaranteed with high probability), while keeping the coverage of the classifier as
high as possible.
Many present and future tasks performed by (deep) predictive models can be dramatically enhanced
by high quality selective prediction. Consider, for example, autonomous driving. Since we cannot
rely on the advent of “singularity”, where AI is superhuman, we must manage with standard machine
learning, which sometimes errs. But what if our deep autonomous driving network were capable of
knowing that it doesn’t know how to respond in a certain situation, disengaging itself in advance and
alerting the human driver (hopefully not sleeping at that time) to take over? There are plenty of other
mission-critical applications that would likewise greatly benefit from effective selective prediction.
The literature on the reject option is quite extensive and mainly discusses rejection mechanisms for
various hypothesis classes and learning algorithms, such as SVM, boosting, and nearest-neighbors
[8, 13, 3]. The reject option has rarely been discussed in the context of neural networks (NNs), and
so far has not been considered for deep NNs (DNNs). Existing NN works consider a cost-based
rejection model [2, 4], whereby the costs of misclassification and abstaining must be specified, and a
rejection mechanism is optimized for these costs. The proposed mechanism for classification is based
on applying a carefully selected threshold on the maximal neuronal response of the softmax layer.
We that call this mechanism softmax response (SR). The cost model can be very useful when we can
quantify the involved costs, but in many applications of interest meaningful costs are hard to reason.
(Imagine trying to set up appropriate rejection/misclassification costs for disengaging an autopilot
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

