OnACID: Online Analysis of Calcium Imaging Data
in Real Time
Andrea Giovannucci†1

Johannes Friedrich†∗1

Matthew Kaufman‡

Anne K. Churchland‡

Dmitri Chklovskii†

Liam Paninski∗

Eftychios A. Pnevmatikakis†2
† Flatiron Institute, New York, NY 10010
‡ Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724
∗
Columbia University, New York, NY 10027
{agiovannucci, jfriedrich, dchklovskii, epnevmatikakis}@flatironinstitute.org
{mkaufman, churchland}@cshl.edu
liam@stat.columbia.edu

Abstract
Optical imaging methods using calcium indicators are critical for monitoring the
activity of large neuronal populations in vivo. Imaging experiments typically
generate a large amount of data that needs to be processed to extract the activity
of the imaged neuronal sources. While deriving such processing algorithms is
an active area of research, most existing methods require the processing of large
amounts of data at a time, rendering them vulnerable to the volume of the recorded
data, and preventing real-time experimental interrogation. Here we introduce
OnACID, an Online framework for the Analysis of streaming Calcium Imaging
Data, including i) motion artifact correction, ii) neuronal source extraction, and iii)
activity denoising and deconvolution. Our approach combines and extends previous
work on online dictionary learning and calcium imaging data analysis, to deliver
an automated pipeline that can discover and track the activity of hundreds of cells
in real time, thereby enabling new types of closed-loop experiments. We apply our
algorithm on two large scale experimental datasets, benchmark its performance on
manually annotated data, and show that it outperforms a popular offline approach.

1

Introduction

Calcium imaging methods continue to gain traction among experimental neuroscientists due to their
capability of monitoring large targeted neuronal populations across multiple days or weeks with
decisecond temporal and single-neuron spatial resolution. To infer the neural population activity
from the raw imaging data, an analysis pipeline is employed which typically involves solving the
following problems (all of which are still areas of active research): i) correcting for motion artifacts
during the imaging experiment, ii) identifying/extracting the sources (neurons and axonal or dendritic
processes) in the imaged field of view (FOV), and iii) denoising and deconvolving the neural activity
from the dynamics of the expressed calcium indicator.
1
2

These authors contributed equally to this work.
To whom correspondence should be addressed.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

