Online Reinforcement Learning in Stochastic Games

Yi-Te Hong
Institute of Information Science
Academia Sinica, Taiwan
ted0504@iis.sinica.edu.tw

Chen-Yu Wei
Institute of Information Science
Academia Sinica, Taiwan
bahh723@iis.sinica.edu.tw

Chi-Jen Lu
Institute of Information Science
Academia Sinica, Taiwan
cjlu@iis.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract
We study online reinforcement learning in average-reward stochastic games (SGs).
An SG models a two-player zero-sum game in a Markov environment, where state
transitions and one-step payoffs are determined simultaneously by a learner and
an adversary. We propose the UCSG algorithm that achieves a sublinear regret
compared to the game value when competing with an arbitrary opponent. This
result improves previous ones under the same setting. The regret bound has a
dependency on the diameter, which is an intrinsic value related to the mixing
property of SGs. If we let the opponent play an optimistic best response to the
learner, UCSG finds an ε-maximin stationary policy with a sample complexity of
Õ (poly(1/ε)), where ε is the gap to the best policy.

1

Introduction

Many real-world scenarios (e.g., markets, computer networks, board games) can be cast as multi-agent
systems. The framework of Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) targets at learning to act in
such systems. While in traditional reinforcement learning (RL) problems, Markov decision processes
(MDPs) are widely used to model a single agent’s interaction with the environment, stochastic games
(SGs, [32]), as an extension of MDPs, are able to describe multiple agents’ simultaneous interaction
with the environment. In this view, SGs are most well-suited to model MARL problems [24].
In this paper, two-player zero-sum SGs are considered. These games proceed like MDPs, with the
exception that in each state, both players select their own actions simultaneously 1 , which jointly
determine the transition probabilities and their rewards . The zero-sum property restricts that the
two players’ payoffs sum to zero. Thus, while one player (Player 1) wants to maximize his/her total
reward, the other (Player 2) would like to minimize that amount. Similar to the case of MDPs, the
reward can be discounted or undiscounted, and the game can be episodic or non-episodic.
In the literature, SGs are typically learned under two different settings, and we will call them online
and offline settings, respectively. In the offline setting, the learner controls both players in a centralized
manner, and the goal is to find the equilibrium of the game [33, 21, 30]. This is also known as finding
the worst-case optimality for each player (a.k.a. maximin or minimax policy). In this case, we
care about the sample complexity, i.e., how many samples are required to estimate the worst-case
optimality such that the error is below some threshold. In the online setting, the learner controls only
one of the players, and plays against an arbitrary opponent [24, 4, 5, 8, 31]. In this case, we care
1

Turn-based SGs, like Go, are special cases: in each state, one player’s action set contains only a null action.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

