Consistent Robust Regression

Kush Bhatia∗
University of California, Berkeley
kushbhatia@berkeley.edu

Prateek Jain
Microsoft Research, India
prajain@microsoft.com

Parameswaran Kamalaruban†
EPFL, Switzerland
kamalaruban.parameswaran@epfl.ch

Purushottam Kar
Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur
purushot@cse.iitk.ac.in

Abstract
We present the first efficient and provably consistent estimator for the robust
regression problem. The area of robust learning and optimization has generated a
significant amount of interest in the learning and statistics communities in recent
years owing to its applicability in scenarios with corrupted data, as well as in
handling model mis-specifications. In particular, special interest has been devoted
to the fundamental problem of robust linear regression where estimators that can
tolerate corruption in up to a constant fraction of the response variables are widely
studied. Surprisingly however, to this date, we are not aware of a polynomial time
estimator that offers a consistent estimate in the presence of dense, unbounded
corruptions. In this work we present such an estimator, called CRR. This solves an
open problem put forward in the work of [3]. Our consistency analysis requires
a novel two-stage proof technique involving a careful analysis of the stability of
ordered lists which may be of independent interest. We show that CRR not only
offers consistent estimates, but is empirically far superior to several other recently
proposed algorithms for the robust regression problem, including extended Lasso
and the T ORRENT algorithm. In comparison, CRR offers comparable or better
model recovery but with runtimes that are faster by an order of magnitude.

1

Introduction

The problem of robust learning involves designing and analyzing learning algorithms that can extract
the underlying model despite dense, possibly malicious, corruptions in the training data provided to
the algorithm. The problem has been studied in a dizzying variety of models and settings ranging
from regression [19], classification [11], dimensionality reduction [4] and matrix completion [8].
In this paper we are interested in the Robust Least Squares Regression (RLSR) problem that finds
several applications to robust methods in face recognition and vision [22, 21], and economics [19].
In this problem, we are given a set of n covariates in d dimensions, arranged as a data matrix
X = [x1 , . . . , xn ], and a response vector y ∈ Rn . However, it is known apriori that a certain number
k of these responses cannot be trusted since they are corrupted. These may correspond to corrupted
pixels in visual recognition tasks or untrustworthy measurements in general sensing tasks.
Using these corrupted data points in any standard least-squares solver, especially when k = O (n), is
likely to yield a poor model with little predictive power. A solution to this is to exclude corrupted
∗
†

Work done in part while Kush was a Research Fellow at Microsoft Research India.
Work done in part while Kamalaruban was interning at Microsoft Research India.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

