Model-based Bayesian inference of neural activity
and connectivity from all-optical interrogation of a
neural circuit
Laurence Aitchison
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, CB2 1PZ, UK
laurence.aitchison@gmail.com
Adam Packer
University College London
London, WC1E 6BT, UK
adampacker@gmail.com

Lloyd Russell
University College London
London, WC1E 6BT, UK
llerussell@gmail.com

Jinyao Yan
Janelia Research Campus
Ashburn, VA 20147
yanj11@janelia.hhmi.org

Michael Häusser
University College London
London, WC1E 6BT, UK
m.hausser@ucl.ac.uk

Philippe Castonguay
Janelia Research Campus
Ashburn, VA 20147
ph.castonguay@gmail.com

Srinivas C. Turaga
Janelia Research Campus
Ashburn, VA 20147
turagas@janelia.hhmi.org

Abstract
Population activity measurement by calcium imaging can be combined with cellular resolution optogenetic activity perturbations to enable the mapping of neural
connectivity in vivo. This requires accurate inference of perturbed and unperturbed neural activity from calcium imaging measurements, which are noisy and
indirect, and can also be contaminated by photostimulation artifacts. We have
developed a new fully Bayesian approach to jointly inferring spiking activity and
neural connectivity from in vivo all-optical perturbation experiments. In contrast
to standard approaches that perform spike inference and analysis in two separate
maximum-likelihood phases, our joint model is able to propagate uncertainty in
spike inference to the inference of connectivity and vice versa. We use the framework of variational autoencoders to model spiking activity using discrete latent
variables, low-dimensional latent common input, and sparse spike-and-slab generalized linear coupling between neurons. Additionally, we model two properties
of the optogenetic perturbation: off-target photostimulation and photostimulation
transients. Using this model, we were able to fit models on 30 minutes of data
in just 10 minutes. We performed an all-optical circuit mapping experiment in
primary visual cortex of the awake mouse, and use our approach to predict neural
connectivity between excitatory neurons in layer 2/3. Predicted connectivity is
sparse and consistent with known correlations with stimulus tuning, spontaneous
correlation and distance.

1

Introduction

Quantitative mapping of connectivity is an essential prerequisite for understanding the operation
of neural circuits. Thus far, it has only been possible to perform neural circuit mapping by using
electrophysiological [1, 2], or electron-microscopic [3, 4] techniques. In addition to being extremely
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

