Convolutional Phase Retrieval
Qing Qu
Columbia University
qq2105@columbia.edu

Yuqian Zhang
Columbia University
yz2409@columbia.edu
John Wright
Columbia University
jw2966@columbia.edu

Yonina C. Eldar
Technion
yonina@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
We study the convolutional phase retrieval problem, which considers recovery of an unknown signal x ∈ Cn from m measurements consisting of the
magnitude of its cyclic convolution with a known kernel a of length m. This
model is motivated by applications to channel estimation, optics, and underwater acoustic communication, where the signal of interest is acted on
by a given channel/filter, and phase information is diﬃcult or impossible to
acquire. We show that when a is random and m is suﬃciently large, x can
be eﬃciently recovered up to a global phase using a combination of spectral initialization and generalized gradient descent. The main challenge is
coping with dependencies in the measurement operator; we overcome this
challenge by using ideas from decoupling theory, suprema of chaos processes and the restricted isometry property of random circulant matrices,
and recent analysis for alternating minimizing methods.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of recovering a unknown signal x ∈ Cn from measurements y =
|a ⊛ x|, which consist of the magnitude of the convolution of x and a given filter a ∈ Cm ,
find z,

s.t.

y = |a ⊛ z| ,

(1)

where ⊛ denotes cyclic convolution. Let Ca ∈ C
be a circulant matrix generated by a,
and let A ∈ Cm×n be a matrix formed by the first n columns of Ca . Then the convolutional
phase retrieval problem can be rewritten in the common matrix-vector form
m×m

find

z,

s.t.

y = |Az| .

(2)

This problem is motivated by applications like channel estimation [37, 1], (non)coherent optical communication [14, 24], and underwater acoustic communication [31]. For example, in
millimeter-wave (mm-wave) wireless communications for 5G networks [27], one important
problem is to reconstruct signal angle of arrival (AoA) from measurements, which are taken
by the convolution of signal AoA and the antenna pattern.
Because of technical diﬃculties that the phase measurements are either very noisy and unreliable, or expensive to acquire, it is preferred to only take measurements of signal magnitude
and the phase information is lost.
Most known results on the exact solution of phase retrieval problems [8, 29, 10, 38, 36, 35]
pertain to generic random matrices, where the entries of A are independent subgaussian random variables. However, in practice it is almost impossible to design purely random measurement matrices: in many cases as we mentioned above, the measurement is much more
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

