How regularization affects the critical points in linear
networks
Amirhossein Taghvaei∗
Coordinated Science Laboratory
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL, 61801
taghvae2@illinois.edu

Jin W. Kim
Coordinated Science Laboratory
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL, 61801
jkim684@illinois.edu

Prashant G. Mehta
Coordinated Science Laboratory
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL, 61801
mehtapg@illinois.edu

Abstract
This paper is concerned with the problem of representing and learning a linear
transformation using a linear neural network. In recent years, there is a growing
interest in the study of such networks, in part due to the successes of deep learning.
The main question of this body of research (and also of our paper) is related to the
existence and optimality properties of the critical points of the mean-squared loss
function. An additional primary concern of our paper pertains to the robustness of
these critical points in the face of (a small amount of) regularization. An optimal
control model is introduced for this purpose and a learning algorithm (backprop
with weight decay) derived for the same using the Hamilton’s formulation of
optimal control. The formulation is used to provide a complete characterization of
the critical points in terms of the solutions of a nonlinear matrix-valued equation,
referred to as the characteristic equation. Analytical and numerical tools from
bifurcation theory are used to compute the critical points via the solutions of the
characteristic equation.

1

Introduction

This paper is concerned with the problem of representing and learning a linear transformation with a
linear neural network. Although a classical problem (Baldi and Hornik [1989, 1995]), there has been
a renewed interest in such networks (Saxe et al. [2013], Kawaguchi [2016], Hardt and Ma [2016],
Gunasekar et al. [2017]) because of the successes of deep learning. The motivation for studying linear
networks is to gain insight into the optimization problem for the more general nonlinear networks. A
∗

Financial support from the NSF CMMI grant 1462773 is gratefully acknowledged.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

