The Importance of Communities for
Learning to Influence
Eric Balkanski
Harvard University
ericbalkanski@g.harvard.edu

Nicole Immorlica
Microsoft Research
nicimm@microsoft.com

Yaron Singer
Harvard University
yaron@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
We consider the canonical problem of influence maximization in social networks.
Since the seminal work of Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos [KKT03] there have been
two, largely disjoint efforts on this problem. The first studies the problem associated
with learning the generative model that produces cascades, and the second focuses
on the algorithmic challenge of identifying a set of influencers, assuming the
generative model is known. Recent results on learning and optimization imply that
in general, if the generative model is not known but rather learned from training data,
no algorithm for influence maximization can yield a constant factor approximation
guarantee using polynomially-many samples, drawn from any distribution.
In this paper we describe a simple algorithm for maximizing influence from training
data. The main idea behind the algorithm is to leverage the strong community
structure of social networks and identify a set of individuals who are influentials
but whose communities have little overlap. Although in general, the approximation
guarantee of such an algorithm is unbounded, we show that this algorithm performs
well experimentally. To analyze its performance, we prove this algorithm obtains a
constant factor approximation guarantee on graphs generated through the stochastic
block model, traditionally used to model networks with community structure.

1

Introduction

For well over a decade now, there has been extensive work on the canonical problem of influence
maximization in social networks. First posed by Domingos and Richardson [DR01, RD02] and
elegantly formulated and further developed by Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos [KKT03], influence
maximization is the algorithmic challenge of selecting individuals who can serve as early adopters of
a new idea, product, or technology in a manner that will trigger a large cascade in the social network.
In their seminal paper, Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos characterize a family of natural influence
processes for which selecting a set of individuals that maximize the resulting cascade reduces to
maximizing a submodular function under a cardinality constraint. Since submodular functions can be
maximized within a 1 1/e approximation guarantee, one can then obtain desirable guarantees for
the influence maximization problem. There have since been two, largely separate, agendas of research
on the problem. The first line of work is concerned with learning the underlying submodular function
from observations of cascades [LK03, AA05, LMF+ 07, GBL10, CKL11, GBS11, NS12, GLK12,
DSSY12, ACKP13, DSGRZ13, FK14, DBB+ 14, CAD+ 14, DGSS14, DLBS14, NPS15, HO15].
The second line of work focuses on algorithmic challenges revolving around maximizing influence,
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

