Learning A Structured Optimal Bipartite Graph
for Co-Clustering

1

Feiping Nie1 , Xiaoqian Wang2 , Cheng Deng3 , Heng Huang2∗
School of Computer Science, Center for OPTIMAL, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, USA
3
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, China
feipingnie@gmail.com,xqwang1991@gmail.com
chdeng@mail.xidian.edu.cn,heng.huang@pitt.edu

Abstract
Co-clustering methods have been widely applied to document clustering and gene
expression analysis. These methods make use of the duality between features and
samples such that the co-occurring structure of sample and feature clusters can be
extracted. In graph based co-clustering methods, a bipartite graph is constructed
to depict the relation between features and samples. Most existing co-clustering
methods conduct clustering on the graph achieved from the original data matrix,
which doesn’t have explicit cluster structure, thus they require a post-processing
step to obtain the clustering results. In this paper, we propose a novel co-clustering
method to learn a bipartite graph with exactly k connected components, where k is
the number of clusters. The new bipartite graph learned in our model approximates
the original graph but maintains an explicit cluster structure, from which we can
immediately get the clustering results without post-processing. Extensive empirical
results are presented to verify the effectiveness and robustness of our model.

1

Introduction

Clustering has long been a fundamental topic in unsupervised learning. The goal of clustering is to
partition data into different groups. Clustering methods have been successfully applied to various
areas, such as document clustering [3, 17], image segmentation [18, 7, 8] and bioinformatics [16, 14].
In clustering problems, the input data is usually formatted as a matrix, where one dimension represents
samples and the other denotes features. Each sample can be seen as a data point characterized by
a vector in the feature space. Alternatively, each feature can be regarded as a vector spanning in
the sample space. Traditional clustering methods propose to cluster samples according to their
distribution on features, or conversely, cluster features in terms of their distribution on samples.
In several types of data, such as document data and gene expression data, duality exists between
samples and features. For example, in document data, we can reasonably assume that documents
can be clustered based on their relations with different word clusters, while word clusters are formed
according to their associations with distinct document clusters. However, in the one-sided clustering
mechanism, the duality between samples and features is not taken into consideration. To make full
use of the duality information, co-clustering methods (also known as bi-clustering methods) are
proposed. The co-clustering mechanism takes advantage of the co-occurring cluster structure among
features and samples to strengthen the clustering performance and gain better interpretation of the
pragmatic meaning of the clusters.
∗
This work was partially supported by U.S. NSF-IIS 1302675, NSF-IIS 1344152, NSF-DBI 1356628,
NSF-IIS 1619308, NSF-IIS 1633753, NIH AG049371.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

