Generalizing GANs: A Turing Perspective

Roderich Groß and Yue Gu
Department of Automatic Control and Systems Engineering
The University of Sheffield
{r.gross,ygu16}@sheffield.ac.uk
Wei Li
Department of Electronics
The University of York
wei.li@york.ac.uk

Melvin Gauci
Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering
Harvard University
mgauci@g.harvard.edu

Abstract
Recently, a new class of machine learning algorithms has emerged, where models
and discriminators are generated in a competitive setting. The most prominent
example is Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). In this paper we examine
how these algorithms relate to the Turing test, and derive what—from a Turing
perspective—can be considered their defining features. Based on these features,
we outline directions for generalizing GANs—resulting in the family of algorithms
referred to as Turing Learning. One such direction is to allow the discriminators
to interact with the processes from which the data samples are obtained, making
them “interrogators”, as in the Turing test. We validate this idea using two case
studies. In the first case study, a computer infers the behavior of an agent while
controlling its environment. In the second case study, a robot infers its own sensor
configuration while controlling its movements. The results confirm that by allowing
discriminators to interrogate, the accuracy of models is improved.

1

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Networks [1] (GANs) are a framework for inferring generative models from
training data. They place two neural networks—a model and a discriminator—in a competitive
setting. The discriminator’s objective is to correctly label samples from either the model or the
training data. The model’s objective is to deceive the discriminator, in other words, to produce
samples that are categorized as training data by the discriminator. The networks are trained using a
gradient-based optimization algorithm. Since their inception in 2014, GANs have been applied in a
range of contexts [2, 3], but most prominently for the generation of photo-realistic images [1, 4].
In this paper we analyze the striking similarities between GANs and the Turing test [5]. The Turing
test probes a machine’s ability to display behavior that, to an interrogator, is indistinguishable from
that of a human. Developing machines that pass the Turing test could be considered as a canonical
problem in computer science [6]. More generally, the problem is that of imitating (and hence
inferring) the structure and/or behavior of any system, such as an organism, a device, a computer
program, or a process.
The idea to infer models in a competitive setting (model versus discriminator) was first proposed
in [7]. The paper considered the problem of inferring the behavior of an agent in a simple environment.
The behavior was deterministic, simplifying the identification task. In a subsequent work [8], the
method, named Turing Learning, was used to infer the behavioral rules of a swarm of memoryless
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

