Aggressive Sampling for Multi-class to Binary
Reduction with Applications to Text Classification

Bikash Joshi
Univ. Grenoble Alps, LIG
Grenoble, France
bikash.joshi@imag.fr

Massih-Reza Amini
Univ. Grenoble Alps, LIG
Grenoble, France
massih-reza.amini@imag.fr

Franck Iutzeler
Univ. Grenoble Alps, LJK
Grenoble, France
franck.iutzeler@imag.fr

Ioannis Partalas
Expedia EWE
Geneva, Switzerland
ipartalas@expedia.com

Yury Maximov
Los Alamos National Laboratory and Skolkovo IST,
USA and Moscow, Russia
yury@lanl.gov

Abstract
We address the problem of multi-class classification in the case where the number of
classes is very large. We propose a double sampling strategy on top of a multi-class
to binary reduction strategy, which transforms the original multi-class problem into
a binary classification problem over pairs of examples. The aim of the sampling
strategy is to overcome the curse of long-tailed class distributions exhibited in
majority of large-scale multi-class classification problems and to reduce the number
of pairs of examples in the expanded data. We show that this strategy does not
alter the consistency of the empirical risk minimization principle defined over the
double sample reduction. Experiments are carried out on DMOZ and Wikipedia
collections with 10,000 to 100,000 classes where we show the efficiency of the
proposed approach in terms of training and prediction time, memory consumption,
and predictive performance with respect to state-of-the-art approaches.

1

Introduction

Large-scale multi-class or extreme classification involves problems with extremely large number of
classes as it appears in text repositories such as Wikipedia, Yahoo! Directory (www.dir.yahoo.com),
or Directory Mozilla DMOZ (www.dmoz.org); and it has recently evolved as a popular branch of
machine learning with many applications in tagging, recommendation and ranking. The most common
and popular baseline in this case is the one-versus-all approach (OVA) [18] where one independent
binary classifier is learned per class. Despite its simplicity, this approach suffers from two main
limitations; first, it becomes computationally intractable when the number of classes grow large,
affecting at the same time the prediction. Second, it suffers from the class imbalance problem by
construction.Recently, two main approaches have been studied to cope with these limitations. The
first one, broadly divided in tree-based and embedding-based methods, have been proposed with
the aim of reducing the effective space of labels in order to control the complexity of the learning
problem. Tree-based methods [4, 3, 6, 7, 9, 21, 5, 15] rely on binary tree structures where each
leaf corresponds to a class and inference is performed by traversing the tree from top to bottom; a
binary classifier being used at each node to determine the child node to develop. These methods have
logarithmic time complexity with the drawback that it is a challenging task to find a balanced tree
structure which can partition the class labels. Further, even though different heuristics have been
developed to address the unbalanced problem, these methods suffer from the drawback that they have
to make several decisions prior to reaching a final category, which leads to error propagation and
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

