Integration Methods and Optimization Algorithms

Damien Scieur
INRIA, ENS,
PSL Research University,
Paris France
damien.scieur@inria.fr

Vincent Roulet
INRIA, ENS,
PSL Research University,
Paris France
vincent.roulet@inria.fr

Francis Bach
INRIA, ENS,
PSL Research University,
Paris France
francis.bach@inria.fr

Alexandre d’Aspremont
CNRS, ENS
PSL Research University,
Paris France
aspremon@ens.fr

Abstract
We show that accelerated optimization methods can be seen as particular instances
of multi-step integration schemes from numerical analysis, applied to the gradient
flow equation. Compared with recent advances in this vein, the differential equation
considered here is the basic gradient flow, and we derive a class of multi-step
schemes which includes accelerated algorithms, using classical conditions from
numerical analysis. Multi-step schemes integrate the differential equation using
larger step sizes, which intuitively explains the acceleration phenomenon.

Introduction
Applying the gradient descent algorithm to minimize a function f has a simple numerical interpretation as the integration of the gradient flow equation, written
ẋ(t) = −∇f (x(t)),

x(0) = x0

(Gradient Flow)

using Euler’s method. This appears to be a somewhat unique connection between optimization and
numerical methods, since these two fields have inherently different goals. On one hand, numerical
methods aim to get a precise discrete approximation of the solution x(t) on a finite time interval. On
the other hand, optimization algorithms seek to find the minimizer of a function, which corresponds
to the infinite time horizon of the gradient flow equation. More sophisticated methods than Euler’s
were developed to get better consistency with the continuous time solution but still focus on a
finite time horizon [see e.g. Süli and Mayers, 2003]. Similarly, structural assumptions on f lead to
more sophisticated optimization algorithms than the gradient method, such as the mirror gradient
method [see e.g. Ben-Tal and Nemirovski, 2001; Beck and Teboulle, 2003], proximal gradient
method [Nesterov, 2007] or a combination thereof [Duchi et al., 2010; Nesterov, 2015]. Among
them Nesterov’s accelerated gradient algorithm [Nesterov, 1983] is proven to be optimal on the
class of smooth convex or strongly convex functions. This latter method was designed with optimal
complexity in mind, but the proof relies on purely algebraic arguments and the key mechanism behind
acceleration remains elusive, with various interpretations discussed in e.g. [Bubeck et al., 2015;
Allen Zhu and Orecchia, 2017; Lessard et al., 2016].
Another recent stream of papers used differential equations to model the acceleration behavior and
offer another interpretation of Nesterov’s algorithm [Su et al., 2014; Krichene et al., 2015; Wibisono
et al., 2016; Wilson et al., 2016]. However, the differential equation is often quite complex, being
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

