Overcoming Catastrophic Forgetting by
Incremental Moment Matching

Sang-Woo Lee1 , Jin-Hwa Kim1 , Jaehyun Jun1 , Jung-Woo Ha2 , and Byoung-Tak Zhang1,3
Seoul National University1
Clova AI Research, NAVER Corp2
Surromind Robotics3
{slee,jhkim,jhjun}@bi.snu.ac.kr jungwoo.ha@navercorp.com
btzhang@bi.snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Catastrophic forgetting is a problem of neural networks that loses the information
of the first task after training the second task. Here, we propose a method, i.e. incremental moment matching (IMM), to resolve this problem. IMM incrementally
matches the moment of the posterior distribution of the neural network which is
trained on the first and the second task, respectively. To make the search space
of posterior parameter smooth, the IMM procedure is complemented by various
transfer learning techniques including weight transfer, L2-norm of the old and the
new parameter, and a variant of dropout with the old parameter. We analyze our approach on a variety of datasets including the MNIST, CIFAR-10, Caltech-UCSDBirds, and Lifelog datasets. The experimental results show that IMM achieves
state-of-the-art performance by balancing the information between an old and a
new network.

1

Introduction

Catastrophic forgetting is a fundamental challenge for artificial general intelligence based on neural
networks. The models that use stochastic gradient descent often forget the information of previous
tasks after being trained on a new task [1, 2]. Online multi-task learning that handles such problems
is described as continual learning. This classic problem has resurfaced with the renaissance of deep
learning research [3, 4].
Recently, the concept of applying a regularization function to a network trained by the old task to
learning a new task has received much attention. This approach can be interpreted as an approximation of sequential Bayesian [5, 6]. Representative examples of this regularization approach include
learning without forgetting [7] and elastic weight consolidation [8]. These algorithms succeeded in
some experiments where their own assumption of the regularization function fits the problem.
Here, we propose incremental moment matching (IMM) to resolve the catastrophic forgetting problem. IMM uses the framework of Bayesian neural networks, which implies that uncertainty is introduced on the parameters in neural networks, and that the posterior distribution is calculated [9, 10].
The dimension of the random variable in the posterior distribution is the number of the parameters
in the neural networks. IMM approximates the mixture of Gaussian posterior with each component
representing parameters for a single task to one Gaussian distribution for a combined task. To merge
the posteriors, we introduce two novel methods of moment matching. One is mean-IMM, which
simply averages the parameters of two networks for old and new tasks as the minimization of the
average of KL-divergence between one approximated posterior distribution for the combined task
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

