Mixture-Rank Matrix Approximation
for Collaborative Filtering

Dongsheng Li1

Chao Chen1

Wei Liu2∗ Tun Lu3,4

Ning Gu3,4

Stephen M. Chu1

1

IBM Research - China
2
Tencent AI Lab, China
3
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China
4
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, Fudan University, China

{ldsli, cshchen, schu}@cn.ibm.com, wliu@ee.columbia.edu, {lutun, ninggu}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Low-rank matrix approximation (LRMA) methods have achieved excellent accuracy among today’s collaborative filtering (CF) methods. In existing LRMA
methods, the rank of user/item feature matrices is typically fixed, i.e., the same rank
is adopted to describe all users/items. However, our studies show that submatrices
with different ranks could coexist in the same user-item rating matrix, so that
approximations with fixed ranks cannot perfectly describe the internal structures
of the rating matrix, therefore leading to inferior recommendation accuracy. In
this paper, a mixture-rank matrix approximation (MRMA) method is proposed, in
which user-item ratings can be characterized by a mixture of LRMA models with
different ranks. Meanwhile, a learning algorithm capitalizing on iterated condition
modes is proposed to tackle the non-convex optimization problem pertaining to
MRMA. Experimental studies on MovieLens and Netflix datasets demonstrate that
MRMA can outperform six state-of-the-art LRMA-based CF methods in terms of
recommendation accuracy.

1

Introduction

Low-rank matrix approximation (LRMA) is one of the most popular methods in today’s collaborative
filtering (CF) methods due to high accuracy [11, 12, 13, 17]. Given a targeted user-item rating matrix
R ∈ Rm×n , the general goal of LRMA is to find two rank-k matrices U ∈ Rm×k and V ∈ Rn×k
such that R ≈ R̂ = U V T . After obtaining the user and item feature matrices, the recommendation
score of the i-th user on the j-th item can be obtained by the dot product between their corresponding
feature vectors, i.e., Ui Vj T .
In existing LRMA methods [12, 13, 17], the rank k is considered fixed, i.e., the same rank is adopted
to describe all users and items. However, in many real-world user-item rating matrices, e.g., Movielens
and Netflix, users/items have a significantly varying number of ratings, so that submatrices with
different ranks could coexist. For instance, a submatrix containing users and items with few ratings
should be of a low rank, e.g., 10 or 20, and a submatrix containing users and items with many ratings
may be of a relatively higher rank, e.g., 50 or 100. Adopting a fixed rank for all users and items
cannot perfectly model the internal structures of the rating matrix, which will lead to imperfect
approximations as well as degraded recommendation accuracy.
In this paper, we propose a mixture-rank matrix approximation (MRMA) method, in which user-item
ratings are represented by a mixture of LRMA models with different ranks. For each user/item, a
probability distribution with a Laplacian prior is exploited to describe its relationship with different
∗

This work was conducted while the author was with IBM.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

