Online Learning of Optimal Bidding Strategy
in Repeated Multi-Commodity Auctions

Sevi Baltaoglu
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
msb372@cornell.edu

Lang Tong
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
lt35@cornell.edu

Qing Zhao
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
qz16@cornell.edu

Abstract
We study the online learning problem of a bidder who participates in repeated
auctions. With the goal of maximizing his T-period payoff, the bidder determines
the optimal allocation of his budget among his bids for K goods at each period.
As a bidding strategy, we propose a polynomial-time algorithm, inspired by the
dynamic programming approach to the knapsack problem. The proposed algorithm,
referred to √
as dynamic programming on discrete set (DPDS), achieves √
a regret
order of O( T log T ). By showing that the regret is lower bounded
by
Ω(
T ) for
√
any strategy, we conclude that DPDS is order optimal up to a log T term. We
evaluate the performance of DPDS empirically in the context of virtual trading in
wholesale electricity markets by using historical data from the New York market.
Empirical results show that DPDS consistently outperforms benchmark heuristic
methods that are derived from machine learning and online learning approaches.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of optimal bidding in a multi-commodity uniform-price auction (UPA) [1],
which promotes the law of one price for identical goods. UPA is widely used in practice. Examples
include spectrum auction, the auction of treasury notes, the auction of emission permits (UK), and
virtual trading in the wholesale electricity market, which we discuss in detail in Sec. 1.1.
A mathematical abstraction of multi-commodity UPA is as follows. A bidder has K goods to bid on
at an auction. With the objective to maximize his T-period expected profit, at each period, the bidder
determines how much to bid for each good subject to a budget constraint.
In the bidding period t, if a bid xt,k for good k is greater than or equal to its auction clearing price
λt,k , then the bid is cleared, and the bidder pays λt,k . His revenue resulting from the cleared bid
will be the good’s spot price (utility) πt,k . In particular, the payoff obtained from good k at period
t is (πt,k − λt,k )1{xt,k ≥ λt,k } where 1{xt,k ≥ λt,k } indicates whether the bid is cleared. Let
λt = [λt,1 , ..., λt,K ]| and πt = [πt,1 , ..., πt,K ]| be the vector of auction clearing and spot market
prices at period t, respectively. Similarly, let xt = [xt,1 , ..., xt,K ]| be the vector of bids for period
t. We assume that (πt , λt ) are drawn from an unknown joint distribution and, in our analysis,
independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) over time.1
At the end of each period, the bidder observes the auction clearing and spot prices of all goods.
Therefore, before choosing the bid of period t, all the information the bidder has is a vector It−1
containing his observation and decision history {xi , λi , πi }t−1
i=1 . Consequently, a bidding policy µ of
a bidder is defined as a sequence of decision rules, i.e., µ = (µ0 , µ1 ..., µT −1 ), such that, at time t − 1,
1
This implies that the auction clearing price is independent of bid xt , which is a reasonable assumption for
any market where an individual’s bid has negligible impact on the market price.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

