Trimmed Density Ratio Estimation

Song Liu∗
University of Bristol
song.liu@bristol.ac.uk

Akiko Takeda
The Institute of Statistical Mathematics,
AIP, RIKEN,
atakeda@ism.ac.jp

Taiji Suzuki
University of Tokyo,
Sakigake (PRESTO), JST,
AIP, RIKEN,
taiji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Kenji Fukumizu
The Institute of Statistical Mathematics,
fukumizu@ism.ac.jp

Abstract
Density ratio estimation is a vital tool in both machine learning and statistical
community. However, due to the unbounded nature of density ratio, the estimation
procedure can be vulnerable to corrupted data points, which often pushes the
estimated ratio toward infinity. In this paper, we present a robust estimator which
automatically identifies and trims outliers. The proposed estimator has a convex
formulation, and the global optimum can be obtained via subgradient descent. We
analyze the parameter estimation error of this estimator under high-dimensional
settings. Experiments are conducted to verify the effectiveness of the estimator.

1

Introduction

Density ratio estimation (DRE) [18, 11, 27] is an important tool in various branches of machine
learning and statistics. Due to its ability of directly modelling the differences between two probability
density functions, DRE finds its applications in change detection [13, 6], two-sample test [32] and
outlier detection [1, 26]. In recent years, a sampling framework called Generative Adversarial
Network (GAN) (see e.g., [9, 19]) uses the density ratio function to compare artificial samples from a
generative distribution and real samples from an unknown distribution. DRE has also been widely
discussed in statistical literatures for adjusting non-parametric density estimation [5], stabilizing the
estimation of heavy tailed distribution [7] and fitting multiple distributions at once [8].
However, as a density ratio function can grow unbounded, DRE can suffer from robustness and
stability issues: a few corrupted points may completely mislead the estimator (see Figure 2 in Section
6 for example). Considering a density ratio p(x)/q(x), a point x that is extremely far away from the
high density region of q may have an almost infinite ratio value and DRE results can be dominated
by such points. This makes DRE performance very sensitive to rare pathological data or small
modifications of the dataset. Here we give two examples:
Cyber-attack In change detection applications, a density ratio p(x)/q(x) is used to determine how
the data generating model differs between p and q. Consider a “hacker” who can spy on our data
may just inject a few data points in p which are extremely far away from the high-density region of q.
This would result excessively large p(x)/q(x) tricking us to believe there is a significant change from
q(x) to p(x), even if there is no change at all. If the generated outliers are also far away from the
∗

This work was done when Song Liu was at The Institute of Statistical Mathematics, Japan

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

