Efficient Online Linear Optimization
with Approximation Algorithms
Dan Garber
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
dangar@technion.ac.il

Abstract
We revisit the problem of online linear optimization in case the set of feasible actions is accessible through an approximated linear optimization oracle with a factor
↵ multiplicative approximation guarantee. This setting is in particular interesting
since it captures natural online extensions of well-studied offline linear optimization problems which are NP-hard, yet admit efficient approximation algorithms.
The goal here is to minimize the ↵-regret which is the natural extension of the
standard regret in online learning to this setting. We present new algorithms with
significantly improved oracle complexity for both the full information and bandit
variants of the problem. Mainly, for both variants, we present ↵-regret bounds of
O(T 1/3 ), were T is the number of prediction rounds, using only O(log(T )) calls
to the approximation oracle per iteration, on average. These are the first results to
obtain both average oracle complexity of O(log(T )) (or even poly-logarithmic in
T ) and ↵-regret bound O(T c ) for a constant c > 0, for both variants.

1

Introduction

In this paper we revisit the problem of Online Linear Optimization (OLO) [14], which is a specialized
case of Online Convex Optimization (OCO) [12] with linear loss functions, in case the feasible set of
actions is accessible through an oracle for approximated linear optimization with a multiplicative
approximation error guarantee. In the standard setting of OLO, a decision maker is repeatedly
required to choose an action, a vector in some fixed feasible set in Rd . After choosing his action,
the decision maker incurs loss (or payoff) given by the inner product between his selected vector
and a vector chosen by an adversary. This game between the decision maker and the adversary then
repeats itself. In the full information variant of the problem, after the decision maker receives his
loss (payoff) on a certain round, he gets to observe the vector chosen by the adversary. In the bandit
version of the problem, the decision maker only observes his loss (payoff) and does not get to observe
the adversary’s vector. The standard goal of the decision maker in OLO is to minimize a quantity
known as regret, which measures the difference between the average loss of the decision maker on
a game of T consecutive rounds (where T is fixed and known in advance), and the average loss
of the best feasible action in hindsight (i.e., chosen with knowledge of all actions of the adversary
throughout the T rounds) (in case of payoffs this difference is reversed). The main concern when
designing algorithms for choosing the actions of the decision maker, is guaranteeing that the regret
goes to zero as the length of the game T increases, as fast as possible (i.e., the rate of the regret in
terms of T ). It should be noted that in this paper we focus on the case in which the adversary is
oblivious (a.k.a. non-adaptive), which means the adversary chooses his entire sequence of actions for
the T rounds beforehand.
While there exist well known algorithms for choosing the decision maker’s actions which guarantee
optimal regret bounds in T , such as the celebrated Follow the Perturbed Leader (FPL) and Online
Gradient Descent (OGD) algorithms [14, 17, 12], efficient implementation of these algorithms hinges
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

