Matrix Norm Estimation from a Few Entries
Ashish Khetan
Department of ISE
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
khetan2@illinois.edu

Sewoong Oh
Department of ISE
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
swoh@illinois.edu

Abstract
Singular values of a data in a matrix form provide insights on the structure of
the data, the effective dimensionality, and the choice of hyper-parameters on
higher-level data analysis tools. However, in many practical applications such
as collaborative filtering and network analysis, we only get a partial observation.
Under such scenarios, we consider the fundamental problem of recovering various
spectral properties of the underlying matrix from a sampling of its entries. We
propose a framework of first estimating the Schatten k-norms of a matrix for
several values of k, and using these as surrogates for estimating spectral properties
of interest, such as the spectrum itself or the rank. This paper focuses on the
technical challenges in accurately estimating the Schatten norms from a sampling
of a matrix. We introduce a novel unbiased estimator based on counting small
structures in a graph and provide guarantees that match its empirical performances.
Our theoretical analysis shows that Schatten norms can be recovered accurately
from strictly smaller number of samples compared to what is needed to recover the
underlying low-rank matrix. Numerical experiments suggest that we significantly
improve upon a competing approach of using matrix completion methods.

1

Introduction

Computing and analyzing the set of singular values of a data in a matrix form, which is called the
spectrum, provide insights into the geometry and topology of the data. Such a spectral analysis
is routinely a first step in general data analysis with the goal of checking if there exists a lower
dimensional subspace explaining the important aspects of the data, which itself might be high
dimensional. Concretely, it is a first step in dimensionality reduction methods such as principal
component analysis or canonical correlation analysis.
However, spectral analysis becomes challenging in practical scenarios where the data is only partially
observed. We commonly observe pairwise relations of randomly chosen pairs: each user only rates a
few movies in recommendation systems, and each player/team only plays against a few opponents in
sports. In other applications, we have more structured samples. For example, in a network analysis
we might be interested in the spectrum of the adjacency matrix of a large network, but only get
to see the connections within a small subset of nodes. Whatever the sampling pattern is, typical
number of paired relations we observe is significantly smaller than the dimension of the data matrix.
We study all such variations in sampling patterns for partially observed data matrices, and ask the
following fundamental question: can we estimate spectral properties of a data matrix from partial
observations? We build on the fact that several spectral properties of interest, such as the spectrum
itself or the rank, can be estimated accurately via first estimating the Schatten k-norms of a matrix
and then aggregating those norms to estimate the spectral properties. In this paper, we focus on the
Pd
challenging task of estimating the Schatten k-norms defined as kM kk = ( i=1 σi (M )k )1/k , where
σ1 (M ) ≥ · · · ≥ σd (M ) are singular values of the data matrix M ∈ Rd×d . Once we obtain accurate
estimates of Schatten k-norms, these estimates, as well as corresponding performance guarantees,
can readily be translated into accurate estimates of the spectral properties of interest.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

