Rigorous Dynamics and Consistent Estimation in
Arbitrarily Conditioned Linear Systems

Alyson K. Fletcher
Dept. Statistics
UC Los Angeles
akfletcher@ucla.edu

Mojtaba Sahraee-Ardakan
Dept. EE,
UC Los Angeles
msahraee@ucla.edu

Sundeep Rangan
Dept. ECE,
NYU
srangan@nyu.edu

Philip Schniter
Dept. ECE,
The Ohio State Univ.
schniter@ece.osu.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of estimating a random vector x from noisy linear measurements y = Ax + w in the setting where parameters θ on the distribution of
x and w must be learned in addition to the vector x. This problem arises in a
wide range of statistical learning and linear inverse problems. Our main contribution shows that a computationally simple iterative message passing algorithm can
provably obtain asymptotically consistent estimates in a certain high-dimensional
large system limit (LSL) under very general parametrizations. Importantly, this
LSL applies to all right-rotationally random A – a much larger class of matrices
than i.i.d. sub-Gaussian matrices to which many past message passing approaches
are restricted. In addition, a simple testable condition is provided in which the
mean square error (MSE) on the vector x matches the Bayes optimal MSE predicted by the replica method. The proposed algorithm uses a combination of
Expectation-Maximization (EM) with a recently-developed Vector Approximate
Message Passing (VAMP) technique. We develop an analysis framework that
shows that the parameter estimates in each iteration of the algorithm converge to
deterministic limits that can be precisely predicted by a simple set of state evolution
(SE) equations. The SE equations, which extends those of VAMP without parameter adaptation, depend only on the initial parameter estimates and the statistical
properties of the problem and can be used to predict consistency and precisely
characterize other performance measures of the method.

1

Introduction

Consider the problem of estimating a random vector x0 from linear measurements y of the form
y = Ax0 + w,
M ×N

w ∼ N (0, θ2−1 I),

x0 ∼ p(x|θ1 ),

(1)

0

where A ∈ R
is a known matrix, p(x|θ1 ) is a density on x with parameters θ1 , w is additive
white Gaussian noise (AWGN) independent of x0 , and θ2 > 0 is the noise precision (inverse variance).
The goal is to estimate x0 along with simultaneously learning the unknown parameters θ := (θ1 , θ2 )
from the data y and A. This problem arises in Bayesian forms of linear inverse problems in signal
processing, as well as in linear regression in statistics.
Exact estimation of the parameters θ via maximum likelihood or other methods is generally intractable.
One promising class of approximate methods combines approximate message passing (AMP) [1]
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

