Learning Disentangled Representations with
Semi-Supervised Deep Generative Models

N. Siddharth†
University of Oxford
nsid@robots.ox.ac.uk

Brooks Paige†
Alan Turing Institute
University of Cambridge

Jan-Willem van de Meent†
Northeastern University
j.vandemeent@northeastern.edu

bpaige@turing.ac.uk

Alban Desmaison
University of Oxford

Noah D. Goodman
Stanford University

Pushmeet Kohli ∗
Deepmind

alban@robots.ox.ac.uk

ngoodman@stanford.edu

pushmeet@google.com

Frank Wood
University of Oxford

Philip H.S. Torr
University of Oxford

fwood@robots.ox.ac.uk

philip.torr@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Variational autoencoders (VAEs) learn representations of data by jointly training a probabilistic
encoder and decoder network. Typically these models encode all features of the data into a
single variable. Here we are interested in learning disentangled representations that encode
distinct aspects of the data into separate variables. We propose to learn such representations
using model architectures that generalise from standard VAEs, employing a general graphical
model structure in the encoder and decoder. This allows us to train partially-specified models
that make relatively strong assumptions about a subset of interpretable variables and rely on
the flexibility of neural networks to learn representations for the remaining variables. We
further define a general objective for semi-supervised learning in this model class, which can be
approximated using an importance sampling procedure. We evaluate our framework’s ability
to learn disentangled representations, both by qualitative exploration of its generative capacity,
and quantitative evaluation of its discriminative ability on a variety of models and datasets.

1

Introduction

Learning representations from data is one of the fundamental challenges in machine learning and
artificial intelligence. Characteristics of learned representations can depend on their intended use.
For the purposes of solving a single task, the primary characteristic required is suitability for that
task. However, learning separate representations for each and every such task involves a large amount
of wasteful repetitive effort. A representation that has some factorisable structure, and consistent
semantics associated to different parts, is more likely to generalise to a new task.
Probabilistic generative models provide a general framework for learning representations: a model is
specified by a joint probability distribution both over the data and over latent random variables, and a
representation can be found by considering the posterior on latent variables given specific data. The
learned representation — that is, inferred values of latent variables — depends then not just on the
data, but also on the generative model in its choice of latent variables and the relationships between
the latent variables and the data. There are two extremes of approaches to constructing generative
models. At one end are fully-specified probabilistic graphical models [19, 22], in which a practitioner
decides on all latent variables present in the joint distribution, the relationships between them, and
the functional form of the conditional distributions which define the model. At the other end are
∗
Author was at Microsoft Research during this project. † indicates equal contribution.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

