Collapsed variational Bayes for Markov jump
processes

Jiangwei Pan∗†
Department of Computer Science
Duke University
panjiangwei@gmail.com

Boqian Zhang∗
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
zhan1977@purdue.edu

Vinayak Rao
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
varao@purdue.edu

Abstract
Markov jump processes are continuous-time stochastic processes widely used
in statistical applications in the natural sciences, and more recently in machine
learning. Inference for these models typically proceeds via Markov chain Monte
Carlo, and can suffer from various computational challenges. In this work, we
propose a novel collapsed variational inference algorithm to address this issue. Our
work leverages ideas from discrete-time Markov chains, and exploits a connection
between these two through an idea called uniformization. Our algorithm proceeds
by marginalizing out the parameters of the Markov jump process, and then approximating the distribution over the trajectory with a factored distribution over
segments of a piecewise-constant function. Unlike MCMC schemes that marginalize out transition times of a piecewise-constant process, our scheme optimizes the
discretization of time, resulting in significant computational savings. We apply
our ideas to synthetic data as well as a dataset of check-in recordings, where we
demonstrate superior performance over state-of-the-art MCMC methods.

1

Markov jump processes

Markov jump processes (MJPs) (Çinlar, 1975) are stochastic processes that generalize discrete-time
discrete-state Markov chains to continuous-time. MJPs find wide application in fields like biology,
chemistry and ecology, where they are used to model phenomena like the evolution of population
sizes (Opper and Sanguinetti, 2007), gene-regulation Boys et al. (2008), or the state of a computing
network Xu and Shelton (2010). A realization of an MJP is a random piecewise-constant function of
time, transitioning between a set of states, usually of finite cardinality N (see Figure 1, left). This
stochastic process is parametrized by an N × 1 distribution π giving the initial distribution over states,
and an N × N rate matrix A governing the dynamics of the process. The off-diagonal element Aij
(i 6= j) gives the rate of transitioning from stateP
i to j, and these elements determine the diagonal
element Aii according to the relation Aii = − i6=j Aij . Thus, the rows of A sum to 0, and the
negative of the diagonal element Aii gives the total rate of leaving state i. Simulating a trajectory
from an MJP over an interval [0, T ] follows what is called the Gillespie algorithm (Gillespie, 1977):
1. First, at time t = 0, sample an initial state s0 from π.
2. From here onwards, upon entering a new state i, sample the time of the next transition from
an exponential with rate |Aii |, and then a new state j 6= i with probability proportional to Aij .
These latter two steps are repeated until the end of the interval, giving a piecewise-constant
trajectory consisting of a sequence of holds and jumps.
Note that under this formulation, it is impossible for the system to make self-transition, these are
effectively absorbed into the rate parameters Aii .
∗
†

Equal contribution
Now at Facebook

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

