Inferring Generative Model Structure
with Static Analysis

Paroma Varma1 , Bryan He2 , Payal Bajaj2 ,
Nishith Khandwala2 , Imon Banerjee3 , Daniel Rubin3,4 , Christopher Ré2
1
Electrical Engineering, 2 Computer Science, 3 Biomedical Data Science, 4 Radiology
Stanford University
{paroma,bryanhe,pabajaj,nishith,imonb,rubin}@stanford.edu,
chrismre@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Obtaining enough labeled data to robustly train complex discriminative models is a
major bottleneck in the machine learning pipeline. A popular solution is combining
multiple sources of weak supervision using generative models. The structure of these
models affects the quality of the training labels, but is difficult to learn without any
ground truth labels. We instead rely on weak supervision sources having some structure by virtue of being encoded programmatically. We present Coral, a paradigm
that infers generative model structure by statically analyzing the code for these
heuristics, thus significantly reducing the amount of data required to learn structure.
We prove that Coral’s sample complexity scales quasilinearly with the number of
heuristics and number of relations identified, improving over the standard sample
complexity, which is exponential in n for learning nth degree relations. Empirically,
Coral matches or outperforms traditional structure learning approaches by up to
3.81 F1 points. Using Coral to model dependencies instead of assuming independence results in better performance than a fully supervised model by 3.07 accuracy
points when heuristics are used to label radiology data without ground truth labels.

1

Introduction

Complex discriminative models like deep neural networks rely on a large amount of labeled training
data for their success. For many real-world applications, obtaining this magnitude of labeled
data is one of the most expensive and time consuming aspects of the machine learning pipeline.
Recently, generative models have been used to create training labels from various weak supervision
sources, such as heuristics or knowledge bases, by modeling the true class label as a latent variable
[1, 2, 27, 31, 36, 37]. After the necessary parameters for the generative models are learned using
unlabeled data, the distribution over the true labels can be inferred. Properly specifying the structure
of these generative models is essential in estimating the accuracy of the supervision sources. While
traditional structure learning approaches have focused on the supervised case [23, 28, 41], previous
works related to weak supervision assume that the structure is user-specified [1, 27, 31, 36]. Recently,
Bach et al. [2] showed that it is possible to learn the structure of these models with a sample complexity
that scales sublinearly with the number of possible binary dependencies. However, the sample
complexity scales exponentially for higher degree dependencies, limiting its ability to learn complex
dependency structures. Moreover, the time required to learn the dependencies also grows exponentially
with the degree of dependencies, hindering the development of user-defined heuristics.
This poses a problem in many domains where high degree dependencies are common among heuristics
that operate over a shared set of inputs. These inputs are interpretable characteristics extracted from the
data. For example, various approaches in computer vision use predicted bounding box or segmentation
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

