Tractability in Structured Probability Spaces

Arthur Choi
University of California
Los Angeles, CA 90095
aychoi@cs.ucla.edu

Yujia Shen
University of California
Los Angeles, CA 90095
yujias@cs.ucla.edu

Adnan Darwiche
University of California
Los Angeles, CA 90095
darwiche@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Recently, the Probabilistic Sentential Decision Diagram (PSDD) has been proposed
as a framework for systematically inducing and learning distributions over structured objects, including combinatorial objects such as permutations and rankings,
paths and matchings on a graph, etc. In this paper, we study the scalability of such
models in the context of representing and learning distributions over routes on
a map. In particular, we introduce the notion of a hierarchical route distribution
and show how they can be leveraged to construct tractable PSDDs over route
distributions, allowing them to scale to larger maps. We illustrate the utility of
our model empirically, in a route prediction task, showing how accuracy can be
increased significantly compared to Markov models.

1

Introduction

A structured probability space is one where members of the space correspond to structured or
combinatorial objects, such as permutations, partial rankings, or routes on a map [Choi et al., 2015,
2016]. Structured spaces have come into focus recently, given their large number of applications
and the lack of systematic methods for inducing and learning distributions over such spaces. Some
structured objects are supported by specialized distributions, e.g., the Mallows distribution over
permutations [Mallows, 1957, Lu and Boutilier, 2011]. For other types of objects, one is basically
on their own as far developing representations and corresponding algorithms for inference and
learning. Standard techniques, such as probabilistic graphical models, are not suitable for these kind
of distributions since the constraints on such objects often lead to almost fully connected graphical
models, which are not amenable to inference or learning.
A framework known as PSDD was proposed recently for systematically inducing and learning
distributions over structured objects [Kisa et al., 2014a,b, Shen et al., 2016, Liang et al., 2017].
According to this framework, one first describes members of the space using propositional logic,
then compiles these descriptions into Boolean circuits with specific properties (a circuit encodes a
structured space by evaluating to 1 precisely on inputs corresponding to members of the space). By
parameterizing these Boolean circuits, one can induce a tractable distribution over objects in the
structured space. The only domain specific investment in this framework corresponds to the encoding
of objects using propositional logic. Moreover, the only computational bottleneck in this framework
is the compilation of propositional logic descriptions to circuits with specific properties, which
are known as SDD circuits (for Sentential Decision Diagrams) [Darwiche, 2011, Xue et al., 2012].
Parameterized SDD circuits are known as a PSDDs (for Probabilistic SDDs) and have attractive
properties, including tractable inference and closed-form parameter estimation under complete data
[Kisa et al., 2014a].
Most of the focus on PSDDs has been dedicated to showing how they can systematically induce and
learn distributions over various structured objects. Case studies have been reported relating to total
and partial rankings [Choi et al., 2015], game traces, and routes on a map [Choi et al., 2016]. The
scalability of these studies varied. For partial rankings, experiments have been reported for hundreds
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

