Greedy Algorithms for Cone Constrained
Optimization with Convergence Guarantees

Francesco Locatello
MPI for Intelligent Systems - ETH Zurich

Michael Tschannen
ETH Zurich

locatelf@ethz.ch

michaelt@nari.ee.ethz.ch

Gunnar Rätsch
ETH Zurich

Martin Jaggi
EPFL

raetsch@inf.ethz.ch

martin.jaggi@epfl.ch

Abstract
Greedy optimization methods such as Matching Pursuit (MP) and Frank-Wolfe
(FW) algorithms regained popularity in recent years due to their simplicity, effectiveness and theoretical guarantees. MP and FW address optimization over the
linear span and the convex hull of a set of atoms, respectively. In this paper, we
consider the intermediate case of optimization over the convex cone, parametrized
as the conic hull of a generic atom set, leading to the first principled definitions
of non-negative MP algorithms for which we give explicit convergence rates and
demonstrate excellent empirical performance. In particular, we derive sublinear
(O(1/t)) convergence on general smooth and convex objectives, and linear convergence (O(e−t )) on strongly convex objectives, in both cases for general sets
of atoms. Furthermore, we establish a clear correspondence of our algorithms
to known algorithms from the MP and FW literature. Our novel algorithms and
analyses target general atom sets and general objective functions, and hence are
directly applicable to a large variety of learning settings.

1

Introduction

In recent years, greedy optimization algorithms have attracted significant interest in the domains
of signal processing and machine learning thanks to their ability to process very large data sets.
Arguably two of the most popular representatives are Frank-Wolfe (FW) [12, 21] and Matching
Pursuit (MP) algorithms [34], in particular Orthogonal MP (OMP) [9, 49]. While the former targets
minimization of a convex function over bounded convex sets, the latter apply to minimization over a
linear subspace. In both cases, the domain is commonly parametrized by a set of atoms or dictionary
elements, and in each iteration, both algorithms rely on querying a so-called linear minimization
oracle (LMO) to find the direction of steepest descent in the set of atoms. The iterate is then updated
as a linear or convex combination, respectively, of previous iterates and the newly obtained atom
from the LMO. The particular choice of the atom set allows to encode structure such as sparsity and
non-negativity (of the atoms) into the solution. This enables control of the trade-off between the
amount of structure in the solution and approximation quality via the number of iterations, which
was found useful in a large variety of use cases including structured matrix and tensor factorizations
[50, 53, 54, 18].
In this paper, we target an important “intermediate case” between the two domain parameterizations
given by the linear span and the convex hull of an atom set, namely the parameterization of the
optimization domain as the conic hull of a possibly infinite atom set. In this case, the solution
can be represented as a non-negative linear combination of the atoms, which is desirable in many
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

