PredRNN: Recurrent Neural Networks for Predictive
Learning using Spatiotemporal LSTMs

Yunbo Wang
School of Software
Tsinghua University
wangyb15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Jianmin Wang
School of Software
Tsinghua University
jimwang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Mingsheng Long∗
School of Software
Tsinghua University
mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn

Zhifeng Gao
School of Software
Tsinghua University
gzf16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Philip S. Yu
School of Software
Tsinghua University
psyu@uic.edu

Abstract
The predictive learning of spatiotemporal sequences aims to generate future images
by learning from the historical frames, where spatial appearances and temporal variations are two crucial structures. This paper models these structures by presenting a
predictive recurrent neural network (PredRNN). This architecture is enlightened by
the idea that spatiotemporal predictive learning should memorize both spatial appearances and temporal variations in a unified memory pool. Concretely, memory
states are no longer constrained inside each LSTM unit. Instead, they are allowed
to zigzag in two directions: across stacked RNN layers vertically and through all
RNN states horizontally. The core of this network is a new Spatiotemporal LSTM
(ST-LSTM) unit that extracts and memorizes spatial and temporal representations
simultaneously. PredRNN achieves the state-of-the-art prediction performance on
three video prediction datasets and is a more general framework, that can be easily
extended to other predictive learning tasks by integrating with other architectures.

1

Introduction

As a key application of predictive learning, generating images conditioned on given consecutive
frames has received growing interests in machine learning and computer vision communities. To
learn representations of spatiotemporal sequences, recurrent neural networks (RNN) [17, 27] with
the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [9] have been recently extended from supervised sequence
learning tasks, such as machine translation [22, 2], speech recognition [8], action recognition [28, 5]
and video captioning [5], to this spatiotemporal predictive learning scenario [21, 16, 19, 6, 25, 12].
1.1

Why spatiotemporal memory?

In spatiotemporal predictive learning, there are two crucial aspects: spatial correlations and temporal
dynamics. The performance of a prediction system depends on whether it is able to memorize
relevant structures. However, to the best of our knowledge, the state-of-the-art RNN/LSTM predictive
learning methods [19, 21, 6, 12, 25] focus more on modeling temporal variations (such as the object
moving trajectories), with memory states being updated repeatedly over time inside each LSTM unit.
Admittedly, the stacked LSTM architecture is proved powerful for supervised spatiotemporal learning
∗

Corresponding author: Mingsheng Long

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

