Interpretable and Globally Optimal Prediction for
Textual Grounding using Image Concepts

Raymond A. Yeh,

Jinjun Xiong† ,

Minh N. Do,

Wen-mei W. Hwu,

Alexander G. Schwing

Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
†
IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center
yeh17@illinois.edu, jinjun@us.ibm.com, w-hwu@illinois.edu,
minhdo@illinois.edu, aschwing@illinois.edu

Abstract
Textual grounding is an important but challenging task for human-computer interaction, robotics and knowledge mining. Existing algorithms generally formulate
the task as selection from a set of bounding box proposals obtained from deep
net based systems. In this work, we demonstrate that we can cast the problem of
textual grounding into a unified framework that permits efficient search over all
possible bounding boxes. Hence, the method is able to consider significantly more
proposals and doesn’t rely on a successful first stage hypothesizing bounding box
proposals. Beyond, we demonstrate that the trained parameters of our model can be
used as word-embeddings which capture spatial-image relationships and provide
interpretability. Lastly, at the time of submission, our approach outperformed the
current state-of-the-art methods on the Flickr 30k Entities and the ReferItGame
dataset by 3.08% and 7.77% respectively.

1

Introduction

Grounding of textual phrases, i.e., finding bounding boxes in images which relate to textual phrases, is
an important problem for human-computer interaction, robotics and mining of knowledge bases, three
applications that are of increasing importance when considering autonomous systems, augmented
and virtual reality environments. For example, we may want to guide an autonomous system by using
phrases such as ‘the bottle on your left,’ or ‘the plate in the top shelf.’ While those phrases are easy to
interpret for a human, they pose significant challenges for present day textual grounding algorithms,
as interpretation of those phrases requires an understanding of objects and their relations.
Existing approaches for textual grounding, such as [38, 15] take advantage of the cognitive performance improvements obtained from deep net features. More specifically, deep net models are
designed to extract features from given bounding boxes and textual data, which are then compared to
measure their fitness. To obtain suitable bounding boxes, many of the textual grounding frameworks,
such as [38, 15], make use of region proposals. While being easy to obtain, automatic extraction of
region proposals is limiting, because the performance of the visual grounding is inherently constrained
by the quality of the proposal generation procedure.
In this work we describe an interpretable mechanism which additionally alleviates any issues arising
due to a limited number of region proposals. Our approach is based on a number of ‘image concepts’
such as semantic segmentations, detections and priors for any number of objects of interest. Based on
those ‘image concepts’ which are represented as score maps, we formulate textual grounding as a
search over all possible bounding boxes. We find the bounding box with highest accumulated score
contained in its interior. The search for this box can be solved via an efficient branch and bound
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

