Online Convex Optimization with Stochastic
Constraints
Hao Yu, Michael J. Neely, Xiaohan Wei
Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Southern California⇤
{yuhao,mjneely,xiaohanw}@usc.edu

Abstract
This paper considers online convex optimization (OCO) with stochastic constraints,
which generalizes Zinkevich’s OCO over a known simple fixed set by introducing
multiple stochastic functional constraints that are i.i.d. generated at each round
and are disclosed to the decision maker only after the decision is made. This
formulation arises naturally when decisions are restricted by stochastic environments or deterministic environments with noisy observations. It also includes
many important problems as special case, such as OCO with long term constraints,
stochastic constrained convex optimization, and deterministic constrained convex optimization.
p To solve this problem, this paper proposes a newpalgorithm
that achieves O( T ) expected regret and constraint violations and O( T log(T ))
high probability regret and constraint violations. Experiments on a real-world data
center scheduling problem further verify the performance of the new algorithm.

1

Introduction

Online convex optimization (OCO) is a multi-round learning process with arbitrarily-varying convex
loss functions where the decision maker has to choose decision x(t) 2 X before observing the
corresponding loss function f t (·). For a fixed time horizon T , define the regret of a learning algorithm
with respect to the best fixed decision in hindsight (with full knowledge of all loss functions) as
regret(T ) =

T
X
t=1

f t (x(t))

min

x2X

T
X

f t (x).

t=1

The goal of OCO is to develop dynamic learning algorithms such that regret grows sub-linearly with
respect to T . The setting of OCO is introduced in a series of work [3, 14, 9, 29] and is formalized in
[29]. OCO has gained considerable amount of research interest recently with various applications
such as online regression, prediction with expert advice, online ranking, online shortest paths, and
portfolio selection. See [23, 11] for more applications and background.
p
In [29], Zinkevich shows O( T ) regret can be achieved by using an online gradient descent (OGD)
update given by
⇥
⇤
x(t + 1) = PX x(t)
rf t (x(t))
(1)

where rf t (·) is a subgradient of f t (·) and PX [·] is the projection onto set X . Hazan et al. in [12]
show
p that better regret is possible under the assumption that each loss function is strongly convex but
O( T ) is the best possible if no additional assumption is imposed.

It is obvious that Zinkevich’s OGD in (1) requires the full knowledge of set X and low complexity
of the projection PX [·]. However, in practice, the constraint set X , which is often described by
⇤

This work is supported in part by grant NSF CCF-1718477.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

