A Sample Complexity Measure with Applications to
Learning Optimal Auctions

Vasilis Syrgkanis
Microsoft Research
vasy@microsoft.com

Abstract
We introduce a new sample complexity measure, which we refer to as split-sample
growth rate. For any hypothesis H and for any sample S of size m, the splitsample growth rate τ̂H (m) counts how many different hypotheses can empirical
risk minimization output on any sub-sample of S of size
m/2. We show
q
 that
log(τ̂H (2m))
the expected generalization error is upper bounded by O
. Our
m
result is enabled by a strengthening of the Rademacher complexity analysis of
the expected generalization error. We show that this sample complexity measure,
greatly simplifies the analysis of the sample complexity of optimal auction design,
for many auction classes studied in the literature. Their sample complexity can
be derived solely by noticing that in these auction classes, ERM on any sample or
sub-sample will pick parameters that are equal to one of the points in the sample.

1

Introduction

The seminal work of [11] gave a recipe for designing the revenue maximizing auction in auction
settings where the private information of players is a single number and when the distribution over
this number is completely known to the auctioneer. The latter raises the question of how has the
auction designer formed this prior distribution over the private information. Recent work, starting
from [4], addresses the question of how to design optimal auctions when having access only to
samples of values from the bidders. We refer the reader to [5] for an overview of the existing results
in the literature. [4, 9, 10, 2] give bounds on the sample complexity of optimal auctions without
computational efficiency, while recent work has also focused on getting computationally efficient
learning bounds [5, 13, 6].
This work solely focuses on sample complexity and not computational efficiency and thus is more
related to [4, 9, 10, 2]. The latter work, uses tools from supervised learning, such as pseudodimension [12] (a variant of VC dimension for real-valued functions), compression bounds [8] and
Rademacher complexity [12, 14] to bound the sample complexity of simple auction classes. Our
work introduces a new measure of sample complexity, which is a strengthening the Rademacher
complexity analysis and hence could also be of independent interest outside the scope of the sample
complexity of optimal auctions. Moreover, for the case of auctions, this measure greatly simplifies
the analysis of their sample complexity in many cases.
In particular, we show that in general PAC learning settings, the expected generalization error is upper
bounded by the Rademacher complexity not of the whole class of hypotheses, but rather only over
the class of hypotheses that could be the outcome of running Expected Risk Minimization (ERM)
on a subset of the samples of half the size. If the number of these hypotheses is small, then the
latter immediately yields a small generalization error. We refer to the growth rate of the latter set of
hypotheses as the split-sample growth rate. This measure of complexity is not restricted to auction
design and could be relevant to general statistical learning theory.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

