The power of absolute discounting:
all-dimensional distribution estimation
Moein Falahatgar
UCSD
moein@ucsd.edu

Mesrob Ohannessian
TTIC
mesrob@gmail.com

Alon Orlitsky
UCSD
alon@ucsd.edu

Venkatadheeraj Pichapati
UCSD
dheerajpv7@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Categorical models are a natural fit for many problems. When learning the distribution of categories from samples, high-dimensionality may dilute the data.
Minimax optimality is too pessimistic to remedy this issue. A serendipitously
discovered estimator, absolute discounting, corrects empirical frequencies by subtracting a constant from observed categories, which it then redistributes among the
unobserved. It outperforms classical estimators empirically, and has been used extensively in natural language modeling. In this paper, we rigorously explain the
prowess of this estimator using less pessimistic notions. We show that (1) absolute discounting recovers classical minimax KL-risk rates, (2) it is adaptive to
an effective dimension rather than the true dimension, (3) it is strongly related to
the Good–Turing estimator and inherits its competitive properties. We use powerlaw distributions as the cornerstone of these results. We validate the theory via
synthetic data and an application to the Global Terrorism Database.

1

Introduction

Many natural problems involve uncertainties about categorical objects. When modeling language,
we reason about words, meanings, and queries. When inferring about mutations, we manipulate
genes, SNPs, and phenotypes. It is sometimes possible to embed these discrete objects into continuous spaces, which allows us to use the arsenal of the latest machine learning tools that often (though
admittedly not always) need numerically meaningful data. But why not operate in the discrete space
directly? One of the main obstacles to this is the dilution of data due to the high-dimensional aspect
of the problem, where dimension in this case refers to the number k of categories.
The classical framework of categorical distribution estimation, studied at length by the information
theory community, involves a fixed small k, [BS04]. Add-contant estimators are sufficient for this
purpose. Some of the impetus to understanding the large k regime came from the neuroscience
world, [Pan04]. But this extended the pessimistic worst-case perspective of the earlier framework,
resulting in guarantees that left a lot to be desired. This is because high-dimension often also comes
with additional structure. In particular, if a distribution produces only roughly d distinct categories
in a sample of size n, then we ought to think of d (and not k) as the effective dimension of the
problem. There are also some ubiquitous structures, like power-law distributions. Natural language
is a flagship example of this, which was observed as early as by Zipf in [Zip35]. Species and genera,
rainfall, terror incidents, to mention just a few all obey power-laws [SLE+ 03, CSN09, ADW13].
Are there estimators that mold to both dimension and structure? It turns out we don’t need to
search far. In natural language processing (NLP) it was first discovered that an estimator proposed
by Good and Turing worked very well [Goo53]. Only recently did we start understanding why
and how [OSZ03, OD12, AJOS13, OS15]. And the best explanation thus far is that it implicitly
competes with the best estimator in a very small neighborhood of the true distribution. But NLP
researchers [NEK94, KN95, CG96] have long realized that another simpler estimator, absolute discounting, is equally good. But why and how this is the case was never properly determined, save
some mention in [OD12] and in [FNT16], where the focus is primarily on form.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

