Learning spatiotemporal piecewise-geodesic
trajectories from longitudinal manifold-valued data

Juliette Chevallier
CMAP, École polytechnique
juliette.chevallier@polytechnique.edu

Pr Stéphane Oudard
Oncology Department
USPC, AP-HP, HEGP

Stéphanie Allassonnière
CRC, Université Paris Descartes
stephanie.allassonniere@parisdescartes.fr

Abstract
We introduce a hierarchical model which allows to estimate a group-average
piecewise-geodesic trajectory in the Riemannian space of measurements and individual variability. This model falls into the well defined mixed-effect models.
The subject-specific trajectories are defined through spatial and temporal transformations of the group-average piecewise-geodesic path, component by component. Thus we can apply our model to a wide variety of situations. Due to the
non-linearity of the model, we use the Stochastic Approximation ExpectationMaximization algorithm to estimate the model parameters. Experiments on synthetic data validate this choice. The model is then applied to the metastatic renal
cancer chemotherapy monitoring: we run estimations on RECIST scores of treated
patients and estimate the time they escape from the treatment. Experiments highlight the role of the different parameters on the response to treatment.

1

Introduction

During the past few years, the way we treat renal metastatic cancer was profoundly changed: a new
class of anti-angiogenic therapies targeting the tumor vessels instead of the tumor cells has emerged
and drastically improved survival by a factor of three (Escudier et al., 2016). These new drugs,
however, do not cure the cancer, and only succeed in delaying the tumor growth, requiring the use of
successive therapies which must be continued or interrupted at the appropriate moment according to
the patient’s response. The new medicine process has also created a new scientific challenge: how
to choose the more efficient drug therapy. This means that one has to properly understand how the
patient reacts to the possible treatments. Actually, there are several strategies and taking the right
decision is a contested issue (Rothermundt et al., 2015, 2017).
To achieve that goal, physicians took an interest in mathematical modeling. Mathematics has already
demonstrated its efficiency and played a role in the change of stop-criteria for a given treatment
(Burotto et al., 2014). However, to the best of our knowledge, there only exists one model which
was designed by medical practitioners. Although, very basic mathematically, it seems to show that
this point of view may produce interesting results. Introduced by Stein et al. in 2008, the model
performs a non-linear regression using the least squares method to fit an increasing or/and decreasing
exponential curve. This model is still used but suffers limitations. First, as the profile are fitted
individual-by-individual independently, the model cannot explain a global dynamic. Then, the choice
of exponential growth avoids the emergence of plateau effects which are often observed in practice.
This opens the way to new models which would explain both a population and each individual with
other constraints on the shape of the response.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

