Pixels to Graphs by Associative Embedding

Alejandro Newell
Jia Deng
Computer Science and Engineering
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
{alnewell, jiadeng}@umich.edu

Abstract
Graphs are a useful abstraction of image content. Not only can graphs represent
details about individual objects in a scene but they can capture the interactions
between pairs of objects. We present a method for training a convolutional neural
network such that it takes in an input image and produces a full graph definition.
This is done end-to-end in a single stage with the use of associative embeddings.
The network learns to simultaneously identify all of the elements that make up a
graph and piece them together. We benchmark on the Visual Genome dataset, and
demonstrate state-of-the-art performance on the challenging task of scene graph
generation.

1

Introduction

Extracting semantics from images is one of the main goals of computer vision. Recent years have
seen rapid progress in the classification and localization of objects [7, 24, 10]. But a bag of labeled
and localized objects is an impoverished representation of image semantics: it tells us what and where
the objects are (“person” and “car”), but does not tell us about their relations and interactions (“person
next to car”). A necessary step is thus to not only detect objects but to identify the relations between
them. An explicit representation of these semantics is referred to as a scene graph [12] where we
represent objects grounded in the scene as vertices and the relationships between them as edges.
End-to-end training of convolutional networks has proven to be a highly effective strategy for image
understanding tasks. It is therefore natural to ask whether the same strategy would be viable for
predicting graphs from pixels. Existing approaches, however, tend to break the problem down into
more manageable steps. For example, one might run an object detection system to propose all of the
objects in the scene, then isolate individual pairs of objects to identify the relationships between them
[18]. This breakdown often restricts the visual features used in later steps and limits reasoning over
the full graph and over the full contents of the image.
We propose a novel approach to this problem, where we train a network to define a complete graph
from a raw input image. The proposed supervision allows a network to better account for the full
image context while making predictions, meaning that the network reasons jointly over the entire
scene graph rather than focusing on pairs of objects in isolation. Furthermore, there is no explicit
reliance on external systems such as Region Proposal Networks (RPN) [24] that provide an initial
pool of object detections.
To do this, we treat all graph elements—both vertices and edges—as visual entities to be detected as
in a standard object detection pipeline. Specifically, a vertex is an instance of an object (“person”),
and an edge is an instance of an object-object relation (“person next to car”). Just as visual patterns
in an image allow us to distinguish between objects, there are properties of the image that allow us to
see relationships. We train the network to pick up on these properties and point out where objects and
relationships are likely to exist in the image space.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

