InfoGAIL: Interpretable Imitation Learning from
Visual Demonstrations
Yunzhu Li
MIT
liyunzhu@mit.edu

Jiaming Song
Stanford University
tsong@cs.stanford.edu

Stefano Ermon
Stanford University
ermon@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
The goal of imitation learning is to mimic expert behavior without access to an
explicit reward signal. Expert demonstrations provided by humans, however, often
show significant variability due to latent factors that are typically not explicitly
modeled. In this paper, we propose a new algorithm that can infer the latent
structure of expert demonstrations in an unsupervised way. Our method, built on
top of Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning, can not only imitate complex
behaviors, but also learn interpretable and meaningful representations of complex
behavioral data, including visual demonstrations. In the driving domain, we
show that a model learned from human demonstrations is able to both accurately
reproduce a variety of behaviors and accurately anticipate human actions using raw
visual inputs. Compared with various baselines, our method can better capture the
latent structure underlying expert demonstrations, often recovering semantically
meaningful factors of variation in the data.

1

Introduction

A key limitation of reinforcement learning (RL) is that it involves the optimization of a predefined
reward function or reinforcement signal [1–6]. Explicitly defining a reward function is straightforward
in some cases, e.g., in games such as Go or chess. However, designing an appropriate reward function
can be difficult in more complex and less well-specified environments, e.g., for autonomous driving
where there is a need to balance safety, comfort, and efficiency.
Imitation learning methods have the potential to close this gap by learning how to perform tasks
directly from expert demonstrations, and has succeeded in a wide range of problems [7–11]. Among
them, Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning (GAIL, [12]) is a model-free imitation learning
method that is highly effective and scales to relatively high dimensional environments. The training
process of GAIL can be thought of as building a generative model, which is a stochastic policy
that when coupled with a fixed simulation environment, produces similar behaviors to the expert
demonstrations. Similarity is achieved by jointly training a discriminator to distinguish expert
trajectories from ones produced by the learned policy, as in GANs [13].
In imitation learning, example demonstrations are typically provided by human experts. These
demonstrations can show significant variability. For example, they might be collected from multiple
experts, each employing a different policy. External latent factors of variation that are not explicitly
captured by the simulation environment can also significantly affect the observed behavior. For
example, expert demonstrations might be collected from users with different skills and habits. The
goal of this paper is to develop an imitation learning framework that is able to automatically discover
and disentangle the latent factors of variation underlying expert demonstrations. Analogous to the goal
of uncovering style, shape, and color in generative modeling of images [14], we aim to automatically
learn similar interpretable concepts from human demonstrations through an unsupervised manner.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

