Successor Features for
Transfer in Reinforcement Learning

André Barreto, Will Dabney, Rémi Munos, Jonathan J. Hunt,
Tom Schaul, Hado van Hasselt, David Silver
{andrebarreto,wdabney,munos,jjhunt,schaul,hado,davidsilver}@google.com

DeepMind

Abstract
Transfer in reinforcement learning refers to the notion that generalization should
occur not only within a task but also across tasks. We propose a transfer framework for the scenario where the reward function changes between tasks but the
environment’s dynamics remain the same. Our approach rests on two key ideas:
successor features, a value function representation that decouples the dynamics of
the environment from the rewards, and generalized policy improvement, a generalization of dynamic programming’s policy improvement operation that considers
a set of policies rather than a single one. Put together, the two ideas lead to an
approach that integrates seamlessly within the reinforcement learning framework
and allows the free exchange of information across tasks. The proposed method
also provides performance guarantees for the transferred policy even before any
learning has taken place. We derive two theorems that set our approach in firm
theoretical ground and present experiments that show that it successfully promotes
transfer in practice, significantly outperforming alternative methods in a sequence
of navigation tasks and in the control of a simulated robotic arm.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) provides a framework for the development of situated agents that learn
how to behave while interacting with the environment [21]. The basic RL loop is defined in an abstract
way so as to capture only the essential aspects of this interaction: an agent receives observations
and selects actions to maximize a reward signal. This setup is generic enough to describe tasks of
different levels of complexity that may unroll at distinct time scales. For example, in the task of
driving a car, an action can be to turn the wheel, make a right turn, or drive to a given location.
Clearly, from the point of view of the designer, it is desirable to describe a task at the highest level of
abstraction possible. However, by doing so one may overlook behavioral patterns and inadvertently
make the task more difficult than it really is. The task of driving to a location clearly encompasses the
subtask of making a right turn, which in turn encompasses the action of turning the wheel. In learning
how to drive an agent should be able to identify and exploit such interdependencies. More generally,
the agent should be able to break a task into smaller subtasks and use knowledge accumulated in any
subset of those to speed up learning in related tasks. This process of leveraging knowledge acquired
in one task to improve performance on other tasks is called transfer [25, 11].
In this paper we look at one specific type of transfer, namely, when subtasks correspond to different
reward functions defined in the same environment. This setup is flexible enough to allow transfer
to happen at different levels. In particular, by appropriately defining the rewards one can induce
different task decompositions. For instance, the type of hierarchical decomposition involved in the
driving example above can be induced by changing the frequency at which rewards are delivered:
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

