Learning Affinity via Spatial Propagation Networks

Sifei Liu
UC Merced, NVIDIA
Guangyu Zhong
Dalian University of Technology

Shalini De Mello
NVIDIA
Ming-Hsuan Yang
UC Merced, NVIDIA

Jinwei Gu
NVIDIA
Jan Kautz
NVIDIA

Abstract
In this paper, we propose spatial propagation networks for learning the affinity matrix for vision tasks. We show that by constructing a row/column linear propagation
model, the spatially varying transformation matrix exactly constitutes an affinity
matrix that models dense, global pairwise relationships of an image. Specifically,
we develop a three-way connection for the linear propagation model, which (a)
formulates a sparse transformation matrix, where all elements can be outputs from
a deep CNN, but (b) results in a dense affinity matrix that effectively models
any task-specific pairwise similarity matrix. Instead of designing the similarity
kernels according to image features of two points, we can directly output all the
similarities in a purely data-driven manner. The spatial propagation network is a
generic framework that can be applied to many affinity-related tasks, such as image
matting, segmentation and colorization, to name a few. Essentially, the model
can learn semantically-aware affinity values for high-level vision tasks due to the
powerful learning capability of deep CNNs. We validate the framework on the
task of refinement of image segmentation boundaries. Experiments on the HELEN
face parsing and PASCAL VOC-2012 semantic segmentation tasks show that the
spatial propagation network provides a general, effective and efficient solution for
generating high-quality segmentation results.

1

Introduction

An affinity matrix is a generic matrix that determines how close, or similar, two points are in a space. In
computer vision tasks, it is a weighted graph that regards each pixel as a node, and connects each pair
of pixels by an edge [25, 16, 15, 10, 29]. The weight on that edge should reflect the pairwise similarity
with respect to different tasks. For example, for low-level vision tasks such as image filtering, the
affinity values should reveal the low-level coherence of color and texture [29, 28, 10, 9]; for mid to
high-level vision tasks such as image matting and segmentation [16, 22], the affinity measure should
reveal the semantic-level pairwise similarities. Most techniques explicitly or implicitly assume a
measurement or a similarity structure over the space of configurations. The success of such algorithms
depends heavily on the assumptions made to construct these affinity matrices, which are generally
not treated as part of the learning problem.
In this paper, we show that the problem of learning the affinity matrix can be equivalently expressed
as learning a group of small row/column-wise, spatially varying linear transformation matrices.
Since a linear transformation can be easily implemented as a differentiable module in a deep neural
network, the transformation matrix can be learned in a purely data-driven manner as opposed to
being constructed by hand. Specifically, we adopt an independent deep CNN with the original RGB
images as inputs to output all entities of the matrix, such that the affinity is learned by a deep model
conditioned on the specific inputs. We show that using a three-way connection, instead of the full
connection between adjoining rows/columns, is sufficient for learning a dense affinity matrix and
requires much fewer output channels of a deep CNN. Therefore, instead of using designed features
and kernel tricks, our network outputs all entities of the affinity matrix in a data-driven manner.

