Non-Convex Finite-Sum Optimization
Via SCSG Methods
Lihua Lei
UC Berkeley
lihua.lei@berkeley.edu

Cheng Ju
UC Berkeley
cju@berkeley.edu

Jianbo Chen
UC Berkeley
jianbochen@berkeley.edu

Michael I. Jordan
UC Berkeley
jordan@stat.berkeley.edu

Abstract
We develop a class of algorithms, as variants of the stochastically controlled
stochastic gradient (SCSG) methods [21], for the smooth non-convex finitesum optimization problem. Assuming the smoothness of each component,
the complexity of SCSGto reach a stationary point with Ek∇f (x)k2 ≤ ε is
O min{ε−5/3 , ε−1 n2/3 } , which strictly outperforms the stochastic gradient descent. Moreover, SCSG is never worse than the state-of-the-art methods based
on variance reduction and it significantly outperforms them when the target accuracy is low. A similar acceleration is also achieved when the functions satisfy
the Polyak-Lojasiewicz condition. Empirical experiments demonstrate that SCSG
outperforms stochastic gradient methods on training multi-layers neural networks
in terms of both training and validation loss.

1

Introduction

We study smooth non-convex finite-sum optimization problems of the form
n
1X
fi (x)
min f (x) =
n i=1
x∈Rd

(1)

where each component fi (x) is possibly non-convex with Lipschitz gradients. This generic form
captures numerous statistical learning problems, ranging from generalized linear models [22] to deep
neural networks [19].
In contrast to the convex case, the non-convex case is comparatively under-studied. Early work
focused on the asymptotic performance of algorithms [11, 7, 29], with non-asymptotic complexity
bounds emerging more recently [24]. In recent years, complexity results have been derived for both
gradient methods [13, 2, 8, 9] and stochastic gradient methods [12, 13, 6, 4, 26, 27, 3]. Unlike in the
convex case, in the non-convex case one can not expect a gradient-based algorithm to converge to the
global minimum if only smoothness is assumed. As a consequence, instead of measuring functionvalue suboptimality Ef (x) − inf x f (x) as in the convex case, convergence is generally measured in
terms of the squared norm of the gradient; i.e., Ek∇f (x)k2 . We summarize the best available rates 1
in Table 1. We also list the rates for Polyak-Lojasiewicz (P-L) functions, which will be defined in
Section 2. The accuracy for minimizing P-L functions is measured by Ef (x) − inf x f (x).
1

It is also common to use Ek∇f (x)k to measure convergence; see, e.g. [2, 8, 9, 3]. Our results
pcan be readily
2
transferred to this alternative measure by using Cauchy-Schwartz inequality, Ek∇f (x)k ≤ Ek∇f (x)k
√ ,
although not vice versa. The rates under this alternative can be made comparable to ours by replacing ε by ε.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

