On Blackbox Backpropagation and Jacobian Sensing

Vikas Sindhwani
Google Brain
New York, NY 10011
sindhwani@google.com

Krzysztof Choromanski
Google Brain
New York, NY 10011
kchoro@google.com

Abstract
From a small number of calls to a given “blackbox" on random input perturbations,
we show how to efficiently recover its unknown Jacobian, or estimate the left action
of its Jacobian on a given vector. Our methods are based on a novel combination of
compressed sensing and graph coloring techniques, and provably exploit structural
prior knowledge about the Jacobian such as sparsity and symmetry while being
noise robust. We demonstrate efficient backpropagation through noisy blackbox
layers in a deep neural net, improved data-efficiency in the task of linearizing the
dynamics of a rigid body system, and the generic ability to handle a rich class of
input-output dependency structures in Jacobian estimation problems.

1

Introduction

Automatic Differentiation (AD) [1, 17] techniques are at the heart of several “end-to-end" machine
learning frameworks such as TensorFlow [5] and Torch [2]. Such frameworks are organized around
a library of primitive operators which are differentiable vector-valued functions of data inputs and
model parameters. A composition of these primitives defines a computation graph - a directed acyclic
graph whose nodes are operators and whose edges represent dataflows, typically culminating in the
evaluation of a scalar-valued loss function. For reverse mode automatic differentiation (backpropagation) to work, each operator needs to be paired with a gradient routine which maps gradients of the
loss function with respect to the outputs of the operator, to gradients with respect to its inputs. In
this paper, we are concerned with extending the automatic differentiation paradigm to computation
graphs where some nodes are "blackboxes" [12], that is, opaque pieces of code implemented outside
the AD framework providing access to an operator only via expensive and potentially noisy function
evaluation, with no associated gradient routine available. A useful mental model of this setting is
shown below where f3 is a blackbox.
f1

x1

x0

f3

f2

x3

f4

x4

x2

Blackboxes, of course, are pervasive - as legacy or proprietary codes or executables, numerical
optimization routines, physics engines (e.g, Bullet [3] and MujoCo [4]), or even wrappers interfacing
with a mechanical system as is typically the case in reinforcement learning, robotics and process
control applications.
The unknown Jacobian of a blackbox is the central object of study in this paper. Recall that the
Jacobian ∇f (x0 ) of a differentiable vector-valued map f : Rn 7→ Rm at an input x0 ∈ Rn is the
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

