Inference in Graphical Models
via Semidefinite Programming Hierarchies
Murat A. Erdogdu
Microsoft Research
erdogdu@cs.toronto.edu

Yash Deshpande
MIT and Microsoft Research
yash@mit.edu

Andrea Montanari
Stanford University
montanari@stanford.edu

Abstract
Maximum A posteriori Probability (MAP) inference in graphical models amounts
to solving a graph-structured combinatorial optimization problem. Popular inference algorithms such as belief propagation (BP) and generalized belief propagation
(GBP) are intimately related to linear programming (LP) relaxation within the
Sherali-Adams hierarchy. Despite the popularity of these algorithms, it is well
understood that the Sum-of-Squares (SOS) hierarchy based on semidefinite programming (SDP) can provide superior guarantees. Unfortunately, SOS relaxations
for a graph with n vertices require solving an SDP with n⇥(d) variables where
d is the degree in the hierarchy. In practice, for d
4, this approach does not
scale beyond a few tens of variables. In this paper, we propose binary SDP relaxations for MAP inference using the SOS hierarchy with two innovations focused
on computational efficiency. Firstly, in analogy to BP and its variants, we only
introduce decision variables corresponding to contiguous regions in the graphical
model. Secondly, we solve the resulting SDP using a non-convex Burer-Monteiro
style method, and develop a sequential rounding procedure. We demonstrate that
the resulting algorithm can solve problems with tens of thousands of variables
within minutes, and outperforms BP and GBP on practical problems such as image
denoising and Ising spin glasses. Finally, for specific graph types, we establish a
sufficient condition for the tightness of the proposed partial SOS relaxation.

1

Introduction

Graphical models provide a powerful framework for analyzing systems comprised by a large number
of interacting variables. Inference in graphical models is crucial in scientific methodology with
countless applications in a variety of fields including causal inference, computer vision, statistical
physics, information theory, and genome research [WJ08, KF09, MM09].
In this paper, we propose a class of inference algorithms for pairwise undirected graphical models.
Such models are fully specified by assigning: (i) a finite domain X for the variables; (ii) a finite
graph G = (V, E) for V = [n] ⌘ {1, . . . , n} capturing the interactions of the basic variables;
e
(iii) a collection of functions ✓ = ({✓iv }i2V , {✓ij
}(i,j)2E ) that quantify the vertex potentials and
interactions between the variables; whereby for each vertex i 2 V we have ✓iv : X ! R and for each
e
edge (i, j) 2 E, we have ✓ij
: X ⇥ X ! R (an arbitrary ordering is fixed on the pair of vertices
{i, j}). These parameters can be used to form a probability distribution on X V for the random vector
x = (x1 , x2 , ..., xn ) 2 X V by letting,
X
X
1
e
p(x|✓) =
eU (x;✓) ,
U (x; ✓) =
✓ij
(xi , xj ) +
✓iv (xi ) ,
(1.1)
Z(✓)
(i,j)2E

i2V

where Z(✓) is the normalization constant commonly referred to as the partition function. While such
models can encode a rich class of multivariate probability distributions, basic inference tasks are
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

