Graph Matching via Multiplicative Update Algorithm

Bo Jiang
School of Computer Science
and Technology
Anhui University, China
jiangbo@ahu.edu.cn

Jin Tang
School of Computer Science
and Technology
Anhui University, China
tj@ahu.edu.cn

Yihong Gong
School of Electronic
and Information Engineering
Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
ygong@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Chris Ding
CSE Department,
University of Texas at
Arlington, Arlington, USA
chqding@uta.edu

Bin Luo
School of Computer Science
and Technology,
Anhui University, China
luobin@ahu.edu.cn

Abstract
As a fundamental problem in computer vision, graph matching problem can
usually be formulated as a Quadratic Programming (QP) problem with doubly
stochastic and discrete (integer) constraints. Since it is NP-hard, approximate
algorithms are required. In this paper, we present a new algorithm, called Multiplicative Update Graph Matching (MPGM), that develops a multiplicative update
technique to solve the QP matching problem. MPGM has three main benefits: (1)
theoretically, MPGM solves the general QP problem with doubly stochastic constraint naturally whose convergence and KKT optimality are guaranteed. (2) Empirically, MPGM generally returns a sparse solution and thus can also incorporate
the discrete constraint approximately. (3) It is efficient and simple to implement.
Experimental results show the benefits of MPGM algorithm.

1

Introduction

In computer vision and machine learning area, many problems of interest can be formulated by
graph matching problem. Previous approaches [3–5, 15, 16] have formulated graph matching as a
Quadratic Programming (QP) problem with both doubly stochastic and discrete constraints. Since
it is known to be NP-hard, many approximate algorithms have been developed to find approximate
solutions for this problem [8, 16, 21, 24, 20, 13].
One kind of approximate methods generally first develop a continuous problem by relaxing the discrete constraint and aim to find the optimal solution for this continuous problem. After that, they
obtain the final discrete solution by using a discretization step such as Hungarian or greedy algorithm [3, 15, 16]. Obviously, the discretization step of these methods is generally independent of the
matching objective optimization process which may lead to weak local optimum for the problem.
Another kind of methods aim to obtain a discrete solution for QP matching problem [16, 1, 24].
For example, Leordeanu et al. [16] proposed an iterative matching method (IPFP) which optimized
the QP matching problem in a discrete domain. Zhou et al. [24, 25] proposed an effective graph
matching method (FGM) which optimized the QP matching problem approximately using a convexconcave relaxation technique [21] and thus returns a discrete solution for the problem. From optimization aspect, the core optimization algorithm used in both IPFP [16] and FGM [24] is related to
Frank-Wolfe [9] algorithm and FGM [24, 25] further uses a path following procedure to alleviate the
local-optimum problem more carefully. The core of Frank-Wolfe [9] algorithm is to optimize the
quadratic problem by sequentially optimizing the linear approximations of QP problem. In addition
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

