Robust Imitation of Diverse Behaviors
Ziyu Wang⇤, Josh Merel⇤ , Scott Reed, Greg Wayne, Nando de Freitas, Nicolas Heess
DeepMind
ziyu,jsmerel,reedscot,gregwayne,nandodefreitas,heess@google.com

Abstract
Deep generative models have recently shown great promise in imitation learning
for motor control. Given enough data, even supervised approaches can do one-shot
imitation learning; however, they are vulnerable to cascading failures when the
agent trajectory diverges from the demonstrations. Compared to purely supervised
methods, Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning (GAIL) can learn more robust
controllers from fewer demonstrations, but is inherently mode-seeking and more
difficult to train. In this paper, we show how to combine the favourable aspects
of these two approaches. The base of our model is a new type of variational
autoencoder on demonstration trajectories that learns semantic policy embeddings.
We show that these embeddings can be learned on a 9 DoF Jaco robot arm in
reaching tasks, and then smoothly interpolated with a resulting smooth interpolation
of reaching behavior. Leveraging these policy representations, we develop a new
version of GAIL that (1) is much more robust than the purely-supervised controller,
especially with few demonstrations, and (2) avoids mode collapse, capturing many
diverse behaviors when GAIL on its own does not. We demonstrate our approach
on learning diverse gaits from demonstration on a 2D biped and a 62 DoF 3D
humanoid in the MuJoCo physics environment.

1

Introduction

Building versatile embodied agents, both in the form of real robots and animated avatars, capable
of a wide and diverse set of behaviors is one of the long-standing challenges of AI. State-of-the-art
robots cannot compete with the effortless variety and adaptive flexibility of motor behaviors produced
by toddlers. Towards addressing this challenge, in this work we combine several deep generative
approaches to imitation learning in a way that accentuates their individual strengths and addresses
their limitations. The end product of this is a robust neural network policy that can imitate a large and
diverse set of behaviors using few training demonstrations.
We first introduce a variational autoencoder (VAE) [15, 26] for supervised imitation, consisting of a
bi-directional LSTM [13, 32, 9] encoder mapping demonstration sequences to embedding vectors,
and two decoders. The first decoder is a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) policy mapping a trajectory
embedding and the current state to a continuous action vector. The second is a dynamics model
mapping the embedding and previous state to the present state, while modelling correlations among
states with a WaveNet [39]. Experiments with a 9 DoF Jaco robot arm and a 9 DoF 2D biped walker,
implemented in the MuJoCo physics engine [38], show that the VAE learns a structured semantic
embedding space, which allows for smooth policy interpolation.
While supervised policies that condition on demonstrations (such as our VAE or the recent approach
of Duan et al. [6]) are powerful models for one-shot imitation, they require large training datasets in
order to work for non-trivial tasks. They also tend to be brittle and fail when the agent diverges too
much from the demonstration trajectories. These limitations of supervised learning for imitation, also
known as behavioral cloning (BC) [24], are well known [28, 29].
⇤

Joint First authors.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

