Balancing information exposure in social networks

Kiran Garimella
Aalto University & HIIT
Helsinki, Finland
kiran.garimella@aalto.fi

Aristides Gionis
Aalto University & HIIT
Helsinki, Finland
aristides.gionis@aalto.fi

Nikos Parotsidis
University of Rome Tor Vergata
Rome, Italy
nikos.parotsidis@uniroma2.it

Nikolaj Tatti
Aalto University & HIIT
Helsinki, Finland
nikolaj.tatti@aalto.fi

Abstract
Social media has brought a revolution on how people are consuming news. Beyond the undoubtedly large number of advantages brought by social-media platforms, a point of criticism has been the creation of echo chambers and filter bubbles, caused by social homophily and algorithmic personalization.
In this paper we address the problem of balancing the information exposure in
a social network. We assume that two opposing campaigns (or viewpoints) are
present in the network, and that network nodes have different preferences towards
these campaigns. Our goal is to find two sets of nodes to employ in the respective campaigns, so that the overall information exposure for the two campaigns
is balanced. We formally define the problem, characterize its hardness, develop
approximation algorithms, and present experimental evaluation results.
Our model is inspired by the literature on influence maximization, but there are
significant differences from the standard model. First, balance of information exposure is modeled by a symmetric difference function, which is neither monotone
nor submodular, and thus, not amenable to existing approaches. Second, while
previous papers consider a setting with selfish agents and provide bounds on bestresponse strategies (i.e., move of the last player), we consider a setting with a
centralized agent and provide bounds for a global objective function.

1

Introduction

Social-media platforms have revolutionized many aspects of human culture, among others, the way
people are exposed to information. A recent survey estimates that 62% of adults in the US get
their news on social media [15]. Despite providing many desirable features, such as, searching,
personalization, and recommendations, one point of criticism is that social media amplify echo
chambers and filter bubbles: users get less exposure to conflicting viewpoints and are isolated in their
own informational bubble. This phenomenon is contributed to social homophily and algorithmic
personalization, and is more acute for controversial topics [9, 12, 14].
In this paper we address the problem of reducing the filter-bubble effect by balancing information
exposure among users. We consider social-media discussions around a topic that are characterized
by two or more conflicting viewpoints. Let us refer to these viewpoints as campaigns. Our approach
follows the popular paradigm of influence propagation [18]: we want to select a small number
of seed users for each campaign so as to maximize the number of users who are exposed to both
campaigns. In contrast to existing work on competitive viral marketing, we do not consider the
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

