Structured Embedding Models for Grouped Data

Maja Rudolph
Columbia Univ.
maja@cs.columbia.edu

Francisco Ruiz
Univ. of Cambridge
Columbia Univ.

Susan Athey
Stanford Univ.

David Blei
Columbia Univ.

Abstract
Word embeddings are a powerful approach for analyzing language, and exponential
family embeddings (EFE) extend them to other types of data. Here we develop
structured exponential family embeddings (S - EFE), a method for discovering
embeddings that vary across related groups of data. We study how the word
usage of U.S. Congressional speeches varies across states and party affiliation,
how words are used differently across sections of the ArXiv, and how the copurchase patterns of groceries can vary across seasons. Key to the success of our
method is that the groups share statistical information. We develop two sharing
strategies: hierarchical modeling and amortization. We demonstrate the benefits
of this approach in empirical studies of speeches, abstracts, and shopping baskets.
We show how S - EFE enables group-specific interpretation of word usage, and
outperforms EFE in predicting held-out data.

1

Introduction

Word embeddings (Bengio et al., 2003; Mikolov et al., 2013d,c,a; Pennington et al., 2014; Levy
and Goldberg, 2014; Arora et al., 2015) are unsupervised learning methods for capturing latent
semantic structure in language. Word embedding methods analyze text data to learn distributed
representations of the vocabulary that capture its co-occurrence statistics. These representations are
useful for reasoning about word usage and meaning (Harris, 1954; Rumelhart et al., 1986). Word
embeddings have also been extended to data beyond text (Barkan and Koenigstein, 2016; Rudolph
et al., 2016), such as items in a grocery store or neurons in the brain. Exponential family embeddings
(EFE) is a probabilistic perspective on embeddings that encompasses many existing methods and
opens the door to bringing expressive probabilistic modeling (Bishop, 2006; Murphy, 2012) to the
problem of learning distributed representations.
We develop structured exponential family embeddings (S - EFE), an extension of EFE for studying
how embeddings can vary across groups of related data. We will study several examples: in U.S.
Congressional speeches, word usage can vary across states or party affiliations; in scientific literature,
the usage patterns of technical terms can vary across fields; in supermarket shopping data, co-purchase
patterns of items can vary across seasons of the year. We will see that S - EFE discovers a per-group
embedding representation of objects. While the naïve approach of fitting an individual embedding
model for each group would typically suffer from lack of data—especially in groups for which fewer
observations are available—we develop two methods that can share information across groups.
Figure 1a illustrates the kind of variation that we can capture. We fit an S - EFE to ArXiv abstracts
grouped into different sections, such as computer science (cs), quantitative finance (q-fin), and
nonlinear sciences (nlin). S- EFE results in a per-section embedding of each term in the vocabulary.
Using the fitted embeddings, we illustrate similar words to the word INTELLIGENCE. We can see
that how INTELLIGENCE is used varies by field: in computer science the most similar words include
ARTIFICIAL and AI ; in finance, similar words include ABILITIES and CONSCIOUSNESS .
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

