Optimal Sample Complexity of M -wise Data for
Top-K Ranking

Minje Jang∗
School of Electrical Engineering
KAIST
jmj427@kaist.ac.kr

Sunghyun Kim∗
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute
Daejeon, Korea
koishkim@etri.re.kr

Changho Suh
School of Electrical Engineering
KAIST
chsuh@kaist.ac.kr
Sewoong Oh
Industrial and Enterprise Systems Engineering Department
UIUC
swoh@illinois.edu

Abstract
We explore the top-K rank aggregation problem in which one aims to recover a
consistent ordering that focuses on top-K ranked items based on partially revealed
preference information. We examine an M -wise comparison model that builds on
the Plackett-Luce (PL) model where for each sample, M items are ranked according
to their perceived utilities modeled as noisy observations of their underlying true
utilities. As our result, we characterize the minimax optimality on the sample size
for top-K ranking. The optimal sample size turns out to be inversely proportional to
M . We devise an algorithm that effectively converts M -wise samples into pairwise
ones and employs a spectral method using the refined data. In demonstrating
its optimality, we develop a novel technique for deriving tight `∞ estimation
error bounds, which is key to accurately analyzing the performance of top-K
ranking algorithms, but has been challenging. Recent work relied on an additional
maximum-likelihood estimation (MLE) stage merged with a spectral method to
attain good estimates in `∞ error to achieve the limit for the pairwise model. In
contrast, although it is valid in slightly restricted regimes, our result demonstrates
a spectral method alone to be sufficient for the general M -wise model. We run
numerical experiments using synthetic data and confirm that the optimal sample
size decreases at the rate of 1/M . Moreover, running our algorithm on real-world
data, we find that its applicability extends to settings that may not fit the PL model.

1

Introduction

Rank aggregation has been explored in a variety of contexts such as social choice [15, 6], web search
and information retrieval [20], recommendation systems [7], and crowd sourcing [16], to name a few.
It aims to bring a consistent ordering to a collection of items, given partial preference information.
∗

Equal contribution.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

