Translation Synchronization via Truncated Least
Squares

Xiangru Huang?
The University of Texas at Austin
2317 Speedway, Austin, 78712
xrhuang@cs.utexas.edu

Zhenxiao Liang?
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China, 100084
liangzx14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Chandrajit Bajaj
The University of Texas at Austin
2317 Speedway, Austin, 78712
bajaj@cs.utexas.edu

Qixing Huang
The University of Texas at Austin
2317 Speedway, Austin, 78712
huangqx@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a robust algorithm, TranSync, for the 1D translation
synchronization problem, in which the aim is to recover the global coordinates of a
set of nodes from noisy measurements of relative coordinates along an observation
graph. The basic idea of TranSync is to apply truncated least squares, where the
solution at each step is used to gradually prune out noisy measurements. We analyze
TranSync under both deterministic and randomized noisy models, demonstrating
its robustness and stability. Experimental results on synthetic and real datasets
show that TranSync is superior to state-of-the-art convex formulations in terms of
both efficiency and accuracy.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we are interested in solving the 1D translation synchronization problem, where the
input is encoded as an observation graph G = (V, E) with n nodes (i.e. V = {1, · · · , n}). Each node
is associated with a latent coordinate x?i ∈ R, 1 ≤ i ≤ n, and each edge (i, j) ∈ E is associated with
a noisy measurement tij = x?i − x?j + N (ij ) of the coordinate difference xi − xj under some noise
model N (ij ). The goal of translation synchronization is to recover the latent coordinates (up to a
global shift) from these noisy pairwise measurements. Translation synchronization is a fundamental
problem that arises in many application domains, including joint alignment of point clouds [7] and
ranking from relative comparisons [8, 16].
A standard approach to translation synchronization is to solve the following linear program:
minimize

X
(i,j)∈E

|tij − (xi − xj )|,

subject to

n
X

xi = 0,

(1)

i=1

Where the constraint ensures that the solution is unique. The major drawback of the linear programming formulation is that it can only tolerate up to 50% of measurements coming from biased
noise models (e.g., uniform samples with non-zero mean). Moreover, it is challenging to solve (1)
efficiently at scale. Solving (1) using interior point method becomes impractical for large-scale
datasets, while more scalable methods such as coordinate descent usually exhibit slow convergence.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

