Z-Forcing: Training Stochastic Recurrent Networks

Anirudh Goyal
MILA, Université de Montréal

Alessandro Sordoni
Microsoft Maluuba

Nan Rosemary Ke
MILA, Polytechnique Montréal

Marc-Alexandre Côté
Microsoft Maluuba

Yoshua Bengio
MILA, Université de Montréal

Abstract
Many efforts have been devoted to training generative latent variable models with
autoregressive decoders, such as recurrent neural networks (RNN). Stochastic
recurrent models have been successful in capturing the variability observed in
natural sequential data such as speech. We unify successful ideas from recently
proposed architectures into a stochastic recurrent model: each step in the sequence
is associated with a latent variable that is used to condition the recurrent dynamics
for future steps. Training is performed with amortised variational inference where
the approximate posterior is augmented with a RNN that runs backward through
the sequence. In addition to maximizing the variational lower bound, we ease
training of the latent variables by adding an auxiliary cost which forces them to
reconstruct the state of the backward recurrent network. This provides the latent
variables with a task-independent objective that enhances the performance of the
overall model. We found this strategy to perform better than alternative approaches
such as KL annealing. Although being conceptually simple, our model achieves
state-of-the-art results on standard speech benchmarks such as TIMIT and Blizzard
and competitive performance on sequential MNIST. Finally, we apply our model to
language modeling on the IMDB dataset where the auxiliary cost helps in learning
interpretable latent variables.

1

Introduction

Due to their ability to capture long-term dependencies, autoregressive models such as recurrent neural
networks (RNN) have become generative models of choice for dealing with sequential data. By
leveraging weight sharing across timesteps, they can model variable length sequences within a fixed
parameter space. RNN dynamics involve a hidden state that is updated at each timestep to summarize
all the information seen previously in the sequence. Given the hidden state at the current timestep,
the network predicts the desired output, which in many cases corresponds to the next input in the
sequence. Due to the deterministic evolution of the hidden state, RNNs capture the entropy in the
observed sequences by shaping conditional output distributions for each step, which are usually
of simple parametric form, i.e. unimodal or mixtures of unimodal. This may be insufficient for
highly structured natural sequences, where there is correlation between output variables at the same
step, i.e. simultaneities (Boulanger-Lewandowski et al., 2012), and complex dependencies between
variables at different timesteps, i.e. long-term dependencies. For these reasons, recent efforts recur
to highly multi-modal output distribution by augmenting the RNN with stochastic latent variables
trained by amortised variational inference, or variational auto-encoding framework (VAE) (Kingma
and Welling, 2014; Fraccaro et al., 2016; Kingma and Welling, 2014). The VAE framework allows
efficient approximate inference by parametrizing the approximate posterior and generative model
with neural networks trainable end-to-end by backpropagation.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

