Multi-output Polynomial Networks
and Factorization Machines
Mathieu Blondel
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
Kyoto, Japan
mathieu@mblondel.org
Takuma Otsuka
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
Kyoto, Japan
otsuka.takuma@lab.ntt.co.jp

Vlad Niculae∗
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY
vlad@cs.cornell.edu

Naonori Ueda
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
RIKEN
Kyoto, Japan
ueda.naonori@lab.ntt.co.jp

Abstract
Factorization machines and polynomial networks are supervised polynomial models based on an efficient low-rank decomposition. We extend these models to the
multi-output setting, i.e., for learning vector-valued functions, with application to
multi-class or multi-task problems. We cast this as the problem of learning a 3-way
tensor whose slices share a common basis and propose a convex formulation of that
problem. We then develop an efficient conditional gradient algorithm and prove
its global convergence, despite the fact that it involves a non-convex basis selection step. On classification tasks, we show that our algorithm achieves excellent
accuracy with much sparser models than existing methods. On recommendation
system tasks, we show how to combine our algorithm with a reduction from ordinal
regression to multi-output classification and show that the resulting algorithm
outperforms simple baselines in terms of ranking accuracy.

1

Introduction

Interactions between features play an important role in many classification and regression tasks.
Classically, such interactions have been leveraged either explicitly, by mapping features to their
products (as in polynomial regression), or implicitly, through the use of the kernel trick. While fast
linear model solvers have been engineered for the explicit approach [9, 28], they are typically limited
to small numbers of features or low-order feature interactions, due to the fact that the number of
parameters that they need to learn scales as O(dt ), where d is the number of features and t is the order
of interactions considered. Models kernelized with the polynomial kernel do not suffer from this
problem; however, the cost of storing and evaluating these models grows linearly with the number of
training instances, a problem sometimes referred to as the curse of kernelization [30].
Factorization machines (FMs) [25] are a more recent approach that can use pairwise feature interactions efficiently even in very high-dimensional data. The key idea of FMs is to model the weights
of feature interactions using a low-rank matrix. Not only this idea offers clear benefits in terms of
model compression compared to the aforementioned approaches, it has also proved instrumental
in modeling interactions between categorical variables, converted to binary features via a one-hot
encoding. Such binary features are usually so sparse that many interactions are never observed in the
∗

Work performed during an internship at NTT Commmunication Science Laboratories, Kyoto.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

