A Unified Game-Theoretic Approach to
Multiagent Reinforcement Learning

Marc Lanctot
DeepMind
lanctot@
Karl Tuyls
DeepMind
karltuyls@

Vinicius Zambaldi
DeepMind
vzambaldi@

Audrūnas Gruslys
DeepMind
audrunas@

Angeliki Lazaridou
DeepMind
angeliki@

Julien Pérolat
DeepMind
perolat@

David Silver
DeepMind
davidsilver@

Thore Graepel
DeepMind
thore@

...@google.com

Abstract
To achieve general intelligence, agents must learn how to interact with others in
a shared environment: this is the challenge of multiagent reinforcement learning
(MARL). The simplest form is independent reinforcement learning (InRL), where
each agent treats its experience as part of its (non-stationary) environment. In
this paper, we first observe that policies learned using InRL can overfit to the
other agents’ policies during training, failing to sufficiently generalize during
execution. We introduce a new metric, joint-policy correlation, to quantify this
effect. We describe an algorithm for general MARL, based on approximate best
responses to mixtures of policies generated using deep reinforcement learning, and
empirical game-theoretic analysis to compute meta-strategies for policy selection.
The algorithm generalizes previous ones such as InRL, iterated best response,
double oracle, and fictitious play. Then, we present a scalable implementation
which reduces the memory requirement using decoupled meta-solvers. Finally,
we demonstrate the generality of the resulting policies in two partially observable
settings: gridworld coordination games and poker.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning combines deep learning [59] with reinforcement learning [94, 64] to
compute a policy used to drive decision-making [73, 72]. Traditionally, a single agent interacts with
its environment repeatedly, iteratively improving its policy by learning from its observations. Inspired
by recent success in Deep RL, we are now seeing a renewed interest in multiagent reinforcement
learning (MARL) [90, 17, 99]. In MARL, several agents interact and learn in an environment
simultaneously, either competitively such as in Go [91] and Poker [39, 105, 74], cooperatively such
as when learning to communicate [23, 93, 36], or some mix of the two [60, 95, 35].
The simplest form of MARL is independent RL (InRL), where each learner is oblivious to the other
agents and simply treats all the interaction as part of its (“localized”) environment. Aside from
the problem that these local environments are non-stationary and non-Markovian [57] resulting in
a loss of convergence guarantees for many algorithms, the policies found can overfit to the other
agents’ policies and hence not generalize well. There has been relatively little work done in RL
community on overfitting to the environment [102, 69], but we argue that this is particularly important
in multiagent settings where one must react dynamically based on the observed behavior of others.
Classical techniques collect or approximate extra information such as the joint values [62, 19, 29, 56],
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

