Riemannian approach to batch normalization

Minhyung Cho
Jaehyung Lee
Applied Research Korea, Gracenote Inc.
mhyung.cho@gmail.com
jaehyung.lee@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Batch Normalization (BN) has proven to be an effective algorithm for deep neural
network training by normalizing the input to each neuron and reducing the internal
covariate shift. The space of weight vectors in the BN layer can be naturally
interpreted as a Riemannian manifold, which is invariant to linear scaling of
weights. Following the intrinsic geometry of this manifold provides a new learning
rule that is more efficient and easier to analyze. We also propose intuitive and
effective gradient clipping and regularization methods for the proposed algorithm
by utilizing the geometry of the manifold. The resulting algorithm consistently
outperforms the original BN on various types of network architectures and datasets.

1

Introduction

Batch Normalization (BN) [1] has become an essential component for breaking performance records
in image recognition tasks [2, 3]. It speeds up training deep neural networks by normalizing the
distribution of the input to each neuron in the network by the mean and standard deviation of the
input computed over a mini-batch of training data, potentially reducing internal covariate shift [1],
the change in the distributions of internal nodes of a deep network during the training.
The authors of BN demonstrated that applying BN to a layer makes its forward pass invariant to
linear scaling of its weight parameters [1]. They argued that this property prevents model explosion
with higher learning rates by making the gradient propagation invariant to linear scaling. Moreover,
the gradient becomes inversely proportional to the scale factor of each weight parameter. While this
property could stabilize the parameter growth by reducing the gradients for larger weights, it could
also have an adverse effect in terms of optimization since there can be an infinite number of networks,
with the same forward pass but different scaling, which may converge to different local optima owing
to different gradients. In practice, networks may become sensitive to the parameters of regularization
methods such as weight decay.
This ambiguity in the optimization process can be removed by interpreting the space of weight
vectors as a Riemannian manifold on which all the scaled versions of a weight vector correspond
to a single point on the manifold. A properly selected metric tensor makes it possible to perform
a gradient descent on this manifold [4, 5], following the gradient direction while staying on the
manifold. This approach fundamentally removes the aforementioned ambiguity while keeping the
invariance property intact, thus ensuring stable weight updates.
In this paper, we first focus on selecting a proper manifold along with the corresponding Riemannian
metric for the scale invariant weight vectors used in BN (and potentially in other normalization
techniques [6, 7, 8]). Mapping scale invariant weight vectors to two well-known matrix manifolds
yields the same metric tensor, leading to a natural choice of the manifold and metric. Then, we derive
the necessary operators to perform a gradient descent on this manifold, which can be understood
as a constrained optimization on the unit sphere. Next, we present two optimization algorithms corresponding to the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) with momentum and Adam [9] algorithms.
An intuitive gradient clipping method is also proposed utilizing the geometry of this space. Finally,
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

