Real Time Image Saliency for Black Box Classifiers
Piotr Dabkowski
pd437@cam.ac.uk
University of Cambridge

Yarin Gal
yarin.gal@eng.cam.ac.uk
University of Cambridge
and Alan Turing Institute, London

Abstract
In this work we develop a fast saliency detection method that can be applied to
any differentiable image classifier. We train a masking model to manipulate the
scores of the classifier by masking salient parts of the input image. Our model
generalises well to unseen images and requires a single forward pass to perform
saliency detection, therefore suitable for use in real-time systems. We test our
approach on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet datasets and show that the produced saliency
maps are easily interpretable, sharp, and free of artifacts. We suggest a new metric
for saliency and test our method on the ImageNet object localisation task. We
achieve results outperforming other weakly supervised methods.

1

Introduction

Current state of the art image classifiers rival human performance on image classification tasks,
but often exhibit unexpected and unintuitive behaviour [6, 13]. For example, we can apply a small
perturbation to the input image, unnoticeable to the human eye, to fool a classifier completely [13].
Another example of an unexpected behaviour is when a classifier fails to understand a given class
despite having high accuracy. For example, if “polar bear” is the only class in the dataset that contains
snow, a classifier may be able to get a 100% accuracy on this class by simply detecting the presence
of snow and ignoring the bear completely [6]. Therefore, even with perfect accuracy, we cannot
be sure whether our model actually detects polar bears or just snow. One way to decouple the two
would be to find snow-only or polar-bear-only images and evaluate the model’s performance on these
images separately. An alternative is to use an image of a polar bear with snow from the dataset and
apply a saliency detection method to test what the classifier is really looking at [6, 11].
Saliency detection methods show which parts of a given image are the most relevant to the model
for a particular input class. Such saliency maps can be obtained for example by finding the smallest
region whose removal causes the classification score to drop significantly. This is because we expect
the removal of a patch which is not useful for the model not to affect the classification score much.
Finding such a salient region can be done iteratively, but this usually requires hundreds of iterations
and is therefore a time-consuming process.
In this paper we lay the groundwork for a new class of fast and accurate model-based saliency
detectors, giving high pixel accuracy and sharp saliency maps (an example is given in figure 1). We
propose a fast, model agnostic, saliency detection method. Instead of iteratively obtaining saliency
maps for each input image separately, we train a model to predict such a map for any input image in a
single feed-forward pass. We show that this approach is not only orders-of-magnitude faster than
iterative methods, but it also produces higher quality saliency masks and achieves better localisation
results. We assess this with standard saliency benchmarks and introduce a new saliency measure.
Our proposed model is able to produce real-time saliency maps, enabling new applications such as
video-saliency which we comment on in our Future Research section.

2

Related work

Since the rise of CNNs in 2012 [5] numerous methods of image saliency detection have been proposed.
One of the earliest such methods is a gradient-based approach introduced in [11] which computes
the gradient of the class with respect to the image and assumes that salient regions are at locations
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

