Efficient Optimization for Linear Dynamical Systems
with Applications to Clustering and Sparse Coding

Wenbing Huang1,3 , Mehrtash Harandi2 , Tong Zhang2
Lijie Fan3 , Fuchun Sun3 , Junzhou Huang1
1
Tencent AI Lab. ;
2
Data61, CSIRO and Australian National University, Australia;
3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University,
Tsinghua National Lab. for Information Science and Technology (TNList);
2

1
{helendhuang, joehhuang}@tencent.com
{mehrtash.harandi@data61.csiro.au, tong.zhang@anu.edu.cn}
3
{flj14@mails, fcsun@mail}.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Linear Dynamical Systems (LDSs) are fundamental tools for modeling spatiotemporal data in various disciplines. Though rich in modeling, analyzing LDSs is
not free of difficulty, mainly because LDSs do not comply with Euclidean geometry
and hence conventional learning techniques can not be applied directly. In this
paper, we propose an efficient projected gradient descent method to minimize a
general form of a loss function and demonstrate how clustering and sparse coding
with LDSs can be solved by the proposed method efficiently. To this end, we first
derive a novel canonical form for representing the parameters of an LDS, and then
show how gradient-descent updates through the projection on the space of LDSs
can be achieved dexterously. In contrast to previous studies, our solution avoids
any approximation in LDS modeling or during the optimization process. Extensive
experiments reveal the superior performance of the proposed method in terms of
the convergence and classification accuracy over state-of-the-art techniques.

1

Introduction

Learning from spatio-temporal data is an active research area in computer vision, signal processing
and robotics. Examples include dynamic texture classification [1], video action recognition [2, 3, 4]
and robotic tactile sensing [5]. One kind of the popular models for analyzing spatio-temporal data
is Linear Dynamical Systems (LDSs) [1]. Specifically, LDSs apply parametric equations to model
the spatio-temporal data. The optimal system parameters learned from the input are employed as
the descriptor of each spatio-temporal sequence. The benefits of applying LDSs are two-fold: 1.
LDSs are generative models and their parameters are learned in an unsupervised manner. This makes
LDSs suitable choices for not only classification but also interpolation/extrapolation/generation of
spatio-temporal sequences [1, 6, 7]; 2. Unlike vectorial ARMA models [8], LDSs are less prone to
the curse of dimensionality as a result of their lower-dimensional state space [9].
Clustering [10] and coding [5] LDSs are two fundamental problems that motivate this work. The
clustering task is to group LDS models based on some given similarity metrics. The problem of
coding, especially sparse coding, is to identify a dictionary of LDSs along their associated sparse
codes to best reconstruct a collection of LDSs. Given a set of LDSs, the key problems of clustering
and sparse coding are computing the mean and finding the LDS atoms, respectively, both of which
are not easy tasks by any measure. Due to an infinite number of equivalent transformations for
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

