Differentially private Bayesian learning on
distributed data
Mikko Heikkilä1
mikko.a.heikkila@helsinki.fi

Eemil Lagerspetz2
eemil.lagerspetz@helsinki.fi

Samuel Kaski3
samuel.kaski@aalto.fi

Kana Shimizu4
shimizu.kana.g@gmail.com

Sasu Tarkoma2
sasu.tarkoma@helsinki.fi

Antti Honkela1,5
antti.honkela@helsinki.fi

1

Helsinki Institute for Information Technology HIIT,
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Helsinki
2
Helsinki Institute for Information Technology HIIT,
Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki
3
Helsinki Institute for Information Technology HIIT,
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University
4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Waseda University
5
Department of Public Health, University of Helsinki

Abstract
Many applications of machine learning, for example in health care, would benefit
from methods that can guarantee privacy of data subjects. Differential privacy
(DP) has become established as a standard for protecting learning results. The
standard DP algorithms require a single trusted party to have access to the entire
data, which is a clear weakness, or add prohibitive amounts of noise. We consider
DP Bayesian learning in a distributed setting, where each party only holds a single
sample or a few samples of the data. We propose a learning strategy based on a
secure multi-party sum function for aggregating summaries from data holders and
the Gaussian mechanism for DP. Our method builds on an asymptotically optimal
and practically efficient DP Bayesian inference with rapidly diminishing extra
cost.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy (DP) [9, 11] has recently gained popularity as the theoretically best-founded
means of protecting the privacy of data subjects in machine learning. It provides rigorous guarantees
against breaches of individual privacy that are robust even against attackers with access to additional
side information. DP learning methods have been proposed e.g. for maximum likelihood estimation
[24], empirical risk minimisation [5] and Bayesian inference [e.g. 8, 13, 16, 17, 19, 25, 29]. There
are DP versions of most popular machine learning methods, including linear regression [16, 28],
logistic regression [4], support vector machines [5], and deep learning [1].
Almost all existing DP machine learning methods assume that some trusted party has unrestricted
access to all the data in order to add the necessary amount of noise needed for the privacy guarantees.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

