Robust and Efficient Transfer Learning with Hidden
Parameter Markov Decision Processes
Taylor Killian∗
taylorkillian@g.harvard.edu
Harvard University

Samuel Daulton∗
sdaulton@g.harvard.edu
Harvard University, Facebook†

George Konidaris
gdk@cs.brown.edu
Brown University

Finale Doshi-Velez
finale@seas.harvard.edu
Harvard University

Abstract
We introduce a new formulation of the Hidden Parameter Markov Decision Process (HiP-MDP), a framework for modeling families of related tasks using lowdimensional latent embeddings. Our new framework correctly models the joint
uncertainty in the latent parameters and the state space. We also replace the original
Gaussian Process-based model with a Bayesian Neural Network, enabling more
scalable inference. Thus, we expand the scope of the HiP-MDP to applications
with higher dimensions and more complex dynamics.

1

Introduction

The world is filled with families of tasks with similar, but not identical, dynamics. For example,
consider the task of training a robot to swing a bat with unknown length l and mass m. The task is a
member of a family of bat-swinging tasks. If a robot has already learned to swing several bats with
various lengths and masses {(li , mi )}N
i=1 , then the robot should learn to swing a new bat with length
l0 and mass m0 more efficiently than learning from scratch. That is, it is grossly inefficient to develop
a control policy from scratch each time a unique task is encountered.
The Hidden Parameter Markov Decision Process (HiP-MDP) [14] was developed to address this
type of transfer learning, where optimal policies are adapted to subtle variations within tasks in an
efficient and robust manner. Specifically, the HiP-MDP paradigm introduced a low-dimensional latent
task parameterization wb that, combined with a state and action, completely describes the system’s
dynamics T (s0 |s, a, wb ). However, the original formulation did not account for nonlinear interactions
between the latent parameterization and the state space when approximating these dynamics, which
required all states to be visited during training. In addition, the original framework scaled poorly
because it used Gaussian Processes (GPs) as basis functions for approximating the task’s dynamics.
We present a new HiP-MDP formulation that models interactions between the latent parameters
wb and the state s when transitioning to state s0 after taking action a. We do so by including the
latent parameters wb , the state s, and the action a as input to a Bayesian Neural Network (BNN).
The BNN both learns the common transition dynamics for a family of tasks and models how the
unique variations of a particular instance impact the instance’s overall dynamics. Embedding the
latent parameters in this way allows for more accurate uncertainty estimation and more robust transfer
when learning a control policy for a new and possibly unique task instance. Our formulation also
inherits several desirable properties of BNNs: it can model multimodal and heteroskedastic transition
∗
†

Both contributed equally as primary authors
Current affiliation, joined afterward

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

