MaskRNN: Instance Level Video Object
Segmentation

Yuan-Ting Hu
UIUC
ythu2@illinois.edu

Jia-Bin Huang
Virginia Tech
jbhuang@vt.edu

Alexander G. Schwing
UIUC
aschwing@illinois.edu

Abstract
Instance level video object segmentation is an important technique for video editing
and compression. To capture the temporal coherence, in this paper, we develop
MaskRNN, a recurrent neural net approach which fuses in each frame the output
of two deep nets for each object instance — a binary segmentation net providing
a mask and a localization net providing a bounding box. Due to the recurrent
component and the localization component, our method is able to take advantage
of long-term temporal structures of the video data as well as rejecting outliers.
We validate the proposed algorithm on three challenging benchmark datasets,
the DAVIS-2016 dataset, the DAVIS-2017 dataset, and the Segtrack v2 dataset,
achieving state-of-the-art performance on all of them.

1

Introduction

Instance level video object segmentation of complex scenes is a challenging problem with applications
in areas such as object identification, video editing, and video compression. With the recent release
of the DAVIS dataset [39], the task of segmenting multiple object instances from videos has gained
considerable attention. However, just like for classical foreground-background segmentation, deforming shapes, fast movements, and multiple objects occluding each other pose significant challenges to
instance level video object segmentation.
Classical techniques [5, 10, 11, 17, 21, 41, 20, 44, 49] for video object segmentation often rely on
geometry and assume rigid scenes. Since these assumptions are often violated in practice, visually
apparent artifacts are commonly observed. To temporally and spatially smooth object mask estimates,
graphical model based techniques [22, 2, 14, 45, 47, 46] have been proposed in the past. While
graphical models enable an effective label propagation across the entire video sequences, they often
tend to be sensitive to parameters.
Recently, deep learning based approaches [7, 26, 23, 6, 25] have been applied to video object
segmentation. Early work in this direction predicts the segmentation mask frame by frame [7]. Later,
prediction of the current frame incorpoerates additional cues from the preceding frame using optical
flow [23, 26, 25], semantic segmentations [6], or mask propagation [26, 25]. Importantly, all these
methods only address the foreground-background segmentation of a single object and are not directly
applicable to instance level segmentation of multiple objects in videos.
In contrast to the aforementioned methods, in this paper, we develop MaskRNN, a framework that
deals with instance level segmentation of multiple objects in videos. We use a bottom-up approach
where we first track and segment individual objects before merging the results. To capture the
temporal structure, our approach employs a recurrent neural net while the segmentation of individual
objects is based on predictions of binary segmentation masks confined to a predicted bounding box.
We evaluate our approach on the DAVIS-2016 dataset [37], the DAVIS-2017 dataset [39], and the
Segtrack v2 dataset [30]. On all three we observe state-of-the-art performance.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

