Triple Generative Adversarial Nets

Chongxuan Li, Kun Xu, Jun Zhu∗, Bo Zhang
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., TNList Lab, State Key Lab of Intell. Tech. & Sys.,
Center for Bio-Inspired Computing Research, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China
{licx14, xu-k16}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {dcszj, dcszb}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Nets (GANs) have shown promise in image generation
and semi-supervised learning (SSL). However, existing GANs in SSL have two
problems: (1) the generator and the discriminator (i.e. the classifier) may not
be optimal at the same time; and (2) the generator cannot control the semantics
of the generated samples. The problems essentially arise from the two-player
formulation, where a single discriminator shares incompatible roles of identifying
fake samples and predicting labels and it only estimates the data without considering
the labels. To address the problems, we present triple generative adversarial
net (Triple-GAN), which consists of three players—a generator, a discriminator
and a classifier. The generator and the classifier characterize the conditional
distributions between images and labels, and the discriminator solely focuses on
identifying fake image-label pairs. We design compatible utilities to ensure that
the distributions characterized by the classifier and the generator both converge to
the data distribution. Our results on various datasets demonstrate that Triple-GAN
as a unified model can simultaneously (1) achieve the state-of-the-art classification
results among deep generative models, and (2) disentangle the classes and styles
of the input and transfer smoothly in the data space via interpolation in the latent
space class-conditionally.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models (DGMs) can capture the underlying distributions of the data and synthesize
new samples. Recently, significant progress has been made on generating realistic images based on
Generative Adversarial Nets (GANs) [7, 3, 22]. GAN is formulated as a two-player game, where the
generator G takes a random noise z as input and produces a sample G(z) in the data space while the
discriminator D identifies whether a certain sample comes from the true data distribution p(x) or the
generator. Both G and D are parameterized as deep neural networks and the training procedure is to
solve a minimax problem:
min max U (D, G) = Ex∼p(x) [log(D(x))] + Ez∼pz (z) [log(1 − D(G(z)))],
G

D

where pz (z) is a simple distribution (e.g., uniform or normal) and U (·) denotes the utilities. Given a
generator and the defined distribution pg , the optimal discriminator is D(x) = p(x)/(pg (x) + p(x))
in the nonparametric setting, and the global equilibrium of this game is achieved if and only if
pg (x) = p(x) [7], which is desired in terms of image generation.
GANs and DGMs in general have also proven effective in semi-supervised learning (SSL) [11],
while retaining the generative capability. Under the same two-player game framework, Cat-GAN [26]
generalizes GANs with a categorical discriminative network and an objective function that minimizes
the conditional entropy of the predictions given the real data while maximizes the conditional entropy
∗

J. Zhu is the corresponding author.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

