Dual-Agent GANs for Photorealistic and Identity
Preserving Profile Face Synthesis

Jian Zhao1,2∗† Lin Xiong3 Karlekar Jayashree3 Jianshu Li1 Fang Zhao1
Zhecan Wang4† Sugiri Pranata3 Shengmei Shen3
Shuicheng Yan1,5 Jiashi Feng1
1

3

National University of Singapore

2

National University of Defense Technology

Panasonic R&D Center Singapore 4 Franklin. W. Olin College of Engineering
5
Qihoo 360 AI Institute

{zhaojian90, jianshu}@u.nus.edu {lin.xiong, karlekar.jayashree, sugiri.pranata, shengmei.shen}@sg.panasonic.com
zhecan.wang@students.olin.edu {elezhf, eleyans, elefjia}@u.nus.edu

Abstract
Synthesizing realistic profile faces is promising for more efficiently training deep
pose-invariant models for large-scale unconstrained face recognition, by populating samples with extreme poses and avoiding tedious annotations. However,
learning from synthetic faces may not achieve the desired performance due to the
discrepancy between distributions of the synthetic and real face images. To narrow
this gap, we propose a Dual-Agent Generative Adversarial Network (DA-GAN)
model, which can improve the realism of a face simulator’s output using unlabeled
real faces, while preserving the identity information during the realism refinement. The dual agents are specifically designed for distinguishing real v.s. fake
and identities simultaneously. In particular, we employ an off-the-shelf 3D face
model as a simulator to generate profile face images with varying poses. DA-GAN
leverages a fully convolutional network as the generator to generate high-resolution
images and an auto-encoder as the discriminator with the dual agents. Besides
the novel architecture, we make several key modifications to the standard GAN
to preserve pose and texture, preserve identity and stabilize training process: (i)
a pose perception loss; (ii) an identity perception loss; (iii) an adversarial loss
with a boundary equilibrium regularization term. Experimental results show that
DA-GAN not only presents compelling perceptual results but also significantly
outperforms state-of-the-arts on the large-scale and challenging NIST IJB-A unconstrained face recognition benchmark. In addition, the proposed DA-GAN is
also promising as a new approach for solving generic transfer learning problems
more effectively. DA-GAN is the foundation of our submissions to NIST IJB-A
2017 face recognition competitions, where we won the 1st places on the tracks of
verification and identification.

1

Introduction

Unconstrained face recognition is a very important yet extremely challenging problem. In recent years,
deep learning techniques have significantly advanced large-scale unconstrained face recognition (8;
19; 27; 34; 29; 16), arguably driven by rapidly increasing resource of face images. However, labeling
huge amount of data for feeding supervised deep learning algorithms is undoubtedly expensive
and time-consuming. Moreover, as often observed in real-world scenarios, the pose distribution of
available face recognition datasets (e.g., IJB-A (15)) is usually unbalanced and has long-tail with
∗
†

Homepage: https://zhaoj9014.github.io/.
Jian Zhao and Zhecan Wang were interns at Panasonic R&D Center Singapore during this work.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

