Best of Both Worlds: Transferring Knowledge from
Discriminative Learning to a Generative Visual
Dialog Model

Jiasen Lu1∗, Anitha Kannan2∗, Jianwei Yang1 , Devi Parikh3,1 , Dhruv Batra3,1
1
Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 Curai, 3 Facebook AI Research
{jiasenlu, jw2yang, parikh, dbatra}@gatech.edu

Abstract
We present a novel training framework for neural sequence models, particularly
for grounded dialog generation. The standard training paradigm for these models
is maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), or minimizing the cross-entropy of the
human responses. Across a variety of domains, a recurring problem with MLE
trained generative neural dialog models (G) is that they tend to produce ‘safe’
and generic responses (‘I don’t know’, ‘I can’t tell’). In contrast, discriminative
dialog models (D) that are trained to rank a list of candidate human responses
outperform their generative counterparts; in terms of automatic metrics, diversity,
and informativeness of the responses. However, D is not useful in practice since it
can not be deployed to have real conversations with users.
Our work aims to achieve the best of both worlds – the practical usefulness of
G and the strong performance of D – via knowledge transfer from D to G. Our
primary contribution is an end-to-end trainable generative visual dialog model,
where G receives gradients from D as a perceptual (not adversarial) loss of the sequence sampled from G. We leverage the recently proposed Gumbel-Softmax (GS)
approximation to the discrete distribution – specifically, a RNN augmented with a
sequence of GS samplers, coupled with the straight-through gradient estimator to
enable end-to-end differentiability. We also introduce a stronger encoder for visual
dialog, and employ a self-attention mechanism for answer encoding along with a
metric learning loss to aid D in better capturing semantic similarities in answer
responses. Overall, our proposed model outperforms state-of-the-art on the VisDial
dataset by a significant margin (2.67% on recall@10).

1

Introduction

One fundamental goal of artificial intelligence (AI) is the development of perceptually-grounded
dialog agents – specifically, agents that can perceive or understand their environment (through vision,
audio, or other sensors), and communicate their understanding with humans or other agents in natural
language. Over the last few years, neural sequence models (e.g. [47, 44, 46]) have emerged as the
dominant paradigm across a variety of setting and datasets – from text-only dialog [44, 40, 23, 3] to
more recently, visual dialog [7, 9, 8, 33, 45], where an agent must answer a sequence of questions
grounded in an image, requiring it to reason about both visual content and the dialog history.
The standard training paradigm for neural dialog models is maximum likelihood estimation (MLE)
or equivalently, minimizing the cross-entropy (under the model) of a ‘ground-truth’ human response.
Across a variety of domains, a recurring problem with MLE trained neural dialog models is that they
tend to produce ‘safe’ generic responses, such as ‘Not sure’ or ‘I don’t know’ in text-only dialog [23],
and ‘I can’t see’ or ‘I can’t tell’ in visual dialog [7, 8]. One reason for this emergent behavior is that
∗

Work was done while at Facebook AI Research.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

