ALICE: Towards Understanding Adversarial
Learning for Joint Distribution Matching

Chunyuan Li1 , Hao Liu2 , Changyou Chen3 , Yunchen Pu1 , Liqun Chen1 ,
Ricardo Henao1 and Lawrence Carin1
1
Duke University 2 Nanjing University 3 University at Buffalo
cl319@duke.edu

Abstract
We investigate the non-identifiability issues associated with bidirectional adversarial training for joint distribution matching. Within a framework of conditional
entropy, we propose both adversarial and non-adversarial approaches to learn
desirable matched joint distributions for unsupervised and supervised tasks. We
unify a broad family of adversarial models as joint distribution matching problems.
Our approach stabilizes learning of unsupervised bidirectional adversarial learning
methods. Further, we introduce an extension for semi-supervised learning tasks.
Theoretical results are validated in synthetic data and real-world applications.

1

Introduction

Deep directed generative models are a powerful framework for modeling complex data distributions.
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [1] can implicitly learn the data generating distribution;
more specifically, GAN can learn to sample from it. In order to do this, GAN trains a generator to
mimic real samples, by learning a mapping from a latent space (where the samples are easily drawn)
to the data space. Concurrently, a discriminator is trained to distinguish between generated and real
samples. The key idea behind GAN is that if the discriminator finds it difficult to distinguish real from
artificial samples, then the generator is likely to be a good approximation to the true data distribution.
In its standard form, GAN only yields a one-way mapping, i.e., it lacks an inverse mapping mechanism
(from data to latent space), preventing GAN from being able to do inference. The ability to compute
a posterior distribution of the latent variable conditioned on a given observation may be important
for data interpretation and for downstream applications (e.g., classification from the latent variable)
[2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Efforts have been made to simultaneously learn an efficient bidirectional model
that can produce high-quality samples for both the latent and data spaces [3, 4, 8, 9, 10, 11]. Among
them, the recently proposed Adversarially Learned Inference (ALI) [4, 10] casts the learning of such
a bidirectional model in a GAN-like adversarial framework. Specifically, a discriminator is trained to
distinguish between two joint distributions: that of the real data sample and its inferred latent code,
and that of the real latent code and its generated data sample.
While ALI is an inspiring and elegant approach, it tends to produce reconstructions that are not
necessarily faithful reproductions of the inputs [4]. This is because ALI only seeks to match two
joint distributions, but the dependency structure (correlation) between the two random variables
(conditionals) within each joint is not specified or constrained. In practice, this results in solutions
that satisfy ALI’s objective and that are able to produce real-looking samples, but have difficulties
reconstructing observed data [4]. ALI also has difficulty discovering the correct pairing relationship
in domain transformation tasks [12, 13, 14].
In this paper, (i) we first describe the non-identifiability issue of ALI. To solve this problem, we
propose to regularize ALI using the framework of Conditional Entropy (CE), hence we call the
proposed approach ALICE. (ii) Adversarial learning schemes are proposed to estimate the conditional
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

