Alternating minimization for dictionary learning with
random initialization
Niladri S. Chatterji
University of California, Berkeley
chatterji@berkeley.edu

Peter L. Bartlett
University of California, Berkeley
peter@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We present theoretical guarantees for an alternating minimization algorithm for
the dictionary learning/sparse coding problem. The dictionary learning problem
is to factorize vector samples y 1 , y 2 , . . . , y n into an appropriate basis (dictionary)
A∗ and sparse vectors x1∗ , . . . , xn∗ . Our algorithm is a simple alternating minimization procedure that switches between `1 minimization and gradient descent
in alternate steps. Dictionary learning and specifically alternating minimization
algorithms for dictionary learning are well studied both theoretically and empirically. However, in contrast to previous theoretical analyses for this problem, we
replace a condition on the operator norm (that is, the largest magnitude singular
value) of the true underlying dictionary A∗ with a condition on the matrix infinity
norm (that is, the largest magnitude term). Our guarantees are under a reasonable
generative model that allows for dictionaries with growing operator norms, and
can handle an arbitrary level of overcompleteness, while having sparsity that is
information theoretically optimal. We also establish upper bounds on the sample
complexity of our algorithm.
Erratum, August 7, 2019: An earlier version of this paper appeared in NIPS 2017 which had
an erroneous claim about convergence guarantees with random initialization. The main result –
Theorem 3 – has been corrected by adding an assumption about the initialization (Assumption B1).

1

Introduction

In the problem of sparse coding/dictionary learning, given i.i.d. samples y 1 , y 2 , . . . , y n ∈ Rd produced from the generative model
y i = A∗ xi∗

(1)

for i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n}, the goal is to recover a fixed dictionary A∗ ∈ Rd×r and s-sparse vectors
xi∗ ∈ Rr . (An s-sparse vector has no more than s non-zero entries.) In many problems of interest,
the dictionary is often overcomplete, that is, r ≥ d. This is believed to add flexibility in modeling and
robustness. This model was first proposed in neuroscience as an energy minimization heuristic that
reproduces features of the V1 region of the visual cortex (Olshausen and Field, 1997; Lewicki and
Sejnowski, 2000). It has also been an extremely successful approach to identifying low dimensional
structure in high dimensional data; it is used extensively to find features in images, speech and video
(see, for example, references in Elad and Aharon, 2006).
Most formulations of dictionary learning tend to yield non-convex optimization problems. For example, note that if either xi∗ or A∗ were known, given y i , this would just be a (matrix/sparse) regression problem. However, estimating both xi∗ and A∗ simultaneously leads to both computational as
well as statistical complications. The heuristic of alternating minimization works well empirically
for dictionary learning. At each step, first an estimate of the dictionary is held fixed while the sparse
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

