Plan, Attend, Generate:
Planning for Sequence-to-Sequence Models

Francis Dutil∗
University of Montreal (MILA)
frdutil@gmail.com

Caglar Gulcehre∗
University of Montreal (MILA)
ca9lar@gmail.com

Adam Trischler
Microsoft Research Maluuba
adam.trischler@microsoft.com

Yoshua Bengio
University of Montreal (MILA)
yoshua.umontreal@gmail.com

Abstract
We investigate the integration of a planning mechanism into sequence-to-sequence
models using attention. We develop a model which can plan ahead in the future when
it computes its alignments between input and output sequences, constructing a matrix
of proposed future alignments and a commitment vector that governs whether to follow
or recompute the plan. This mechanism is inspired by the recently proposed strategic
attentive reader and writer (STRAW) model for Reinforcement Learning. Our proposed
model is end-to-end trainable using primarily differentiable operations. We show that
it outperforms a strong baseline on character-level translation tasks from WMT’15,
the algorithmic task of finding Eulerian circuits of graphs, and question generation
from the text. Our analysis demonstrates that the model computes qualitatively intuitive
alignments, converges faster than the baselines, and achieves superior performance
with fewer parameters.

1 Introduction
Several important tasks in the machine learning literature can be cast as sequence-to-sequence
problems (Cho et al., 2014b; Sutskever et al., 2014). Machine translation is a prime example of this: a
system takes as input a sequence of words or characters in some source language, then generates an output
sequence of words or characters in the target language – the translation.
Neural encoder-decoder models (Cho et al., 2014b; Sutskever et al., 2014) have become a standard
approach for sequence-to-sequence tasks such as machine translation and speech recognition. Such models
generally encode the input sequence as a set of vector representations using a recurrent neural network
(RNN). A second RNN then decodes the output sequence step-by-step, conditioned on the encodings.
An important augmentation to this architecture, first described by Bahdanau et al. (2015), is for models
to compute a soft alignment between the encoder representations and the decoder state at each time-step,
through an attention mechanism. The computed alignment conditions the decoder more directly on a
relevant subset of the input sequence. Computationally, the attention mechanism is typically a simple
learned function of the decoder’s internal state, e.g., an MLP.
In this work, we propose to augment the encoder-decoder model with attention by integrating a planning
mechanism. Specifically, we develop a model that uses planning to improve the alignment between input
and output sequences. It creates an explicit plan of input-output alignments to use at future time-steps, based
∗

denotes that both authors (CG and FD) contributed equally and the order is determined randomly.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

