Training Quantized Nets: A Deeper Understanding
Hao Li1∗, Soham De1∗, Zheng Xu1 , Christoph Studer2 , Hanan Samet1 , Tom Goldstein1
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park
2
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Cornell University
{haoli,sohamde,xuzh,hjs,tomg}@cs.umd.edu, studer@cornell.edu

Abstract
Currently, deep neural networks are deployed on low-power portable devices by first training
a full-precision model using powerful hardware, and then deriving a corresponding lowprecision model for efficient inference on such systems. However, training models directly
with coarsely quantized weights is a key step towards learning on embedded platforms that
have limited computing resources, memory capacity, and power consumption. Numerous
recent publications have studied methods for training quantized networks, but these studies
have mostly been empirical. In this work, we investigate training methods for quantized neural networks from a theoretical viewpoint. We first explore accuracy guarantees for training
methods under convexity assumptions. We then look at the behavior of these algorithms for
non-convex problems, and show that training algorithms that exploit high-precision representations have an important greedy search phase that purely quantized training methods
lack, which explains the difficulty of training using low-precision arithmetic.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are an integral part of state-of-the-art computer vision and natural language
processing systems. Because of their high memory requirements and computational complexity,
networks are usually trained using powerful hardware. There is an increasing interest in training
and deploying neural networks directly on battery-powered devices, such as cell phones or other
platforms. Such low-power embedded systems are memory and power limited, and in some cases
lack basic support for floating-point arithmetic.
To make neural nets practical on embedded systems, many researchers have focused on training nets
with coarsely quantized weights. For example, weights may be constrained to take on integer/binary
values, or may be represented using low-precision (8 bits or less) fixed-point numbers. Quantized nets
offer the potential of superior memory and computation efficiency, while achieving performance that
is competitive with state-of-the-art high-precision nets. Quantized weights can dramatically reduce
memory size and access bandwidth, increase power efficiency, exploit hardware-friendly bitwise
operations, and accelerate inference throughput [1–3].
Handling low-precision weights is difficult and motivates interest in new training methods. When
learning rates are small, stochastic gradient methods make small updates to weight parameters.
Binarization/discretization of weights after each training iteration “rounds off” these small updates
and causes training to stagnate [1]. Thus, the naïve approach of quantizing weights using a rounding
procedure yields poor results when weights are represented using a small number of bits. Other
approaches include classical stochastic rounding methods [4], as well as schemes that combine
full-precision floating-point weights with discrete rounding procedures [5]. While some of these
schemes seem to work in practice, results in this area are largely experimental, and little work has
been devoted to explaining the excellent performance of some methods, the poor performance of
others, and the important differences in behavior between these methods.
∗

Equal contribution. Author ordering determined by a cryptographically secure random number generator.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

