Model-Powered Conditional Independence Test
Rajat Sen1,* , Ananda Theertha Suresh2,* , Karthikeyan Shanmugam3,* , Alexandros G. Dimakis1 , and
Sanjay Shakkottai1
1

The University of Texas at Austin
2
Google, New York
3
IBM Research, Thomas J. Watson Center

Abstract
We consider the problem of non-parametric Conditional Independence testing
(CI testing) for continuous random variables. Given i.i.d samples from the joint
distribution f (x, y, z) of continuous random vectors X, Y and Z, we determine
whether X ?
? Y |Z. We approach this by converting the conditional independence
test into a classification problem. This allows us to harness very powerful classifiers
like gradient-boosted trees and deep neural networks. These models can handle
complex probability distributions and allow us to perform significantly better
compared to the prior state of the art, for high-dimensional CI testing. The main
technical challenge in the classification problem is the need for samples from
the conditional product distribution f CI (x, y, z) = f (x|z)f (y|z)f (z) – the joint
distribution if and only if X ?
? Y |Z. – when given access only to i.i.d. samples
from the true joint distribution f (x, y, z). To tackle this problem we propose a novel
nearest neighbor bootstrap procedure and theoretically show that our generated
samples are indeed close to f CI in terms of total variational distance. We then
develop theoretical results regarding the generalization bounds for classification for
our problem, which translate into error bounds for CI testing. We provide a novel
analysis of Rademacher type classification bounds in the presence of non-i.i.d nearindependent samples. We empirically validate the performance of our algorithm on
simulated and real datasets and show performance gains over previous methods.

1

Introduction

Testing datasets for Conditional Independence (CI) have significant applications in several statistical/learning problems; among others, examples include discovering/testing for edges in Bayesian
networks [15, 27, 7, 9], causal inference [23, 14, 29, 5] and feature selection through Markov Blankets [16, 31]. Given a triplet of random variables/vectors (X, Y, Z), we say that X is conditionally
independent of Y given Z (denoted by X ?
? Y |Z), if the joint distribution fX,Y,Z (x, y, z) factorizes
as fX,Y,Z (x, y, z) = fX|Z (x|z)fY |Z (y|z)fZ (z). The problem of Conditional Independence Testing
(CI Testing) can be defined as follows: Given n i.i.d samples from fX,Y,Z (x, y, z), distinguish
between the two hypothesis H0 : X ?
? Y |Z and H1 : X 6?
? Y |Z.
In this paper we propose a data-driven Model-Powered CI test. The central idea in a model-driven
approach is to convert a statistical testing or estimation problem into a pipeline that utilizes the power
of supervised learning models like classifiers and regressors; such pipelines can then leverage recent
advances in classification/regression in high-dimensional settings. In this paper, we take such a
model-powered approach (illustrated in Fig. 1), which reduces the problem of CI testing to Binary
Classification. Specifically, the key steps of our procedure are as follows:
* Equal Contribution
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

