Estimating Mutual Information for
Discrete-Continuous Mixtures
Sreeram Kannan
Department of Electrical Engineering
University of Washington
ksreeram@uw.edu

Weihao Gao
Department of ECE
Coordinated Science Laboratory
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
wgao9@illinois.edu
Sewoong Oh
Department of IESE
Coordinated Science Laboratory
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
swoh@illinois.edu

Pramod Viswanath
Department of ECE
Coordinated Science Laboratory
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
pramodv@illinois.edu

Abstract
Estimation of mutual information from observed samples is a basic primitive in
machine learning, useful in several learning tasks including correlation mining,
information bottleneck, Chow-Liu tree, and conditional independence testing in
(causal) graphical models. While mutual information is a quantity well-defined
for general probability spaces, estimators have been developed only in the special
case of discrete or continuous pairs of random variables. Most of these estimators
operate using the 3H-principle, i.e., by calculating the three (differential) entropies
of X, Y and the pair (X, Y ). However, in general mixture spaces, such individual
entropies are not well defined, even though mutual information is. In this paper, we
develop a novel estimator for estimating mutual information in discrete-continuous
mixtures. We prove the consistency of this estimator theoretically as well as
demonstrate its excellent empirical performance. This problem is relevant in a
wide-array of applications, where some variables are discrete, some continuous,
and others are a mixture between continuous and discrete components.

1

Introduction

A fundamental quantity of interest in machine learning is mutual information (MI), which characterizes the shared information between a pair of random variables (X, Y ). MI obeys several intuitively
appealing properties including the data-processing inequality, invariance under one-to-one transformations and chain rule [10]. Therefore, mutual information is widely used in machine learning for
canonical tasks as classification [35], clustering [32, 49, 8, 29] and feature selection [2, 13]. Mutual
information also emerges as the “correct" quantity in several graphical model inference problems
(e.g., the Chow-Liu tree [9] and conditional independence testing [6]). MI is also pervasively used
in many data science application domains, such as sociology [40], computational biology [28], and
computational neuroscience [41].
An important problem in any of these applications is to estimate mutual information effectively
from samples. While mutual information has been the de facto measure of information in several
applications for decades, the estimation of mutual information from samples remains an active
research problem. Recently, there has been a resurgence of interest in entropy, relative entropy and
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

