Fast amortized inference of neural activity from
calcium imaging data with variational autoencoders

Artur Speiser12 , Jinyao Yan3 , Evan Archer4∗, Lars Buesing4†,
Srinivas C. Turaga3‡ and Jakob H. Macke1‡§
1
research center caesar, an associate of the Max Planck Society, Bonn, Germany
2
IMPRS Brain and Behavior Bonn/Florida
3
HHMI Janelia Research Campus
4
Columbia University
artur.speiser@caesar.de, turagas@janelia.hhmi.org, jakob.macke@caesar.de

Abstract
Calcium imaging permits optical measurement of neural activity. Since intracellular
calcium concentration is an indirect measurement of neural activity, computational
tools are necessary to infer the true underlying spiking activity from fluorescence
measurements. Bayesian model inversion can be used to solve this problem, but
typically requires either computationally expensive MCMC sampling, or faster but
approximate maximum-a-posteriori optimization. Here, we introduce a flexible
algorithmic framework for fast, efficient and accurate extraction of neural spikes
from imaging data. Using the framework of variational autoencoders, we propose
to amortize inference by training a deep neural network to perform model inversion
efficiently. The recognition network is trained to produce samples from the posterior
distribution over spike trains. Once trained, performing inference amounts to a fast
single forward pass through the network, without the need for iterative optimization
or sampling. We show that amortization can be applied flexibly to a wide range
of nonlinear generative models and significantly improves upon the state of the
art in computation time, while achieving competitive accuracy. Our framework is
also able to represent posterior distributions over spike-trains. We demonstrate the
generality of our method by proposing the first probabilistic approach for separating
backpropagating action potentials from putative synaptic inputs in calcium imaging
of dendritic spines.

1

Introduction

Spiking activity in neurons leads to changes in intra-cellular calcium concentration which can be
measured by fluorescence microscopy of synthetic calcium indicators such as Oregon Green BAPTA-1
[1] or genetically encoded calcium indictors such as GCaMP6 [2]. Such calcium imaging has become
important since it enables the parallel measurement of large neural populations in a spatially resolved
and minimally invasive manner [3, 4]. Calcium imaging can also be used to study neural activity at
subcellular resolution, e.g. for measuring the tuning of dendritic spines [5, 6]. However, due to the
indirect nature of calcium imaging, spike inference algorithms must be used to infer the underlying
neural spiking activity leading to measured fluorescence dynamics.
∗

current affiliation: Cogitai.Inc
current affiliation: DeepMind
‡
equal contribution
§
current primary affiliation: Centre for Cognitive Science, Technical University Darmstadt
†

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

