Linear Convergence of a Frank-Wolfe Type
Algorithm over Trace-Norm Balls∗

Zeyuan Allen-Zhu
Microsoft Research, Redmond
zeyuan@csail.mit.edu

Elad Hazan
Princeton University
ehazan@cs.princeton.edu

Wei Hu
Princeton University
huwei@cs.princeton.edu

Yuanzhi Li
Princeton University
yuanzhil@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
We propose a rank-k variant of the classical Frank-Wolfe algorithm to solve convex
optimization over a trace-norm ball. Our algorithm replaces the top singular-vector
computation (1-SVD) in Frank-Wolfe with a top-k singular-vector computation
(k-SVD), which can be done by repeatedly applying 1-SVD k times. Alternatively,
our algorithm can be viewed as a rank-k restricted version of projected gradient
descent. We show that our algorithm has a linear convergence rate when the
objective function is smooth and strongly convex, and the optimal solution has rank
at most k. This improves the convergence rate and the total time complexity of the
Frank-Wolfe method and its variants.

1

Introduction

Minimizing a convex matrix function over a trace-norm ball, which is: (recall that the trace norm
kXk∗ of a matrix X equals the sum of its singular values)

minX∈Rm×n f (X) : kXk∗ ≤ θ ,
(1.1)
is an important optimization problem that serves as a convex surrogate to many low-rank machine
learning tasks, including matrix completion [2, 10, 16], multiclass classification [4], phase retrieval [3],
polynomial neural nets [12], and more. In this paper we assume without loss of generality that θ = 1.
One natural algorithm for Problem (1.1) is projected gradient descent (PGD). In each iteration,
PGD first moves X in the direction of the gradient, and then projects it onto the trace-norm ball.
Unfortunately, computing this projection requires the full singular value decomposition (SVD) of the
matrix, which takes O(mn min{m, n}) time in general. This prevents PGD from being efficiently
applied to problems with large m and n.
Alternatively, one can use projection-free algorithms. As first proposed by Frank and Wolfe [5],
one can select a search direction (which is usually the gradient direction) and perform a linear
optimization over the constraint set in this direction. In the case of Problem (1.1), performing linear
optimization over a trace-norm ball amounts to computing the top (left and right) singular vectors
of a matrix, which can be done much faster than full SVD. Therefore, projection-free algorithms
become attractive for convex minimization over trace-norm balls.
Unfortunately, despite its low per-iteration complexity, the Frank-Wolfe (FW) algorithm suffers from
slower convergence rate compared with PGD. When the objective f (X) is smooth, FW requires
O(1/ε) iterations to convergence to an ε-approximate minimizer, and
√ this 1/ε rate is tight even if the
objective is also strongly convex [6]. In contrast, PGD achieves 1/ ε rate if f (X) is smooth (under
Nesterov’s acceleration [14]), and log(1/ε) rate if f (X) is both smooth and strongly convex.
∗

The full version of this paper can be found on https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.02105.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

