Differentially Private Empirical Risk Minimization
Revisited: Faster and More General∗
Di Wang
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
State University of New York at Buffalo
Buffalo, NY 14260
dwang45@buffalo.edu

Minwei Ye
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
State University of New York at Buffalo
Buffalo, NY 14260
minweiye@buffalo.edu

Jinhui Xu
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
State University of New York at Buffalo
Buffalo, NY 14260
jinhui@buffalo.edu

Abstract
In this paper we study the differentially private Empirical Risk Minimization
(ERM) problem in different settings. For smooth (strongly) convex loss function
with or without (non)-smooth regularization, we give algorithms that achieve either
optimal or near optimal utility bounds with less gradient complexity compared with
previous work. For ERM with smooth convex loss function in high-dimensional
(p  n) setting, we give an algorithm which achieves the upper bound with less
gradient complexity than previous ones. At last, we generalize the expected excess
empirical risk from convex loss functions to non-convex ones satisfying the PolyakLojasiewicz condition and give a tighter upper bound on the utility than the one in
[34].

1

Introduction

Privacy preserving is an important issue in learning. Nowadays, learning algorithms are often required
to deal with sensitive data. This means that the algorithm needs to not only learn effectively from
the data but also provide a certain level of guarantee on privacy preserving. Differential privacy is a
rigorous notion for statistical data privacy and has received a great deal of attentions in recent years
[11, 10]. As a commonly used supervised learning method, Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM)
also faces the challenge of achieving simultaneously privacy preserving and learning. Differentially
Private (DP) ERM with convex loss function has been extensively studied in the last decade, starting
from [7]. In this paper, we revisit this problem and present several improved results.
Problem Setting Given a dataset D = {z1 , z2 · · · , zn } from a data universe X , and a closed
convex set C ⊆ Rp , DP-ERM is to find
n

x∗ ∈ arg min F r (x, D) = F (x, D) + r(x) =
x∈C

1X
f (x, zi ) + r(x)
n i=1

with the guarantee of being differentially private. We refer to f as loss function. r(·) is some simple
(non)-smooth convex function called regularizer. If the loss function is convex, the utility of the
∗

This research was supported in part by NSF through grants IIS-1422591, CCF-1422324, and CCF-1716400.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

