Learning to Pivot with Adversarial Networks

Gilles Louppe
New York University
g.louppe@nyu.edu

Michael Kagan
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
makagan@slac.stanford.edu

Kyle Cranmer
New York University
kyle.cranmer@nyu.edu

Abstract
Several techniques for domain adaptation have been proposed to account for
differences in the distribution of the data used for training and testing. The majority
of this work focuses on a binary domain label. Similar problems occur in a scientific
context where there may be a continuous family of plausible data generation
processes associated to the presence of systematic uncertainties. Robust inference
is possible if it is based on a pivot – a quantity whose distribution does not depend
on the unknown values of the nuisance parameters that parametrize this family
of data generation processes. In this work, we introduce and derive theoretical
results for a training procedure based on adversarial networks for enforcing the
pivotal property (or, equivalently, fairness with respect to continuous attributes) on
a predictive model. The method includes a hyperparameter to control the tradeoff between accuracy and robustness. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this
approach with a toy example and examples from particle physics.

1

Introduction

Machine learning techniques have been used to enhance a number of scientific disciplines, and they
have the potential to transform even more of the scientific process. One of the challenges of applying
machine learning to scientific problems is the need to incorporate systematic uncertainties, which
affect both the robustness of inference and the metrics used to evaluate a particular analysis strategy.
In this work, we focus on supervised learning techniques where systematic uncertainties can be
associated to a data generation process that is not uniquely specified. In other words, the lack of
systematic uncertainties corresponds to the (rare) case that the process that generates training data is
unique, fully specified, and an accurate representative of the real world data. By contrast, a common
situation when systematic uncertainty is present is when the training data are not representative
of the real data. Several techniques for domain adaptation have been developed to create models
that are more robust to this binary type of uncertainty. A more generic situation is that there are
several plausible data generation processes, specified as a family parametrized by continuous nuisance
parameters, as is typically found in scientific domains. In this broader context, statisticians have for
long been working on robust inference techniques based on the concept of a pivot – a quantity whose
distribution is invariant with the nuisance parameters (see e.g., (Degroot and Schervish, 1975)).
Assuming a probability model p(X, Y, Z), where X are the data, Y are the target labels, and Z are the
nuisance parameters, we consider the problem of learning a predictive model f (X) for Y conditional
on the observed values of X that is robust to uncertainty in the unknown value of Z. We introduce a
flexible learning procedure based on adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014) for enforcing that
f (X) is a pivot with respect to Z. We derive theoretical results proving that the procedure converges
towards a model that is both optimal and statistically independent of the nuisance parameters (if
that model exists) or for which one can tune a trade-off between accuracy and robustness (e.g., as
driven by a higher level objective). In particular, and to the best of our knowledge, our contribution is
the first solution for imposing pivotal constraints on a predictive model, working regardless of the
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

