Model evidence from nonequilibrium simulations

Michael Habeck
Statistical Inverse Problems in Biophysics, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry &
Institute for Mathematical Stochastics, University of Göttingen, 37077 Göttingen, Germany
email mhabeck@gwdg.de

Abstract
The marginal likelihood, or model evidence, is a key quantity in Bayesian parameter estimation and model comparison. For many probabilistic models, computation
of the marginal likelihood is challenging, because it involves a sum or integral over
an enormous parameter space. Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) is a powerful
approach to compute marginal likelihoods. Various MCMC algorithms and evidence estimators have been proposed in the literature. Here we discuss the use of
nonequilibrium techniques for estimating the marginal likelihood. Nonequilibrium
estimators build on recent developments in statistical physics and are known as
annealed importance sampling (AIS) and reverse AIS in probabilistic machine
learning. We introduce estimators for the model evidence that combine forward and
backward simulations and show for various challenging models that the evidence
estimators outperform forward and reverse AIS.

1

Introduction

The marginal likelihood or model evidence is a central quantity in Bayesian inference [1, 2], but
notoriously difficult to compute. If likelihood L(x) ≡ p(y|x, M ) models data y and prior π(x) ≡
p(x|M ) expresses our knowledge about the parameters x of the model M , the posterior p(x|y, M )
and the model evidence Z are given by:
Z
p(y|x, M ) p(x|M )
L(x) π(x)
p(x|y, M ) =
=
, Z ≡ p(y|M ) = L(x) π(x) dx .
(1)
p(y|M )
Z
Parameter estimation proceeds by drawing samples from p(x|y, M ), and different ways to model the
data are ranked by their evidence. For example, two models M1 and M2 can be compared via their
Bayes factor, which is proportional to the ratio of their marginal likelihoods p(y|M1 )/p(y|M2 ) [3].
Often the posterior (and perhaps also the prior) is intractable in the sense that it is not possible to
compute the normalizing constant and therefore also the evidence analytically. This makes it difficult
to compare different models via their posterior probability and model evidence. Markov chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) algorithms [4] only require unnormalized probability distributions and are among the
most powerful and accurate methods to estimate the marginal likelihood, but they are computationally
expensive. Therefore, it is important to develop efficient MCMC algorithms that can sample from the
posterior and allow us to compute the marginal likelihood.
There is a close analogy between the marginal likelihood and the log-partition function or free energy
from statistical physics [5]. Therefore, many concepts and algorithms originating in statistical physics
have been applied to problems arising in probabilistic inference. Here we show that nonequilibrium
fluctuation theorems (FTs) [6, 7, 8] can be used to estimate the marginal likelihood from forward and
reverse simulations.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

