Linear Time Computation of Moments in
Sum-Product Networks
Geoff Gordon
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
ggordon@cs.cmu.edu

Han Zhao
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
han.zhao@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Bayesian online algorithms for Sum-Product Networks (SPNs) need to update
their posterior distribution after seeing one single additional instance. To do so,
they must compute moments of the model parameters under this distribution. The
best existing method for computing such moments scales quadratically in the
size of the SPN, although it scales linearly for trees. This unfortunate scaling
makes Bayesian online algorithms prohibitively expensive, except for small or
tree-structured SPNs. We propose an optimal linear-time algorithm that works
even when the SPN is a general directed acyclic graph (DAG), which significantly
broadens the applicability of Bayesian online algorithms for SPNs. There are three
key ingredients in the design and analysis of our algorithm: 1). For each edge
in the graph, we construct a linear time reduction from the moment computation
problem to a joint inference problem in SPNs. 2). Using the property that each SPN
computes a multilinear polynomial, we give an efficient procedure for polynomial
evaluation by differentiation without expanding the network that may contain
exponentially many monomials. 3). We propose a dynamic programming method
to further reduce the computation of the moments of all the edges in the graph from
quadratic to linear. We demonstrate the usefulness of our linear time algorithm by
applying it to develop a linear time assume density filter (ADF) for SPNs.

1

Introduction

Sum-Product Networks (SPNs) have recently attracted some interest because of their flexibility in
modeling complex distributions as well as the tractability of performing exact marginal inference [11,
5, 6, 9, 16–18, 10]. They are general-purpose inference machines over which one can perform exact
joint, marginal and conditional queries in linear time in the size of the network. It has been shown that
discrete SPNs are equivalent to arithmetic circuits (ACs) [3, 8] in the sense that one can transform
each SPN into an equivalent AC and vice versa in linear time and space with respect to the network
size [13]. SPNs are also closely connected to probabilistic graphical models: by interpreting each sum
node in the network as a hidden variable and each product node as a rule encoding context-specific
conditional independence [1], every SPN can be equivalently converted into a Bayesian network
where compact data structures are used to represent the local probability distributions [16]. This
relationship characterizes the probabilistic semantics encoded by the network structure and allows
practitioners to design principled and efficient parameter learning algorithms for SPNs [17, 18].
Most existing batch learning algorithms for SPNs can be straightforwardly adapted to the online
setting, where the network updates its parameters after it receives one instance at each time step.
This online learning setting makes SPNs more widely applicable in various real-world scenarios.
This includes the case where either the data set is too large to store at once, or the network needs
to adapt to the change of external data distributions. Recently Rashwan et al. [12] proposed an
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

