Min-Max Propagation

Christopher Srinivasa
University of Toronto
Borealis AI
christopher.srinivasa
@gmail.com

Inmar Givoni
University of
Toronto
inmar.givoni
@gmail.com

Siamak Ravanbakhsh
University of
British
Columbia
siamakx@cs.ubc.ca

Brendan J. Frey
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
Deep Genomics
frey@psi.toronto.edu

Abstract
We study the application of min-max propagation, a variation of belief propagation,
for approximate min-max inference in factor graphs. We show that for “any” highorder function that can be minimized in O(ω), the min-max message update can be
obtained using an efficient O(K(ω + log(K)) procedure, where K is the number
of variables. We demonstrate how this generic procedure, in combination with
efficient updates for a family of high-order constraints, enables the application of
min-max propagation to efficiently approximate the NP-hard problem of makespan
minimization, which seeks to distribute a set of tasks on machines, such that the
worst case load is minimized.

1

Introduction

Min-max is a common optimization problem that involves minimizing a function with respect to
some variables X and maximizing it with respect to others Z: minX maxZ f (X, Z). For example,
f (X, Z) may be the cost or loss incurred by a system X under different operating conditions Z, in
which case the goal is to select the system whose worst-case cost is lowest. In Section 2, we show
that factor graphs present a desirable framework for solving min-max problems and in Section 3 we
review min-max propagation, a min-max based belief propagation algorithm.
Sum-product and min-sum inference using message passing has repeatedly produced groundbreaking
results in various fields, from low-density parity-check codes in communication theory (Kschischang
et al., 2001), to satisfiability in combinatorial optimization and latent-factor analysis in machine
learning.
An important question is whether “min-max” propagation can also yield good approximate solutions
when dealing with NP-hard problems? In this paper we answer this question in two parts.
I) Our main contribution is the introduction of an efficient min-max message passing procedure
for a generic family of high-order factors in Section 4. This enables us to approach new problems
through their factor graph formulation. Section 5.2 leverages our solution for high-order factors
to efficiently approximate the problem of makespan minimization using min-max propagation. II)
To better understand the pros and cons of min-max propagation, Section 5.1 compares it with the
alternative approach of reducing min-max inference to a sequence of Constraint Satisfaction Problems
(CSPs).
The feasibility of “exact” inference in a min-max semiring using the junction-tree method goes back
to (Aji and McEliece, 2000). More recent work of (Vinyals et al., 2013) presents the application
of min-max for junction-tree in a particular setting of the makespan problem. In this paper, we
investigate the usefulness of min-max propagation in the loopy case and more importantly provide an
efficient and generic algorithm to perform message passing with high-order factors.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

