Non-Stationary Spectral Kernels

Sami Remes
Markus Heinonen
Samuel Kaski
sami.remes@aalto.fi
markus.o.heinonen@aalto.fi
samuel.kaski@aalto.fi
Helsinki Institute for Information Technology HIIT
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University

Abstract
We propose non-stationary spectral kernels for Gaussian process regression by
modelling the spectral density of a non-stationary kernel function as a mixture of
input-dependent Gaussian process frequency density surfaces. We solve the generalised Fourier transform with such a model, and present a family of non-stationary
and non-monotonic kernels that can learn input-dependent and potentially longrange, non-monotonic covariances between inputs. We derive efficient inference
using model whitening and marginalized posterior, and show with case studies that
these kernels are necessary when modelling even rather simple time series, image
or geospatial data with non-stationary characteristics.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes are a flexible method for non-linear regression [18]. They define a distribution
over functions, and their performance depends heavily on the covariance function that constrains the
function values. Gaussian processes interpolate function values by considering the value of functions
at other similar points, as defined by the kernel function. Standard kernels, such as the Gaussian
kernel, lead to smooth neighborhood-dominated interpolation that is oblivious of any periodic or
long-range connections within the input space, and can not adapt the similarity metric to different
parts of the input space.
Two key properties of covariance functions are stationarity and monotony. A stationary kernel
K(x, x0 ) = K(x + a, x0 + a) is a function only of the distance x − x0 and not directly the value of
x. Hence it encodes an identical similarity notion across the input space, while a monotonic kernel
decreases over distance. Kernels that are both stationary and monotonic, such as the Gaussian and
Matérn kernels, can encode neither input-dependent function dynamics nor long-range correlations
within the input space. Non-monotonic and non-stationary functions are commonly encountered in
realistic signal processing [19], time series analysis [9], bioinformatics [5, 20], and in geostatistics
applications [7, 8].
Recently, several authors have explored kernels that are either non-monotonic or non-stationary. A
non-monotonic kernel can reveal informative manifolds over the input space by coupling distant
points due to periodic or other effects. Non-monotonic kernels have been derived from the Fourier
decomposition of kernels [13, 24, 30], which renders them inherently stationary. Non-stationary
kernels, on the other hand, are based on generalising monotonic base kernels, such as the Matérn
family of kernels [6, 15], by partitioning the input space [4], or by input transformations [25].
We propose an expressive and efficient kernel family that is – in contrast to earlier methods –
both non-stationary and non-monotonic, and hence can infer long-range or periodic relations in an
input-dependent manner. We derive the kernel from first principles by solving the more expressive
generalised Fourier decomposition of non-stationary functions, than the more limited standard Fourier
decomposition exploited by earlier works. We propose and solve the generalised spectral density as a
mixture of Gaussian process density surfaces that model flexible input-dependent frequency patterns.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

