Thinking Fast and Slow
with Deep Learning and Tree Search
Thomas Anthony1, , Zheng Tian1 , and David Barber1,2
1

University College London
2
Alan Turing Institute
thomas.anthony.14@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Sequential decision making problems, such as structured prediction, robotic control,
and game playing, require a combination of planning policies and generalisation of
those plans. In this paper, we present Expert Iteration (E X I T), a novel reinforcement
learning algorithm which decomposes the problem into separate planning and
generalisation tasks. Planning new policies is performed by tree search, while a
deep neural network generalises those plans. Subsequently, tree search is improved
by using the neural network policy to guide search, increasing the strength of new
plans. In contrast, standard deep Reinforcement Learning algorithms rely on a
neural network not only to generalise plans, but to discover them too. We show that
E X I T outperforms REINFORCE for training a neural network to play the board
game Hex, and our final tree search agent, trained tabula rasa, defeats M O H EX 1.0,
the most recent Olympiad Champion player to be publicly released.

1

Introduction

According to dual-process theory [1, 2], human reasoning consists of two different kinds of thinking.
System 1 is a fast, unconscious and automatic mode of thought, also known as intuition or heuristic
process. System 2, an evolutionarily recent process unique to humans, is a slow, conscious, explicit
and rule-based mode of reasoning.
When learning to complete a challenging planning task, such as playing a board game, humans exploit
both processes: strong intuitions allow for more effective analytic reasoning by rapidly selecting
interesting lines of play for consideration. Repeated deep study gradually improves intuitions.
Stronger intuitions feedback to stronger analysis, creating a closed learning loop. In other words,
humans learn by thinking fast and slow.
In deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms such as REINFORCE [3] and DQN [4], neural
networks make action selections with no lookahead; this is analogous to System 1. Unlike human
intuition, their training does not benefit from a ‘System 2’ to suggest strong policies. In this paper,
we present Expert Iteration (E X I T), which uses a Tree Search as an analogue of System 2; this assists
the training of the neural network. In turn, the neural network is used to improve the performance of
the tree search by providing fast ‘intuitions’ to guide search.
At a low level, E X I T can be viewed as an extension of Imitation Learning (IL) methods to domains
where the best known experts are unable to achieve satisfactory performance. In IL an apprentice
is trained to imitate the behaviour of an expert policy. Within E X I T, we iteratively re-solve the IL
problem. Between each iteration, we perform an expert improvement step, where we bootstrap the
(fast) apprentice policy to increase the performance of the (comparatively slow) expert.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

