Matching neural paths: transfer from recognition to
correspondence search

Nikolay Savinov1
1

Lubor Ladicky1

Marc Pollefeys1,2

Department of Computer Science at ETH Zurich, 2 Microsoft

{nikolay.savinov,lubor.ladicky,marc.pollefeys}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Many machine learning tasks require finding per-part correspondences between
objects. In this work we focus on low-level correspondences — a highly ambiguous
matching problem. We propose to use a hierarchical semantic representation of
the objects, coming from a convolutional neural network, to solve this ambiguity.
Training it for low-level correspondence prediction directly might not be an option
in some domains where the ground-truth correspondences are hard to obtain. We
show how transfer from recognition can be used to avoid such training. Our idea is
to mark parts as “matching” if their features are close to each other at all the levels
of convolutional feature hierarchy (neural paths). Although the overall number
of such paths is exponential in the number of layers, we propose a polynomial
algorithm for aggregating all of them in a single backward pass. The empirical
validation is done on the task of stereo correspondence and demonstrates that we
achieve competitive results among the methods which do not use labeled target
domain data.

1

Introduction

Finding per-part correspondences between objects is a long-standing problem in machine learning.
The level at which correspondences are established can go as low as pixels for images or millisecond
timestamps for sound signals. Typically, it is highly ambiguous to match at such a low level: a pixel
or a timestamp just does not contain enough information to be discriminative and many false positives
will follow. A hierarchical semantic representation could help to solve the ambiguity: we could
choose the low-level match which also matches at the higher levels. For example, a car contains a
wheel which contains a bolt. If we want to check if this bolt matches the bolt in another view of the
car, we should check if the wheel and the car match as well.
One possible hierarchical semantic representation could be computed by a convolutional neural
network. The features in such a network are composed in a hierarchical manner: the lower-level
features are used to compute higher-level features by applying convolutions, max-poolings and
non-linear activation functions on them. Nevertheless, training such a convolutional neural network
for correspondence prediction directly (e.g., [25], [2]) might not be an option in some domains
where the ground-truth correspondences are hard and expensive to obtain. This raises the question of
scalability of such approaches and motivates the search for methods which do not require training
correspondence data.
To address the training data problem, we could transfer the knowledge from the source domain where
the labels are present to the target domain where no labels or few labeled data are present. The most
common form of transfer is from classification tasks. Its promise is two-fold. First, classification
labels are one of the easiest to obtain as it is a natural task for humans. This allows to create huge
recognition datasets like Imagenet [18]. Second, the features from the low to mid-levels have been
shown to transfer well to a variety of tasks [22], [3], [15].
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

