A General Framework for Robust Interactive
Learning∗

Ehsan Emamjomeh-Zadeh†

David Kempe‡

Abstract
We propose a general framework for interactively learning models, such as (binary
or non-binary) classifiers, orderings/rankings of items, or clusterings of data points.
Our framework is based on a generalization of Angluin’s equivalence query model
and Littlestone’s online learning model: in each iteration, the algorithm proposes a
model, and the user either accepts it or reveals a specific mistake in the proposal.
The feedback is correct only with probability p > 21 (and adversarially incorrect
with probability 1 − p), i.e., the algorithm must be able to learn in the presence of
arbitrary noise. The algorithm’s goal is to learn the ground truth model using few
iterations.
Our general framework is based on a graph representation of the models and user
feedback. To be able to learn efficiently, it is sufficient that there be a graph G
whose nodes are the models, and (weighted) edges capture the user feedback, with
the property that if s, s∗ are the proposed and target models, respectively, then any
(correct) user feedback s0 must lie on a shortest s-s∗ path in G. Under this one
assumption, there is a natural algorithm, reminiscent of the Multiplicative Weights
Update algorithm, which will efficiently learn s∗ even in the presence of noise in
the user’s feedback.
From this general result, we rederive with barely any extra effort classic results on
learning of classifiers and a recent result on interactive clustering; in addition, we
easily obtain new interactive learning algorithms for ordering/ranking.

1

Introduction

With the pervasive reliance on machine learning systems across myriad application domains in the real
world, these systems frequently need to be deployed before they are fully trained. This is particularly
true when the systems are supposed to learn a specific user’s (or a small group of users’) personal
and idiosyncratic preferences. As a result, we are seeing an increased practical interest in online and
interactive learning across a variety of domains.
A second feature of the deployment of such systems “in the wild” is that the feedback the system
receives is likely to be noisy. Not only may individual users give incorrect feedback, but even if they
do not, the preferences — and hence feedback — across different users may vary. Thus, interactive
learning algorithms deployed in real-world systems must be resilient to noisy feedback.
Since the seminal work of Angluin [2] and Littlestone [14], the paradigmatic application of (noisy)
interactive learning has been online learning of a binary classifier when the algorithm is provided
with feedback on samples it had previously classified incorrectly. However, beyond (binary or other)
classifiers, there are many other models that must be frequently learned in an interactive manner. Two
∗

A full version is available on the arXiv at https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.05422. The present version
omits all proofs and several other details and discussions.
†
Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California, emamjome@usc.edu
‡
Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California, dkempe@usc.edu
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

