Label Efficient Learning of Transferable
Representations across Domains and Tasks

Zelun Luo
Stanford University
zelunluo@stanford.edu

Yuliang Zou
Virginia Tech
ylzou@vt.edu

Judy Hoffman
University of California, Berkeley
jhoffman@eecs.berkeley.edu

Li Fei-Fei
Stanford University
feifeili@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We propose a framework that learns a representation transferable across different
domains and tasks in a label efficient manner. Our approach battles domain shift
with a domain adversarial loss, and generalizes the embedding to novel task using
a metric learning-based approach. Our model is simultaneously optimized on
labeled source data and unlabeled or sparsely labeled data in the target domain.
Our method shows compelling results on novel classes within a new domain even
when only a few labeled examples per class are available, outperforming the
prevalent fine-tuning approach. In addition, we demonstrate the effectiveness of
our framework on the transfer learning task from image object recognition to video
action recognition.

1

Introduction

Humans are exceptional visual learners capable of generalizing their learned knowledge to novel
domains and concepts and capable of learning from few examples. In recent years, computational
models based on end-to-end learnable convolutional networks have made significant improvements for
visual recognition [18, 28, 54] and have been shown to demonstrate some cross-task generalizations [8,
48] while enabling faster learning of subsequent tasks as most frequently evidenced through finetuning [14, 36, 50].
However, most efforts focus on the supervised learning scenario where a closed world assumption
is made at training time about both the domain of interest and the tasks to be learned. Thus,
any generalization ability of these models is only an observed byproduct. There has been a large
push in the research community to address generalizing and adapting deep models across different
domains [64, 13, 58, 38], to learn tasks in a data efficient way through few shot learning [27, 70, 47,
11], and to generically transfer information across tasks [1, 14, 50, 35].
While most approaches consider each scenarios in isolation we aim to directly tackle the joint problem
of adapting to a novel domain which has new tasks and few annotations. Given a large labeled source
dataset with annotations for a task set, A, we seek to transfer knowledge to a sparsely labeled target
domain with a possibly wholly new task set, B. This setting is in line with our intuition that we
should be able to learn reusable and general purpose representations which enable faster learning of
future tasks requiring less human intervention. In addition, this setting matches closely to the most
common practical approach for training deep models which is to use a large labeled source dataset
(often ImageNet [6, 52]) to train an initial representation and then to continue supervised learning
with a new set of data and often with new concepts.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

