Toward Robustness against Label Noise in
Training Deep Discriminative Neural Networks

Arash Vahdat
D-Wave Systems Inc.
Burnaby, BC, Canada
avahdat@dwavesys.com

Abstract
Collecting large training datasets, annotated with high-quality labels, is costly
and time-consuming. This paper proposes a novel framework for training deep
convolutional neural networks from noisy labeled datasets that can be obtained
cheaply. The problem is formulated using an undirected graphical model that
represents the relationship between noisy and clean labels, trained in a semisupervised setting. In our formulation, the inference over latent clean labels is
tractable and is regularized during training using auxiliary sources of information.
The proposed model is applied to the image labeling problem and is shown to be
effective in labeling unseen images as well as reducing label noise in training on
CIFAR-10 and MS COCO datasets.

1

Introduction

The availability of large annotated data collections such as ImageNet [1] is one of the key reasons
why deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been successful in the image classification
problem. However, collecting training data with such high-quality annotation is very costly and time
consuming. In some applications, annotators are required to be trained before identifying classes in
data, and feedback from many annotators is aggregated to reduce labeling error. On the other hand,
many inexpensive approaches for collecting labeled data exist, such as data mining on social media
websites, search engines, querying fewer annotators per instance, or the use of amateur annotators
instead of experts. However, all these low-cost approaches have one common side effect: label noise.
This paper tackles the problem of training deep CNNs for the image labeling task from datapoints
with noisy labels. Most previous work in this area has focused on modeling label noise for multiclass
classification1 using a directed graphical model similar to Fig. 1.a. It is typically assumed that the
clean labels are hidden during training, and they are marginalized by enumerating all possible classes.
These techniques cannot be extended to the multilabel classification problem, where exponentially
many configurations exist for labels, and the explaining-away phenomenon makes inference over
latent clean labels difficult.
We propose a conditional random field (CRF) [2] model to represent the relationship between noisy
and clean labels, and we show how modern deep CNNs can gain robustness against label noise using
our proposed structure. We model the clean labels as latent variables during training, and we design
our structure such that the latent variables can be inferred efficiently.
The main challenge in modeling clean labels as latent is the lack of semantics on latent variables.
In other words, latent variables may not semantically correspond to the clean labels when the joint
probability of clean and noisy labels is parameterized such that latent clean labels can take any
1

Each sample is assumed to belong to only one class.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

