Natural Value Approximators:
Learning when to Trust Past Estimates

Zhongwen Xu
DeepMind
zhongwen@google.com

Joseph Modayil
DeepMind
modayil@google.com

Hado van Hasselt
DeepMind
hado@google.com

Andre Barreto
DeepMind
andrebarreto@google.com

David Silver
DeepMind
davidsilver@google.com

Tom Schaul
DeepMind
schaul@google.com

Abstract
Neural networks have a smooth initial inductive bias, such that small changes in
input do not lead to large changes in output. However, in reinforcement learning
domains with sparse rewards, value functions have non-smooth structure with
a characteristic asymmetric discontinuity whenever rewards arrive. We propose
a mechanism that learns an interpolation between a direct value estimate and a
projected value estimate computed from the encountered reward and the previous
estimate. This reduces the need to learn about discontinuities, and thus improves
the value function approximation. Furthermore, as the interpolation is learned
and state-dependent, our method can deal with heterogeneous observability. We
demonstrate that this one change leads to significant improvements on multiple
Atari games, when applied to the state-of-the-art A3C algorithm.

1

Motivation

The central problem of reinforcement learning is value function approximation: how to accurately
estimate the total future reward from a given state. Recent successes have used deep neural networks
to approximate the value function, resulting in state-of-the-art performance in a variety of challenging
domains [9]. Neural networks are most effective when the desired target function is smooth. However,
value functions are, by their very nature, discontinuous functions with sharp variations over time. In
this paper we introduce a representation of value that matches the natural temporal structure of value
functions.
A value function represents the expected sum of future discounted rewards. If non-zero rewards occur
infrequently but reliably, then an accurate prediction of the cumulative discounted reward rises as
such rewarding moments approach and drops immediately after. This is depicted schematically with
the dashed black line in Figure 1. The true value function is quite smooth, except immediately after
receiving a reward when there is a sharp drop. This is a pervasive scenario because many domains
associate positive or negative reinforcements to salient events (like picking up an object, hitting a
wall, or reaching a goal position). The problem is that the agent’s observations tend to be smooth
in time, so learning an accurate value estimate near those sharp drops puts strain on the function
approximator – especially when employing differentiable function approximators such as neural
networks that naturally make smooth maps from observations to outputs.
To address this problem, we incorporate the temporal structure of cumulative discounted rewards into
the value function itself. The main idea is that, by default, the value function can respect the reward
sequence. If no reward is observed, then the next value smoothly matches the previous value, but
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

