Hash Embeddings for Efficient Word Representations

Dan Svenstrup
Department for Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
2800 Lyngby, Denmark
dsve@dtu.dk

Jonas Meinertz Hansen
FindZebra
Copenhagen, Denmark
jonas@findzebra.com

Ole Winther
Department for Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
2800 Lyngby, Denmark
olwi@dtu.dk

Abstract
We present hash embeddings, an efficient method for representing words in a
continuous vector form. A hash embedding may be seen as an interpolation between
a standard word embedding and a word embedding created using a random hash
function (the hashing trick). In hash embeddings each token is represented by
k d-dimensional embeddings vectors and one k dimensional weight vector. The
final d dimensional representation of the token is the product of the two. Rather
than fitting the embedding vectors for each token these are selected by the hashing
trick from a shared pool of B embedding vectors. Our experiments show that
hash embeddings can easily deal with huge vocabularies consisting of millions
of tokens. When using a hash embedding there is no need to create a dictionary
before training nor to perform any kind of vocabulary pruning after training. We
show that models trained using hash embeddings exhibit at least the same level
of performance as models trained using regular embeddings across a wide range
of tasks. Furthermore, the number of parameters needed by such an embedding
is only a fraction of what is required by a regular embedding. Since standard
embeddings and embeddings constructed using the hashing trick are actually just
special cases of a hash embedding, hash embeddings can be considered an extension
and improvement over the existing regular embedding types.

1

Introduction

Contemporary neural networks rely on loss functions that are continuous in the model’s parameters
in order to be able to compute gradients for training. For this reason, any data that we wish to feed
through the network, even data that is of a discrete nature in its original form will be translated into a
continuous form. For textual input it often makes sense to represent each distinct word or phrase with
a dense real-valued vector in Rn . These word vectors are trained either jointly with the rest of the
model, or pre-trained on a large corpus beforehand.
For large datasets the size of the vocabulary can easily be in the order of hundreds of thousands,
adding millions or even billions of parameters to the model. This problem can be especially severe
when n-grams are allowed as tokens in the vocabulary. For example, the pre-trained Word2Vec
vectors from Google (Miháltz, 2016) has a vocabulary consisting of 3 million words and phrases.
This means that even though the embedding size is moderately small (300 dimensions), the total
number of parameters is close to one billion.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

