Scalable Planning with Tensorflow for Hybrid
Nonlinear Domains
Ga Wu

Buser Say

Scott Sanner
Department of Mechanical & Industrial Engineering, University of Toronto, Canada
email: {wuga,bsay,ssanner}@mie.utoronto.ca

Abstract
Given recent deep learning results that demonstrate the ability to effectively optimize high-dimensional non-convex functions with gradient descent optimization on
GPUs, we ask in this paper whether symbolic gradient optimization tools such as
Tensorflow can be effective for planning in hybrid (mixed discrete and continuous)
nonlinear domains with high dimensional state and action spaces? To this end, we
demonstrate that hybrid planning with Tensorflow and RMSProp gradient descent
is competitive with mixed integer linear program (MILP) based optimization on
piecewise linear planning domains (where we can compute optimal solutions)
and substantially outperforms state-of-the-art interior point methods for nonlinear
planning domains. Furthermore, we remark that Tensorflow is highly scalable,
converging to a strong plan on a large-scale concurrent domain with a total of
576,000 continuous action parameters distributed over a horizon of 96 time steps
and 100 parallel instances in only 4 minutes. We provide a number of insights that
clarify such strong performance including observations that despite long horizons,
RMSProp avoids both the vanishing and exploding gradient problems. Together
these results suggest a new frontier for highly scalable planning in nonlinear hybrid
domains by leveraging GPUs and the power of recent advances in gradient descent
with highly optimized toolkits like Tensorflow.

1

Introduction

Many real-world hybrid (mixed discrete continuous) planning problems such as Reservoir Control [Yeh, 1985], Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning (HVAC) [Erickson et al., 2009; Agarwal
et al., 2010], and Navigation [Faulwasser and Findeisen, 2009] have highly nonlinear transition and
(possibly nonlinear) reward functions to optimize. Unfortunately, existing state-of-the-art hybrid
planners [Ivankovic et al., 2014; Löhr et al., 2012; Coles et al., 2013; Piotrowski et al., 2016] are not
compatible with arbitrary nonlinear transition and reward models. While HD-MILP-PLAN [Say et
al., 2017] supports arbitrary nonlinear transition and reward models, it also assumes the availability of
data to learn the state-transitions. Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) methods [Coulom, 2006; Kocsis
and Szepesvári, 2006; Keller and Helmert, 2013] including AlphaGo [Silver et al., 2016] that can use
any (nonlinear) black box model of transition dynamics do not inherently work with continuous action
spaces due to the infinite branching factor. While MCTS with continuous action extensions such as
HOOT [Weinstein and Littman, 2012] have been proposed, their continuous partitioning methods do
not scale to high-dimensional continuous action spaces (for example, 100’s or 1,000’s of dimensions
as used in this paper). Finally, offline model-free reinforcement learning (for example, Q-learning)
with function approximation [Sutton and Barto, 1998; Szepesvári, 2010] and deep extensions [Mnih
et al., 2013] do not require any knowledge of the (nonlinear) transition model or reward, but they also
do not directly apply to domains with high-dimensional continuous action spaces. That is, offline
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

