Clustering with Noisy Queries

Arya Mazumdar and Barna Saha
College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
{arya,barna}@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we provide a rigorous theoretical study of clustering with noisy
queries. Given a set of n elements, our goal is to recover the true clustering by
asking minimum number of pairwise queries to an oracle. Oracle can answer
queries of the form “do elements u and v belong to the same cluster?”-the queries
can be asked interactively (adaptive queries), or non-adaptively up-front, but its
answer can be erroneous with probability p. In this paper, we provide the first
information theoretic lower bound on the number of queries for clustering with
noisy oracle in both situations. We design novel algorithms that closely match
this query complexity lower bound, even when the number of clusters is unknown.
Moreover, we design computationally efficient algorithms both for the adaptive
and non-adaptive settings. The problem captures/generalizes multiple application
scenarios. It is directly motivated by the growing body of work that use crowdsourcing for entity resolution, a fundamental and challenging data mining task
aimed to identify all records in a database referring to the same entity. Here crowd
represents the noisy oracle, and the number of queries directly relates to the cost
of crowdsourcing. Another application comes from the problem of sign edge
prediction in social network, where social interactions can be both positive and
negative, and one must identify the sign of all pair-wise interactions by querying
a few pairs. Furthermore, clustering with noisy oracle is intimately connected
to correlation clustering, leading to improvement therein. Finally, it introduces
a new direction of study in the popular stochastic block model where one has an
incomplete stochastic block model matrix to recover the clusters.

1

Introduction

Clustering is one of the most fundamental and popular methods for data classification. In this paper
we initiate a rigorous theoretical study of clustering with the help of a noisy oracle, a model that
captures many application scenarios and has drawn significant attention in recent years.
Suppose we are given a set of n points, that need to be clustered into k clusters where k is unknown
to us. Suppose there is an oracle that can answer pair-wise queries of the form, “do u and v belong to
the same cluster?”. Repeating the same question to the oracle always returns the same answer, but the
answer could be wrong with probability p = 12 − λ, λ > 0 (i.e., slightly better than random answer).
We are interested to find the minimum number of queries needed to recover the true clusters with high
probability. Understanding query complexity of the noisy oracle model is a fundamental theoretical
question [25] with many existing works on sorting and selection [7, 8] where queries are erroneous
with probability p, and repeating the same question does not change the answer. Here we study the
basic clustering problem under this setting which also captures several fundamental applications.
Crowdsourced Entity Resolution. Entity resolution (ER) is an important data mining task that
tries to identify all records in a database that refer to the same underlying entity. Starting with the
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

