Exploring Generalization in Deep Learning

Behnam Neyshabur, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, David McAllester, Nathan Srebro
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
{bneyshabur, srinadh, mcallester, nati}@ttic.edu

Abstract
With a goal of understanding what drives generalization in deep networks, we
consider several recently suggested explanations, including norm-based control,
sharpness and robustness. We study how these measures can ensure generalization,
highlighting the importance of scale normalization, and making a connection
between sharpness and PAC-Bayes theory. We then investigate how well the
measures explain different observed phenomena.

1

Introduction

Learning with deep neural networks has enjoyed huge empirical success in recent years across a wide
variety of tasks. Despite being a complex, non-convex optimization problem, simple methods such as
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) are able to recover good solutions that minimize the training error.
More surprisingly, the networks learned this way exhibit good generalization behavior, even when
the number of parameters is significantly larger than the amount of training data [20, 30].
In such an over parametrized setting, the objective has multiple global minima, all minimize the
training error, but many of them do not generalize well. Hence, just minimizing the training error is
not sufficient for learning: picking the wrong global minima can lead to bad generalization behavior.
In such situations, generalization behavior depends implicitly on the algorithm used to minimize
the training error. Different algorithmic choices for optimization such as the initialization, update
rules, learning rate, and stopping condition, will lead to different global minima with different
generalization behavior [7, 12, 18]. For example, Neyshabur et al. [18] introduced Path-SGD, an
optimization algorithm that is invariant to rescaling of weights, and showed better generalization
behavior over SGD for both feedforward and recurrent neural networks [18, 22]. Keskar et al. [12]
noticed that the solutions found by stochastic gradient descent with large batch sizes generalizes
worse than the one found with smaller batch sizes, and Hardt et al. [10] discuss how stochastic
gradient descent ensures uniform stability, thereby helping generalization for convex objectives.
What is the bias introduced by these algorithmic choices for neural networks? What ensures generalization in neural networks? What is the relevant notion of complexity or capacity control?
As mentioned above, simply accounting for complexity in terms of the number of parameters, or any
measure which is uniform across all functions representable by a given architecture, is not sufficient
to explain the generalization ability of neural networks trained in practice. For linear models, norms
and margin-based measures, and not the number of parameters, are commonly used for capacity
control [5, 9, 25]. Also norms such as the trace norm and max norm are considered as sensible
inductive biases in matrix factorization and are often more appropriate than parameter-counting
measures such as the rank [27, 28]. In a similar spirit, Bartlett [3], Neyshabur et al. [20] and in
parallel to this work, Bartlett et al. [2] suggested different norms of network parameters to measure
the capacity of neural networks. In a different line of work, Keskar et al. [12] suggested “sharpness”
(robustness of the training error to perturbations in the parameters) as a complexity measure for neural
networks. Others, including Langford and Caruana [13] and more recently Dziugaite and Roy [8],
propose a PAC-Bayes analysis.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

