Recurrent Ladder Networks
Isabeau Prémont-Schwarz, Alexander Ilin, Tele Hotloo Hao,
Antti Rasmus, Rinu Boney, Harri Valpola
The Curious AI Company
{isabeau,alexilin,hotloo,antti,rinu,harri}@cai.fi

Abstract
We propose a recurrent extension of the Ladder networks [22] whose structure
is motivated by the inference required in hierarchical latent variable models. We
demonstrate that the recurrent Ladder is able to handle a wide variety of complex
learning tasks that benefit from iterative inference and temporal modeling. The
architecture shows close-to-optimal results on temporal modeling of video data,
competitive results on music modeling, and improved perceptual grouping based
on higher order abstractions, such as stochastic textures and motion cues. We
present results for fully supervised, semi-supervised, and unsupervised tasks. The
results suggest that the proposed architecture and principles are powerful tools
for learning a hierarchy of abstractions, learning iterative inference and handling
temporal information.

1

Introduction

Many cognitive tasks require learning useful representations on multiple abstraction levels. Hierarchical latent variable models are an appealing approach for learning a hierarchy of abstractions.
The classical way of learning such models is by postulating an explicit parametric model for the
distributions of random variables. The inference procedure, which evaluates the posterior distribution
of the unknown variables, is then derived from the model – an approach adopted in probabilistic
graphical models (see, e.g., [5]).
The success of deep learning can, however, be explained by the fact that popular deep models focus
on learning the inference procedure directly. For example, a deep classifier like AlexNet [19] is
trained to produce the posterior probability of the label for a given data sample. The representations
that the network computes at different layers are related to the inference in an implicit latent variable
model but the designer of the model does not need to know about them.
However, it is actually tremendously valuable to understand what kind of inference is required by
different types of probabilistic models in order to design an efficient network architecture. Ladder
networks [22, 28] are motivated by the inference required in a hierarchical latent variable model. By
design, the Ladder networks aim to emulate a message passing algorithm, which includes a bottom-up
pass (from input to label in classification tasks) and a top-down pass of information (from label to
input). The results of the bottom-up and top-down computations are combined in a carefully selected
manner.
The original Ladder network implements only one iteration of the inference algorithm but complex
models are likely to require iterative inference. In this paper, we propose a recurrent extension
of the Ladder network for iterative inference and show that the same architecture can be used for
temporal modeling. We also show how to use the proposed architecture as an inference engine in
more complex models which can handle multiple independent objects in the sensory input. Thus, the
proposed architecture is suitable for the type of inference required by rich models: those that can
learn a hierarchy of abstractions, can handle temporal information and can model multiple objects in
the input.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

