Gaussian Quadrature for Kernel Features

Tri Dao
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
trid@stanford.edu

Christopher De Sa
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
cdesa@cs.cornell.edu

Christopher Ré
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
chrismre@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Kernel methods have recently attracted resurgent interest, showing performance
competitive with deep neural networks in tasks such as speech recognition. The
random Fourier features map is a technique commonly used to scale up kernel
machines, but employing the randomized feature map means that O(−2 ) samples
are required to achieve an approximation error of at most . We investigate some
alternative schemes for constructing feature maps that are deterministic, rather
than random, by approximating the kernel in the frequency domain using Gaussian
quadrature. We show that deterministic feature maps can be constructed, for any
γ
γ > 0, to achieve error  with O(ee + −1/γ ) samples as  goes to 0. Our method
works particularly well with sparse ANOVA kernels, which are inspired by the
convolutional layer of CNNs. We validate our methods on datasets in different
domains, such as MNIST and TIMIT, showing that deterministic features are faster
to generate and achieve accuracy comparable to the state-of-the-art kernel methods
based on random Fourier features.

1

Introduction

Kernel machines are frequently used to solve a wide variety of problems in machine learning [26].
They have gained resurgent interest and have recently been shown [13, 18, 21, 19, 22] to be competitive with deep neural networks in some tasks such as speech recognition on large datasets. A kernel
machine is one that handles input x1 , . . . , xn , represented as vectors in Rd , only in terms of some
kernel function k : Rd × Rd → R of pairs of data points k(xi , xj ). This representation is attractive
for classification problems because one can learn non-linear decision boundaries directly on the input
without having to extract features before training a linear classifier.
One well-known downside of kernel machines is the fact that they scale poorly to large datasets.
Naive kernel methods, which operate on the Gram matrix Gi,j = k(xi , xj ) of the data, can take a very
long time to run because the Gram matrix itself requires O(n2 ) space and many operations on it (e.g.,
the singular value decomposition) take up to O(n3 ) time. Rahimi and Recht [23] proposed a solution
to this problem: approximating the kernel with an inner product in a higher-dimensional space.
Specifically, they suggest constructing a feature map z : Rd → RD such that k(x, y) ≈ hz(x), z(y)i.
This approximation enables kernel machines to use scalable linear methods for solving classification
problems and to avoid the pitfalls of naive kernel methods by not materializing the Gram matrix.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

