Multi-Objective Non-parametric Sequential
Prediction
Guy Uziel
Computer Science Department
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
guziel@cs.technion.ac.il

Ran El-Yaniv
Computer Science Department
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
rani@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Online-learning research has mainly been focusing on minimizing one objective
function. In many real-world applications, however, several objective functions
have to be considered simultaneously. Recently, an algorithm for dealing with
several objective functions in the i.i.d. case has been presented. In this paper,
we extend the multi-objective framework to the case of stationary and ergodic
processes, thus allowing dependencies among observations. We first identify an
asymptomatic lower bound for any prediction strategy and then present an algorithm
whose predictions achieve the optimal solution while fulfilling any continuous and
convex constraining criterion.

1

Introduction

In the traditional online learning setting, and in particular in sequential prediction under uncertainty,
the learner is evaluated by a single loss function that is not completely known at each iteration [6].
When dealing with multiple objectives, since it is impossible to simultaneously minimize all of the
objectives, one objective is chosen as the main function to minimize, leaving the others to be bound
by pre-defined thresholds. Methods for dealing with one objective function can be transformed to
deal with several objective functions by giving each objective a pre-defined weight. The difficulty,
however, lies in assigning an appropriate weight to each objective in order to keep the objectives
below a given threshold. This approach is very problematic in real world applications, where the
player is required to to satisfy certain constraints. For example, in online portfolio selection [4], the
player may want to maximize wealth while keeping the risk (i.e., variance) contained below a certain
threshold. Another example is the Neyman-Pearson (NP) classification paradigm (see, e.g., [19])
(which extends the objective in classical binary classification) where the goal is to learn a classifier
achieving low classification error whose type I error is kept below a given threshold.
In the adversarial setting it is known that multiple-objective is generally impossible when the
constraints are unknown a-priory [18]. In the stochastic setting, Mahdavi et al. [17] proposed a
framework for dealing with multiple objectives in the i.i.d. case. They proved that if there exists a
solution that minimizes the main objective function while keeping the other objectives below given
thresholds, then their algorithm will converge to the optimal solution.
In this work, we study online prediction with multiple objectives but now consider the challenging
general case where the unknown underlying process is stationary and ergodic, thus allowing observations to depend on each other arbitrarily. The (single-objective) sequential prediction under stationary
and ergodic sources, has been considered in many papers and in various application domains. For
example, in online portfolio selection, [12, 9, 10] proposed non-parametric online strategies that
guarantee, under mild conditions, the best possible outcome. Another interesting example in this
regard is the work on time-series prediction by [2, 8, 3]. A common theme to all these results is that
the asymptotically optimal strategies are constructed by combining the predictions of many simple
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

