k-Support and Ordered Weighted Sparsity for
Overlapping Groups: Hardness and Algorithms

Cong Han Lim
University of Wisconsin-Madison
clim9@wisc.edu

Stephen J. Wright
University of Wisconsin-Madison
swright@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
The k-support and OWL norms generalize the `1 norm, providing better prediction
accuracy and better handling of correlated variables. We study the norms obtained
from extending the k-support norm and OWL norms to the setting in which there
are overlapping groups. The resulting norms are in general NP-hard to compute,
but they are tractable for certain collections of groups. To demonstrate this fact,
we develop a dynamic program for the problem of projecting onto the set of
vectors supported by a fixed number of groups. Our dynamic program utilizes tree
decompositions and its complexity scales with the treewidth. This program can
be converted to an extended formulation which, for the associated group structure,
models the k-group support norms and an overlapping group variant of the ordered
weighted `1 norm. Numerical results demonstrate the efficacy of the new penalties.

1

Introduction

The use of the `1 -norm to induce sparse solutions is ubiquitous in machine learning, statistics, and
signal processing. When the variables can be grouped into sets corresponding to different explanatory
factors, group variants of the `1 penalty can be used to recover solutions supported on a small number
of groups. When the collection of groups G forms a partition of the variables (that is, the groups do
not overlap), the group lasso penalty [19]
X
ΩGL (x) :=
kxG kp
(1)
G∈G

is often used. In many cases, however, some variables may contribute to more than one explanatory
factor, which leads naturally to overlapping-group formulations. Such is the case in applications such
as finding relevant sets of genes in a biological process [10] or recovering coefficients in wavelet
trees [17]. In such contexts, the standard group lasso may introduce artifacts, since variables that are
contained in different numbers of groups are penalized differently. Another approach is to employ
the latent group lasso [10]:
X
X
ΩLGL (x) := min
kvG kp such that
vG = x,
(2)
x,v

G∈G

G∈G

where each vG is a separate vector of latent variables supported only on the group G. The latent
group lasso (2) can be written in terms of atomic norms, where the atomic set is
{x : kxkp ≤ 1, supp(x) ⊆ G for some G ∈ G} .
This set allows vectors supported on any one group. The unit ball is the convex hull of this atomic set.
A different way of extending the `1 -norm involves explicit use of a sparsity parameter k. Argyriou
et al. [1] introduce the k-support norm Ωk from the atomic norm perspective. The atoms are the set
of k-sparse vectors with unit norm, and the unit ball of the norm is thus
conv ({x : kxkp ≤ 1, |supp(x)|≤ k}) .
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

(3)

