K-Medoids for K-Means Seeding

James Newling
Idiap Research Institue and
École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne
james.newling@idiap.ch

François Fleuret
Idiap Research Institue and
École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne
francois.fleuret@idiap.ch

Abstract
We show experimentally that the algorithm clarans of Ng and Han (1994) finds
better K-medoids solutions than the Voronoi iteration algorithm of Hastie et al.
(2001). This finding, along with the similarity between the Voronoi iteration algorithm and Lloyd’s K-means algorithm, motivates us to use clarans as a K-means
initializer. We show that clarans outperforms other algorithms on 23/23 datasets
with a mean decrease over k-means-++ (Arthur and Vassilvitskii, 2007) of 30%
for initialization mean squared error (MSE) and 3% for final MSE. We introduce
algorithmic improvements to clarans which improve its complexity and runtime,
making it a viable initialization scheme for large datasets.

1

Introduction

1.1

K-means and K-medoids

The K-means problem is to find a partitioning of points, so as to minimize the sum of the squares
of the distances from points to their assigned partition’s mean. In general this problem is NP-hard,
and in practice approximation algorithms are used. The most popular of these is Lloyd’s algorithm,
henceforth lloyd, which alternates between freezing centers and assignments, while updating the
other. Specifically, in the assignment step, for each point the nearest (frozen) center is determined.
Then during the update step, each center is set to the mean of points assigned to it. lloyd has
applications in data compression, data classification, density estimation and many other areas, and
was recognised in Wu et al. (2008) as one of the top-10 algorithms in data mining.
The closely related K-medoids problem differs in that the center of a cluster is its medoid, not its
mean, where the medoid is the cluster member which minimizes the sum of dissimilarities between
itself and other cluster members. In this paper, as our application is K-means initialization, we focus
on the case where dissimilarity is squared distance, although K-medoids generalizes to non-metric
spaces and arbitrary dissimilarity measures, as discussed in §SM-A.
By modifying the update step in lloyd to compute medoids instead of means, a viable K-medoids
algorithm is obtained. This algorithm has been proposed at least twice (Hastie et al., 2001; Park and
Jun, 2009) and is often referred to as the Voronoi iteration algorithm. We refer to it as medlloyd.
Another K-medoids algorithm is clarans of Ng and Han (1994, 2002), for which there is no direct
K-means equivalent. It works by randomly proposing swaps between medoids and non-medoids,
accepting only those which decrease MSE. We will discuss how clarans works, what advantages
it has over medlloyd, and our motivation for using it for K-means initialization in §2 and §SM-A.
1.2

K-means initialization

lloyd is a local algorithm, in that far removed centers and points do not directly influence each
other. This property contributes to lloyd’s tendency to terminate in poor minima if not well initial31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

