Adaptive Bayesian Sampling with Monte Carlo EM

Anirban Roychowdhury, Srinivasan Parthasarathy
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Ohio State University
roychowdhury.7@osu.edu, srini@cse.ohio-state.edu

Abstract
We present a novel technique for learning the mass matrices in samplers obtained
from discretized dynamics that preserve some energy function. Existing adaptive
samplers use Riemannian preconditioning techniques, where the mass matrices are
functions of the parameters being sampled. This leads to significant complexities in
the energy reformulations and resultant dynamics, often leading to implicit systems
of equations and requiring inversion of high-dimensional matrices in the leapfrog
steps. Our approach provides a simpler alternative, by using existing dynamics in
the sampling step of a Monte Carlo EM framework, and learning the mass matrices
in the M step with a novel online technique. We also propose a way to adaptively
set the number of samples gathered in the E step, using sampling error estimates
from the leapfrog dynamics. Along with a novel stochastic sampler based on
Nosé-Poincaré dynamics, we use this framework with standard Hamiltonian Monte
Carlo (HMC) as well as newer stochastic algorithms such as SGHMC and SGNHT,
and show strong performance on synthetic and real high-dimensional sampling
scenarios; we achieve sampling accuracies comparable to Riemannian samplers
while being significantly faster.

1

Introduction

Markov Chain Monte Carlo sampling is a well-known set of techniques for learning complex Bayesian
probabilistic models that arise in machine learning. Typically used in cases where computing the
posterior distributions of parameters in closed form is not feasible, MCMC techniques that converge
reliably to the target distributions offer a provably correct way (in an asymptotic sense) to draw
samples of target parameters from arbitrarily complex probability distributions. A recently proposed
method in this domain is Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) [1, 2], that formulates the target density
as an “energy function” augmented with auxiliary “momentum” parameters, and uses discretized
Hamiltonian dynamics to sample the parameters while preserving the energy function. The resulting
samplers perform noticeably better than random walk-based methods in terms of sampling efficiency
and accuracy [1, 3]. For use in stochastic settings, where one uses random minibatches of the data
to calculate the gradients of likelihoods for better scalability, researchers have used Fokker-Planck
correction steps to preserve the energy in the face of stochastic noise [4], as well as used auxiliary
“thermostat” variables to control the effect of this noise on the momentum terms [5, 6]. As with the
batch setting, these methods have exploited energy-preserving dynamics to sample more efficiently
than random walk-based stochastic samplers [4, 7, 8].
A primary (hyper-)parameter of interest in these augmented energy function-based samplers in the
“mass” matrix of the kinetic energy term; as noted by various researchers [1, 3, 6, 8, 9], this matrix
plays an important role in the trajectories taken by the samplers in the parameter space of interest,
thereby affecting the overall efficiency. While prior efforts have set this to the identity matrix or some
other pre-calculated value [4, 5, 7], recent work has shown that there are significant gains to be had in
efficiency as well as convergent accuracy by reformulating the mass in terms of the target parameters
to be sampled [3, 6, 8], thereby making the sampler sensitive to the underlying geometry. This is
done by imposing a positive definite constraint on the adaptive mass, and using it as the metric of
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

