Learning a Multi-View Stereo Machine

Abhishek Kar
UC Berkeley
akar@berkeley.edu

Christian Häne
UC Berkeley
chaene@berkeley.edu

Jitendra Malik
UC Berkeley
malik@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We present a learnt system for multi-view stereopsis. In contrast to recent learning
based methods for 3D reconstruction, we leverage the underlying 3D geometry of
the problem through feature projection and unprojection along viewing rays. By
formulating these operations in a differentiable manner, we are able to learn the
system end-to-end for the task of metric 3D reconstruction. End-to-end learning
allows us to jointly reason about shape priors while conforming to geometric
constraints, enabling reconstruction from much fewer images (even a single image)
than required by classical approaches as well as completion of unseen surfaces. We
thoroughly evaluate our approach on the ShapeNet dataset and demonstrate the
benefits over classical approaches and recent learning based methods.

1

Introduction

Multi-view stereopsis (MVS) is classically posed as the following problem - given a set of images
with known camera poses, it produces a geometric representation of the underlying 3D world. This
representation can be a set of disparity maps, a 3D volume in the form of voxel occupancies, signed
distance fields etc. An early example of such a system is the stereo machine from Kanade et al. [26]
that computes disparity maps from images streams from six video cameras. Modern approaches
focus on acquiring the full 3D geometry in the form of volumetric representations or polygonal
meshes [48]. The underlying principle behind MVS is simple - a 3D point looks locally similar when
projected to different viewpoints [29]. Thus, classical methods use the basic principle of finding
dense correspondences in images and triangulate to obtain a 3D reconstruction.
The question we try to address in this work is can we learn a multi-view stereo system? For the
binocular case, Becker and Hinton [1] demonstrated that a neural network can learn to predict a depth
map from random dot stereograms. A recent work [28] shows convincing results for binocular stereo
by using an end-to-end learning approach with binocular geometry constraints.
In this work, we present Learnt Stereo Machines (LSM) - a system which is able to reconstruct object
geometry as voxel occupancy grids or per-view depth maps from a small number of views, including
just a single image. We design our system inspired by classical approaches while learning each
component from data embedded in an end to end system. LSMs have built in projective geometry,
enabling reasoning in metric 3D space and effectively exploiting the geometric structure of the MVS
problem. Compared to classical approaches, which are designed to exploit a specific cue such as
silhouettes or photo-consistency, our system learns to exploit the cues that are relevant to the particular
instance while also using priors about shape to predict geometry for unseen regions.
Recent work from Choy et al. [5] (3D-R2N2) trains convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to
predict object geometry given only images. While this work relied primarily on semantic cues for
reconstruction, our formulation enables us to exploit strong geometric cues. In our experiments, we
demonstrate that a straightforward way of incorporating camera poses for volumetric occupancy
prediction does not lead to expected gains, while our geometrically grounded method is able to
effectively utilize the additional information.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

