Imagination-Augmented Agents
for Deep Reinforcement Learning

Sébastien Racanière∗ Théophane Weber∗ David P. Reichert∗ Lars Buesing
Arthur Guez Danilo Rezende Adria Puigdomènech Badia Oriol Vinyals
Nicolas Heess Yujia Li Razvan Pascanu
Peter Battaglia
Demis Hassabis David Silver Daan Wierstra
DeepMind

Abstract
We introduce Imagination-Augmented Agents (I2As), a novel architecture for deep
reinforcement learning combining model-free and model-based aspects. In contrast to most existing model-based reinforcement learning and planning methods,
which prescribe how a model should be used to arrive at a policy, I2As learn to
interpret predictions from a learned environment model to construct implicit plans
in arbitrary ways, by using the predictions as additional context in deep policy
networks. I2As show improved data efficiency, performance, and robustness to
model misspecification compared to several baselines.

1

Introduction

A hallmark of an intelligent agent is its ability to rapidly adapt to new circumstances and "achieve
goals in a wide range of environments" [1]. Progress has been made in developing capable agents for
numerous domains using deep neural networks in conjunction with model-free reinforcement learning
(RL) [2–4], where raw observations directly map to values or actions. However, this approach usually
requires large amounts of training data and the resulting policies do not readily generalize to novel
tasks in the same environment, as it lacks the behavioral flexibility constitutive of general intelligence.
Model-based RL aims to address these shortcomings by endowing agents with a model of the
world, synthesized from past experience. By using an internal model to reason about the future,
here also referred to as imagining, the agent can seek positive outcomes while avoiding the adverse
consequences of trial-and-error in the real environment – including making irreversible, poor decisions.
Even if the model needs to be learned first, it can enable better generalization across states, remain
valid across tasks in the same environment, and exploit additional unsupervised learning signals, thus
ultimately leading to greater data efficiency. Another appeal of model-based methods is their ability
to scale performance with more computation by increasing the amount of internal simulation.
The neural basis for imagination, model-based reasoning and decision making has generated a
lot of interest in neuroscience [5–7]; at the cognitive level, model learning and mental simulation
have been hypothesized and demonstrated in animal and human learning [8–11]. Its successful
deployment in artificial model-based agents however has hitherto been limited to settings where an
exact transition model is available [12] or in domains where models are easy to learn – e.g. symbolic
environments or low-dimensional systems [13–16]. In complex domains for which a simulator is
not available to the agent, recent successes are dominated by model-free methods [2, 17]. In such
domains, the performance of model-based agents employing standard planning methods usually
suffers from model errors resulting from function approximation [18, 19]. These errors compound
during planning, causing over-optimism and poor agent performance. There are currently no planning
∗

Equal contribution, corresponding authors: {sracaniere, theophane, reichert}@google.com.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

