Repeated Inverse Reinforcement Learning

Kareem Amin∗
Google Research
New York, NY 10011
kamin@google.com

Nan Jiang∗
Satinder Singh
Computer Science & Engineering,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48104
{nanjiang,baveja}@umich.edu

Abstract
We introduce a novel repeated Inverse Reinforcement Learning problem: the agent
has to act on behalf of a human in a sequence of tasks and wishes to minimize the
number of tasks that it surprises the human by acting suboptimally with respect to
how the human would have acted. Each time the human is surprised, the agent is
provided a demonstration of the desired behavior by the human. We formalize this
problem, including how the sequence of tasks is chosen, in a few different ways
and provide some foundational results.

1

Introduction

One challenge in building AI agents that learn from experience is how to set their goals or rewards.
In the Reinforcement Learning (RL) setting, one interesting answer to this question is inverse RL
(or IRL) in which the agent infers the rewards of a human by observing the human’s policy in a task
[2]. Unfortunately, the IRL problem is ill-posed for there are typically many reward functions for
which the observed behavior is optimal in a single task [3]. While the use of heuristics to select from
among the set of feasible reward functions has led to successful applications of IRL to the problem
of learning from demonstration [e.g., 4], not identifying the reward function poses fundamental
challenges to the question of how well and how safely the agent will perform when using the learned
reward function in other tasks.
We formalize multiple variations of a new repeated IRL problem in which the agent and (the same)
human face multiple tasks over time. We separate the reward function into two components, one
which is invariant across tasks and can be viewed as intrinsic to the human, and a second that is
task specific. As a motivating example, consider a human doing tasks throughout a work day, e.g.,
getting coffee, driving to work, interacting with co-workers, and so on. Each of these tasks has a
task-specific goal, but the human brings to each task intrinsic goals that correspond to maintaining
health, financial well-being, not violating moral and legal principles, etc. In our repeated IRL setting,
the agent presents a policy for each new task that it thinks the human would do. If the agent’s policy
“surprises” the human by being sub-optimal, the human presents the agent with the optimal policy.
The objective of the agent is to minimize the number of surprises to the human, i.e., to generalize the
human’s behavior to new tasks.
In addition to addressing generalization across tasks, the repeated IRL problem we introduce and
our results are of interest in resolving the question of unidentifiability of rewards from observations
in standard IRL. Our results are also of interest to a particular aspect of the concern about how
to make sure that the AI systems we build are safe, or AI safety. Specifically, the issue of reward
misspecification is often mentioned in AI safety articles [e.g., 5, 6, 7]. These articles mostly discuss
broad ethical concerns and possible research directions, while our paper develops mathematical
formulations and algorithmic solutions to a specific way of addressing reward misspecification.
*
∗

This paper extends an unpublished arXiv paper by the authors [1].
Equal contribution.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

