ELF: An Extensive, Lightweight and Flexible
Research Platform for Real-time Strategy Games

Yuandong Tian1

Qucheng Gong1

Wenling Shang2

Yuxin Wu1

C. Lawrence Zitnick1

1

2
Facebook AI Research
Oculus
1
2
{yuandong, qucheng, yuxinwu, zitnick}@fb.com
wendy.shang@oculus.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose ELF, an Extensive, Lightweight and Flexible platform
for fundamental reinforcement learning research. Using ELF, we implement a
highly customizable real-time strategy (RTS) engine with three game environments (Mini-RTS, Capture the Flag and Tower Defense). Mini-RTS, as a miniature version of StarCraft, captures key game dynamics and runs at 40K frameper-second (FPS) per core on a laptop. When coupled with modern reinforcement
learning methods, the system can train a full-game bot against built-in AIs endto-end in one day with 6 CPUs and 1 GPU. In addition, our platform is flexible in
terms of environment-agent communication topologies, choices of RL methods,
changes in game parameters, and can host existing C/C++-based game environments like ALE [4]. Using ELF, we thoroughly explore training parameters and
show that a network with Leaky ReLU [17] and Batch Normalization [11] coupled with long-horizon training and progressive curriculum beats the rule-based
built-in AI more than 70% of the time in the full game of Mini-RTS. Strong performance is also achieved on the other two games. In game replays, we show
our agents learn interesting strategies. ELF, along with its RL platform, is open
sourced at https://github.com/facebookresearch/ELF.

1

Introduction

Game environments are commonly used for research in Reinforcement Learning (RL), i.e. how to
train intelligent agents to behave properly from sparse rewards [4, 6, 5, 14, 29]. Compared to the
real world, game environments offer an infinite amount of highly controllable, fully reproducible,
and automatically labeled data. Ideally, a game environment for fundamental RL research is:
• Extensive: The environment should capture many diverse aspects of the real world, such
as rich dynamics, partial information, delayed/long-term rewards, concurrent actions with
different granularity, etc. Having an extensive set of features and properties increases the
potential for trained agents to generalize to diverse real-world scenarios.
• Lightweight: A platform should be fast and capable of generating samples hundreds or
thousands of times faster than real-time with minimal computational resources (e.g., a single machine). Lightweight and efficient platforms help accelerate academic research of RL
algorithms, particularly for methods which are heavily data-dependent.
• Flexible: A platform that is easily customizable at different levels, including rich choices
of environment content, easy manipulation of game parameters, accessibility of internal
variables, and flexibility of training architectures. All are important for fast exploration of
different algorithms. For example, changing environment parameters [35], as well as using
internal data [15, 19] have been shown to substantially accelerate training.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

