Group Additive Structure Identification for Kernel
Nonparametric Regression

Pan Chao
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906
panchao25@gmail.com

Michael Zhu
Department of Statistics, Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906
Center for Statistical Science
Department of Industrial Engineering
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
yuzhu@purdue.edu

Abstract
The additive model is one of the most popularly used models for high dimensional
nonparametric regression analysis. However, its main drawback is that it neglects
possible interactions between predictor variables. In this paper, we reexamine the
group additive model proposed in the literature, and rigorously define the intrinsic
group additive structure for the relationship between the response variable Y and
the predictor vector X, and further develop an effective structure-penalized kernel
method for simultaneous identification of the intrinsic group additive structure
and nonparametric function estimation. The method utilizes a novel complexity
measure we derive for group additive structures. We show that the proposed method
is consistent in identifying the intrinsic group additive structure. Simulation study
and real data applications demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method as
a general tool for high dimensional nonparametric regression.

1

Introduction

Regression analysis is popularly used to study the relationship between a response variable Y
and a vector of predictor variables X. Linear and logistic regression analysis are arguably two
most popularly used regression tools in practice, and both postulate explicit parametric models on
f (X) = E[Y |X] as a function of X. When no parametric models can be imposed, nonparametric
regression analysis can instead be performed. On one hand, nonparametric regression analysis is
flexible and not susceptible to model mis-specification, whereas on the other hand, it suffers from a
number of well-known drawbacks especially in high dimensional settings. Firstly, the asymptotic
error rate of nonparametric regression deteriorates quickly as the dimension of X increases. [16]
shows that with some regularity conditions, the
 optimal asymptotic error rate for estimating a dtimes differentiable function is O n−d/(2d+p) , where p is the dimensionality of X. Secondly, the
resulting fitted nonparametric function is often complicated and difficult to interpret.
To overcome the drawbacks of high dimensional nonparametric regression, one popularly used
approach is to impose the additive structure [5] on f (X), that is to assume that f (X) = f1 (X1 ) +
· · ·+fp (Xp ) where f1 , . . . , fp are p unspecified univariate functions. Thanks to the additive structure,
the nonparametric estimation of f or equivalently the individual fi ’s for 1 ≤ i ≤ p becomes efficient
and does not suffer from the curse of dimensionality. Furthermore, the interpretability of the resulting
model has also been much improved.
The key drawback of the additive model is that it does not assume interactions between the predictor variables. To address this limitation, functional ANOVA models were proposed to accommodate higher order interactions, see [4] and [13]. For example, by neglecting interactions of
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

