Scalable Model Selection for Belief Networks
Zhao Song† , Yusuke Muraoka∗ , Ryohei Fujimaki∗ , Lawrence Carin†
†

Department of ECE, Duke University
Durham, NC 27708, USA
{zhao.song, lcarin}@duke.edu

∗

NEC Data Science Research Laboratories
Cupertino, CA 95014, USA
{ymuraoka, rfujimaki}@nec-labs.com

Abstract
We propose a scalable algorithm for model selection in sigmoid belief networks
(SBNs), based on the factorized asymptotic Bayesian (FAB) framework. We derive
the corresponding generalized factorized information criterion (gFIC) for the SBN,
which is proven to be statistically consistent with the marginal log-likelihood. To
capture the dependencies within hidden variables in SBNs, a recognition network
is employed to model the variational distribution. The resulting algorithm, which
we call FABIA, can simultaneously execute both model selection and inference
by maximizing the lower bound of gFIC. On both synthetic and real data, our
experiments suggest that FABIA, when compared to state-of-the-art algorithms for
learning SBNs, (i) produces a more concise model, thus enabling faster testing; (ii)
improves predictive performance; (iii) accelerates convergence; and (iv) prevents
overfitting.

1

Introduction

The past decade has witnessed a dramatic increase in popularity of deep learning [20], stemming from
its state-of-the-art performance across many domains, including computer vision [19], reinforcement
learning [27], and speech recognition [15]. However, one important issue in deep learning is that
its performance is largely determined by the underlying model: a larger and deeper network tends
to possess more representational power, but at the cost of being more prone to overfitting [32],
and increased computation. The latter issue presents a challenge for deployment to devices with
constrained resources [2]. Inevitably, an appropriate model-selection method is required to achieve
good performance. Model selection is here the task of selecting the number of layers and the number
of nodes in each layer.
Despite the rapid advancement in performance of deep models, little work has been done to address
the problem of model selection. As a basic approach, cross-validation selects a model according
to a validation score. However, this is not scalable, as its complexity is exponential with respect to
LMAX
the number of layers in the network: O(JMAX
), where JMAX and LMAX represent the maximum
allowed numbers of nodes in each layer and number of layers, respectively. In Alvarez and Salzmann
[2], a constrained optimization approach was proposed to infer the number of nodes in convolutional
neural networks (CNNs); the key idea is to incorporate a sparse group Lasso penalty term to shrink
all edges flowing into a node. Based on the shrinkage mechanism of the truncated gamma-negative
binomial process, Zhou et al. [36] showed that the number of nodes in Poisson gamma belief networks
(PGBNs) can be learned. Furthermore, we empirically observe that the shrinkage priors employed
in Gan et al. [11], Henao et al. [14], Song et al. [31] can potentially perform model selection in
certain tasks, even though this was not explicitly discussed in those works. One common problem for
these approaches, however, is that the hyperparameters need to be tuned in order to achieve good
performance, which may be time-consuming for some applications involving deep networks.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

