Recursive Sampling for the Nyström Method
Cameron Musco
MIT EECS
cnmusco@mit.edu

Christopher Musco
MIT EECS
cpmusco@mit.edu

Abstract
We give the first algorithm for kernel Nyström approximation that runs in linear
time in the number of training points and is provably accurate for all kernel matrices,
without dependence on regularity or incoherence conditions. The algorithm projects
the kernel onto a set of s landmark points sampled by their ridge leverage scores,
requiring just O(ns) kernel evaluations and O(ns2 ) additional runtime. While
leverage score sampling has long been known to give strong theoretical guarantees
for Nyström approximation, by employing a fast recursive sampling scheme, our
algorithm is the first to make the approach scalable. Empirically we show that it
finds more accurate kernel approximations in less time than popular techniques
such as classic Nyström approximation and the random Fourier features method.

1

Introduction

The kernel method is a powerful for applying linear learning algorithms (SVMs, linear regression,
etc.) to nonlinear problems. The key idea is to map data to a higher dimensional kernel feature space,
where linear relationships correspond to nonlinear relationships in the original data.
Typically this mapping is implicit. A kernel function is used to compute inner products in the
high-dimensional kernel space, without ever actually mapping original data points to the space.
Given n data points x1 , . . . , xn , the n ⇥ n kernel matrix K is formed where Ki,j contains the highdimensional inner product between xi and xj , as computed by the kernel function. All computations
required by a linear learning method are performed using the inner product information in K.
Unfortunately, the transition from linear to nonlinear comes at a high cost. Just generating the entries
of K requires ⇥(n2 ) time, which is prohibitive for large datasets.
1.1

Kernel approximation

A large body of work seeks to accelerate kernel methods by finding a compressed, often lowrank, approximation K̃ to the true kernel matrix K. Techniques include random sampling and
embedding [AMS01, BBV06, ANW14], random Fourier feature methods for shift invariant kernels
[RR07, RR09, LSS13], and incomplete Cholesky factorization [FS02, BJ02].
One of the most popular techniques is the Nyström method, which constructs K̃ using a subset of
“landmark” data points [WS01]. Once s data points are selected, K̃ (in factored form) takes just
O(ns) kernel evaluations and O(s3 ) additional time to compute, requires O(ns) space to store, and
can be manipulated quickly in downstream applications. E.g., inverting K̃ takes O(ns2 ) time.
The Nyström method performs well in practice [YLM+ 12, GM13, TRVR16], is widely implemented
[HFH+ 09, PVG+ 11, IBM14], and is used in a number of applications under different names such as
“landmark isomap” [DST03] and “landmark MDS” [Pla05]. In the classic variant, landmark points are
selected uniformly at random. However, significant research seeks to improve performance via data31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

