Efficient Sublinear-Regret Algorithms for Online
Sparse Linear Regression with Limited Observation

Shinji Ito
NEC Corporation
s-ito@me.jp.nec.com
Hanna Sumita
National Institute of Informatics
sumita@nii.ac.jp

Daisuke Hatano
National Institute of Informatics
hatano@nii.ac.jp

Akihiro Yabe
NEC Corporation
a-yabe@cq.jp.nec.com

Naonori Kakimura
Keio University
kakimura@math.keio.ac.jp

Takuro Fukunaga
JST, PRESTO
takuro@nii.ac.jp

Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi
National Institute of Informatics
k-keniti@nii.ac.jp

Abstract
Online sparse linear regression is the task of applying linear regression analysis
to examples arriving sequentially subject to a resource constraint that a limited
number of features of examples can be observed. Despite its importance in many
practical applications, it has been recently shown that there is no polynomialtime sublinear-regret algorithm unless NP⊆BPP, and only an exponential-time
sublinear-regret algorithm has been found. In this paper, we introduce mild assumptions to solve the problem. Under these assumptions, we present polynomialtime sublinear-regret algorithms for the online sparse linear regression. In addition, thorough experiments with publicly available data demonstrate that our algorithms outperform other known algorithms.

1

Introduction

In online regression, a learner receives examples one by one, and aims to make a good prediction
from the features of arriving examples, learning a model in the process. Online regression has
attracted attention recently in the research community in managing massive learning data.In realworld scenarios, however, with resource constraints, it is desired to make a prediction with only a
limited number of features per example. Such scenarios arise in the context of medical diagnosis of
a disease [3] and in generating a ranking of web pages in a search engine, in which it costs to obtain
features or only partial features are available in each round. In both these examples, predictions need
to be made sequentially because a patient or a search query arrives online.
To resolve the above issue of limited access to features, Kale [7] proposed online sparse regression.
In this problem, a learner makes a prediction for the labels of examples arriving sequentially over
a number of rounds. Each example has d features that can be potentially accessed by the learner.
However, in each round, the learner can acquire the values of at most k 0 features out of the d features,
where k 0 is a parameter set in advance. The learner then makes a prediction for the label of the
example. After the prediction, the true label is revealed to the learner, and the learner suffers a
loss for making an incorrect prediction. The performance of the prediction is measured here by the
standard notion of regret, which is the difference between the total loss of the learner and the total
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

