Stochastic Optimization with Variance Reduction
for Infinite Datasets with Finite Sum Structure
Alberto Bietti
Inria∗
alberto.bietti@inria.fr

Julien Mairal
Inria∗
julien.mairal@inria.fr

Abstract
Stochastic optimization algorithms with variance reduction have proven successful
for minimizing large finite sums of functions. Unfortunately, these techniques are
unable to deal with stochastic perturbations of input data, induced for example by
data augmentation. In such cases, the objective is no longer a finite sum, and the
main candidate for optimization is the stochastic gradient descent method (SGD).
In this paper, we introduce a variance reduction approach for these settings when
the objective is composite and strongly convex. The convergence rate outperforms
SGD with a typically much smaller constant factor, which depends on the variance
of gradient estimates only due to perturbations on a single example.

1

Introduction

Many supervised machine learning problems can be cast as the minimization of an expected loss
over a data distribution with respect to a vector x in Rp of model parameters. When an infinite
amount of data is available, stochastic optimization methods such as SGD or stochastic mirror descent
algorithms, or their variants, are typically used (see [5, 11, 24, 34]). Nevertheless, when the dataset is
finite, incremental methods based on variance reduction techniques (e.g., [2, 8, 15, 17, 18, 27, 29])
have proven to be significantly faster at solving the finite-sum problem
n
n
o
1X
minp F (x) := f (x) + h(x) =
fi (x) + h(x) ,
x∈R
n i=1

(1)

where the functions fi are smooth and convex, and h is a simple convex penalty that need not be
differentiable such as the ℓ1 norm. A classical setting is fi (x) = ℓ(yi , x⊤ ξi ) + (µ/2)kxk2 , where
(ξi , yi ) is an example-label pair, ℓ is a convex loss function, and µ is a regularization parameter.
In this paper, we are interested in a variant of (1) where random perturbations of data are introduced,
which is a common scenario in machine learning. Then, the functions fi involve an expectation over
a random perturbation ρ, leading to the problem
n
n
o
1X
minp F (x) :=
fi (x) + h(x) .
x∈R
n i=1

with

fi (x) = Eρ [f˜i (x, ρ)].

(2)

Unfortunately, variance reduction methods are not compatible with the setting (2), since evaluating
a single gradient ∇fi (x) requires computing a full expectation. Yet, dealing with random perturbations is of utmost interest; for instance, this is a key to achieve stable feature selection [23],
improving the generalization error both in theory [33] and in practice [19, 32], obtaining stable
and robust predictors [36], or using complex a priori knowledge about data to generate virtually
∗

Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

