The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Structured
Random Orthogonal Embeddings

Krzysztof Choromanski ∗
Google Brain Robotics
kchoro@google.com

Mark Rowland ∗
University of Cambridge
mr504@cam.ac.uk

Adrian Weller
University of Cambridge and Alan Turing Institute
aw665@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
We examine a class of embeddings based on structured random matrices with
orthogonal rows which can be applied in many machine learning applications
including dimensionality reduction and kernel approximation. For both the JohnsonLindenstrauss transform and the angular kernel, we show that we can select matrices
yielding guaranteed improved performance in accuracy and/or speed compared to
earlier methods. We introduce matrices with complex entries which give significant
further accuracy improvement. We provide geometric and Markov chain-based
perspectives to help understand the benefits, and empirical results which suggest
that the approach is helpful in a wider range of applications.

1

Introduction

Embedding methods play a central role in many machine learning applications by projecting feature
vectors into a new space (often nonlinearly), allowing the original task to be solved more efficiently.
The new space might have more or fewer dimensions depending on the goal. Applications include
the Johnson-Lindenstrauss Transform for dimensionality reduction (JLT, Johnson and Lindenstrauss,
1984) and kernel methods with random feature maps (Rahimi and Recht, 2007). The embedding can
be costly hence many fast methods have been developed, see §1.1 for background and related work.
We present a general class of random embeddings based on particular structured random matrices
with orthogonal rows, which we call random ortho-matrices (ROMs); see §2. We show that ROMs
may be used for the applications above, in each case demonstrating improvements over previous
methods in statistical accuracy (measured by mean squared error, MSE), in computational efficiency
(while providing similar accuracy), or both. We highlight the following contributions:
• In §3: The Orthogonal Johnson-Lindenstrauss Transform (OJLT) for dimensionality reduction.
We prove this has strictly smaller MSE than the previous unstructured JLT mechanisms. Further,
OJLT is as fast as the fastest previous JLT variants (which are structured).
• In §4: Estimators for the angular kernel (Sidorov et al., 2014) which guarantee better MSE. The
angular kernel is important for many applications, including natural language processing (Sidorov
et al., 2014), image analysis (Jégou et al., 2011), speaker representations (Schmidt et al., 2014)
and tf-idf data sets (Sundaram et al., 2013).
• In §5: Two perspectives on the effectiveness of ROMs to help build intuitive understanding.
In §6 we provide empirical results which support our analysis, and show that ROMs are effective for
a still broader set of applications. Full details and proofs of all results are in the Appendix.
∗

equal contribution

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

