Principles of Riemannian Geometry
in Neural Networks
Michael Hauser
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Pennsylvania State University
State College, PA 16801
mzh190@psu.edu

Asok Ray
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Pennsylvania State University
State College, PA 16801
axr2@psu.edu

Abstract
This study deals with neural networks in the sense of geometric transformations
acting on the coordinate representation of the underlying data manifold which
the data is sampled from. It forms part of an attempt to construct a formalized
general theory of neural networks in the setting of Riemannian geometry. From
this perspective, the following theoretical results are developed and proven for
feedforward networks. First it is shown that residual neural networks are finite difference approximations to dynamical systems of first order differential
equations, as opposed to ordinary networks that are static. This implies that the
network is learning systems of differential equations governing the coordinate
transformations that represent the data. Second it is shown that a closed form
solution of the metric tensor on the underlying data manifold can be found by
backpropagating the coordinate representations learned by the neural network
itself. This is formulated in a formal abstract sense as a sequence of Lie group
actions on the metric fibre space in the principal and associated bundles on the
data manifold. Toy experiments were run to confirm parts of the proposed theory,
as well as to provide intuitions as to how neural networks operate on data.

1

Introduction

The introduction is divided into two parts. Section 1.1 attempts to succinctly describe ways in
which neural networks are usually understood to operate. Section 1.2 articulates a more minority
perspective. It is this minority perspective that this study develops, showing that there exists a rich
connection between neural networks and Riemannian geometry.
1.1

Latent variable perspectives

Neural networks are usually understood from a latent variable perspective, in the sense that
successive layers are learning successive representations of the data. For example, convolution
networks [10] are understood quite well as learning hierarchical representations of images [19].
Long short-term memory networks [9] are designed such that input data act on a memory cell to
avoid problems with long term dependencies. More complex devices like neural Turing machines
are designed with similar intuitions for reading and writing to a memory [6].
Residual networks were designed [7] with the intuition that it is easier to learn perturbations from
the identity map than it is to learn an unreferenced map. Further experiments then suggest that
residual networks work well because, during forward propagation and back propagation, the signal
from any block can be mapped to any other block [8]. After unraveling the residual network, this
attribute can be seen more clearly. From this perspective, the residual network can be understood
as an ensemble of shallower networks [17].
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

