Temporal Coherency based Criteria for Predicting
Video Frames using Deep Multi-stage Generative
Adversarial Networks
Prateep Bhattacharjee1 , Sukhendu Das2
Visualization and Perception Laboratory
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, India
1
prateepb@cse.iitm.ac.in, 2 sdas@iitm.ac.in

Abstract
Predicting the future from a sequence of video frames has been recently a sought
after yet challenging task in the field of computer vision and machine learning.
Although there have been efforts for tracking using motion trajectories and flow
features, the complex problem of generating unseen frames has not been studied
extensively. In this paper, we deal with this problem using convolutional models
within a multi-stage Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) framework. The
proposed method uses two stages of GANs to generate crisp and clear set of
future frames. Although GANs have been used in the past for predicting the
future, none of the works consider the relation between subsequent frames in
the temporal dimension. Our main contribution lies in formulating two objective
functions based on the Normalized Cross Correlation (NCC) and the Pairwise
Contrastive Divergence (PCD) for solving this problem. This method, coupled
with the traditional L1 loss, has been experimented with three real-world video
datasets viz. Sports-1M, UCF-101 and the KITTI. Performance analysis reveals
superior results over the recent state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Video frame prediction has recently been a popular problem in computer vision as it caters to a wide
range of applications including self-driving cars, surveillance, robotics and in-painting. However, the
challenge lies in the fact that, real-world scenes tend to be complex, and predicting the future events
requires modeling of complicated internal representations of the ongoing events. Past approaches
on video frame prediction include the use of recurrent neural architectures [19], Long Short Term
Memory [8] networks [22] and action conditional deep networks [17]. Recently, the work of [14]
modeled the frame prediction problem in the framework of Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN).
Generative models, as introduced by Goodfellow et. al., [5] try to generate images from random noise
by simultaneously training a generator (G) and a discriminator network (D) in a process similar to a
zero-sum game. Mathieu et. al. [14] shows the effectiveness of this adversarial training in the domain
of frame prediction using a combination of two objective functions (along with the basic adversarial
loss) employed on a multi-scale generator network. This idea stems from the fact that the original
L2-loss tends to produce blurry frames. This was overcome by the use of Gradient Difference Loss
(GDL) [14], which showed significant improvement over the past approaches when compared using
similarity and sharpness measures. However, this approach, although producing satisfying results for
the first few predicted frames, tends to generate blurry results for predictions far away (∼6) in the
future.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

