Asynchronous Coordinate Descent under More
Realistic Assumption∗

Tao Sun
National University of Defense Technology
Changsha, Hunan 410073, China
nudtsuntao@163.com

Robert Hannah
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
RobertHannah89@math.ucla.edu

Wotao Yin
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
wotaoyin@math.ucla.edu

Abstract
Asynchronous-parallel algorithms have the potential to vastly speed up algorithms
by eliminating costly synchronization. However, our understanding of these algorithms is limited because the current convergence theory of asynchronous block
coordinate descent algorithms is based on somewhat unrealistic assumptions. In
particular, the age of the shared optimization variables being used to update blocks
is assumed to be independent of the block being updated. Additionally, it is
assumed that the updates are applied to randomly chosen blocks.
In this paper, we argue that these assumptions either fail to hold or will imply less
efficient implementations. We then prove the convergence of asynchronous-parallel
block coordinate descent under more realistic assumptions, in particular, always
without the independence assumption. The analysis permits both the deterministic
(essentially) cyclic and random rules for block choices. Because a bound on the
asynchronous delays may or may not be available, we establish convergence for
both bounded delays and unbounded delays. The analysis also covers nonconvex,
weakly convex, and strongly convex functions. The convergence theory involves a
Lyapunov function that directly incorporates both objective progress and delays. A
continuous-time ODE is provided to motivate the construction at a high level.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider the asynchronous-parallel block coordinate descent (async-BCD) algorithm
for solving the unconstrained minimization problem
min f (x) = f (x1 , . . . , xN ),

x∈RN

(1)

where f is a differentiable function and ∇f is L-Lipschitz continuous. Async-BCD [14, 13, 16]
has virtually the same implementation as regular BCD. The difference is that the threads doing the
parallel computation do not wait for all others to finish and share their updates before starting the next
iteration, but merely continue to update with the most recent solution-vector information available2 .
∗
The work is supported in part by the National Key R&D Program of China 2017YFB0202902, China
Scholarship Council, NSF DMS-1720237, and ONR N000141712162
2
Additionally, the step size needs to be modified to ensure convergence results hold. However in practice
traditional step sizes appear to still allow convergence, barring extreme circumstances.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

