Stochastic and Adversarial Online Learning without
Hyperparameters

Ashok Cutkosky
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
ashokc@cs.stanford.edu

Kwabena Boahen
Department of Bioengineering
Stanford University
boahen@stanford.edu

Abstract
Most online optimization algorithms focus on one of two things: performing well
in adversarial settings by adapting to
√unknown data parameters (such as Lipschitz
constants), typically achieving O( T ) regret, or performing well in stochastic
settings where they can leverage some structure in the losses (such as strong
convexity), typically achieving O(log(T
√ )) regret. Algorithms that focus on the
former problem hitherto achieved O( T ) in the stochastic setting rather than
O(log(T )). Here we introduce an online optimization algorithm that achieves
O(log4 (T )) regret√
in a wide class of stochastic settings while gracefully degrading
to the optimal O( T ) regret in adversarial settings (up to logarithmic factors).
Our algorithm does not require any prior knowledge about the data or tuning of
parameters to achieve superior performance.

1

Extending Adversarial Algorithms to Stochastic Settings

The online convex optimization (OCO) paradigm [1, 2] can be used to model a large number of
scenarios of interest, such as streaming problems, adversarial environments, or stochastic optimization.
In brief, an OCO algorithm plays T rounds of a game in which on each round the algorithm outputs
a vector wt in some convex space W , and then receives a loss function `t : W → R that is convex.
The algorithm’s objective is to minimize regret, which is the total loss of all rounds relative to w? ,
PT
the minimizer of t=1 `t in W :
RT (w? ) =

T
X

`t (wt ) − `t (w? )

t=1

OCO algorithms typically either make as few as possible assumptions about the `t while attempting
to perform well (adversarial settings), or assume that the `t have some particular structure that can
be leveraged to perform much
√ better (stochastic settings). For the adversarial setting, the minimax
optimal regret is O(BLmax T ), where B is the diameter of W and Lmax is the maximum Lipschitz
constant of the losses [3]. A wide variety of algorithms achieve this bound without prior knowledge of
one or both of B and Lmax [4, 5, 6, 7], resulting in hyperparameter-free algorithms. In the stochastic
setting, it was recently shown that for a class of problems (those satisfying the so-called Bernstein
condition), one can achieve regret O(dBLmax log(T )) where W ⊂ Rd using the M ETAG RAD
algorithm [8, 9]. This approach requires knowledge of the parameter Lmax .
In this paper, we extend an algorithm for the parameter-free adversarial setting [7] to the stochastic
setting, achieving both optimal regret in adversarial settings as well as logarithmic regret in a wide
class of stochastic settings, without needing to tune parameters. Our class of stochastic settings is
those for which E[∇`t (wt )] is aligned with wt − w? , quantified by a value α that increases with
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

