Controllable Invariance
through Adversarial Feature Learning

Qizhe Xie, Zihang Dai, Yulun Du, Eduard Hovy, Graham Neubig
Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
{qizhex, dzihang, yulund, hovy, gneubig}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Learning meaningful representations that maintain the content necessary for a
particular task while filtering away detrimental variations is a problem of great
interest in machine learning. In this paper, we tackle the problem of learning
representations invariant to a specific factor or trait of data. The representation
learning process is formulated as an adversarial minimax game. We analyze the
optimal equilibrium of such a game and find that it amounts to maximizing the
uncertainty of inferring the detrimental factor given the representation while maximizing the certainty of making task-specific predictions. On three benchmark tasks,
namely fair and bias-free classification, language-independent generation, and
lighting-independent image classification, we show that the proposed framework
induces an invariant representation, and leads to better generalization evidenced by
the improved performance.

1

Introduction

How to produce a data representation that maintains meaningful variations of data while eliminating
noisy signals is a consistent theme of machine learning research. In the last few years, the dominant
paradigm for finding such a representation has shifted from manual feature engineering based on
specific domain knowledge to representation learning that is fully data-driven, and often powered by
deep neural networks [Bengio et al., 2013]. Being universal function approximators [Gybenko, 1989],
deep neural networks can easily uncover the complicated variations in data [Zhang et al., 2017],
leading to powerful representations. However, how to systematically incorporate a desired invariance
into the learned representation in a controllable way remains an open problem.
A possible avenue towards the solution is to devise a dedicated neural architecture that by construction
has the desired invariance property. As a typical example, the parameter sharing scheme and pooling
mechanism in modern deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) [LeCun et al., 1998] take advantage
of the spatial structure of image processing problems, allowing them to induce more generic feature
representations than fully connected networks. Since the invariance we care about can vary greatly
across tasks, this approach requires us to design a new architecture each time a new invariance
desideratum shows up, which is time-consuming and inflexible.
When our belief of invariance is specific to some attribute of the input data, an alternative approach is
to build a probabilistic model with a random variable corresponding to the attribute, and explicitly
reason about the invariance. For instance, the variational fair auto-encoder (VFAE) [Louizos et al.,
2016] employs the maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) to eliminate the negative influence of specific
“nuisance variables”, such as removing the lighting conditions of images to predict the person’s
identity. Similarly, under the setting of domain adaptation, standard binary adversarial cost [Ganin
and Lempitsky, 2015, Ganin et al., 2016] and central moment discrepancy (CMD) [Zellinger et al.,
2017] have been utilized to learn features that are domain invariant. However, all these invariance
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

