The Reversible Residual Network:
Backpropagation Without Storing Activations

Aidan N. Gomez∗ 1 , Mengye Ren∗ 1,2,3 , Raquel Urtasun1,2,3 , Roger B. Grosse1,2
University of Toronto1
Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence2
Uber Advanced Technologies Group3
{aidan, mren, urtasun, rgrosse}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Deep residual networks (ResNets) have significantly pushed forward the state-ofthe-art on image classification, increasing in performance as networks grow both
deeper and wider. However, memory consumption becomes a bottleneck, as one
needs to store the activations in order to calculate gradients using backpropagation. We present the Reversible Residual Network (RevNet), a variant of ResNets
where each layer’s activations can be reconstructed exactly from the next layer’s.
Therefore, the activations for most layers need not be stored in memory during
backpropagation. We demonstrate the effectiveness of RevNets on CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-100, and ImageNet, establishing nearly identical classification accuracy
to equally-sized ResNets, even though the activation storage requirements are
independent of depth.

1

Introduction

Over the last five years, deep convolutional neural networks have enabled rapid performance improvements across a wide range of visual processing tasks [19, 26, 20]. For the most part, the
state-of-the-art networks have been growing deeper. For instance, deep residual networks (ResNets)
[13] are the state-of-the-art architecture across multiple computer vision tasks [19, 26, 20]. The
key architectural innovation behind ResNets was the residual block, which allows information to be
passed directly through, making the backpropagated error signals less prone to exploding or vanishing.
This made it possible to train networks with hundreds of layers, and this vastly increased depth led to
significant performance gains.
Nearly all modern neural networks are trained using backpropagation. Since backpropagation
requires storing the network’s activations in memory, the memory cost is proportional to the number
of units in the network. Unfortunately, this means that as networks grow wider and deeper, storing
the activations imposes an increasing memory burden, which has become a bottleneck for many
applications [34, 37]. Graphics processing units (GPUs) have limited memory capacity, leading to
constraints often exceeded by state-of-the-art architectures, some of which reach over one thousand
layers [13]. Training large networks may require parallelization across multiple GPUs [7, 28], which
is both expensive and complicated to implement. Due to memory constraints, modern architectures
are often trained with a mini-batch size of 1 (e.g. [34, 37]), which is inefficient for stochastic gradient
methods [11]. Reducing the memory cost of storing activations would significantly improve our
ability to efficiently train wider and deeper networks.
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Code available at https://github.com/renmengye/revnet-public

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

