A New Alternating Direction Method for Linear
Programming

Sinong Wang
Department of ECE
The Ohio State University
wang.7691@osu.edu

Ness Shroff
Department of ECE and CSE
The Ohio State University
shroff.11@osu.edu

Abstract
It is well known that, for a linear program (LP) with constraint matrix A ∈ Rm×n ,
the Alternating Direction Method of Multiplier converges globally and linearly at a
rate O((kAk2F + mn) log(1/)). However, such a rate is related to the problem
dimension and the algorithm exhibits a slow and fluctuating “tail convergence” in
practice. In this paper, we propose a new variable splitting method of LP and prove
that our method has a convergence rate of O(kAk2 log(1/)). The proof is based
on simultaneously estimating the distance from a pair of primal dual iterates to the
optimal primal and dual solution set by certain residuals. In practice, we result
in a new first-order LP solver that can exploit both the sparsity and the specific
structure of matrix A and a significant speedup for important problems such as
basis pursuit, inverse covariance matrix estimation, L1 SVM and nonnegative
matrix factorization problem compared with the current fastest LP solvers.

1

Introduction

We are interested in applying the Alternating Direction Method of Multiplier (ADMM) to solve a
linear program (LP) of the form
min

x∈Rn

cT x

s.t. Ax = b, xi ≥ 0, i ∈ [nb ].

(1)

where c ∈ Rn , A ∈ Rm×n is the constraint matrix, b ∈ Rm and [nb ] = {1, . . . , nb }. This problem
plays a major role in numerical optimization, and has been used in a large variety of application areas.
For example, several important machine learning problems including the nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) [1], l1 -regularized SVM [2], sparse inverse covariance matrix estimation (SICE) [3]
and the basis pursuit (BP) [4], and the MAP inference [5] problem can be cast into an LP setting.
The complexity of the traditional LP solver is still at least quadratic in the problem dimension, i.e., the
Interior Point method (IPM) with a weighted path finding strategy. However, many recent problems
in machine learning have extremely large-scale targeting data but exhibit a sparse structure, i.e.,
nnz(A)  mn, where nnz(A) is the number of non-zero elements in the constraint matrix A. This
characteristic severely limits the ability of the IPM or Simplex technique to solve these problems. On
the other hand, first-order methods have received extensive attention recently due to their ability to
deal with large data sets. These methods require a matrix vector multiplication Ax in each iteration
with complexity linear in nnz(A). However, the key challenge in designing a first-order algorithm is
that LPs are usually non-smooth and non-strongly convex optimization problems (may not have a
unique solution). Utilizing the standard primal and dual stochastic sub-gradient descent method will
result in an extremely slow convergence rate, i.e., O(1/2 ) [6].
The ADMM was first developed in 1975 [7], and since then there have been several LP solvers
based on this technique. Compared with the traditional Augmented Lagrangian Method (ALM), this
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

