Scalable Log Determinants for Gaussian Process
Kernel Learning

Kun Dong 1 , David Eriksson 1 , Hannes Nickisch 2 , David Bindel 1 , Andrew Gordon Wilson 1
1
Cornell University, 2 Phillips Research Hamburg

Abstract
For applications as varied as Bayesian neural networks, determinantal point processes, elliptical graphical models, and kernel learning for Gaussian processes
(GPs), one must compute a log determinant of an n × n positive definite matrix,
and its derivatives – leading to prohibitive O(n3 ) computations. We propose novel
O(n) approaches to estimating these quantities from only fast matrix vector multiplications (MVMs). These stochastic approximations are based on Chebyshev,
Lanczos, and surrogate models, and converge quickly even for kernel matrices that
have challenging spectra. We leverage these approximations to develop a scalable
Gaussian process approach to kernel learning. We find that Lanczos is generally
superior to Chebyshev for kernel learning, and that a surrogate approach can be
highly efficient and accurate with popular kernels.

1

Introduction

There is a pressing need for scalable machine learning approaches to extract rich statistical structure from large datasets. A common bottleneck — arising in determinantal point processes [1],
Bayesian neural networks [2], model comparison [3], graphical models [4], and Gaussian process
kernel learning [5] — is computing a log determinant over a large positive definite matrix. While
we can approximate log determinants by existing stochastic expansions relying on matrix vector
multiplications (MVMs), these approaches make assumptions, such as near-uniform eigenspectra
[6], which are unsuitable in machine learning contexts. For example, the popular RBF kernel gives
rise to rapidly decaying eigenvalues. Moreover, while standard approaches, such as stochastic power
series, have reasonable asymptotic complexity in the rank of the matrix, they require too many terms
(MVMs) for the precision necessary in machine learning applications.
Gaussian processes (GPs) provide a principled probabilistic kernel learning framework, for which a
log determinant is of foundational importance. Specifically, the marginal likelihood of a Gaussian
process is the probability of data given only kernel hyper-parameters. This utility function for kernel
learning compartmentalizes into automatically calibrated model fit and complexity terms — called
automatic Occam’s razor — such that the simplest models which explain the data are automatically
favoured [7, 5], without the need for approaches such as cross-validation, or regularization, which
can be costly, heuristic, and involve substantial hand-tuning and human intervention. The automatic
complexity penalty, called the Occam’s factor [3], is a log determinant of a kernel (covariance) matrix,
related to the volume of solutions that can be expressed by the Gaussian process.
Many current approaches to scalable Gaussian processes [e.g., 8–10] focus on inference assuming
a fixed kernel, or use approximations that do not allow for very flexible kernel learning [11], due
to poor scaling with number of basis functions or inducing points. Alternatively, approaches which
exploit algebraic structure in kernel matrices can provide highly expressive kernel learning [12], but
are essentially limited to grid structured data.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

