Real-Time Bidding with Side Information

Arthur Flajolet
MIT, ORC
flajolet@mit.edu

Patrick Jaillet
MIT, EECS, LIDS, ORC
jaillet@mit.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of repeated bidding in online advertising auctions when
some side information (e.g. browser cookies) is available ahead of submitting a bid
in the form of a d-dimensional vector. The goal for the advertiser is to maximize
the total utility (e.g. the total number of clicks) derived from displaying ads given
that a limited budget B is allocated for a given time horizon T . Optimizing the bids
is modeled as a contextual Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) problem with a knapsack
constraint and a continuum of arms. We develop UCB-type algorithms that combine
two streams of literature: the confidence-set approach to linear contextual MABs
and the probabilistic bisection search method for stochastic root-finding. Under
mild assumptions on the underlying unknown
√distribution, we establish distributionindependent regret bounds of order Õ(d · T ) when either B = ∞ or when B
scales linearly with T .

1

Introduction

On the internet, advertisers and publishers now interact through real-time marketplaces called ad
exchanges. Through them, any publisher can sell the opportunity to display an ad when somebody is
visiting a webpage he or she owns. Conversely, any advertiser interested in such an opportunity can
pay to have his or her ad displayed. In order to match publishers with advertisers and to determine
prices, ad exchanges commonly use a variant of second-price auctions which typically runs as follows.
Each participant is initially provided with some information about the person that will be targeted
by the ad (e.g. browser cookies, IP address, and operating system) along with some information
about the webpage (e.g. theme) and the ad slot (e.g. width and visibility). Based on this limited
knowledge, advertisers must submit a bid in a timely fashion if they deem the opportunity worthwhile.
Subsequently, the highest bidder gets his or her ad displayed and is charged the second-highest bid.
Moreover, the winner can usually track the customer’s interaction with the ad (e.g. clicks). Because
the auction is sealed, very limited feedback is provided to the advertiser if the auction is lost. In
particular, the advertiser does not receive any customer feedback in this scenario. In addition, the
demand for ad slots, the supply of ad slots, and the websurfers’ profiles cannot be predicted ahead of
time and are thus commonly modeled as random variables, see [19]. These two features contribute to
making the problem of bid optimization in ad auctions particularly challenging for advertisers.
1.1

Problem statement and contributions

We consider an advertiser interested in purchasing ad impressions through an ad exchange. As
standard practice in the online advertising industry, we suppose that the advertiser has allocated a
limited budget B for a limited period of time, which corresponds to the next T ad auctions. Rounds,
indexed by t ∈ N, correspond to ad auctions in which the advertiser participates. At the beginning of
round t ∈ N, some contextual information about the ad slot and the person that will be targeted is
revealed to the advertiser in the form of a multidimensional vector xt ∈ X , where X is a subset of
Rd . Without loss of generality, the coordinates of xt are assumed to be normalized in such a way that
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

