Multimodal Learning and Reasoning for Visual
Question Answering

Ilija Ilievski
Integrative Sciences and Engineering
National University of Singapore
ilija.ilievski@u.nus.edu

Jiashi Feng
Electrical and Computer Engineering
National University of Singapore
elefjia@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Reasoning about entities and their relationships from multimodal data is a key goal
of Artificial General Intelligence. The visual question answering (VQA) problem
is an excellent way to test such reasoning capabilities of an AI model and its
multimodal representation learning. However, the current VQA models are oversimplified deep neural networks, comprised of a long short-term memory (LSTM)
unit for question comprehension and a convolutional neural network (CNN) for
learning single image representation. We argue that the single visual representation
contains a limited and general information about the image contents and thus limits
the model reasoning capabilities. In this work we introduce a modular neural network model that learns a multimodal and multifaceted representation of the image
and the question. The proposed model learns to use the multimodal representation
to reason about the image entities and achieves a new state-of-the-art performance
on both VQA benchmark datasets, VQA v1.0 and v2.0, by a wide margin.

1

Introduction

One of the hallmarks of human intelligence is the ability to reason about entities and their relationships
using data from different modalities [40]. Humans can easily reason about the entities in a complex
scene by building multifaceted mental representations of the scene contents. Thus, any plausible
attempt for Artificial General Intelligence must also be able to reason about entities and their
relationships.
Deep learning models have demonstrated excellent performance on many computer vision tasks such
as image classification, object recognition, and scene classification [37, 23]. However, the models
are limited to a single task over single data modality and thus are still far from complete scene
understanding and reasoning.
The visual question answering (VQA), a task to provide answers to natural language questions about
the contents of an image, has been proposed to fill this gap [3, 22]. Solving the VQA task requires
understanding of the image contents, the question words, and their relationships. The human-posed
questions are arbitrary and thus besides being a challenging machine comprehension problem, their
answering also involves many computer vision tasks such as scene classification, object detection
and classification, and face analysis. Thus, VQA represents a problem comprised of multiple subproblems over multimodal data and as such can serve as a proxy test for the general reasoning
capabilities of an AI model [30].
However, the current state-of-the-art VQA approaches employ oversimplified deep neural network
models, comprised of a long short-term memory (LSTM) unit [9] for question comprehension and
a convolutional neural network (CNN) [24] for learning a single representation of the image. The
single visual representation encodes a limited and general information about the image contents and
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

