Formal Guarantees on the Robustness of a
Classifier against Adversarial Manipulation

Matthias Hein and Maksym Andriushchenko
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
Saarland University, Saarbrücken Informatics Campus, Germany

Abstract
Recent work has shown that state-of-the-art classifiers are quite brittle,
in the sense that a small adversarial change of an originally with high
confidence correctly classified input leads to a wrong classification again
with high confidence. This raises concerns that such classifiers are vulnerable
to attacks and calls into question their usage in safety-critical systems. We
show in this paper for the first time formal guarantees on the robustness
of a classifier by giving instance-specific lower bounds on the norm of the
input manipulation required to change the classifier decision. Based on
this analysis we propose the Cross-Lipschitz regularization functional. We
show that using this form of regularization in kernel methods resp. neural
networks improves the robustness of the classifier with no or small loss in
prediction performance.

1

Introduction

The problem of adversarial manipulation of classifiers has been addressed initially in the area
of spam email detection, see e.g. [5, 16]. The goal of the spammer is to manipulate the spam
email (the input of the classifier) in such a way that it is not detected by the classifier. In deep
learning the problem was brought up in the seminal paper by [24]. They showed for state-ofthe-art deep neural networks, that one can manipulate an originally correctly classified input
image with a non-perceivable small transformation so that the classifier now misclassifies
this image with high confidence, see [7] or Figure 3 for an illustration. This property calls
into question the usage of neural networks and other classifiers showing this behavior in
safety critical systems, as they are vulnerable to attacks. On the other hand this also shows
that the concepts learned by a classifier are still quite far away from the visual perception
of humans. Subsequent research has found fast ways to generate adversarial samples with
high probability [7, 12, 19] and suggested to use them during training as a form of data
augmentation to gain more robustness. However, it turns out that the so-called adversarial
training does not settle the problem as one can yet again construct adversarial examples
for the final classifier. Interestingly, it has recently been shown that there exist universal
adversarial changes which when applied lead, for every image, to a wrong classification with
high probability [17]. While one needs access to the neural network model for the generation
of adversarial changes, it has been shown that adversarial manipulations generalize across
neural networks [18, 15, 14], which means that neural network classifiers can be attacked
even as a black-box method. The most extreme case has been shown recently [15], where
they attack the commercial system Clarifai, which is a black-box system as neither the
underlying classifier nor the training data are known. Nevertheless, they could successfully
generate adversarial images with an existing network and fool this commercial system. This
emphasizes that there are indeed severe security issues with modern neural networks. While
countermeasures have been proposed [8, 7, 26, 18, 12, 2], none of them provides a guarantee
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

