SchNet: A continuous-filter convolutional neural
network for modeling quantum interactions

K. T. Schütt1∗, P.-J. Kindermans1 , H. E. Sauceda2 , S. Chmiela1
A. Tkatchenko3 , K.-R. Müller1,4,5†
1
Machine Learning Group, Technische Universität Berlin, Germany
2
Theory Department, Fritz-Haber-Institut der Max-Planck-Gesellschaft, Berlin, Germany
3
Physics and Materials Science Research Unit, University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg
4
Max-Planck-Institut für Informatik, Saarbrücken, Germany
5
Dept. of Brain and Cognitive Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, South Korea
∗
kristof.schuett@tu-berlin.de † klaus-robert.mueller@tu-berlin.de

Abstract
Deep learning has the potential to revolutionize quantum chemistry as it is ideally
suited to learn representations for structured data and speed up the exploration
of chemical space. While convolutional neural networks have proven to be the
first choice for images, audio and video data, the atoms in molecules are not
restricted to a grid. Instead, their precise locations contain essential physical
information, that would get lost if discretized. Thus, we propose to use continuousfilter convolutional layers to be able to model local correlations without requiring
the data to lie on a grid. We apply those layers in SchNet: a novel deep learning
architecture modeling quantum interactions in molecules. We obtain a joint model
for the total energy and interatomic forces that follows fundamental quantumchemical principles. Our architecture achieves state-of-the-art performance for
benchmarks of equilibrium molecules and molecular dynamics trajectories. Finally,
we introduce a more challenging benchmark with chemical and structural variations
that suggests the path for further work.

1

Introduction

The discovery of novel molecules and materials with desired properties is crucial for applications
such as batteries, catalysis and drug design. However, the vastness of chemical compound space
and the computational cost of accurate quantum-chemical calculations prevent an exhaustive exploration. In recent years, there have been increased efforts to use machine learning for the accelerated
discovery of molecules and materials with desired properties [1–9]. However, these methods are
only applied to stable systems in so-called equilibrium, i.e., local minima of the potential energy
surface E(r1 , . . . , rn ) where ri is the position of atom i. Data sets such as the established QM9
benchmark [10] contain only equilibrium molecules. Predicting stable atom arrangements is in itself
an important challenge in quantum chemistry and material science.
In general, it is not clear how to obtain equilibrium conformations without optimizing the atom
positions. Therefore, we need to compute both the total energy E(r1 , . . . , rn ) and the forces acting
on the atoms
∂E
Fi (r1 , . . . , rn ) = −
(r1 , . . . , rn ).
(1)
∂ri
One possibility is to use a less computationally costly, however, also less accurate quantum-chemical
approximation. Instead, we choose to extend the domain of our machine learning model to both
compositional (chemical) and configurational (structural) degrees of freedom.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

