Task-based End-to-end Model Learning
in Stochastic Optimization
Priya L. Donti
Dept. of Computer Science
Dept. of Engr. & Public Policy
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
pdonti@cs.cmu.edu

Brandon Amos
Dept. of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
bamos@cs.cmu.edu

J. Zico Kolter
Dept. of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
zkolter@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
With the increasing popularity of machine learning techniques, it has become common to see prediction algorithms operating within some larger process. However,
the criteria by which we train these algorithms often differ from the ultimate criteria on which we evaluate them. This paper proposes an end-to-end approach for
learning probabilistic machine learning models in a manner that directly captures
the ultimate task-based objective for which they will be used, within the context
of stochastic programming. We present three experimental evaluations of the proposed approach: a classical inventory stock problem, a real-world electrical grid
scheduling task, and a real-world energy storage arbitrage task. We show that the
proposed approach can outperform both traditional modeling and purely black-box
policy optimization approaches in these applications.

1

Introduction

While prediction algorithms commonly operate within some larger process, the criteria by which
we train these algorithms often differ from the ultimate criteria on which we evaluate them: the
performance of the full “closed-loop” system on the ultimate task at hand. For instance, instead of
merely classifying images in a standalone setting, one may want to use these classifications within
planning and control tasks such as autonomous driving. While a typical image classification algorithm
might optimize accuracy or log likelihood, in a driving task we may ultimately care more about the
difference between classifying a pedestrian as a tree vs. classifying a garbage can as a tree. Similarly,
when we use a probabilistic prediction algorithm to generate forecasts of upcoming electricity demand,
we then want to use these forecasts to minimize the costs of a scheduling procedure that allocates
generation for a power grid. As these examples suggest, instead of using a “generic loss,” we instead
may want to learn a model that approximates the ultimate task-based “true loss.”
This paper considers an end-to-end approach for learning probabilistic machine learning models
that directly capture the objective of their ultimate task. Formally, we consider probabilistic models
in the context of stochastic programming, where the goal is to minimize some expected cost over
the models’ probabilistic predictions, subject to some (potentially also probabilistic) constraints.
As mentioned above, it is common to approach these problems in a two-step fashion: first to fit a
predictive model to observed data by minimizing some criterion such as negative log-likelihood,
and then to use this model to compute or approximate the necessary expected costs in the stochastic
programming setting. While this procedure can work well in many instances, it ignores the fact
that the true cost of the system (the optimization objective evaluated on actual instantiations in the
real world) may benefit from a model that actually attains worse overall likelihood, but makes more
accurate predictions over certain manifolds of the underlying space.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

