Recycling Privileged Learning
and Distribution Matching for Fairness

Novi Quadrianto∗
Predictive Analytics Lab (PAL)
University of Sussex
Brighton, United Kingdom
n.quadrianto@sussex.ac.uk

Viktoriia Sharmanska
Department of Computing
Imperial College London
London, United Kingdom
sharmanska.v@gmail.com

Abstract
Equipping machine learning models with ethical and legal constraints is a serious
issue; without this, the future of machine learning is at risk. This paper takes a step
forward in this direction and focuses on ensuring machine learning models deliver
fair decisions. In legal scholarships, the notion of fairness itself is evolving and
multi-faceted. We set an overarching goal to develop a unified machine learning
framework that is able to handle any definitions of fairness, their combinations,
and also new definitions that might be stipulated in the future. To achieve our
goal, we recycle two well-established machine learning techniques, privileged
learning and distribution matching, and harmonize them for satisfying multi-faceted
fairness definitions. We consider protected characteristics such as race and gender
as privileged information that is available at training but not at test time; this
accelerates model training and delivers fairness through unawareness. Further, we
cast demographic parity, equalized odds, and equality of opportunity as a classical
two-sample problem of conditional distributions, which can be solved in a general
form by using distance measures in Hilbert Space. We show several existing
models are special cases of ours. Finally, we advocate returning the Pareto frontier
of multi-objective minimization of error and unfairness in predictions. This will
facilitate decision makers to select an operating point and to be accountable for it.

1

Introduction

Machine learning technologies have permeated everyday life and it is common nowadays that an
automated system makes decisions for/about us, such as who is going to get bank credit. As
more decisions in employment, housing, and credit become automated, there is a pressing need
for addressing ethical and legal aspects, including fairness, accountability, transparency, privacy,
and confidentiality, posed by those machine learning technologies [1, 2]. This paper focuses on
enforcing fairness in the decisions made by machine learning models. A decision is fair if [3, 4,
5]: i) it is not based on a protected characteristic [6] such as gender, marital status, or age (fair
treatment), ii) it does not disproportionately benefit or hurt individuals sharing a certain value of
their protected characteristic (fair impact), and iii) given the target outcomes, it enforces equal
discrepancies between decisions and target outcomes across groups of individuals based on their
protected characteristic (fair supervised performance).
The above three fairness definitions have been studied before, and several machine learning frameworks for addressing each one or a combination of them are available. We first note that one could
ensure fair treatment by simply ignoring protected characteristic features, i.e. fairness through
unawareness. However this poses a risk of unfairness by proxy as there are ways of predicting
∗

Also with National Research University Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russia.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

