Accelerated consensus via Min-Sum Splitting

Patrick Rebeschini
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
patrick.rebeschini@stats.ox.ac.uk

Sekhar Tatikonda
Department of Electrical Engineering
Yale University
sekhar.tatikonda@yale.edu

Abstract
We apply the Min-Sum message-passing protocol to solve the consensus problem
in distributed optimization. We show that while the ordinary Min-Sum algorithm
does not converge, a modified version of it known as Splitting yields convergence to
the problem solution. We prove that a proper choice of the tuning parameters allows
Min-Sum Splitting to yield subdiffusive accelerated convergence rates, matching
the rates obtained by shift-register methods. The acceleration scheme embodied by
Min-Sum Splitting for the consensus problem bears similarities with lifted Markov
chains techniques and with multi-step first order methods in convex optimization.

1

Introduction

Min-Sum is a local message-passing algorithm designed to distributedly optimize an objective
function that can be written as a sum of component functions, each of which depends on a subset of
the decision variables. Due to its simplicity, Min-Sum has emerged as canonical protocol to address
large scale problems in a variety of domains, including signal processing, statistics, and machine
learning. For problems supported on tree graphs, the Min-Sum algorithm corresponds to dynamic
programming and is guaranteed to converge to the problem solution. For arbitrary graphs, the ordinary
Min-Sum algorithm may fail to converge, or it may converge to something different than the problem
solution [28]. In the case of strictly convex objective functions, there are known sufficient conditions
to guarantee the convergence and correctness of the algorithm. The most general condition requires
the Hessian of the objective function to be scaled diagonally dominant [28, 25]. While the Min-Sum
scheme can be applied to optimization problems with constraints, by incorporating the constraints
into the objective function as hard barriers, the known sufficient conditions do not apply in this case.
In [34], a generalization of the traditional Min-Sum scheme has been proposed, based on a
reparametrization of the original objective function. This algorithm is called Splitting, as it can be
derived by creating equivalent graph representations for the objective function by “splitting” the
nodes of the original graph. In the case of unconstrained problems with quadratic objective functions,
where Min-Sum is also known as Gaussian Belief Propagation, the algorithm with splitting has been
shown to yield convergence in settings where the ordinary Min-Sum does not converge [35]. To date,
a theoretical investigation of the rates of convergence of Min-Sum Splitting has not been established.
In this paper we establish rates of convergence for the Min-Sum Splitting algorithm applied to solve
the consensus problem, which can be formulated as an equality-constrained problem in optimization.
The basic version of the consensus problem is the network averaging problem. In this setting, each
node in a graph is assigned a real number, and the goal is to design a distributed protocol that allows
the nodes to iteratively exchange information with their neighbors so to arrive at consensus on the
average across the network. Early work include [42, 41]. The design of distributed algorithms
to solve the averaging problem has received a lot of attention recently, as consensus represents a
widely-used primitive to compute aggregate statistics in a variety of fields. Applications include, for
instance, estimation problems in sensor networks, distributed tracking and localization, multi-agents
coordination, and distributed inference [20, 21, 9, 19]. Consensus is typically combined with some
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

