Gradient Methods for Submodular Maximization
Hamed Hassani
ESE Department
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA
hassani@seas.upenn.edu

Mahdi Soltanolkotabi
EE Department
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
soltanol@usc.edu

Amin Karbasi
ECE Department
Yale University
New Haven, CT
amin.karbasi@yale.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of maximizing continuous submodular functions that naturally arise in many learning applications such as those involving
utility functions in active learning and sensing, matrix approximations and network
inference. Despite the apparent lack of convexity in such functions, we prove that
stochastic projected gradient methods can provide strong approximation guarantees
for maximizing continuous submodular functions with convex constraints. More
specifically, we prove that for monotone continuous DR-submodular functions, all
fixed points of projected gradient ascent provide a factor 1/2 approximation to the
global maxima. We also study stochastic gradient methods and show that after
O(1/2 ) iterations these methods reach solutions which achieve in expectation
− ). An immediate application of our results is to
objective values exceeding ( OPT
2
maximize submodular functions that are defined stochastically, i.e. the submodular
function is defined as an expectation over a family of submodular functions with an
unknown distribution. We will show how stochastic gradient methods are naturally
well-suited for this setting, leading to a factor 1/2 approximation when the function is monotone. In particular, it allows us to approximately maximize discrete,
monotone submodular optimization problems via projected gradient ascent on a
continuous relaxation, directly connecting the discrete and continuous domains.
Finally, experiments on real data demonstrate that our projected gradient methods
consistently achieve the best utility compared to other continuous baselines while
remaining competitive in terms of computational effort.

1

Introduction

Submodular set functions exhibit a natural diminishing returns property, resembling concave functions
in continuous domains. At the same time, they can be minimized exactly in polynomial time (while
can only be maximized approximately), which makes them similar to convex functions. They have
found numerous applications in machine learning, including viral marketing [1], dictionary learning
[2] network monitoring [3, 4], sensor placement [5], product recommendation [6, 7], document and
corpus summarization [8] data summarization [9], crowd teaching [10, 11], and probabilistic models
[12, 13]. However, submodularity is in general a property that goes beyond set functions and can
be defined for continuous functions. In this paper, we consider the following stochastic continuous
submodular optimization problem
max F (x) ≐ Eθ∼D [Fθ (x)],
x∈K

(1.1)

where K is a bounded convex body, D is generally an unknown distribution, and Fθ ’s are continuous
submodular functions for every θ ∈ D. We also use OPT ≜ maxx∈K F (x) to denote the optimum
value. We note that the function F (x) is itself also continuous submodular, as a non-negative
combination of submodular functions are still submodular [14]. The formulation covers popular
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

