Learning from uncertain curves:
The 2-Wasserstein metric for Gaussian processes

Anton Mallasto
Department of Computer Science
University of Copenhagen
mallasto@di.ku.dk

Aasa Feragen
Department of Computer Science
University of Copenhagen
aasa@di.ku.dk

Abstract
We introduce a novel framework for statistical analysis of populations of nondegenerate Gaussian processes (GPs), which are natural representations of uncertain
curves. This allows inherent variation or uncertainty in function-valued data to be
properly incorporated in the population analysis. Using the 2-Wasserstein metric we
geometrize the space of GPs with L2 mean and covariance functions over compact
index spaces. We prove uniqueness of the barycenter of a population of GPs, as well
as convergence of the metric and the barycenter of their finite-dimensional counterparts. This justifies practical computations. Finally, we demonstrate our framework
through experimental validation on GP datasets representing brain connectivity and
climate development. A M ATLAB library for relevant computations will be published at https://sites.google.com/view/antonmallasto/software.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes (GPs, see Fig. 1) are the
counterparts of Gaussian distributions (GDs)
over functions, making GPs natural objects to
model uncertainty in estimated functions. With
the rise of GP modelling and probabilistic numerics, GPs are increasingly used to model uncertainty in function-valued data such as segmentation boundaries [17, 19, 30], image registration [38] or time series [28]. Centered GPs, or
covariance operators, appear as image features
in computer vision [12,16,25,26] and as features
of phonetic language structure [23]. A natural
next step is therefore to analyze populations of Figure 1: An illustration of a GP, with mean funcGPs, where performance depends crucially on tion (in black) and confidence bound (in grey). The
proper incorporation of inherent uncertainty or colorful curves are sample paths of this GP.
variation. This paper contributes a principled
framework for population analysis of GPs based on Wasserstein, a.k.a. earth mover’s, distances.
The importance of incorporating uncertainty into population analysis is emphasized by the example
in Fig. 2, where each data point is a GP representing the minimal temperature in the Siberian city
Vanavara over the course of one year [9, 34]. A naïve way to compute its average temperature curve
is to compute the per-day mean and standard deviation of the yearly GP mean curves. This is shown
in the bottom right plot, and it is clear that the temperature variation is grossly underestimated,
especially in the summer season. The top right figure shows the mean GP obtained with our proposed
framework, which preserves a far more accurate representation of the natural temperature variation.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

