Semisupervised Clustering, AND-Queries and Locally
Encodable Source Coding

Arya Mazumdar
College of Information & Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
arya@cs.umass.edu

Soumyabrata Pal
College of Information & Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
soumyabratap@umass.edu

Abstract
Source coding is the canonical problem of data compression in information theory.
In a locally encodable source coding, each compressed bit depends on only few bits
of the input. In this paper, we show that a recently popular model of semisupervised
clustering is equivalent to locally encodable source coding. In this model, the task
is to perform multiclass labeling of unlabeled elements. At the beginning, we can
ask in parallel a set of simple queries to an oracle who provides (possibly erroneous)
binary answers to the queries. The queries cannot involve more than two (or a
fixed constant number ∆ of) elements. Now the labeling of all the elements (or
clustering) must be performed based on the (noisy) query answers. The goal is to
recover all the correct labelings while minimizing the number of such queries. The
equivalence to locally encodable source codes leads us to find lower bounds on
the number of queries required in variety of scenarios. We are also able to show
fundamental limitations of pairwise ‘same cluster’ queries - and propose pairwise
AND queries, that provably performs better in many situations.

1

Introduction

Suppose we have n elements, and the ith element has a label Xi ∈ {0, 1, . . . , k − 1}, ∀i ∈ {1, . . . , n}.
We consider the task of learning the labels of the elements (or learning the label vector). This can
also be easily thought of as a clustering problem of n elements into k clusters, where there is a
ground-truth clustering1 . There exist various approaches to this problem in general. In many cases
some similarity values between pair of elements are known (a high similarity value indicate that
they are in the same cluster). Given these similarity values (or a weighted complete graph), the task
is equivalent to to graph clustering; when perfect similarity values are known this is equivalent to
finding the connected components of a graph.
A recent approach to clustering has been via crowdsourcing. Suppose there is an oracle (expert
labelers, crowd workers) with whom we can make pairwise queries of the form “do elements u and v
belong to the same cluster?”. We will call this the ‘same cluster’ query (as per [4]). Based on the
answers from the oracle, we then try to reconstruct the labeling or clustering. This idea has seen
a recent surge of interest especially in the entity resolution research (see, for e.g. [33, 30, 8, 20]).
Since each query to crowd workers cost time and money, a natural objective will be to minimize the
number of queries to the oracle and still recover the clusters exactly. Carefully designed adaptive and
interactive querying algorithms for clustering has also recently been developed [33, 30, 8, 22, 21]. In
1
The difference between clustering and learning labels is that in the case of clustering it is not necessary to
know the value of the label for a cluster. Therefore any unsupervised labeling algorithm will be a clustering
algorithm, however the reverse is not true. In this paper we are mostly concerned about the labeling problem,
hence our algorithms (upper bounds) are valid for clustering as well.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

