Affinity Clustering: Hierarchical Clustering at Scale

MohammadHossein Bateni
Google Research
bateni@google.com

Soheil Behnezhad∗
University of Maryland
soheil@cs.umd.edu

Mahsa Derakhshan∗
University of Maryland
mahsaa@cs.umd.edu

MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi∗
University of Maryland
hajiagha@cs.umd.edu

Raimondas Kiveris
Google Research
rkiveris@google.com

Silvio Lattanzi
Google Research
silviol@google.com

Vahab Mirrokni
Google Research
mirrokni@google.com

Abstract
Graph clustering is a fundamental task in many data-mining and machine-learning
pipelines. In particular, identifying a good hierarchical structure is at the same time
a fundamental and challenging problem for several applications. The amount of
data to analyze is increasing at an astonishing rate each day. Hence there is a need
for new solutions to efficiently compute effective hierarchical clusterings on such
huge data.
The main focus of this paper is on minimum spanning tree (MST) based clusterings.
In particular, we propose affinity, a novel hierarchical clustering based on Borůvka’s
MST algorithm. We prove certain theoretical guarantees for affinity (as well as
some other classic algorithms) and show that in practice it is superior to several
other state-of-the-art clustering algorithms.
Furthermore, we present two MapReduce implementations for affinity. The first
one works for the case where the input graph is dense and takes constant rounds. It
is based on a Massively Parallel MST algorithm for dense graphs that improves
upon the state-of-the-art algorithm of Lattanzi et al. [34]. Our second algorithm has
no assumption on the density of the input graph and finds the affinity clustering in
O(log n) rounds using Distributed Hash Tables (DHTs). We show experimentally
that our algorithms are scalable for huge data sets, e.g., for graphs with trillions of
edges.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a classic unsupervised learning problem with many applications in information retrieval,
data mining, and machine learning. In hierarchical clustering the goal is to detect a nested hierarchy
of clusters that unveils the full clustering structure of the input data set. In this work we study the
hierarchical clustering problem on real-world graphs. This problem has received a lot of attention
in recent years [13, 16, 41] and new elegant formulations and algorithms have been introduced.
Nevertheless many of the newly proposed techniques are sequential, hence difficult to apply on large
data sets.
∗

Supported in part by NSF CAREER award CCF-1053605, NSF BIGDATA grant IIS-1546108, NSF
AF:Medium grant CCF-1161365, DARPA GRAPHS/AFOSR grant FA9550-12-1-0423, and another DARPA
SIMPLEX grant.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

