Minimal Exploration
in Structured Stochastic Bandits
Richard Combes
Centrale-Supelec / L2S
richard.combes@supelec.fr

Stefan Magureanu
KTH, EE School / ACL
magur@kth.se

Alexandre Proutiere
KTH, EE School / ACL
alepro@kth.se

Abstract
This paper introduces and addresses a wide class of stochastic bandit problems
where the function mapping the arm to the corresponding reward exhibits some
known structural properties. Most existing structures (e.g. linear, Lipschitz, unimodal, combinatorial, dueling, . . . ) are covered by our framework. We derive an
asymptotic instance-specific regret lower bound for these problems, and develop
OSSB, an algorithm whose regret matches this fundamental limit. OSSB is not
based on the classical principle of “optimism in the face of uncertainty” or on
Thompson sampling, and rather aims at matching the minimal exploration rates
of sub-optimal arms as characterized in the derivation of the regret lower bound.
We illustrate the efficiency of OSSB using numerical experiments in the case of
the linear bandit problem and show that OSSB outperforms existing algorithms,
including Thompson sampling.

1

Introduction

Numerous extensions of the classical stochastic MAB problem [30] have been recently investigated.
These extensions are motivated by applications arising in various fields including e.g. on-line
services (search engines, display ads, recommendation systems, ...), and most often concern structural
properties of the mapping of arms to their average rewards. This mapping can for instance be
linear [14], convex [2], unimodal [36], Lipschitz [3], or may exhibit some combinatorial structure
[10, 29, 35].
In their seminal paper, Lai and Robbins [30] develop a comprehensive theory for MAB problems
with unrelated arms, i.e., without structure. They derive asymptotic (as the time horizon grows large)
instance-specific regret lower bounds and propose algorithms achieving this minimal regret. These
algorithms have then been considerably simplified, so that today, we have a few elementary indexbased1 and yet asymptotically optimal algorithms [18, 26]. Developing a similar comprehensive
theory for MAB problems with structure is considerably more challenging. Due to the structure, the
rewards observed for a given arm actually provide side-information about the average rewards of
other arms2 . This side-information should be exploited so as to accelerate as much as possible the
process of learning the average rewards. Very recently, instance-specific regret lower bounds and
asymptotically optimal algorithms could be derived only for a few MAB problems with finite set of
arms and specific structures, namely linear [31], Lipschitz [32] and unimodal [12].
In this paper, we investigate a large class of structured MAB problems. This class extends the
classical stochastic MAB problem [30] in two directions: (i) it allows for any arbitrary structure;
(ii) it allows different kinds of feedback. More precisely, our generic MAB problem is as follows.
1
An algorithm is index-based if the arm selection in each round is solely made comparing the indexes of
each arm, and where the index of an arm only depends on the rewards observed for this arm.
2
Index-based algorithms cannot be optimal in MAB problems with structure.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

