Visual Interaction Networks: Learning a Physics
Simulator from Video
Nicholas Watters, Andrea Tacchetti, Théophane Weber
Razvan Pascanu, Peter Battaglia, Daniel Zoran
DeepMind
London, United Kingdom
{nwatters, atacchet, theophane,
razp, peterbattaglia, danielzoran}@google.com

Abstract
From just a glance, humans can make rich predictions about the future of a wide
range of physical systems. On the other hand, modern approaches from engineering,
robotics, and graphics are often restricted to narrow domains or require information
about the underlying state. We introduce the Visual Interaction Network, a generalpurpose model for learning the dynamics of a physical system from raw visual
observations. Our model consists of a perceptual front-end based on convolutional
neural networks and a dynamics predictor based on interaction networks. Through
joint training, the perceptual front-end learns to parse a dynamic visual scene into
a set of factored latent object representations. The dynamics predictor learns to roll
these states forward in time by computing their interactions, producing a predicted
physical trajectory of arbitrary length. We found that from just six input video
frames the Visual Interaction Network can generate accurate future trajectories of
hundreds of time steps on a wide range of physical systems. Our model can also
be applied to scenes with invisible objects, inferring their future states from their
effects on the visible objects, and can implicitly infer the unknown mass of objects.
This work opens new opportunities for model-based decision-making and planning
from raw sensory observations in complex physical environments.

1

Introduction

Physical reasoning is a core domain of human knowledge [22] and among the earliest topics in AI
[24, 25]. However, we still do not have a system for physical reasoning that can approach the abilities
of even a young child. A key obstacle is that we lack a general-purpose mechanism for making
physical predictions about the future from sensory observations of the present. Overcoming this
challenge will help close the gap between human and machine performance on important classes
of behavior that depend on physical reasoning, such as model-based decision-making [3], physical
inference [13], and counterfactual reasoning [10, 11].
We introduce the Visual Interaction Network (VIN), a general-purpose model for predicting future
physical states from video data. The VIN is learnable and can be trained from supervised data
sequences which consist of input image frames and target object state values. It can learn to
approximate a range of different physical systems which involve interacting entities by implicitly
internalizing the rules necessary for simulating their dynamics and interactions.
The VIN model is comprised of two main components: a visual encoder based on convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) [17], and a recurrent neural network (RNN) with an interaction network (IN)
[2] as its core, for making iterated physical predictions. Using this architecture we are able to learn a
model which infers object states and can make accurate predictions about these states in future time
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

