Robust Optimization for Non-Convex Objectives
Robert Chen
Computer Science
Harvard University

Brendan Lucier
Microsoft Research
New England

Yaron Singer
Computer Science
Harvard University

Vasilis Syrgkanis
Microsoft Research
New England

Abstract
We consider robust optimization problems, where the goal is to optimize in the
worst case over a class of objective functions. We develop a reduction from
robust improper optimization to stochastic optimization: given an oracle that
returns ↵-approximate solutions for distributions over objectives, we compute a
distribution over solutions that is ↵-approximate in the worst case. We show that
derandomizing this solution is NP-hard in general, but can be done for a broad
class of statistical learning tasks. We apply our results to robust neural network
training and submodular optimization. We evaluate our approach experimentally on
corrupted character classification and robust influence maximization in networks.

1

Introduction

In many learning tasks we face uncertainty about the loss we aim to optimize. Consider, for example,
a classification task such as character recognition, required to perform well under various types of
distortion. In some environments, such as recognizing characters in photos, the classifier must handle
rotation and patterned backgrounds. In a different environment, such as low-resolution images, it
is more likely to encounter noisy pixelation artifacts. Instead of training a separate classifier for
each possible scenario, one seeks to optimize performance in the worst case over different forms of
corruption (or combinations thereof) made available to the trainer as black-boxes.
More generally, our goal is to find a minimax solution that optimizes in the worst case over a given
family of functions. Even if each individual function can be optimized effectively, it is not clear such
solutions would perform well in the worst case. In many cases of interest, individual objectives are
non-convex and hence state-of-the-art methods are only approximate. In stochastic optimization,
where one must optimize a distribution over loss functions, approximate stochastic optimization is
often straightforward, since loss functions are commonly closed under convex combination. Can
approximately optimal stochastic solutions yield an approximately optimal robust solution?
In this paper we develop a reduction from robust optimization to stochastic optimization. Given an ↵approximate oracle for stochastic optimization we show how to implement an ↵-approximate solution
for robust optimization under a necessary extension, and illustrate its effectiveness in applications.
Main Results. Given an ↵-approximate stochastic oracle for distributions over (potentially nonconvex) loss functions, we show how to solve ↵-approximate robust optimization in a convexified
solution space. This outcome is “improper” in the sense that it may lie outside the original solution
space, if the space is non-convex. This can be interpreted as computing a distribution over solutions.
We show that the relaxation to improper learning is necessary in general: It is NP-hard to achieve
robust optimization with respect to the original outcome space, even if stochastic optimization can be
solved exactly, and even if there are only polynomially many loss functions. We complement this
by showing that in any statistical learning scenario where loss is convex in the predicted dependent
variable, we can find a single (deterministic) solution with matching performance guarantees.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

