Geometric Matrix Completion with Recurrent
Multi-Graph Neural Networks

Federico Monti
Università della Svizzera italiana
Lugano, Switzerland
federico.monti@usi.ch

Michael M. Bronstein
Università della Svizzera italiana
Lugano, Switzerland
michael.bronstein@usi.ch

Xavier Bresson
School of Computer Science and Engineering
NTU, Singapore
xbresson@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Matrix completion models are among the most common formulations of recommender systems. Recent works have showed a boost of performance of these
techniques when introducing the pairwise relationships between users/items in the
form of graphs, and imposing smoothness priors on these graphs. However, such
techniques do not fully exploit the local stationary structures on user/item graphs,
and the number of parameters to learn is linear w.r.t. the number of users and items.
We propose a novel approach to overcome these limitations by using geometric
deep learning on graphs. Our matrix completion architecture combines a novel
multi-graph convolutional neural network that can learn meaningful statistical
graph-structured patterns from users and items, and a recurrent neural network that
applies a learnable diffusion on the score matrix. Our neural network system is
computationally attractive as it requires a constant number of parameters independent of the matrix size. We apply our method on several standard datasets, showing
that it outperforms state-of-the-art matrix completion techniques.

1

Introduction

Recommender systems have become a central part of modern intelligent systems. Recommending
movies on Netflix, friends on Facebook, furniture on Amazon, and jobs on LinkedIn are a few
examples of the main purpose of these systems. Two major approaches to recommender systems are
collaborative [5] and content [32] filtering techniques. Systems based on collaborative filtering use
collected ratings of items by users and offer new recommendations by finding similar rating patterns.
Systems based on content filtering make use of similarities between items and users to recommend
new items. Hybrid systems combine collaborative and content techniques.
Matrix completion. Mathematically, a recommendation method can be posed as a matrix completion problem [9], where columns and rows represent users and items, respectively, and matrix
values represent scores determining whether a user would like an item or not. Given a small subset of
known elements of the matrix, the goal is to fill in the rest. A famous example is the Netflix challenge
[22] offered in 2009 and carrying a 1M$ prize for the algorithm that can best predict user ratings for
movies based on previous user ratings. The size of the Netflix matrix is 480k movies × 18k users
(8.5B entries), with only 0.011% known entries.
Recently, there have been several attempts to incorporate geometric structure into matrix completion
problems [27, 19, 33, 24], e.g. in the form of column and row graphs representing similarity of users
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

