Spherical convolutions and their application in
molecular modelling

Wouter Boomsma
Department of Computer Science
University of Copenhagen
wb@di.ku.dk

Jes Frellsen
Department of Computer Science
IT University of Copenhagen
jefr@itu.dk

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks are increasingly used outside the domain of image
analysis, in particular in various areas of the natural sciences concerned with
spatial data. Such networks often work out-of-the box, and in some cases entire
model architectures from image analysis can be carried over to other problem
domains almost unaltered. Unfortunately, this convenience does not trivially
extend to data in non-euclidean spaces, such as spherical data. In this paper, we
introduce two strategies for conducting convolutions on the sphere, using either
a spherical-polar grid or a grid based on the cubed-sphere representation. We
investigate the challenges that arise in this setting, and extend our discussion to
include scenarios of spherical volumes, with several strategies for parameterizing
the radial dimension. As a proof of concept, we conclude with an assessment of the
performance of spherical convolutions in the context of molecular modelling, by
considering structural environments within proteins. We show that the models are
capable of learning non-trivial functions in these molecular environments, and that
our spherical convolutions generally outperform standard 3D convolutions in this
setting. In particular, despite the lack of any domain specific feature-engineering,
we demonstrate performance comparable to state-of-the-art methods in the field,
which build on decades of domain-specific knowledge.

1

Introduction

Given the transformational role that convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have had in the area of
image analysis, it is natural to consider whether such networks can be efficiently applied in other
contexts. In particular spatially embedded data can often be interpreted as images, allowing for
direct transfer of neural network architectures to these domains. Recent years have demonstrated
interesting examples in a broad selection of the natural sciences, ranging from physics (Aurisano
et al., 2016; Mills et al., 2017) to biology (Wang et al., 2016; Min et al., 2017), in many cases showing
convolutional neural networks to substantially outperform existing methods.
The standard convolutional neural network can be applied naturally to data embedded in a Euclidean
space, where uniformly spaced grids can be trivially defined. For other manifolds, such as the sphere,
it is less obvious, and to our knowledge, convolutional neural networks for such manifolds have not
been systematically investigated. In particular for the sphere, the topic has direct applications in a
range of scientific disciplines, such as the earth sciences, astronomy, and modelling of molecular
structure.
This paper presents two strategies for creating spherical convolutions, as understood in the context
of convolutional neural networks (i.e., discrete, and efficiently implementable as tensor operations).
The first is a straightforward periodically wrapped convolution on a spherical-polar grid. The second
builds on the concept of a cubed-sphere (Ronchi et al., 1996). We proceed with extending these
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

