Finite Sample Analysis of the GTD Policy Evaluation
Algorithms in Markov Setting

Yue Wang ∗
School of Science
Beijing Jiaotong University
11271012@bjtu.edu.cn

Wei Chen
Microsoft Research
wche@microsoft.com

Zhi-Ming Ma
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science
Chinese Academy of Sciences
mazm@amt.ac.cn

Yuting Liu
School of Science
Beijing Jiaotong University
ytliu@bjtu.edu.cn

Tie-Yan Liu
Microsoft Research
Tie-Yan.Liu@microsoft.com

Abstract
In reinforcement learning (RL) , one of the key components is policy evaluation,
which aims to estimate the value function (i.e., expected long-term accumulated
reward) of a policy. With a good policy evaluation method, the RL algorithms
will estimate the value function more accurately and find a better policy. When
the state space is large or continuous Gradient-based Temporal Difference(GTD)
policy evaluation algorithms with linear function approximation are widely used.
Considering that the collection of the evaluation data is both time and reward
consuming, a clear understanding of the finite sample performance of the policy
evaluation algorithms is very important to reinforcement learning. Under the
assumption that data are i.i.d. generated, previous work provided the finite sample
analysis of the GTD algorithms with constant step size by converting them into
convex-concave saddle point problems. However, it is well-known that, the data
are generated from Markov processes rather than i.i.d. in RL problems.. In this
paper, in the realistic Markov setting, we derive the finite sample bounds for the
general convex-concave saddle point problems, and hence for the GTD algorithms.
We have the following discussions based on our bounds. (1) With variants of step
size, GTD algorithms converge. (2) The convergence rate is determined by the
step size, with the mixing time of the Markov process as the coefficient. The faster
the Markov processes mix, the faster the convergence. (3) We explain that the
experience replay trick is effective by improving the mixing property of the Markov
process. To the best of our knowledge, our analysis is the first to provide finite
sample bounds for the GTD algorithms in Markov setting.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto [1998]) technologies are very powerful to learn how
to interact with environments, and has variants of important applications, such as robotics, computer
games and so on (Kober et al. [2013], Mnih et al. [2015], Silver et al. [2016], Bahdanau et al. [2016]).
In RL problem, an agent observes the current state, takes an action following a policy at the current
state, receives a reward from the environment, and the environment transits to the next state in Markov,
and again repeats these steps. The goal of the RL algorithms is to find the optimal policy which
∗

This work was done when the first author was visiting Microsoft Research Asia.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

