MarrNet: 3D Shape Reconstruction via 2.5D Sketches

Jiajun Wu*
MIT CSAIL

Yifan Wang*
ShanghaiTech University

Tianfan Xue
MIT CSAIL

William T. Freeman
MIT CSAIL, Google Research

Xingyuan Sun
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT CSAIL

Abstract
3D object reconstruction from a single image is a highly under-determined problem, requiring strong prior knowledge of plausible 3D shapes. This introduces
challenges for learning-based approaches, as 3D object annotations are scarce in
real images. Previous work chose to train on synthetic data with ground truth 3D
information, but suffered from domain adaptation when tested on real data.
In this work, we propose MarrNet, an end-to-end trainable model that sequentially
estimates 2.5D sketches and 3D object shape. Our disentangled, two-step formulation has three advantages. First, compared to full 3D shape, 2.5D sketches are much
easier to be recovered from a 2D image; models that recover 2.5D sketches are also
more likely to transfer from synthetic to real data. Second, for 3D reconstruction
from 2.5D sketches, systems can learn purely from synthetic data. This is because
we can easily render realistic 2.5D sketches without modeling object appearance
variations in real images, including lighting, texture, etc. This further relieves the
domain adaptation problem. Third, we derive differentiable projective functions
from 3D shape to 2.5D sketches; the framework is therefore end-to-end trainable on
real images, requiring no human annotations. Our model achieves state-of-the-art
performance on 3D shape reconstruction.

1

Introduction

Humans quickly recognize 3D shapes from a single image. Figure 1a shows a number of images
of chairs; despite their drastic difference in object texture, material, environment lighting, and
background, humans easily recognize they have very similar 3D shapes. What is the most essential
information that makes this happen?
Researchers in human perception argued that our 3D perception could rely on recovering 2.5D
sketches [Marr, 1982], which include intrinsic images [Barrow and Tenenbaum, 1978, Tappen et al.,
2003] like depth and surface normal maps (Figure 1b). Intrinsic images disentangle object appearance
variations in texture, albedo, lighting, etc., with its shape, which retains all information from the
observed image for 3D reconstruction. Humans further combine 2.5D sketches and a shape prior
learned from past experience to reconstruct a full 3D shape (Figure 1c). In the field of computer
vision, there have also been abundant works exploiting the idea for reconstruction 3D shapes of
faces [Kemelmacher-Shlizerman and Basri, 2011], objects [Tappen et al., 2003], and scenes [Hoiem
et al., 2005, Saxena et al., 2009].
Recently, researchers attempted to tackle the problem of single-image 3D reconstruction with deep
learning. These approaches usually regress a 3D shape from a single RGB image directly [Tulsiani
et al., 2017, Choy et al., 2016, Wu et al., 2016b]. In contrast, we propose a two-step while end-to-end
trainable pipeline, sequentially recovering 2.5D sketches (depth and normal maps) and a 3D shape.
∗ indicates equal contributions.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

