Alternating Estimation for Structured
High-Dimensional Multi-Response Models

Sheng Chen
Arindam Banerjee
Dept. of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
{shengc,banerjee}@cs.umn.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning high-dimensional multi-response linear models with structured parameters. By exploiting the noise correlations among different
responses, we propose an alternating estimation (AltEst) procedure to estimate
the model parameters based on the generalized Dantzig selector (GDS). Under
suitable sample size and resampling assumptions, we show that the error of the
estimates generated by AltEst, with high probability, converges linearly to certain
minimum achievable level, which can be tersely expressed by a few geometric
measures, such as Gaussian width of sets related to the parameter structure. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first non-asymptotic statistical guarantee for such
AltEst-type algorithm applied to estimation with general structures.

1

Introduction

Multi-response (a.k.a. multivariate) linear models [2, 8, 20, 21] have found numerous applications in
real-world problems, e.g. expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) mapping in computational biology
[28], land surface temperature prediction in climate informatics [17], neural semantic basis discovery
in cognitive science [30], etc. Unlike simple linear model where each response is a scalar, one obtains
a response vector at each observation in multi-response model, given as a (noisy) linear combinations
of predictors, and the parameter (i.e., coefficient vector) to learn can be either response-specific
(i.e., allowed to be different for every response), or shared by all responses. The multi-response
model has been well studied under the context of the multi-task learning [10], where each response is
coined as a task. In recent years, the multi-task learning literature have largely focused on exploring
the parameter structure across tasks via convex formulations [15, 3, 26]. Another emphasis area in
multi-response modeling is centered around the exploitation of the noise correlation among different
responses [35, 36, 29, 40, 42], instead of assuming that the noise is independent for each response.
To be specific, we consider the following multi-response linear models with m real-valued outputs,
yi = Xi θ ∗ + ηi ,

ηi ∼ N (0, Σ∗ ) ,

(1)

where yi ∈ Rm is the response vector, Xi ∈ Rm×p consists of m p-dimensional feature vectors,
and ηi ∈ Rm is a noise vector sampled from a multivariate zero-mean Gaussian distribution with
covariance Σ∗ . For simplicity, we assume Diag(Σ∗ ) = Im×m throughout the paper. The m
responses share the same underlying parameter θ ∗ ∈ Rp , which corresponds to the so-called pooled
model [19]. In fact, this seemingly restrictive setting is general enough to encompass the model
with response-specific parameters, which can be realized by block-diagonalizing rows of Xi and
stacking all coefficient vectors into a “long” vector. Under the assumption of correlated noise, the
true noise covariance structure Σ∗ is usually unknown. Therefore it is typically required to estimate
the parameter θ ∗ along with the covariance Σ∗ . In practice, we observe n data points, denoted by
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

