A KL-LUCB Bandit Algorithm for
Large-Scale Crowdsourcing

Ervin Tánczos∗ and Robert Nowak†
University of Wisconsin-Madison
tanczos@wisc.edu, rdnowak@wisc.edu

Bob Mankoff
Former Cartoon Editor of the New Yorker
bmankoff@hearst.com

Abstract
This paper focuses on best-arm identification in multi-armed bandits with bounded
rewards. We develop an algorithm that is a fusion of lil-UCB and KL-LUCB,
offering the best qualities of the two algorithms in one method. This is achieved by
proving a novel anytime confidence bound for the mean of bounded distributions,
which is the analogue of the LIL-type bounds recently developed for sub-Gaussian
distributions. We corroborate our theoretical results with numerical experiments
based on the New Yorker Cartoon Caption Contest.

1

Multi-Armed Bandits for Large-Scale Crowdsourcing

This paper develops a new multi-armed bandit (MAB) for large-scale crowdsourcing, in the style
of the KL-UCB [4, 9, 3]. Our work is strongly motivated by crowdsourcing contests, like the New
Yorker Cartoon Caption contest [10]3 . The new approach targets the “best-arm identification problem”
[1] in the fixed confidence setting and addresses two key limitations of existing theory and algorithms:
(i) State of the art algorithms for best arm identification are based on sub-Gaussian confidence bounds
[5] and fail to exploit the fact that rewards are usually bounded in crowdsourcing applications.
(ii) Existing KL-UCB algorithms for best-arm identification do exploit bounded rewards [8] , but have
suboptimal performance guarantees in the fixed confidence setting, both in terms of dependence
on problem-dependent hardness parameters (Chernoff information) and on the number of arms,
which can be large in crowdsourcing applications.
The new algorithm we propose and analyze is called lil-KLUCB, since it is inspired by the lil-UCB
algorithm [5] and the KL-LUCB algorithm [8]. The lil-UCB algorithm is based on sub-Gaussian
bounds and has a sample complexity for best-arm identification that scales as
X
−1
∆−2
log ∆−2
i log(δ
i ),
i≥2

where δ ∈ (0, 1) is the desired confidence and ∆i = µ1 − µi is the gap between the means of the
best arm (denoted as arm 1) and arm i. If the rewards are in [0, 1], then the KL-LUCB algorithm has
†
3

This work was partially supported by the NSF grant IIS-1447449 and the AFSOR grant FA9550-13-1-0138.
For more details on the New Yorker Cartoon Caption Contest, see the Supplementary Materials.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

