On the Fine-Grained Complexity of
Empirical Risk Minimization:
Kernel Methods and Neural Networks
Arturs Backurs
CSAIL
MIT
backurs@mit.edu

Piotr Indyk
CSAIL
MIT
indyk@mit.edu

Ludwig Schmidt
CSAIL
MIT
ludwigs@mit.edu

Abstract
Empirical risk minimization (ERM) is ubiquitous in machine learning and underlies most supervised learning methods. While there is a large body of work on
algorithms for various ERM problems, the exact computational complexity of ERM
is still not understood. We address this issue for multiple popular ERM problems
including kernel SVMs, kernel ridge regression, and training the final layer of a neural network. In particular, we give conditional hardness results for these problems
based on complexity-theoretic assumptions such as the Strong Exponential Time
Hypothesis. Under these assumptions, we show that there are no algorithms that
solve the aforementioned ERM problems to high accuracy in sub-quadratic time.
We also give similar hardness results for computing the gradient of the empirical
loss, which is the main computational burden in many non-convex learning tasks.

1

Introduction

Empirical risk minimization (ERM) has been highly influential in modern machine learning [37].
ERM underpins many core results in statistical learning theory and is one of the main computational
problems in the field. Several important methods such as support vector machines (SVM), boosting,
and neural networks follow the ERM paradigm [34]. As a consequence, the algorithmic aspects of
ERM have received a vast amount of attention over the past decades. This naturally motivates the
following basic question:
What are the computational limits for ERM algorithms?
In this work, we address this question both in convex and non-convex settings. Convex ERM problems
have been highly successful in a wide range of applications, giving rise to popular methods such as
SVMs and logistic regression. Using tools from convex optimization, the resulting problems can be
solved in polynomial time. However, the exact time complexity of many important ERM problems
such as kernel SVMs is not yet well understood. As the size of data sets in machine learning continues
to grow, this question is becoming increasingly important. For ERM problems with millions of
high-dimensional examples, even quadratic time algorithms can become painfully slow (or expensive)
to run.
Non-convex ERM problems have also attracted extensive research interest, e.g., in the context of deep
neural networks. First order methods that follow the gradient of the empirical loss are not guaranteed
to find the global minimizer in this setting. Nevertheless, variants of gradient descent are by far the
most common method for training large neural networks. Here, the computational bottleneck is to
compute a number of gradients, not necessarily to minimize the empirical loss globally. Although we
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

