Implicit Regularization in Matrix Factorization

Suriya Gunasekar
TTI at Chicago
suriya@ttic.edu

Blake Woodworth
TTI at Chicago
blake@ttic.edu

Behnam Neyshabur
TTI at Chicago
behnam@ttic.edu

Srinadh Bhojanapalli
TTI at Chicago
srinadh@ttic.edu
Nathan Srebro
TTI at Chicago
nati@ttic.edu

Abstract
We study implicit regularization when optimizing an underdetermined quadratic
objective over a matrix X with gradient descent on a factorization of X. We
conjecture and provide empirical and theoretical evidence that with small enough
step sizes and initialization close enough to the origin, gradient descent on a full
dimensional factorization converges to the minimum nuclear norm solution.

1

Introduction

When optimizing underdetermined problems with multiple global minima, the choice of optimization
algorithm can play a crucial role in biasing us toward a specific global minima, even though this bias is
not explicitly specified in the objective or problem formulation. For example, using gradient descent
to optimize an unregularized, underdetermined least squares problem would yield the minimum
Euclidean norm solution, while using coordinate descent or preconditioned gradient descent might
yield a different solution. Such implicit bias, which can also be viewed as a form of regularization,
can play an important role in learning.
In particular, implicit regularization has been shown to play a crucial role in training deep models
[14, 13, 18, 11]: deep models often generalize well even when trained purely by minimizing the
training error without any explicit regularization, and when there are more parameters than samples
and the optimization problem is underdetermined. Consequently, there are many zero training error
solutions, all global minima of the training objective, many of which generalize badly. Nevertheless,
our choice of optimization algorithm, typically a variant of gradient descent, seems to prefer solutions
that do generalize well. This generalization ability cannot be explained by the capacity of the
explicitly specified model class (namely, the functions representable in the chosen architecture).
Instead, it seems that the optimization algorithm biases us toward a “simple" model, minimizing
some implicit “regularization measure”, and that generalization is linked to this measure. But what
are the regularization measures that are implicitly minimized by different optimization procedures?
As a first step toward understanding implicit regularization in complex models, in this paper we
carefully analyze implicit regularization in matrix factorization models, which can be viewed as
two-layer networks with linear transfer. We consider gradient descent on the entries of the factor
matrices, which is analogous to gradient descent on the weights of a multilayer network. We show
how such an optimization approach can indeed yield good generalization properties even when the
problem is underdetermined. We identify the implicit regularizer as the nuclear norm, and show that
even when we use a full dimensional factorization, imposing no constraints on the factored matrix,
optimization by gradient descent on the factorization biases us toward the minimum nuclear norm
solution. Our empirical study leads us to conjecture that with small step sizes and initialization close
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

