Decomposition-Invariant Conditional Gradient for
General Polytopes with Line Search

Mohammad Ali Bashiri
Xinhua Zhang
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, Illinois 60607
{mbashi4,zhangx}@uic.edu

Abstract
Frank-Wolfe (FW) algorithms with linear convergence rates have recently achieved
great efficiency in many applications. Garber and Meshi (2016) designed a new
decomposition-invariant pairwise FW variant with favorable dependency on the
domain geometry. Unfortunately it applies only to a restricted class of polytopes
and cannot achieve theoretical and practical efficiency at the same time. In this
paper, we show that by employing an away-step update, similar rates can be
generalized to arbitrary polytopes with strong empirical performance. A new
“condition number” of the domain is introduced which allows leveraging the sparsity
of the solution. We applied the method to a reformulation of SVM, and the linear
convergence rate depends, for the first time, on the number of support vectors.

1

Introduction

The Frank-Wolfe algorithm [FW, 1] has recently gained revived popularity in constrained convex
optimization, in part because linear optimization on many feasible domains of interest admits efficient
computational solutions [2]. It has been well known that FW achieves O(1/) rate for smooth convex
optimization on a compact domain [1, 3, 4]. Recently a number of works have focused on linearly
converging FW variants under various assumptions.
In the context of convex feasibility problem, [5] showed linear rates for FW where the condition
number depends on the distance of the optimum to the relative boundary [6]. Similar dependency
was derived in the local linear rate on polytopes using the away-step [6, 7]. With a different analysis
approach, [8–10] derived linear rates when the Robinson’s condition is satisfied at the optimal solution
[11], but it was not made clear how the rate depends on the dimension and other problem parameters.
To avoid the dependency on the location of the optimum, [12] proposed a variant of FW whose
rate depends on some geometric parameters of the feasible domain (a polytope). In a similar flavor,
[13, 14] analyzed four versions of FW including away-steps [6], and their affine-invariant rates depend
on the pyramidal width (Pw) of the polytope, which is hard to compute and can still be ill-conditioned.
Moreover, [15] recently gave a duality-based analysis for non-strongly convex functions. Some lower
bounds on the dependency of problem parameters for linear rates of FW are given in [12, 16].
To get around the lower bound, one may tailor FW to specific objectives and domains (e.g. spectrahedron in [17]). [18] specialized the pairwise FW (PFW) to simplex-like polytopes (SLPs) whose
vertices are binary, and is defined by equality constraints and xi ≥ 0. The advantages include: a) the
convergence rate depends linearly on the cardinality of the optimal solution and the domain diameter
square (D2 ), which can be much better than the pyramidal width; b) it is decomposition-invariant,
meaning that it does not maintain a pool of atoms accumulated and the away-step is performed on the
face that the current iterate lies on. This results in considerable savings in computation and storage.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

