Learning Neural Representations of
Human Cognition across Many fMRI Studies

Arthur Mensch∗
Inria
arthur.mensch@m4x.org
Julien Mairal†
Inria
julien.mairal@inria.fr

Danilo Bzdok
Department of Psychiatry, RWTH
danilo.bzdok@rwth-aachen.de

Bertrand Thirion∗
Inria
bertrand.thirion@inria.fr

Gaël Varoquaux∗
Inria
gael.varoquaux@inria.fr

Abstract
Cognitive neuroscience is enjoying rapid increase in extensive public brain-imaging
datasets. It opens the door to large-scale statistical models. Finding a unified
perspective for all available data calls for scalable and automated solutions to
an old challenge: how to aggregate heterogeneous information on brain function into a universal cognitive system that relates mental operations/cognitive
processes/psychological tasks to brain networks? We cast this challenge in a
machine-learning approach to predict conditions from statistical brain maps across
different studies. For this, we leverage multi-task learning and multi-scale dimension reduction to learn low-dimensional representations of brain images that carry
cognitive information and can be robustly associated with psychological stimuli.
Our multi-dataset classification model achieves the best prediction performance
on several large reference datasets, compared to models without cognitive-aware
low-dimension representations; it brings a substantial performance boost to the
analysis of small datasets, and can be introspected to identify universal template
cognitive concepts.
Due to the advent of functional brain-imaging technologies, cognitive neuroscience is accumulating
quantitative maps of neural activity responses to specific tasks or stimuli. A rapidly increasing
number of neuroimaging studies are publicly shared (e.g., the human connectome project, HCP [1]),
opening the door to applying large-scale statistical approaches [2]. Yet, it remains a major challenge
to formally extract structured knowledge from heterogeneous neuroscience repositories. As stressed
in [3], aggregating knowledge across cognitive neuroscience experiments is intrinsically difficult due
to the diverse nature of the hypotheses and conclusions of the investigators. Cognitive neuroscience
experiments aim at isolating brain effects underlying specific psychological processes: they yield
statistical maps of brain activity that measure the neural responses to carefully designed stimulus.
Unfortunately, neither regional brain responses nor experimental stimuli can be considered to be
atomic: a given experimental stimulus recruits a spatially distributed set of brain regions [4], while
each brain region is observed to react to diverse stimuli. Taking advantage of the resulting data
richness to build formal models describing psychological processes requires to describe each cognitive
∗
†

Inria, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay, 91191 Gif sur Yvette, France
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

