Diffusion Approximations for Online Principal
Component Estimation and Global Convergence

Chris Junchi Li

Mengdi Wang
Han Liu
Princeton University
Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton, NJ 08544
{junchil,mengdiw,hanliu}@princeton.edu
Tong Zhang
Tencent AI Lab
Shennan Ave, Nanshan District, Shenzhen, Guangdong Province 518057, China
tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org

Abstract
In this paper, we propose to adopt the diffusion approximation tools to study the
dynamics of Oja’s iteration which is an online stochastic gradient descent method
for the principal component analysis. Oja’s iteration maintains a running estimate
of the true principal component from streaming data and enjoys less temporal
and spatial complexities. We show that the Oja’s iteration for the top eigenvector
generates a continuous-state discrete-time Markov chain over the unit sphere. We
characterize the Oja’s iteration in three phases using diffusion approximation and
weak convergence tools. Our three-phase analysis further provides a finite-sample
error bound for the running estimate, which matches the minimax information
lower bound for principal component analysis under the additional assumption of
bounded samples.

1

Introduction

In the procedure of Principal Component Analysis (PCA) we aim at learning the principal leading
eigenvector of the covariance matrix of a d-dimensional random vector Z from its independent
and identically distributed realizations Z1 , . . . , Zn . Let E[Z] = 0, and let the eigenvalues of Σ be
λ1 > λ2 ≥ · · · ≥ λd > 0, then the PCA problem can be formulated as minimizing the expectation of
a nonconvex function:


minimize − w> E ZZ > w,
(1.1)
subject to kwk = 1, w ∈ Rd ,
where k · k denotes the Euclidean norm. Since the eigengap λ1 − λ2 is nonzero, the solution to
(1.1) is unique, denoted by w∗ . The classical method of finding the estimator of the first leading
eigenvector w∗ can be formulated as the solution to the empirical covariance problem as
n

>
X
b (n) w,
b (n) ≡ 1
b (n) = argmin −w> Σ
w
where Σ
Z (i) Z (i) .
n i=1
kwk=1
b (n) denotes the empirical covariance matrix for the first n samples. The estimator w
b (n)
In words, Σ
b (n) . Precisely, [43] shows that the
produced via this process provides a statistical optimal solution w
e (n) that is a function of the first n samples and w∗ has the following
angle between any estimator w
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

