Compression-aware Training of Deep Networks

Mathieu Salzmann
EPFL - CVLab
Lausanne, Switzerland
mathieu.salzmann@epfl.ch

Jose M. Alvarez
Toyota Research Institute
Los Altos, CA 94022
jose.alvarez@tri.global

Abstract
In recent years, great progress has been made in a variety of application domains
thanks to the development of increasingly deeper neural networks. Unfortunately,
the huge number of units of these networks makes them expensive both computationally and memory-wise. To overcome this, exploiting the fact that deep networks
are over-parametrized, several compression strategies have been proposed. These
methods, however, typically start from a network that has been trained in a standard manner, without considering such a future compression. In this paper, we
propose to explicitly account for compression in the training process. To this end,
we introduce a regularizer that encourages the parameter matrix of each layer to
have low rank during training. We show that accounting for compression during
training allows us to learn much more compact, yet at least as effective, models
than state-of-the-art compression techniques.

1

Introduction

With the increasing availability of large-scale datasets, recent years have witnessed a resurgence of
interest for Deep Learning techniques. Impressive progress has been made in a variety of application
domains, such as speech, natural language and image processing, thanks to the development of new
learning strategies [15, 53, 30, 45, 26, 3] and of new architectures [31, 44, 46, 23]. In particular, these
architectures tend to become ever deeper, with hundreds of layers, each of which containing hundreds
or even thousands of units.
While it has been shown that training such very deep architectures was typically easier than smaller
ones [24], it is also well-known that they are highly over-parameterized. In essence, this means that
equally good results could in principle be obtained with more compact networks. Automatically
deriving such equivalent, compact models would be highly beneficial in runtime- and memorysensitive applications, e.g., to deploy deep networks on embedded systems with limited hardware
resources. As a consequence, many methods have been proposed to compress existing architectures.
An early trend for such compression consisted of removing individual parameters [33, 22] or entire
units [36, 29, 38] according to their influence on the output. Unfortunately, such an analysis of
individual parameters or units quickly becomes intractable in the presence of very deep networks.
Therefore, currently, one of the most popular compression approaches amounts to extracting low-rank
approximations either of individual units [28] or of the parameter matrix/tensor of each layer [14].
This latter idea is particularly attractive, since, as opposed to the former one, it reduces the number of
units in each layer. In essence, the above-mentioned techniques aim to compress a network that has
been pre-trained. There is, however, no guarantee that the parameter matrices of such pre-trained
networks truly have low-rank. Therefore, these methods typically truncate some of the relevant
information, thus resulting in a loss of prediction accuracy, and, more importantly, do not necessarily
achieve the best possible compression rates.
In this paper, we propose to explicitly account for compression while training the initial deep network.
Specifically, we introduce a regularizer that encourages the parameter matrix of each layer to have
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

