A Sharp Error Analysis for the Fused Lasso, with
Application to Approximate Changepoint Screening

Kevin Lin
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
kevinl1@andrew.cmu.edu

James Sharpnack
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
jsharpna@ucdavis.edu

Alessandro Rinaldo
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
arinaldo@stat.cmu.edu

Ryan J. Tibshirani
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
ryantibs@stat.cmu.edu

Abstract
In the 1-dimensional multiple changepoint detection problem, we derive a new fast
error rate for the fused lasso estimator, under the assumption that the mean vector
has a sparse number of changepoints. This rate is seen to be suboptimal (compared
to the minimax rate) by only a factor of log log n. Our proof technique is centered
around a novel construction that we call a lower interpolant. We extend our results
to misspecified models and exponential family distributions. We also describe the
implications of our error analysis for the approximate screening of changepoints.

1

Introduction

Consider the 1-dimensional multiple changepoint model
yi = θ0,i + i , i = 1, . . . , n,
(1)
where i , i = 1, . . . , n are i.i.d. errors, and θ0,i , i = 1, . . . , n is a piecewise constant mean sequence,
having a set of changepoints

S0 = i ∈ {1, . . . , n − 1} : θ0,i 6= θ0,i+1 .
(2)
This is a well-studied setting, and there is a large body of literature on estimation of the piecewise
constant mean vector θ0 ∈ Rn and its changepoints S0 using various estimators; refer, e.g., to the
surveys Brodsky and Darkhovski (1993); Chen and Gupta (2000); Eckley et al. (2011).
In this work, we consider the 1-dimensional fused lasso (also called 1d fused lasso, or simply fused
lasso) estimator, which, given a data vector y ∈ Rn from a model as in (1), is defined by
n
n−1
X
1X
θb = argmin
(yi − θi )2 + λ
|θi − θi+1 |,
2 i=1
θ∈Rn
i=1

(3)

where λ ≥ 0 serves as a tuning parameter. This was proposed and named by Tibshirani et al. (2005),
but the same idea was proposed earlier in signal processing, under the name total variation denoising,
by Rudin et al. (1992). Variants of the fused lasso have been used in biology to detect regions where
two genomic samples differ due to genetic variations (Tibshirani and Wang, 2008), in finance to detect
shifts in the stock market (Chan et al., 2014), and in neuroscience to detect changes in stationary
behaviors of the brain (Aston and Kirch, 2012). Popularity of the fused lasso can be attributed in part
to its computational scalability, the optimization problem in (3) being convex and highly structured.
There has also been plenty of supporting statistical theory developed for the fused lasso, which we
review in Section 2.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

