On Structured Prediction Theory with Calibrated
Convex Surrogate Losses

Anton Osokin
INRIA/ENS,∗ Paris, France
HSE†, Moscow, Russia

Francis Bach
INRIA/ENS,∗ Paris, France

Simon Lacoste-Julien
MILA and DIRO
Université de Montréal, Canada

Abstract
We provide novel theoretical insights on structured prediction in the context of
efficient convex surrogate loss minimization with consistency guarantees. For any
task loss, we construct a convex surrogate that can be optimized via stochastic
gradient descent and we prove tight bounds on the so-called “calibration function”
relating the excess surrogate risk to the actual risk. In contrast to prior related
work, we carefully monitor the effect of the exponential number of classes in the
learning guarantees as well as on the optimization complexity. As an interesting
consequence, we formalize the intuition that some task losses make learning harder
than others, and that the classical 0-1 loss is ill-suited for structured prediction.

1

Introduction

Structured prediction is a subfield of machine learning aiming at making multiple interrelated
predictions simultaneously. The desired outputs (labels) are typically organized in some structured
object such as a sequence, a graph, an image, etc. Tasks of this type appear in many practical domains
such as computer vision [34], natural language processing [42] and bioinformatics [19].
The structured prediction setup has at least two typical properties differentiating it from the classical
binary classification problems extensively studied in learning theory:
1. Exponential number of classes: this brings both additional computational and statistical challenges.
By exponential, we mean exponentially large in the size of the natural dimension of output, e.g., the
number of all possible sequences is exponential w.r.t. the sequence length.
2. Cost-sensitive learning: in typical applications, prediction mistakes are not all equally costly.
The prediction error is usually measured with a highly-structured task-specific loss function, e.g.,
Hamming distance between sequences of multi-label variables or mean average precision for ranking.
Despite many algorithmic advances to tackle structured prediction problems [4, 35], there have been
relatively few papers devoted to its theoretical understanding. Notable recent exceptions that made
significant progress include Cortes et al. [13] and London et al. [28] (see references therein) which
proposed data-dependent generalization error bounds in terms of popular empirical convex surrogate
losses such as the structured hinge loss [44, 45, 47]. A question not addressed by these works is
whether their algorithms are consistent: does minimizing their convex bounds with infinite data lead
to the minimization of the task loss as well? Alternatively, the structured probit and ramp losses are
consistent [31, 30], but non-convex and thus it is hard to obtain computational guarantees for them.
In this paper, we aim at getting the property of consistency for surrogate losses that can be efficiently
minimized with guarantees, and thus we consider convex surrogate losses.
The consistency of convex surrogates is well understood in the case of binary classification [50, 5, 43]
and there is significant progress in the case of multi-class 0-1 loss [49, 46] and general multi∗
†

DI École normale supérieure, CNRS, PSL Research University
National Research University Higher School of Economics

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

