Safe Adaptive Importance Sampling

Sebastian U. Stich
EPFL

Anant Raj
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems

sebastian.stich@epfl.ch

anant.raj@tuebingen.mpg.de

Martin Jaggi
EPFL
martin.jaggi@epfl.ch

Abstract
Importance sampling has become an indispensable strategy to speed up optimization algorithms for large-scale applications. Improved adaptive variants—using
importance values defined by the complete gradient information which changes
during optimization—enjoy favorable theoretical properties, but are typically computationally infeasible. In this paper we propose an efficient approximation of
gradient-based sampling, which is based on safe bounds on the gradient. The
proposed sampling distribution is (i) provably the best sampling with respect to
the given bounds, (ii) always better than uniform sampling and fixed importance
sampling and (iii) can efficiently be computed—in many applications at negligible
extra cost. The proposed sampling scheme is generic and can easily be integrated
into existing algorithms. In particular, we show that coordinate-descent (CD) and
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) can enjoy significant a speed-up under the novel
scheme. The proven efficiency of the proposed sampling is verified by extensive
numerical testing.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning applications operate on massive datasets. The algorithms that are used
for data analysis face the difficult challenge to cope with the enormous amount of data or the vast
dimensionality of the problems. A simple and well established strategy to reduce the computational
costs is to split the data and to operate only on a small part of it, as for instance in coordinate
descent (CD) methods and stochastic gradient (SGD) methods. These kind of methods are state of
the art for a wide selection of machine learning, deep leaning and signal processing applications [9,
11, 35, 27]. The application of these schemes is not only motivated by their practical preformance,
but also well justified by theory [18, 19, 2].
Deterministic strategies are seldom used for the data selection—examples are steepest coordinate
descent [4, 34, 20] or screening algorithms [14, 15]. Instead, randomized selection has become
ubiquitous, most prominently uniform sampling [27, 29, 7, 8, 28] but also non-uniform sampling based
on a fixed distribution, commonly referred to as importance sampling [18, 19, 2, 33, 16, 6, 25, 24].
While these sampling strategies typically depend on the input data, they do not adapt to the information
of the current parameters during optimization. In contrast, adaptive importance sampling strategies
constantly re-evaluate the relative importance of each data point during training and thereby often
surpass the performance of static algorithms [22, 5, 26, 10, 21, 23]. Common strategies are gradientbased sampling [22, 36, 37] (mostly for SGD) and duality gap-based sampling for CD [5, 23].
The drawbacks of adaptive strategies are twofold: often the provable theoretical guarantees can be
worse than the complexity estimates for uniform sampling [23, 3] and often it is computationally
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

