Information-theoretic analysis of generalization
capability of learning algorithms
Aolin Xu
Maxim Raginsky
{aolinxu2,maxim}@illinois.edu ⇤

Abstract
We derive upper bounds on the generalization error of a learning algorithm in
terms of the mutual information between its input and output. The bounds provide
an information-theoretic understanding of generalization in learning problems,
and give theoretical guidelines for striking the right balance between data fit and
generalization by controlling the input-output mutual information. We propose a
number of methods for this purpose, among which are algorithms that regularize
the ERM algorithm with relative entropy or with random noise. Our work extends
and leads to nontrivial improvements on the recent results of Russo and Zou.

1

Introduction

A learning algorithm can be viewed as a randomized mapping, or a channel in the informationtheoretic language, which takes a training dataset as input and generates a hypothesis as output.
The generalization error is the difference between the population risk of the output hypothesis and
its empirical risk on the training data. It measures how much the learned hypothesis suffers from
overfitting. The traditional way of analyzing the generalization error relies either on certain complexity
measures of the hypothesis space, e.g. the VC dimension and the Rademacher complexity [1], or
on certain properties of the learning algorithm, e.g., uniform stability [2]. Recently, motivated
by improving the accuracy of adaptive data analysis, Russo and Zou [3] showed that the mutual
information between the collection of empirical risks of the available hypotheses and the final output
of the algorithm can be used effectively to analyze and control the bias in data analysis, which is
equivalent to the generalization error in learning problems. Compared to the methods of analysis
based on differential privacy, e.g., by Dwork et al. [4, 5] and Bassily et al. [6], the method proposed
in [3] is simpler and can handle unbounded loss functions; moreover, it provides elegant informationtheoretic insights into improving the generalization capability of learning algorithms. In a similar
information-theoretic spirit, Alabdulmohsin [7, 8] proposed to bound the generalization error in
learning problems using the total-variation information between a random instance in the dataset and
the output hypothesis, but the analysis apply only to bounded loss functions.
In this paper, we follow the information-theoretic framework proposed by Russo and Zou [3] to
derive upper bounds on the generalization error of learning algorithms. We extend the results in [3]
to the situation where the hypothesis space is uncountably infinite, and provide improved upper
bounds on the expected absolute generalization error. We also obtain concentration inequalities for
the generalization error, which were not given in [3]. While the main quantity examined in [3] is the
mutual information between the collection of empirical risks of the hypotheses and the output of the
algorithm, we mainly focus on relating the generalization error to the mutual information between the
input dataset and the output of the algorithm, which formalizes the intuition that the less information
⇤
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of
Illinois, Urbana, IL 61801, USA. This work was supported in part by the NSF CAREER award CCF-1254041
and in part by the Center for Science of Information (CSoI), an NSF Science and Technology Center, under
grant agreement CCF-0939370.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

