Online control of the false discovery rate with
decaying memory
Aaditya Ramdas

Fanny Yang Martin J. Wainwright Michael I. Jordan
University of California, Berkeley
{aramdas, fanny-yang, wainwrig, jordan} @berkeley.edu

Abstract
In the online multiple testing problem, p-values corresponding to different null
hypotheses are observed one by one, and the decision of whether or not to reject the current hypothesis must be made immediately, after which the next pvalue is observed. Alpha-investing algorithms to control the false discovery rate
(FDR), formulated by Foster and Stine, have been generalized and applied to many
settings, including quality-preserving databases in science and multiple A/B or
multi-armed bandit tests for internet commerce. This paper improves the class
of generalized alpha-investing algorithms (GAI) in four ways: (a) we show how
to uniformly improve the power of the entire class of monotone GAI procedures
by awarding more alpha-wealth for each rejection, giving a win-win resolution to
a recent dilemma raised by Javanmard and Montanari, (b) we demonstrate how
to incorporate prior weights to indicate domain knowledge of which hypotheses
are likely to be non-null, (c) we allow for differing penalties for false discoveries
to indicate that some hypotheses may be more important than others, (d) we define a new quantity called the decaying memory false discovery rate (mem-FDR)
that may be more meaningful for truly temporal applications, and which alleviates
problems that we describe and refer to as “piggybacking” and “alpha-death.” Our
GAI++ algorithms incorporate all four generalizations simultaneously, and reduce
to more powerful variants of earlier algorithms when the weights and decay are all
set to unity. Finally, we also describe a simple method to derive new online FDR
rules based on an estimated false discovery proportion.

1

Introduction

The problem of multiple comparisons was first recognized in the seminal monograph by Tukey [12]:
simply stated, given a collection of multiple hypotheses to be tested, the goal is to distinguish between the nulls and non-nulls, with suitable control on different types of error. We are given access
to one p-value for each hypothesis, which we use to decide which subset of hypotheses to reject, effectively proclaiming the rejected hypothesis as being non-null. The rejected hypotheses are called
discoveries, and the subset of these that were truly null—and hence mistakenly rejected—are called
false discoveries. In this work, we measure a method’s performance using the false discovery rate
(FDR) [2], defined as the expected ratio of false discoveries to total discoveries. Specifically, we
require that any procedure must guarantee that the FDR is bounded by a pre-specified constant ↵.
The traditional form of multiple testing is offline in nature, meaning that an algorithm testing N
hypotheses receives the entire batch of p-values {P1 , . . . , PN } at one time instant. In the online
version of the problem, we do not know how many hypotheses we are testing in advance; instead, a
possibly infinite sequence of p-values appear one by one, and a decision about rejecting the null must
be made before the next p-value is received. There are at least two different motivating justifications
for considering the online setting:
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

