Minimax Estimation of Bandable Precision Matrices
Addison J. Hu∗
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06520
addison.hu@yale.edu

Sahand N. Negahban
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06520
sahand.negahban@yale.edu

Abstract
The inverse covariance matrix provides considerable insight for understanding
statistical models in the multivariate setting. In particular, when the distribution over
variables is assumed to be multivariate normal, the sparsity pattern in the inverse
covariance matrix, commonly referred to as the precision matrix, corresponds to
the adjacency matrix representation of the Gauss-Markov graph, which encodes
conditional independence statements between variables. Minimax results under the
spectral norm have previously been established for covariance matrices, both sparse
and banded, and for sparse precision matrices. We establish minimax estimation
bounds for estimating banded precision matrices under the spectral norm. Our
results greatly improve upon the existing bounds; in particular, we find that the
minimax rate for estimating banded precision matrices matches that of estimating
banded covariance matrices. The key insight in our analysis is that we are able to
obtain barely-noisy estimates of k×k subblocks of the precision matrix by inverting
slightly wider blocks of the empirical covariance matrix along the diagonal. Our
theoretical results are complemented by experiments demonstrating the sharpness
of our bounds.

1

Introduction

Imposing structure is crucial to performing statistical estimation in the high-dimensional regime
where the number of observations can be much smaller than the number of parameters. In estimating
graphical models, a long line of work has focused on understanding how to impose sparsity on the
underlying graph structure.
Sparse edge recovery is generally not easy for an arbitrary distribution. However, for Gaussian
graphical models, it is well-known that the graphical structure is encoded in the inverse of the
covariance matrix Σ−1 = Ω, commonly referred to as the precision matrix [12, 14, 3]. Therefore,
accurate recovery of the precision matrix is paramount to understanding the structure of the graphical
model. As a consequence, a great deal of work has focused on sparse recovery of precision matrices
under the multivariate normal assumption [8, 4, 5, 17, 16]. Beyond revealing the graph structure, the
precision matrix also turns out to be highly useful in a variety of applications, including portfolio
optimization, speech recognition, and genomics [12, 23, 18].
Although there has been a rich literature exploring the sparse precision matrix setting for Gaussian
graphical models, less work has emphasized understanding the estimation of precision matrices
under additional structural assumptions, with some exceptions for block structured sparsity [10] or
bandability [1]. One would hope that extra structure should allow us to obtain more statistically
efficient solutions. In this work, we focus on the case of bandable precision matrices, which capture
∗
Addison graduated from Yale in May 2017. Up-to-date contact information may be found at http:
//huisaddison.com/.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

