Machine Learning with Adversaries:
Byzantine Tolerant Gradient Descent

Peva Blanchard
EPFL, Switzerland
peva.blanchard@epfl.ch

El Mahdi El Mhamdi∗
EPFL, Switzerland
elmahdi.elmhamdi@epfl.ch

Rachid Guerraoui
EPFL, Switzerland
rachid.guerraoui@epfl.ch

Julien Stainer
EPFL, Switzerland
julien.stainer@epfl.ch

Abstract
We study the resilience to Byzantine failures of distributed implementations of
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). So far, distributed machine learning frameworks have largely ignored the possibility of failures, especially arbitrary (i.e.,
Byzantine) ones. Causes of failures include software bugs, network asynchrony,
biases in local datasets, as well as attackers trying to compromise the entire system.
Assuming a set of n workers, up to f being Byzantine, we ask how resilient can
SGD be, without limiting the dimension, nor the size of the parameter space. We
first show that no gradient aggregation rule based on a linear combination of the vectors proposed by the workers (i.e, current approaches) tolerates a single Byzantine
failure. We then formulate a resilience property of the aggregation rule capturing
the basic requirements to guarantee convergence despite f Byzantine workers. We
propose Krum, an aggregation rule that satisfies our resilience property, which we
argue is the first provably Byzantine-resilient algorithm for distributed SGD. We
also report on experimental evaluations of Krum.

1

Introduction

The increasing amount of data available [6], together with the growing complexity of machine
learning models [27], has led to learning schemes that require a lot of computational resources. As a
consequence, most industry-grade machine-learning implementations are now distributed [1]. For
example, as of 2012, Google reportedly used 16.000 processors to train an image classifier [22]. More
recently, attention has been given to federated learning and federated optimization settings [15, 16, 23]
with a focus on communication efficiency. However, distributing a computation over several machines
(worker processes) induces a higher risk of failures. These include crashes and computation errors,
stalled processes, biases in the way the data samples are distributed among the processes, but also, in
the worst case, attackers trying to compromise the entire system. The most robust system is one that
tolerates Byzantine failures [17], i.e., completely arbitrary behaviors of some of the processes.
A classical approach to mask failures in distributed systems is to use a state machine replication
protocol [26], which requires however state transitions to be applied by all worker processes. In the
case of distributed machine learning, this constraint can be translated in two ways: either (a) the
processes agree on a sample of data based on which they update their local parameter vectors, or (b)
they agree on how the parameter vector should be updated. In case (a), the sample of data has to be
transmitted to each process, which then has to perform a heavyweight computation to update its local
∗

contact author

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

