Deep Learning for Precipitation Nowcasting:
A Benchmark and A New Model
Xingjian Shi, Zhihan Gao, Leonard Lausen, Hao Wang, Dit-Yan Yeung
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{xshiab,zgaoag,lelausen,hwangaz,dyyeung}@cse.ust.hk
Wai-kin Wong, Wang-chun Woo
Hong Kong Observatory
Hong Kong, China
{wkwong,wcwoo}@hko.gov.hk

Abstract
With the goal of making high-resolution forecasts of regional rainfall, precipitation nowcasting has become an important and fundamental technology underlying
various public services ranging from rainstorm warnings to flight safety. Recently,
the Convolutional LSTM (ConvLSTM) model has been shown to outperform traditional optical flow based methods for precipitation nowcasting, suggesting that deep
learning models have a huge potential for solving the problem. However, the convolutional recurrence structure in ConvLSTM-based models is location-invariant
while natural motion and transformation (e.g., rotation) are location-variant in general. Furthermore, since deep-learning-based precipitation nowcasting is a newly
emerging area, clear evaluation protocols have not yet been established. To address
these problems, we propose both a new model and a benchmark for precipitation
nowcasting. Specifically, we go beyond ConvLSTM and propose the Trajectory
GRU (TrajGRU) model that can actively learn the location-variant structure for
recurrent connections. Besides, we provide a benchmark that includes a real-world
large-scale dataset from the Hong Kong Observatory, a new training loss, and a
comprehensive evaluation protocol to facilitate future research and gauge the state
of the art.

1

Introduction

Precipitation nowcasting refers to the problem of providing very short range (e.g., 0-6 hours) forecast
of the rainfall intensity in a local region based on radar echo maps1 , rain gauge and other observation
data as well as the Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) models. It significantly impacts the daily
lives of many and plays a vital role in many real-world applications. Among other possibilities,
it helps to facilitate drivers by predicting road conditions, enhances flight safety by providing
weather guidance for regional aviation, and avoids casualties by issuing citywide rainfall alerts.
In addition to the inherent complexities of the atmosphere and relevant dynamical processes, the
ever-growing need for real-time, large-scale, and fine-grained precipitation nowcasting poses extra
challenges to the meteorological community and has aroused research interest in the machine learning
community [23, 25].
1

The radar echo maps are Constant Altitude Plan Position Indicator (CAPPI) images which can be converted
to rainfall intensity maps using the Marshall-Palmer relationship or Z-R relationship [19].
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

