Unsupervised Sequence Classification using
Sequential Output Statistics
Yu Liu † , Jianshu Chen ⇤ , and Li Deng†
⇤

Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA 98052, USA⇤
jianshuc@microsoft.com
†
Citadel LLC, Seattle/Chicago, USA†
Li.Deng@citadel.com

Abstract
We consider learning a sequence classifier without labeled data by using sequential
output statistics. The problem is highly valuable since obtaining labels in training
data is often costly, while the sequential output statistics (e.g., language models)
could be obtained independently of input data and thus with low or no cost. To
address the problem, we propose an unsupervised learning cost function and study
its properties. We show that, compared to earlier works, it is less inclined to
be stuck in trivial solutions and avoids the need for a strong generative model.
Although it is harder to optimize in its functional form, a stochastic primal-dual
gradient method is developed to effectively solve the problem. Experiment results
on real-world datasets demonstrate that the new unsupervised learning method
gives drastically lower errors than other baseline methods. Specifically, it reaches
test errors about twice of those obtained by fully supervised learning.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised learning is one of the most challenging problems in machine learning. It is often
formulated as the modeling of how the world works without requiring a huge amount of human
labeling effort, e.g. [8]. To reach this grand goal, it is necessary to first solve a sub-goal of
unsupervised learning with high practical value; that is, learning to predict output labels from input
data without requiring costly labeled data. Toward this end, we study in this paper the learning of a
sequence classifier without labels by using sequential output statistics. The problem is highly valuable
since the sequential output statistics, such as language models, could be obtained independently of
the input data and thus with no labeling cost.
The problem we consider here is different from most studies on unsupervised learning, which
concern automatic discovery of inherent regularities of the input data to learn their representations
[13, 28, 18, 17, 5, 1, 31, 20, 14, 12]. When these methods are applied in prediction tasks, either the
learned representations are used as feature vectors [22] or the learned unsupervised models are used
to initialize a supervised learning algorithm [9, 18, 2, 24, 10]. In both ways, the above unsupervised
methods played an auxiliary role in helping supervised learning when it is applied to prediction tasks.
Recently, various solutions have been proposed to address the input-to-output prediction problem
without using labeled training data, all without demonstrated successes [11, 30, 7]. Similar to this
work, the authors in [7] proposed an unsupervised cost that also exploits the sequence prior of
the output samples to train classifiers. The power of such a strong prior in the form of language
⇤
†

All the three authors contributed equally to the paper.
The work was done while Yu Liu and Li Deng were at Microsoft Research.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

