A Probabilistic Framework for Nonlinearities in
Stochastic Neural Networks
Qinliang Su
Xuejun Liao
Lawrence Carin
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Duke University, Durham, NC, USA
{qs15, xjliao, lcarin}@duke.edu

Abstract
We present a probabilistic framework for nonlinearities, based on doubly truncated Gaussian distributions. By setting the truncation points appropriately, we
are able to generate various types of nonlinearities within a unified framework,
including sigmoid, tanh and ReLU, the most commonly used nonlinearities in
neural networks. The framework readily integrates into existing stochastic neural
networks (with hidden units characterized as random variables), allowing one for
the first time to learn the nonlinearities alongside model weights in these networks.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the performance improvements brought about
by the proposed framework when integrated with the restricted Boltzmann machine
(RBM), temporal RBM and the truncated Gaussian graphical model (TGGM).

1

Introduction

A typical neural network is composed of nonlinear units connected by linear weights, and such a
network is known to have universal approximation ability under mild conditions about the nonlinearity
used at each unit [1, 2]. In previous work, the choice of nonlinearity has commonly been taken as a
part of network design rather than network learning, and the training algorithms for neural networks
have been mostly concerned with learning the linear weights. However, it is becoming increasingly
understood that the choice of nonlinearity plays an important role in model performance. For example,
[3] showed advantages of rectified linear units (ReLU) over sigmoidal units in using the restricted
Boltzmann machine (RBM) [4] to pre-train feedforward ReLU networks. It was further shown in [5]
that rectified linear units (ReLU) outperform sigmoidal units in a generative network under the same
undirected and bipartite structure as the RBM.
A number of recent works have reported benefits of learning nonlinear units along with the inter-unit
weights. These methods are based on using parameterized nonlinear functions to activate each unit
in a neural network, with the unit-dependent parameters incorporated into the data-driven training
algorithms. In particular, [6] considered the adaptive piecewise linear (APL) unit defined by a mixture
of hinge-shaped functions, and [7] used nonparametric Fourier basis expansion to construct the
activation function of each unit. The maxout network [8] employs piecewise linear convex (PLC)
units, where each PLC unit is obtained by max-pooling over multiple linear units. The PLC units were
extended to Lp units in [9] where the normalized Lp norm of multiple linear units yields the output
of an Lp unit. All these methods have been developed for learning the deterministic characteristics
of a unit, lacking a stochastic unit characterization. The deterministic nature limits these methods
from being easily applied to stochastic neural networks (for which the hidden units are random
variables, rather than being characterized by a deterministic function), such as Boltzmann machines
[10], restricted Boltzmann machines [11], and sigmoid belief networks (SBNs) [12].
We propose a probabilistic framework to unify the sigmoid, hyperbolic tangent (tanh) and ReLU
nonlinearities, most commonly used in neural networks. The proposed framework represents a
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

