Independence clustering (without a matrix)

Daniil Ryabko
INRIA Lillle,
40 avenue de Halley, Villeneuve d’Ascq, France
daniil@ryabko.net

Abstract
The independence clustering problem is considered in the following formulation:
given a set S of random variables, it is required to find the finest partitioning
{U1 , . . . , Uk } of S into clusters such that the clusters U1 , . . . , Uk are mutually
independent. Since mutual independence is the target, pairwise similarity measurements are of no use, and thus traditional clustering algorithms are inapplicable. The
distribution of the random variables in S is, in general, unknown, but a sample is
available. Thus, the problem is cast in terms of time series. Two forms of sampling
are considered: i.i.d. and stationary time series, with the main emphasis being on
the latter, more general, case. A consistent, computationally tractable algorithm for
each of the settings is proposed, and a number of fascinating open directions for
further research are outlined.

1

Introduction

Many applications face the situation where a set S = {x1 , . . . , xN } of samples has to be divided into
clusters in such a way that inside each cluster the samples are dependent, but the clusters between
themselves are as independent as possible. Here each xi may itself be a sample or a time series
xi = X1i , . . . , Xni . For example, in financial applications, xi can be a series of recordings of prices of
a stock i over time. The goal is to find the segments of the market such that different segments evolve
independently, but within each segment the prices are mutually informative [15, 17]. In biological
applications, each xi may be a DNA sequence, or may represent gene expression data [28, 20], or, in
other applications, an fMRI record [4, 13].
The staple approach to this problem in applications is to construct a matrix of (pairwise) correlations
between the elements, and use traditional clustering methods, e.g., linkage-based methods or k means
and its variants, with this matrix [15, 17, 16]. If mutual information is used, it is used as a (pairwise)
proximity measure between individual inputs, e.g. [14].
We remark that pairwise independence is but a surrogate for (mutual) independence, and, in addition,
correlation is a surrogate for pairwise independence. There is, however, no need to resort to surrogates
unless forced to do so by statistical or computational hardness results. We therefore propose to
reformulate the problem from the first principles, and then show that it is indeed solvable both
statistically and computationally — but calls for completely different algorithms. The formulation
proposed is as follows.
Given a set S = (x1 , . . . , xN ) of random variables, it is required to find the finest partitioning
{U1 , . . . , Uk } of S into clusters such that the clusters U1 , . . . , Uk are mutually independent.
To our knowledge, this problem in its full generality has not been addressed before. A similar
informal formulation appears in the work [1] that is devoted to optimizing a generalization of the
ICA objective. However, the actual problem considered only concerns the case of tree-structured
dependence, which allows for a solution based on pairwise measurements of mutual information.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

