On the Complexity of Learning Neural Networks

Le Song
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
lsong@cc.gatech.edu

Santosh Vempala
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
vempala@gatech.edu

John Wilmes
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
wilmesj@gatech.edu

Bo Xie
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
bo.xie@gatech.edu

Abstract
The stunning empirical successes of neural networks currently lack rigorous theoretical explanation. What form would such an explanation take, in the face of
existing complexity-theoretic lower bounds? A first step might be to show that
data generated by neural networks with a single hidden layer, smooth activation
functions and benign input distributions can be learned efficiently. We demonstrate
here a comprehensive lower bound ruling out this possibility: for a wide class
of activation functions (including all currently used), and inputs drawn from any
logconcave distribution, there is a family of one-hidden-layer functions whose
output is a sum gate, that are hard to learn in a precise sense: any statistical query
algorithm (which includes all known variants of stochastic gradient descent with
any loss function) needs an exponential number of queries even using tolerance
inversely proportional to the input dimensionality. Moreover, this hard family of
functions is realizable with a small (sublinear in dimension) number of activation
units in the single hidden layer. The lower bound is also robust to small perturbations of the true weights. Systematic experiments illustrate a phase transition in the
training error as predicted by the analysis.

1

Introduction

It is well-known that Neural Networks (NN’s) provide universal approximate representations [11, 6, 2]
and under mild assumptions, i.e., any real-valued function can be approximated by a NN. This holds
for a wide class of activation functions (hidden layer units) and even with only a single hidden layer
(although there is a trade-off between depth and width [8, 20]). Typically learning a NN is done by
stochastic gradient descent applied to a loss function comparing the network’s current output to the
values of the given training data; for regression, typically the function is just the least-squares error.
Variants of gradient descent include drop-out, regularization, perturbation, batch gradient descent etc.
In all cases, the training algorithm has the following form:
Repeat:
1. Compute a fixed function FW (.) defined by the current network weights W on a subset
of training examples.
2. Use FW (.) to update the current weights W .

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

