Continuous DR-submodular Maximization:
Structure and Algorithms
An Bian
ETH Zurich
ybian@inf.ethz.ch

Kfir Y. Levy
ETH Zurich
yehuda.levy@inf.ethz.ch

Andreas Krause
ETH Zurich
krausea@ethz.ch

Joachim M. Buhmann
ETH Zurich
jbuhmann@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
DR-submodular continuous functions are important objectives with wide real-world
applications spanning MAP inference in determinantal point processes (DPPs),
and mean-field inference for probabilistic submodular models, amongst others.
DR-submodularity captures a subclass of non-convex functions that enables both
exact minimization and approximate maximization in polynomial time.
In this work we study the problem of maximizing non-monotone continuous DRsubmodular functions under general down-closed convex constraints. We start
by investigating geometric properties that underlie such objectives, e.g., a strong
relation between (approximately) stationary points and global optimum is proved.
These properties are then used to devise two optimization algorithms with provable
guarantees. Concretely, we first devise a “two-phase” algorithm with 1/4 approximation guarantee. This algorithm allows the use of existing methods for finding
(approximately) stationary points as a subroutine, thus, harnessing recent progress
in non-convex optimization. Then we present a non-monotone F RANK -W OLFE
variant with 1/e approximation guarantee and sublinear convergence rate. Finally,
we extend our approach to a broader class of generalized DR-submodular continuous functions, which captures a wider spectrum of applications. Our theoretical
findings are validated on synthetic and real-world problem instances.

1

Introduction

Submodularity is classically most well known for set function optimization, where it enables efficient
minimization [23] and approximate maximization [31; 25] in polynomial time. Submodularity has
recently been studied on the integer lattice [34; 33] and on continuous domains [3; 4; 36; 21], with
significant theoretical results and practical applications. For set functions, it is well known that
submodularity is equivalent to the diminishing returns (DR) property. However, this does not hold
for integer-lattice functions or continuous functions, where the DR property defines a subclass of
submodular functions, called DR-submodular functions.
In continuous domains, applying convex optimization techniques enables efficient minimization of
submodular continuous functions [3; 36] (despite the non-convex nature of such objectives). In [4]
it is further shown that continuous submodularity enables constant-factor approximation schemes
for constrained monotone DR-submodular maximization and “box” constrained non-monotone
submodular maximization problems.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

