Stochastic Approximation
for Canonical Correlation Analysis
Raman Arora
Dept. of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21204
arora@cs.jhu.edu

Teodor V. Marinov
Dept. of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21204
tmarino2@jhu.edu

Poorya Mianjy
Dept. of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21204
mianjy@jhu.edu

Nathan Srebro
TTI-Chicago
Chicago, Illinois 60637
nati@ttic.edu

Abstract
We propose novel first-order stochastic approximation algorithms for canonical
correlation analysis (CCA). Algorithms presented are instances of inexact matrix
stochastic gradient (MSG) and inexact matrix exponentiated gradient (MEG), and
achieve ✏-suboptimality in the population objective in poly( 1✏ ) iterations. We also
consider practical variants of the proposed algorithms and compare them with other
methods for CCA both theoretically and empirically.

1

Introduction

Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) [11] is a ubiquitous statistical technique for finding maximally
correlated linear components of two sets of random variables. CCA can be posed as the following
stochastic optimization problem: given a pair of random vectors (x, y) 2 Rdx ⇥ Rdy , with some
(unknown) joint distribution D, find the k-dimensional subspaces where the projections of x and y
are maximally correlated, i.e. find matrices Ũ 2 Rdx ⇥k and Ṽ 2 Rdy ⇥k that
maximize Ex,y [x> ŨṼ> y] subject to Ũ> Ex [xx> ]Ũ = Ik , Ṽ> Ey [yy> ]Ṽ = Ik .

(1)

CCA-based techniques have recently met with success at unsupervised representation learning where
multiple “views” of data are used to learn improved representations for each of the views [3, 5, 13,
23]. The different views often contain complementary information, and CCA-based “multiview”
representation learning methods can take advantage of this information to learn features that are
useful for understanding the structure of the data and that are beneficial for downstream tasks.
Unsupervised learning techniques leverage unlabeled data which is often plentiful. Accordingly,
in this paper, we are interested in first-order stochastic Approximation (SA) algorithms for solving
Problem (1) that can easily scale to very large datasets. A stochastic approximation algorithm is an
iterative algorithm, where in each iteration a single sample from the population is used to perform an
update, as in stochastic gradient descent (SGD), the classic SA algorithm.
There are several computational challenges associated with solving Problem (1). A first challenge
stems from the fact that Problem (1) is non-convex. Nevertheless, akin to related spectral methods
such as principal component analysis (PCA), the solution to CCA can be given in terms of a
generalized eigenvalue problem. In other words, despite being non-convex, CCA admits a tractable
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

