Learning Multiple Tasks with Multilinear
Relationship Networks

Mingsheng Long, Zhangjie Cao, Jianmin Wang, Philip S. Yu
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
{mingsheng,jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

caozhangjie14@gmail.com

psyu@uic.edu

Abstract
Deep networks trained on large-scale data can learn transferable features to promote
learning multiple tasks. Since deep features eventually transition from general to
specific along deep networks, a fundamental problem of multi-task learning is how
to exploit the task relatedness underlying parameter tensors and improve feature
transferability in the multiple task-specific layers. This paper presents Multilinear
Relationship Networks (MRN) that discover the task relationships based on novel
tensor normal priors over parameter tensors of multiple task-specific layers in deep
convolutional networks. By jointly learning transferable features and multilinear
relationships of tasks and features, MRN is able to alleviate the dilemma of negativetransfer in the feature layers and under-transfer in the classifier layer. Experiments
show that MRN yields state-of-the-art results on three multi-task learning datasets.

1

Introduction

Supervised learning machines trained with limited labeled samples are prone to overfitting, while
manual labeling of sufficient training data for new domains is often prohibitive. Thus it is imperative
to design versatile algorithms for reducing the labeling consumption, typically by leveraging off-theshelf labeled data from relevant tasks. Multi-task learning is based on the idea that the performance
of one task can be improved using related tasks as inductive bias [4]. Knowing the task relationship
should enable the transfer of shared knowledge from relevant tasks such that only task-specific features
need to be learned. This fundamental idea of task relatedness has motivated a variety of methods,
including multi-task feature learning that learns a shared feature representation [1, 2, 6, 5, 23], and
multi-task relationship learning that models inherent task relationship [10, 14, 29, 31, 15, 17, 8].
Learning inherent task relatedness is a hard problem, since the training data of different tasks may be
sampled from different distributions and fitted by different models. Without prior knowledge on the
task relatedness, the distribution shift may pose a major difficulty in transferring knowledge across
different tasks. Unfortunately, if cross-task knowledge transfer is impossible, then we will overfit
each task due to limited amount of labeled data. One way to circumvent this dilemma is to use an
external data source, e.g. ImageNet, to learn transferable features through which the shift in the
inductive biases can be reduced such that different tasks can be correlated more effectively. This idea
has motivated some latest deep learning methods for learning multiple tasks [25, 22, 7, 27], which
learn a shared representation in feature layers and multiple independent classifiers in classifier layer.
However, these deep multi-task learning methods do not explicitly model the task relationships.
This may result in under-transfer in the classifier layer as knowledge can not be transferred across
different classifiers. Recent research also reveals that deep features eventually transition from general
to specific along the network, and feature transferability drops significantly in higher layers with
increasing task dissimilarity [28], hence the sharing of all feature layers may be risky to negativetransfer. Therefore, it remains an open problem how to exploit the task relationship across different
deep networks while improving the feature transferability in task-specific layers of the deep networks.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

