Regularizing Deep Neural Networks by Noise:
Its Interpretation and Optimization

Hyeonwoo Noh
Tackgeun You
Jonghwan Mun
Bohyung Han
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, POSTECH, Korea
{shgusdngogo,tackgeun.you,choco1916,bhhan}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
Overfitting is one of the most critical challenges in deep neural networks, and there
are various types of regularization methods to improve generalization performance.
Injecting noises to hidden units during training, e.g., dropout, is known as a successful regularizer, but it is still not clear enough why such training techniques
work well in practice and how we can maximize their benefit in the presence of
two conflicting objectives—optimizing to true data distribution and preventing
overfitting by regularization. This paper addresses the above issues by 1) interpreting that the conventional training methods with regularization by noise injection
optimize the lower bound of the true objective and 2) proposing a technique to
achieve a tighter lower bound using multiple noise samples per training example
in a stochastic gradient descent iteration. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
idea in several computer vision applications.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have been showing impressive performance in a variety of applications in
multiple domains [2, 12, 20, 23, 26, 27, 28, 31, 35, 38]. Its great success comes from various factors
including emergence of large-scale datasets, high-performance hardware support, new activation
functions, and better optimization methods. Proper regularization is another critical reason for better
generalization performance because deep neural networks are often over-parametrized and likely to
suffer from overfitting problem. A common type of regularization is to inject noises during training
procedure: adding or multiplying noise to hidden units of the neural networks, e.g., dropout. This
kind of technique is frequently adopted in many applications due to its simplicity, generality, and
effectiveness.
Noise injection for training incurs a tradeoff between data fitting and model regularization, even
though both objectives are important to improve performance of a model. Using more noise makes it
harder for a model to fit data distribution while reducing noise weakens regularization effect. Since
the level of noise directly affects the two terms in objective function, model fitting and regularization
terms, it would be desirable to maintain proper noise levels during training or develop an effective
training algorithm given a noise level.
Between these two potential directions, we are interested in the latter, more effective training. Within
the standard stochastic gradient descent framework, we propose to facilitate optimization of deep
neural networks with noise added for better regularization. Specifically, by regarding noise injected
outputs of hidden units as stochastic activations, we interpret that the conventional training strategy
optimizes the lower bound of the marginal likelihood over the hidden units whose values are sampled
with a reparametrization trick [18].
Our algorithm is motivated by the importance weighted autoencoders [7], which are variational
autoencoders trained for tighter variational lower bounds using more samples of stochastic variables
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

