AIDE: An algorithm for measuring the accuracy of
probabilistic inference algorithms

Marco F. Cusumano-Towner
Probabilistic Computing Project
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
marcoct@mit.edu

Vikash K. Mansinghka
Probabilistic Computing Project
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
vkm@mit.edu

Abstract
Approximate probabilistic inference algorithms are central to many fields. Examples include sequential Monte Carlo inference in robotics, variational inference
in machine learning, and Markov chain Monte Carlo inference in statistics. A
key problem faced by practitioners is measuring the accuracy of an approximate
inference algorithm on a specific data set. This paper introduces the auxiliary
inference divergence estimator (AIDE), an algorithm for measuring the accuracy of
approximate inference algorithms. AIDE is based on the observation that inference
algorithms can be treated as probabilistic models and the random variables used
within the inference algorithm can be viewed as auxiliary variables. This view leads
to a new estimator for the symmetric KL divergence between the approximating
distributions of two inference algorithms. The paper illustrates application of AIDE
to algorithms for inference in regression, hidden Markov, and Dirichlet process
mixture models. The experiments show that AIDE captures the qualitative behavior
of a broad class of inference algorithms and can detect failure modes of inference
algorithms that are missed by standard heuristics.

1

Introduction

Approximate probabilistic inference algorithms are central to diverse disciplines, including statistics,
robotics, machine learning, and artificial intelligence. Popular approaches to approximate inference
include sequential Monte Carlo, variational inference, and Markov chain Monte Carlo. A key problem
faced by practitioners is measuring the accuracy of an approximate inference algorithm on a specific
data set. The accuracy is influenced by complex interactions between the specific data set in question,
the model family, the algorithm tuning parameters such as the number of iterations, and any associated
proposal distributions and/or approximating variational family. Unfortunately, practitioners assessing
the accuracy of inference have to rely on heuristics that are either brittle or specialized for one type
of algorithm [1], or both. For example, log marginal likelihood estimates can be used to assess
the accuracy of sequential Monte Carlo and variational inference, but these estimates can fail to
significantly penalize an algorithm for missing a posterior mode. Expectations of probe functions do
not assess the full approximating distribution, and they require design specific to each model.
This paper introduces an algorithm for estimating the symmetrized KL divergence between the output
distributions of a broad class of exact and approximate inference algorithms. The key idea is that
inference algorithms can be treated as probabilistic models and the random variables used within
the inference algorithm can be viewed as latent variables. We show how sequential Monte Carlo,
Markov chain Monte Carlo, rejection sampling, and variational inference can be represented in a
common mathematical formalism based on two new concepts: generative inference models and
meta-inference algorithms. Using this framework, we introduce the Auxiliary Inference Divergence
Estimator (AIDE), which estimates the symmetrized KL divergence between the output distributions
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

