Deep Subspace Clustering Networks

Pan Ji∗
University of Adelaide

Tong Zhang∗
Australian National University

Mathieu Salzmann
EPFL - CVLab

Hongdong Li
Australian National University

Ian Reid
University of Adelaide

Abstract
We present a novel deep neural network architecture for unsupervised subspace
clustering. This architecture is built upon deep auto-encoders, which non-linearly
map the input data into a latent space. Our key idea is to introduce a novel
self-expressive layer between the encoder and the decoder to mimic the “selfexpressiveness” property that has proven effective in traditional subspace clustering.
Being differentiable, our new self-expressive layer provides a simple but effective
way to learn pairwise affinities between all data points through a standard backpropagation procedure. Being nonlinear, our neural-network based method is able
to cluster data points having complex (often nonlinear) structures. We further
propose pre-training and fine-tuning strategies that let us effectively learn the
parameters of our subspace clustering networks. Our experiments show that
our method significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art unsupervised subspace
clustering techniques.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we tackle the problem of subspace clustering [42] – a sub-field of unsupervised
learning – which aims to cluster data points drawn from a union of low-dimensional subspaces in an
unsupervised manner. Subspace clustering has become an important problem as it has found various
applications in computer vision, e.g., image segmentation [50, 27], motion segmentation [17, 9],
and image clustering [14, 10]. For example, under Lambertian reflectance, the face images of one
subject obtained with a fixed pose and varying lighting conditions lie in a low-dimensional subspace
of dimension close to nine [2]. Therefore, one can employ subspace clustering to group images of
multiple subjects according to their respective subjects.
Most recent works on subspace clustering [49, 6, 10, 23, 46, 26, 16, 52] focus on clustering linear
subspaces. However, in practice, the data do not necessarily conform to linear subspace models. For
instance, in the example of face image clustering, reflectance is typically non-Lambertian and the
pose of the subject often varies. Under these conditions, the face images of one subject rather lie in
a non-linear subspace (or sub-manifold). A few works [5, 34, 35, 51, 47] have proposed to exploit
the kernel trick [40] to address the case of non-linear subspaces. However, the selection of different
kernel types is largely empirical, and there is no clear reason to believe that the implicit feature space
corresponding to a predefined kernel is truly well-suited to subspace clustering.
In this paper, by contrast, we introduce a novel deep neural network architecture to learn (in an
unsupervised manner) an explicit non-linear mapping of the data that is well-adapted to subspace
clustering. To this end, we build our deep subspace clustering networks (DSC-Nets) upon deep
auto-encoders, which non-linearly map the data points to a latent space through a series of encoder
∗

Authors contributed equally to this work

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

