Hunt For The Unique, Stable, Sparse And Fast
Feature Learning On Graphs

Saurabh Verma
Department of Computer Science
University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
verma@cs.umn.edu

Zhi-Li Zhang
Department of Computer Science
University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
zhang@cs.umn.edu

Abstract
For the purpose of learning on graphs, we hunt for a graph feature representation
that exhibit certain uniqueness, stability and sparsity properties while also being
amenable to fast computation. This leads to the discovery of family of graph
spectral distances (denoted as F GSD) and their based graph feature representations,
which we prove to possess most of these desired properties. To both evaluate
the quality of graph features produced by F GSD and demonstrate their utility, we
apply them to the graph classification problem. Through extensive experiments, we
show that a simple SVM based classification algorithm, driven with our powerful
F GSD based graph features, significantly outperforms all the more sophisticated
state-of-art algorithms on the unlabeled node datasets in terms of both accuracy
and speed; it also yields very competitive results on the labeled datasets – despite
the fact it does not utilize any node label information.

1

Introduction

In the past decade, there has been tremendous interests in learning on collection of graphs for
various purposes, in particular for solving graph classification problem. Several applications of graph
classification can be found in the domain of bioinformatics, or chemoinformatics, or social networks.
A fundamental question inherent in graph classification is determining whether two graph structures
are identical, i.e., the graph isomorphism problem, which was not known to belong either P or NP
until recently. In the seminal paper [2], Babai shows that the graph isomorphism can be solved in
quasipolynomial time; while of enormous theoretical signficance, the implication of this result in
developing practical algorithms is still unclear. Fortunately, in graph classification problems one
is more interested in whether two graphs have “similar” (as opposed to identical) structures. This
allows for potentially much faster (yet not fully explored) algorithms to be successfully applied to the
graph classification while also accounting for graph isomorphism. One approach to get around both
these intimately tied problems together is to learn an explicit graph representation that is invariant
under graph isomorphism1 but also useful for extracting graph features.
More specifically, given a graph G, we are interested in learning a graph representation (or spectrum),
R : G → (g1 , g2 , ..., gr ), that captures certain inherent “atomic” (unique) sub-structures of the graph
and is invariant under graph isomorphism (i.e., two isomorphic graphs yield the same representation).
Subsequently, we want to learn a feature function F : R → (f1 , f2 , ..., fd ) from R such that the
graph features {fi }di=1 can be employed for solving the graph classification problem. However, in
machine learning, not much attention has been given towards learning R and most of the previous
studies have focused on designing graph kernels and thus bypasses computing any explicit graph
representation. The series of papers (19, 20, 22) by Kondor et al. are some of the first (and few) that
are concerned with constructing explicit graph features – using a group theoretic approach – that are
invariant to graph isomorphism and can be successfully applied to the graph classification problem.
1

That is, invariant under permutation of graph vertex labels.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

