Predictive State Recurrent Neural Networks
Carlton Downey
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
cmdowney@cs.cmu.edu

Ahmed Hefny
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, 15213
ahefny@cs.cmu.edu

Byron Boots
Georgia Tech
Atlanta, GA, 30332
bboots@cc.gatech.edu

Boyue Li
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, 15213
boyue@cs.cmu.edu

Geoff Gordon
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, 15213
ggordon@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We present a new model, Predictive State Recurrent Neural Networks (PSRNNs),
for filtering and prediction in dynamical systems. PSRNNs draw on insights from
both Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) and Predictive State Representations
(PSRs), and inherit advantages from both types of models. Like many successful
RNN architectures, PSRNNs use (potentially deeply composed) bilinear transfer
functions to combine information from multiple sources. We show that such bilinear
functions arise naturally from state updates in Bayes filters like PSRs, in which
observations can be viewed as gating belief states. We also show that PSRNNs
can be learned effectively by combining Backpropogation Through Time (BPTT)
with an initialization derived from a statistically consistent learning algorithm
for PSRs called two-stage regression (2SR). Finally, we show that PSRNNs can
be factorized using tensor decomposition, reducing model size and suggesting
interesting connections to existing multiplicative architectures such as LSTMs and
GRUs. We apply PSRNNs to 4 datasets, and show that we outperform several
popular alternative approaches to modeling dynamical systems in all cases.

1

Introduction

Learning to predict temporal sequences of observations is a fundamental challenge in a range of
disciplines including machine learning, robotics, and natural language processing. While there are a
wide variety of different approaches to modelling time series data, many of these approaches can be
categorized as either recursive Bayes Filtering or Recurrent Neural Networks.
Bayes Filters (BFs) [1] focus on modeling and maintaining a belief state: a set of statistics, which,
if known at time t, are sufficient to predict all future observations as accurately as if we know the
full history. The belief state is generally interpreted as the statistics of a distribution over the latent
state of a data generating process, conditioned on history. BFs recursively update the belief state by
conditioning on new observations using Bayes rule. Examples of common BFs include sequential
filtering in Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) [2] and Kalman Filters (KFs) [3].
Predictive State Representations [4] (PSRs) are a variation on Bayes filters that do not define system
state explicitly, but proceed directly to a representation of state as the statistics of a distribution
of features of future observations, conditioned on history. By defining the belief state in terms of
observables rather than latent states, PSRs can be easier to learn than other filtering methods [5–7].
PSRs also support rich functional forms through kernel mean map embeddings [8], and a natural
interpretation of model update behavior as a gating mechanism. This last property is not unique to
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

