An Empirical Bayes Approach to Optimizing
Machine Learning Algorithms

James McInerney
Spotify Research
45 W 18th St, 7th Floor
New York, NY 10011
jamesm@spotify.com

Abstract
There is rapidly growing interest in using Bayesian optimization to tune model and
inference hyperparameters for machine learning algorithms that take a long time to
run. For example, Spearmint is a popular software package for selecting the optimal
number of layers and learning rate in neural networks. But given that there is
uncertainty about which hyperparameters give the best predictive performance, and
given that fitting a model for each choice of hyperparameters is costly, it is arguably
wasteful to “throw away” all but the best result, as per Bayesian optimization.
A related issue is the danger of overfitting the validation data when optimizing
many hyperparameters. In this paper, we consider an alternative approach that
uses more samples from the hyperparameter selection procedure to average over
the uncertainty in model hyperparameters. The resulting approach, empirical
Bayes for hyperparameter averaging (EB-Hyp) predicts held-out data better than
Bayesian optimization in two experiments on latent Dirichlet allocation and deep
latent Gaussian models. EB-Hyp suggests a simpler approach to evaluating and
deploying machine learning algorithms that does not require a separate validation
data set and hyperparameter selection procedure.

1

Introduction

There is rapidly growing interest in using Bayesian optimization (BayesOpt) to tune model and
inference hyperparameters for machine learning algorithms that take a long time to run (Snoek
et al., 2012). Tuning algorithms by grid search is a time consuming task. Tuning by hand is
also time consuming and requires trial, error, and expert knowledge of the model. To capture this
knowledge, BayesOpt uses a performance model (usually a Gaussian process) as a guide to regions
of hyperparameter space that perform well. BayesOpt balances exploration and exploitation to decide
which hyperparameter to evaluate next in an iterative procedure.
BayesOpt for machine learning algorithms is a form of model selection in which some objective, such
as predictive likelihood or root mean squared error, is optimized with respect to hyperparameters η.
Thus, it is an empirical Bayesian procedure where the marginal likelihood is replaced by a proxy
objective. Empirical Bayes optimizes the marginal likelihood of data set X (a summary of symbols
is provided in Table 1),
η̂ := arg max Ep(θ | η) [p(X | θ)],
η

(1)

then uses p(θ | X, η̂) as the posterior distribution over the unknown model parameters θ (Carlin
and Louis, 2000). Empirical Bayes is applied in different ways, e.g., gradient-based optimization
of Gaussian process kernel parameters, optimization of hyperparameters to conjugate priors in
variational inference. What is special about BayesOpt is that it performs empirical Bayes in a way
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

