Adaptive stimulus selection for optimizing neural
population responses

Benjamin R. Cowley1,2 , Ryan C. Williamson1,2,5 , Katerina Acar2,6 ,
Matthew A. Smith∗,2,7 , Byron M. Yu∗,2,3,4
1
Machine Learning Dept., 2 Center for Neural Basis of Cognition, 3 Dept. of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, 4 Dept. of Biomedical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University
5
School of Medicine, 6 Dept. of Neuroscience, 7 Dept. of Ophthalmology, University of Pittsburgh
bcowley@cs.cmu.edu, {rcw30, kac216, smithma}@pitt.edu, byronyu@cmu.edu
∗
denotes equal contribution.

Abstract
Adaptive stimulus selection methods in neuroscience have primarily focused on
maximizing the firing rate of a single recorded neuron. When recording from
a population of neurons, it is usually not possible to find a single stimulus that
maximizes the firing rates of all neurons. This motivates optimizing an objective
function that takes into account the responses of all recorded neurons together.
We propose “Adept,” an adaptive stimulus selection method that can optimize
population objective functions. In simulations, we first confirmed that population
objective functions elicited more diverse stimulus responses than single-neuron
objective functions. Then, we tested Adept in a closed-loop electrophysiological
experiment in which population activity was recorded from macaque V4, a cortical
area known for mid-level visual processing. To predict neural responses, we used
the outputs of a deep convolutional neural network model as feature embeddings.
Natural images chosen by Adept elicited mean neural responses that were 20%
larger than those for randomly-chosen natural images, and also evoked a larger diversity of neural responses. Such adaptive stimulus selection methods can facilitate
experiments that involve neurons far from the sensory periphery, for which it is
often unclear which stimuli to present.

1

Introduction

A key choice in a neurophysiological experiment is to determine which stimuli to present. Often, it
is unknown a priori which stimuli will drive a to-be-recorded neuron, especially in brain areas far
from the sensory periphery. Most studies either choose from a class of parameterized stimuli (e.g.,
sinusoidal gratings or pure tones) or present many randomized stimuli (e.g., white noise) to find the
stimulus that maximizes the response of a neuron (i.e., the preferred stimulus) [1, 2]. However, the
first approach limits the range of stimuli explored, and the second approach may not converge in a
finite amount of recording time [3]. To efficiently find a preferred stimulus, studies have employed
adaptive stimulus selection (also known as “adaptive sampling” or “optimal experimental design”)
to determine the next stimulus to show given the responses to previous stimuli in a closed-loop
experiment [4, 5]. Many adaptive methods have been developed to find the smallest number of
stimuli needed to fit parameters of a model that predicts the recorded neuron’s activity from the
stimulus [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. When no encoding model exists for a neuron (e.g., neurons in higher
visual cortical areas), adaptive methods rely on maximizing the neuron’s firing rate via genetic
algorithms [12, 13, 14] or gradient ascent [15, 16] to home in on the neuron’s preferred stimulus. To
our knowledge, all current adaptive stimulus selection methods focus solely on optimizing the firing
rate of a single neuron.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

