Learning Low-Dimensional Metrics
Lalit Jain ⇤
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
lalitj@umich.edu

Blake Mason ⇤
University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI 53706
bmason3@wisc.edu

Robert Nowak
University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI 53706
rdnowak@wisc.edu

Abstract
This paper investigates the theoretical foundations of metric learning, focused on
three key questions that are not fully addressed in prior work: 1) we consider
learning general low-dimensional (low-rank) metrics as well as sparse metrics;
2) we develop upper and lower (minimax) bounds on the generalization error; 3)
we quantify the sample complexity of metric learning in terms of the dimension
of the feature space and the dimension/rank of the underlying metric; 4) we also
bound the accuracy of the learned metric relative to the underlying true generative
metric. All the results involve novel mathematical approaches to the metric learning
problem, and also shed new light on the special case of ordinal embedding (aka
non-metric multidimensional scaling).

1

Low-Dimensional Metric Learning

This paper studies the problem of learning a low-dimensional Euclidean metric from comparative
judgments. Specifically, consider a set of n items with high-dimensional features xi 2 Rp and
suppose we are given a set of (possibly noisy) distance comparisons of the form
sign(dist(xi , xj )

dist(xi , xk )),

for a subset of all possible triplets of the items. Here we have in mind comparative judgments
made by humans and the distance function implicitly defined according to human perceptions of
similarities and differences. For example, the items could be images and the xi could be visual
features automatically extracted by a machine. Accordingly, our goal is to learn a p ⇥ p symmetric
positive semi-definite (psd) matrix K such that the metric dK (xi , xj ) := (xi xj )T K(xi xj ),
where dK (xi , xj ) denotes the squared distance between items i and j with respect to a matrix K,
predicts the given distance comparisons as well as possible. Furthermore, it is often desired that
the metric is low-dimensional relative to the original high-dimensional feature representation (i.e.,
rank(K)  d < p). There are several motivations for this:
• Learning a high-dimensional metric may be infeasible from a limited number of comparative
judgments, and encouraging a low-dimensional solution is a natural regularization.
• Cognitive scientists are often interested in visualizing human perceptual judgments (e.g., in a
two-dimensional representation) and determining which features most strongly influence human
perceptions. For example, educational psychologists in [1] collected comparisons between visual
representations of chemical molecules in order to identify a small set of visual features that most
significantly influence the judgments of beginning chemistry students.
• It is sometimes reasonable to hypothesize that a small subset of the high-dimensional features
dominate the underlying metric (i.e., many irrelevant features).
• Downstream applications of the learned metric (e.g., for classification purposes) may benefit from
robust, low-dimensional metrics.
⇤

Authors contributed equally to this paper and are listed alphabetically.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

