Mean Field Residual Networks: On the Edge of Chaos
Greg Yang⇤

Samuel S. Schoenholz

Microsoft Research AI
gregyang@microsoft.com

Google Brain
schsam@google.com

Abstract
We study randomly initialized residual networks using mean field theory and the
theory of difference equations. Classical feedforward neural networks, such as
those with tanh activations, exhibit exponential behavior on the average when
propagating inputs forward or gradients backward. The exponential forward dynamics causes rapid collapsing of the input space geometry, while the exponential
backward dynamics causes drastic vanishing or exploding gradients. We show,
in contrast, that by adding skip connections, the network will, depending on the
nonlinearity, adopt subexponential forward and backward dynamics, and in many
cases in fact polynomial. The exponents of these polynomials are obtained through
analytic methods and proved and verified empirically to be correct. In terms of
the “edge of chaos” hypothesis, these subexponential and polynomial laws allow
residual networks to “hover over the boundary between stability and chaos,” thus
preserving the geometry of the input space and the gradient information flow. In
our experiments, for each activation function we study here, we initialize residual
networks with different hyperparameters and train them on MNIST. Remarkably,
our initialization time theory can accurately predict test time performance of these
networks, by tracking either the expected amount of gradient explosion or the
expected squared distance between the images of two input vectors. Importantly,
we show, theoretically as well as empirically, that common initializations such
as the Xavier or the He schemes are not optimal for residual networks, because
the optimal initialization variances depend on the depth. Finally, we have made
mathematical contributions by deriving several new identities for the kernels of
powers of ReLU functions by relating them to the zeroth Bessel function of the
second kind.

1

Introduction

Previous works [9, 3, 11] have shown that randomly initialized neural networks exhibit a spectrum of
behavior with depth, from stable to chaotic, which depends on the variance of the initializations: the
cosine distance of two input vectors converges exponentially fast with depth to a fixed point in [0, 1];
if this fixed point is 1, then the behavior is stable; if this fixed point is 0, then the behavior is chaotic.
It has been argued in many prior works [1, 9] that effective computation can only be supported by
a dynamical behavior that is on the edge of chaos. Too much stability prevents the neural network
from telling apart two different inputs. While some chaotic behavior can increase the expressivity
of a network, too much chaos makes the neural network think two similar inputs are very different.
At the same time, the same initialization variances also control how far gradient information can be
propagated through the network; the networks with chaotic forward dynamics will tend to suffer from
exploding gradients, while networks with stable forward dynamics will tend to suffer from vanishing
gradients.
⇤

Work done while at Harvard University

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

