Active Exploration for Learning
Symbolic Representations

Garrett Andersen
PROWLER.io
Cambridge, United Kingdom
garrett@prowler.io

George Konidaris
Department of Computer Science
Brown University
gdk@cs.brown.edu

Abstract
We introduce an online active exploration algorithm for data-efficiently learning
an abstract symbolic model of an environment. Our algorithm is divided into two
parts: the first part quickly generates an intermediate Bayesian symbolic model
from the data that the agent has collected so far, which the agent can then use along
with the second part to guide its future exploration towards regions of the state
space that the model is uncertain about. We show that our algorithm outperforms
random and greedy exploration policies on two different computer game domains.
The first domain is an Asteroids-inspired game with complex dynamics but basic
logical structure. The second is the Treasure Game, with simpler dynamics but
more complex logical structure.

1

Introduction

Much work has been done in artificial intelligence and robotics on how high-level state abstractions
can be used to significantly improve planning [19]. However, building these abstractions is difficult,
and consequently, they are typically hand-crafted [15, 13, 7, 4, 5, 6, 20, 9].
A major open question is then the problem of abstraction: how can an intelligent agent learn highlevel models that can be used to improve decision making, using only noisy observations from its
high-dimensional sensor and actuation spaces? Recent work [11, 12] has shown how to automatically
generate symbolic representations suitable for planning in high-dimensional, continuous domains.
This work is based on the hierarchical reinforcement learning framework [1], where the agent has
access to high-level skills that abstract away the low-level details of control. The agent then learns
representations for the (potentially abstract) effect of using these skills. For instance, opening a door
is a high-level skill, while knowing that opening a door typically allows one to enter a building would
be part of the representation for this skill. The key result of that work was that the symbols required to
determine the probability of a plan succeeding are directly determined by characteristics of the skills
available to an agent. The agent can learn these symbols autonomously by exploring the environment,
which removes the need to hand-design symbolic representations of the world.
It is therefore possible to learn the symbols by naively collecting samples from the environment,
for example by random exploration. However, in an online setting the agent shall be able to use
its previously collected data to compute an exploration policy which leads to better data efficiency.
We introduce such an algorithm, which is divided into two parts: the first part quickly generates
an intermediate Bayesian symbolic model from the data that the agent has collected so far, while
the second part uses the model plus Monte-Carlo tree search to guide the agent’s future exploration
towards regions of the state space that the model is uncertain about. We show that our algorithm is
significantly more data-efficient than more naive methods in two different computer game domains.
The first domain is an Asteroids-inspired game with complex dynamics but basic logical structure.
The second is the Treasure Game, with simpler dynamics but more complex logical structure.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

