Pose Guided Person Image Generation

Liqian Ma1

Xu Jia2∗ Qianru Sun3∗ Bernt Schiele3 Tinne Tuytelaars2 Luc Van Gool1,4
KU-Leuven/PSI, TRACE (Toyota Res in Europe) 2 KU-Leuven/PSI, IMEC
3
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus
4
ETH Zurich
{liqian.ma, xu.jia, tinne.tuytelaars, luc.vangool}@esat.kuleuven.be
{qsun, schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de vangool@vision.ee.ethz.ch
1

Abstract
This paper proposes the novel Pose Guided Person Generation Network (PG2 )
that allows to synthesize person images in arbitrary poses, based on an image of
that person and a novel pose. Our generation framework PG2 utilizes the pose
information explicitly and consists of two key stages: pose integration and image
refinement. In the first stage the condition image and the target pose are fed into a
U-Net-like network to generate an initial but coarse image of the person with the
target pose. The second stage then refines the initial and blurry result by training a
U-Net-like generator in an adversarial way. Extensive experimental results on both
128×64 re-identification images and 256×256 fashion photos show that our model
generates high-quality person images with convincing details.

1

Introduction

Generating realistic-looking images is of great value for many applications such as face editing,
movie making and image retrieval based on synthesized images. Consequently, a wide range of
methods have been proposed including Variational Autoencoders (VAE) [14], Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) [6] and Autoregressive models (e.g., PixelRNN [30]). Recently, GAN models have
been particularly popular due to their principle ability to generate sharp images through adversarial
training. For example in [21, 5, 1], GANs are leveraged to generate faces and natural scene images
and several methods are proposed to stabilize the training process and to improve the quality of
generation.
From an application perspective, users typically have a particular intention in mind such as changing
the background, an object’s category, its color or viewpoint. The key idea of our approach is to
guide the generation process explicitly by an appropriate representation of that intention to enable
direct control over the generation process. More specifically, we propose to generate an image by
conditioning it on both a reference image and a specified pose. With a reference image as condition,
the model has sufficient information about the appearance of the desired object in advance. The
guidance given by the intended pose is both explicit and flexible. So in principle this approach can
manipulate any object to an arbitrary pose. In this work, we focus on transferring a person from a
given pose to an intended pose. There are many interesting applications derived from this task. For
example, in movie making, we can directly manipulate a character’s human body to a desired pose or,
for human pose estimation, we can generate training data for rare but important poses.
Transferring a person from one pose to another is a challenging task. A few examples can be seen in
Figure 1. It is difficult for a complete end-to-end framework to do this because it has to generate both
correct poses and detailed appearance simultaneously. Therefore, we adopt a divide-and-conquer
strategy, dividing the problem into two stages which focus on learning global human body structure
∗

Equal contribution.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

