Sobolev Training for Neural Networks

Wojciech Marian Czarnecki, Simon Osindero, Max Jaderberg
Grzegorz Swirszcz, and Razvan Pascanu
DeepMind, London, UK
{lejlot,osindero,jaderberg,swirszcz,razp}@google.com

Abstract
At the heart of deep learning we aim to use neural networks as function approximators – training them to produce outputs from inputs in emulation of a ground
truth function or data creation process. In many cases we only have access to
input-output pairs from the ground truth, however it is becoming more common to
have access to derivatives of the target output with respect to the input – for example when the ground truth function is itself a neural network such as in network
compression or distillation. Generally these target derivatives are not computed, or
are ignored. This paper introduces Sobolev Training for neural networks, which is
a method for incorporating these target derivatives in addition the to target values
while training. By optimising neural networks to not only approximate the function’s outputs but also the function’s derivatives we encode additional information
about the target function within the parameters of the neural network. Thereby
we can improve the quality of our predictors, as well as the data-efficiency and
generalization capabilities of our learned function approximation. We provide
theoretical justifications for such an approach as well as examples of empirical
evidence on three distinct domains: regression on classical optimisation datasets,
distilling policies of an agent playing Atari, and on large-scale applications of
synthetic gradients. In all three domains the use of Sobolev Training, employing
target derivatives in addition to target values, results in models with higher accuracy
and stronger generalisation.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are one of the main tools of modern machine learning. They are
consistently proven to be powerful function approximators, able to model a wide variety of functional
forms – from image recognition [8, 24], through audio synthesis [27], to human-beating policies
in the ancient game of GO [22]. In many applications the process of training a neural network
consists of receiving a dataset of input-output pairs from a ground truth function, and minimising
some loss with respect to the network’s parameters. This loss is usually designed to encourage
the network to produce the same output, for a given input, as that from the target ground truth
function. Many of the ground truth functions we care about in practice have an unknown analytic
form, e.g. because they are the result of a natural physical process, and therefore we only have the
observed input-output pairs for supervision. However, there are scenarios where we do know the
analytic form and so are able to compute the ground truth gradients (or higher order derivatives),
alternatively sometimes these quantities may be simply observable. A common example is when the
ground truth function is itself a neural network; for instance this is the case for distillation [9, 20],
compressing neural networks [7], and the prediction of synthetic gradients [12]. Additionally, if we
are dealing with an environment/data-generation process (vs. a pre-determined set of data points),
then even though we may be dealing with a black box we can still approximate derivatives using finite
differences. In this work, we consider how this additional information can be incorporated in the
learning process, and what advantages it can provide in terms of data efficiency and performance. We
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

