Gradient descent GAN optimization is locally stable
Vaishnavh Nagarajan
Computer Science Department
Carnegie-Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
vaishnavh@cs.cmu.edu

J. Zico Kolter
Computer Science Department
Carnegie-Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
zkolter@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Despite the growing prominence of generative adversarial networks (GANs), optimization in GANs is still a poorly understood topic. In this paper, we analyze
the “gradient descent” form of GAN optimization, i.e., the natural setting where
we simultaneously take small gradient steps in both generator and discriminator
parameters. We show that even though GAN optimization does not correspond to a
convex-concave game (even for simple parameterizations), under proper conditions,
equilibrium points of this optimization procedure are still locally asymptotically
stable for the traditional GAN formulation. On the other hand, we show that the
recently proposed Wasserstein GAN can have non-convergent limit cycles near
equilibrium. Motivated by this stability analysis, we propose an additional regularization term for gradient descent GAN updates, which is able to guarantee local
stability for both the WGAN and the traditional GAN, and also shows practical
promise in speeding up convergence and addressing mode collapse.

1

Introduction

Since their introduction a few years ago, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [Goodfellow et al.,
2014] have gained prominence as one of the most widely used methods for training deep generative
models. GANs have been successfully deployed for tasks such as photo super-resolution, object
generation, video prediction, language modeling, vocal synthesis, and semi-supervised learning,
amongst many others [Ledig et al., 2017, Wu et al., 2016, Mathieu et al., 2016, Nguyen et al., 2017,
Denton et al., 2015, Im et al., 2016].
At the core of the GAN methodology is the idea of jointly training two networks: a generator network,
meant to produce samples from some distribution (that ideally will mimic examples from the data
distribution), and a discriminator network, which attempts to differentiate between samples from
the data distribution and the ones produced by the generator. This problem is typically written as a
min-max optimization problem of the following form:
min max (Ex⇠pdata [log D(x)] + Ez⇠platent [log(1 D(G(z)))]) .
(1)
G

D

For the purposes of this paper, we will shortly consider a more general form of the optimization problem, which also includes the recent Wasserstein GAN (WGAN) [Arjovsky et al., 2017] formulation.
Despite their prominence, the actual task of optimizing GANs remains a challenging problem, both
from a theoretical and a practical standpoint. Although the original GAN paper included some
analysis on the convergence properties of the approach [Goodfellow et al., 2014], it assumed that
updates occurred in pure function space, allowed arbitrarily powerful generator and discriminator
networks, and modeled the resulting optimization objective as a convex-concave game, therefore
yielding well-defined global convergence properties. Furthermore, this analysis assumed that the
discriminator network is fully optimized between generator updates, an assumption that does not
mirror the practice of GAN optimization. Indeed, in practice, there exist a number of well-documented
failure modes for GANs such as mode collapse or vanishing gradient problems.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

