DropoutNet: Addressing Cold Start
in Recommender Systems

Maksims Volkovs
layer6.ai
maks@layer6.ai

Guangwei Yu
layer6.ai
guang@layer6.ai

Tomi Poutanen
layer6.ai
tomi@layer6.ai

Abstract
Latent models have become the default choice for recommender systems due to
their performance and scalability. However, research in this area has primarily focused on modeling user-item interactions, and few latent models have been developed for cold start. Deep learning has recently achieved remarkable success showing excellent results for diverse input types. Inspired by these results we propose
a neural network based latent model called DropoutNet to address the cold start
problem in recommender systems. Unlike existing approaches that incorporate additional content-based objective terms, we instead focus on the optimization and
show that neural network models can be explicitly trained for cold start through
dropout. Our model can be applied on top of any existing latent model effectively
providing cold start capabilities, and full power of deep architectures. Empirically
we demonstrate state-of-the-art accuracy on publicly available benchmarks. Code
is available at https://github.com/layer6ai-labs/DropoutNet.

1

Introduction

Popularity of online content delivery services, e-commerce, and social web has highlighted an important challenge of surfacing relevant content to consumers. Recommender systems have proven
to be effective tools for this task, receiving increasingly more attention. One common approach to
building accurate recommender models is collaborative filtering (CF). CF is a method of making
predictions about an individual’s preferences based on the preference information from other users.
CF has been shown to work well across various domains [19], and many successful web-services
such as Netflix, Amazon and YouTube use CF to deliver highly personalized recommendations to
their users.
The majority of the existing approaches in CF can be divided into two categories: neighbor-based
and model-based. Model-based approaches, and in particular latent models, are typically the preferred choice since they build compact representations of the data and achieve high accuracy. These
representations are optimized for fast retrieval and can be scaled to handle millions of users in
real-time. For these reasons we concentrate on latent approaches in this work. Latent models are
typically learned by applying a variant of low rank approximation to the target preference matrix.
As such, they work well when lots of preference information is available but start to degrade in
highly sparse settings. The most extreme case of sparsity known as cold start occurs when no preference information is available for a given user or item. In such cases, the only way a personalized
recommendation can be generated is by incorporating additional content information. Base latent
approaches cannot incorporate content, so a number of hybrid models have been proposed [3, 21, 22]
to combine preference and content information. However, most hybrid methods introduce additional
objective terms considerably complicating learning and inference. Moreover, the content part of the
objective is typically generative [21, 9, 22] forcing the model to “explain” the content rather than
use it to maximize recommendation accuracy.
Recently, deep learning has achieved remarkable success in areas such as computer vision [15, 11],
speech [12, 10] and natural language processing [5, 16]. In all of these areas end-to-end deep neu31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

