Deep Learning with Topological Signatures

Christoph Hofer
Department of Computer Science
University of Salzburg, Austria
chofer@cosy.sbg.ac.at

Roland Kwitt
Department of Computer Science
University of Salzburg, Austria
Roland.Kwitt@sbg.ac.at

Marc Niethammer
UNC Chapel Hill, NC, USA
mn@cs.unc.edu

Andreas Uhl
Department of Computer Science
University of Salzburg, Austria
uhl@cosy.sbg.ac.at

Abstract
Inferring topological and geometrical information from data can offer an alternative
perspective on machine learning problems. Methods from topological data analysis,
e.g., persistent homology, enable us to obtain such information, typically in the form
of summary representations of topological features. However, such topological
signatures often come with an unusual structure (e.g., multisets of intervals) that is
highly impractical for most machine learning techniques. While many strategies
have been proposed to map these topological signatures into machine learning
compatible representations, they suffer from being agnostic to the target learning
task. In contrast, we propose a technique that enables us to input topological
signatures to deep neural networks and learn a task-optimal representation during
training. Our approach is realized as a novel input layer with favorable theoretical
properties. Classification experiments on 2D object shapes and social network
graphs demonstrate the versatility of the approach and, in case of the latter, we
even outperform the state-of-the-art by a large margin.

1

Introduction

Methods from algebraic topology have only recently emerged in the machine learning community,
most prominently under the term topological data analysis (TDA) [7]. Since TDA enables us to
infer relevant topological and geometrical information from data, it can offer a novel and potentially
beneficial perspective on various machine learning problems. Two compelling benefits of TDA
are (1) its versatility, i.e., we are not restricted to any particular kind of data (such as images,
sensor measurements, time-series, graphs, etc.) and (2) its robustness to noise. Several works have
demonstrated that TDA can be beneficial in a diverse set of problems, such as studying the manifold
of natural image patches [8], analyzing activity patterns of the visual cortex [28], classification of 3D
surface meshes [27, 22], clustering [11], or recognition of 2D object shapes [29].
Currently, the most widely-used tool from TDA is persistent homology [15, 14]. Essentially1 ,
persistent homology allows us to track topological changes as we analyze data at multiple “scales”.
As the scale changes, topological features (such as connected components, holes, etc.) appear and
disappear. Persistent homology associates a lifespan to these features in the form of a birth and
a death time. The collection of (birth, death) tuples forms a multiset that can be visualized as a
persistence diagram or a barcode, also referred to as a topological signature of the data. However,
leveraging these signatures for learning purposes poses considerable challenges, mostly due to their
1

We will make these concepts more concrete in Sec. 2.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

