Inverse Reward Design

Dylan Hadfield-Menell
Smitha Milli Pieter Abbeel∗ Stuart Russell Anca D. Dragan
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94709
{dhm, smilli, pabbeel, russell, anca}@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Autonomous agents optimize the reward function we give them. What they don’t
know is how hard it is for us to design a reward function that actually captures
what we want. When designing the reward, we might think of some specific
training scenarios, and make sure that the reward will lead to the right behavior
in those scenarios. Inevitably, agents encounter new scenarios (e.g., new types of
terrain) where optimizing that same reward may lead to undesired behavior. Our
insight is that reward functions are merely observations about what the designer
actually wants, and that they should be interpreted in the context in which they were
designed. We introduce inverse reward design (IRD) as the problem of inferring the
true objective based on the designed reward and the training MDP. We introduce
approximate methods for solving IRD problems, and use their solution to plan
risk-averse behavior in test MDPs. Empirical results suggest that this approach can
help alleviate negative side effects of misspecified reward functions and mitigate
reward hacking.

1

Introduction

Robots2 are becoming more capable of optimizing their reward functions. But along with that comes
the burden of making sure we specify these reward functions correctly. Unfortunately, this is a
notoriously difficult task. Consider the example from Figure 1. Alice, an AI engineer, wants to build
a robot, we’ll call it Rob, for mobile navigation. She wants it to reliably navigate to a target location
and expects it to primarily encounter grass lawns and dirt pathways. She trains a perception system
to identify each of these terrain types and then uses this to define a reward function that incentivizes
moving towards the target quickly, avoiding grass where possible. When Rob is deployed into the
world, it encounters a novel terrain type; for dramatic effect, we’ll suppose that it is lava. The terrain
prediction goes haywire on this out-of-distribution input and generates a meaningless classification
which, in turn, produces an arbitrary reward evaluation. As a result, Rob might then drive to its
demise. This failure occurs because the reward function Alice specified implicitly through the terrain
predictors, which ends up outputting arbitrary values for lava, is different from the one Alice intended,
which would actually penalize traversing lava.
In the terminology from Amodei et al. (2016), this is a negative side effect of a misspecified reward —
a failure mode of reward design where leaving out important aspects leads to poor behavior. Examples
date back to King Midas, who wished that everything he touched turn to gold, leaving out that he
didn’t mean his food or family. Another failure mode is reward hacking, which happens when, e.g., a
vacuum cleaner ejects collected dust so that it can collect even more (Russell & Norvig, 2010), or a
racing boat in a game loops in place to collect points instead of actually winning the race (Amodei
& Clark, 2016). Short of requiring that the reward designer anticipate and penalize all possible
misbehavior in advance, how can we alleviate the impact of such reward misspecification?
∗
2

OpenAI, International Computer Science Institute (ICSI)
Throughout this paper, we will use robot to refer generically to any artificial agent.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

