Fisher GAN
Youssef Mroueh⇤ , Tom Sercu⇤
mroueh@us.ibm.com, tom.sercu1@ibm.com
⇤ Equal Contribution
AI Foundations, IBM Research AI
IBM T.J Watson Research Center

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are powerful models for learning complex distributions. Stable training of GANs has been addressed in many recent
works which explore different metrics between distributions. In this paper we
introduce Fisher GAN which fits within the Integral Probability Metrics (IPM)
framework for training GANs. Fisher GAN defines a critic with a data dependent
constraint on its second order moments. We show in this paper that Fisher GAN
allows for stable and time efficient training that does not compromise the capacity
of the critic, and does not need data independent constraints such as weight clipping. We analyze our Fisher IPM theoretically and provide an algorithm based on
Augmented Lagrangian for Fisher GAN. We validate our claims on both image
sample generation and semi-supervised classification using Fisher GAN.

1

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [1] have recently become a prominent method to learn
high-dimensional probability distributions. The basic framework consists of a generator neural
network which learns to generate samples which approximate the distribution, while the discriminator
measures the distance between the real data distribution, and this learned distribution that is referred
to as fake distribution. The generator uses the gradients from the discriminator to minimize the
distance with the real data distribution. The distance between these distributions was the object of
study in [2], and highlighted the impact of the distance choice on the stability of the optimization. The
original GAN formulation optimizes the Jensen-Shannon divergence, while later work generalized
this to optimize f-divergences [3], KL [4], the Least Squares objective [5]. Closely related to our
work, Wasserstein GAN (WGAN) [6] uses the earth mover distance, for which the discriminator
function class needs to be constrained to be Lipschitz. To impose this Lipschitz constraint, WGAN
proposes to use weight clipping, i.e. a data independent constraint, but this comes at the cost of
reducing the capacity of the critic and high sensitivity to the choice of the clipping hyper-parameter.
A recent development Improved Wasserstein GAN (WGAN-GP) [7] introduced a data dependent
constraint namely a gradient penalty to enforce the Lipschitz constraint on the critic, which does not
compromise the capacity of the critic but comes at a high computational cost.
We build in this work on the Integral probability Metrics (IPM) framework for learning GAN of [8].
Intuitively the IPM defines a critic function f , that maximally discriminates between the real and
fake distributions. We propose a theoretically sound and time efficient data dependent constraint on
the critic of Wasserstein GAN, that allows a stable training of GAN and does not compromise the
capacity of the critic. Where WGAN-GP uses a penalty on the gradients of the critic, Fisher GAN
imposes a constraint on the second order moments of the critic. This extension to the IPM framework
is inspired by the Fisher Discriminant Analysis method.
The main contributions of our paper are:
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

