Streaming Sparse Gaussian Process Approximations

Thang D. Bui∗
Cuong V. Nguyen∗
Richard E. Turner
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, UK
{tdb40,vcn22,ret26}@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Sparse pseudo-point approximations for Gaussian process (GP) models provide a
suite of methods that support deployment of GPs in the large data regime and enable analytic intractabilities to be sidestepped. However, the field lacks a principled
method to handle streaming data in which both the posterior distribution over function values and the hyperparameter estimates are updated in an online fashion. The
small number of existing approaches either use suboptimal hand-crafted heuristics
for hyperparameter learning, or suffer from catastrophic forgetting or slow updating
when new data arrive. This paper develops a new principled framework for deploying Gaussian process probabilistic models in the streaming setting, providing
methods for learning hyperparameters and optimising pseudo-input locations. The
proposed framework is assessed using synthetic and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic models employing Gaussian processes have become a standard approach to solving
many machine learning tasks, thanks largely to the modelling flexibility, robustness to overfitting, and
well-calibrated uncertainty estimates afforded by the approach [1]. One of the pillars of the modern
Gaussian process probabilistic modelling approach is a set of sparse approximation schemes that
allow the prohibitive computational cost of GP methods, typically O(N 3 ) for training and O(N 2 ) for
prediction where N is the number of training points, to be substantially reduced whilst still retaining
accuracy. Arguably the most important and influential approximations of this sort are pseudo-point
approximation schemes that employ a set of M  N pseudo-points to summarise the observational
data thereby reducing computational costs to O(N M 2 ) and O(M 2 ) for training and prediction,
respectively [2, 3]. Stochastic optimisation methods that employ mini-batches of training data can
be used to further reduce computational costs [4, 5, 6, 7], allowing GPs to be scaled to datasets
comprising millions of data points.
The focus of this paper is to provide a comprehensive framework for deploying the Gaussian process
probabilistic modelling approach to streaming data. That is, data that arrive sequentially in an online
fashion, possibly in small batches, and whose number are not known a priori (and indeed may be
infinite). The vast majority of previous work has focussed exclusively on the batch setting and there
is not a satisfactory framework that supports learning and approximation in the streaming setting.
A naïve approach might simply incorporate each new datum as they arrived into an ever-growing
dataset and retrain the GP model from scratch each time. With infinite computational resources, this
approach is optimal, but in the majority of practical settings, it is intractable. A feasible alternative
would train on just the most recent K training data points, but this completely ignores potentially
large amounts of informative training data and it does not provide a method for incorporating the
old model into the new one which would save computation (except perhaps through initialisation of
the hyperparameters). Existing, sparse approximation schemes could be applied in the same manner,
but they merely allow K to be increased, rather than allowing all previous data to be leveraged, and
again do not utilise intermediate approximate fits.
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

