Deep Dynamic Poisson Factorization Model

Chengyue Gong
Department of Information Management
Peking University
cygong@pku.edu.cn

Win-bin Huang
Department of Information Management
Peking University
huangwb@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
A new model, named as deep dynamic poisson factorization model, is proposed
in this paper for analyzing sequential count vectors. The model based on the
Poisson Factor Analysis method captures dependence among time steps by neural
networks, representing the implicit distributions. Local complicated relationship
is obtained from local implicit distribution, and deep latent structure is exploited
to get the long-time dependence. Variational inference on latent variables and
gradient descent based on the loss functions derived from variational distribution is
performed in our inference. Synthetic datasets and real-world datasets are applied
to the proposed model and our results show good predicting and fitting performance
with interpretable latent structure.

1

Introduction

There has been growing interest in analyzing sequentially observed count vectors x1 , x2 ,. . . , xT . Such
data appears in many real world applications, such as recommend systems, text analysis, network
analysis and time series analysis. Analyzing such data should conquer the computational or statistical
challenges, since they are often high-dimensional, sparse, and with complex dependence across the
time steps. For example, when analyzing the dynamic word count matrix of research papers, the
amount of words used is large and many words appear only few times. Although we know the trend
that one topic may encourage researchers to write papers about related topics in the following year,
the relationship among each time step and each topic is still hard to analyze completely.
Bayesian factor analysis model has recently reached success in modeling sequentially observed
count matrix. They assume the data is Poisson distributed, and model the data under Poisson
Factorize Analysis (PFA). PFA factorizes a count matrix, where Φ ∈ RV+ ×K is the loading matrix and
Θ ∈ RT+×K is the factor score matrix. The assumption that θt ∼ Gamma(θt−1 , βt ) is then included
[1, 2] to smooth the transition through time. With property of the Gamma-Poisson distribution and
Gamma-NB process, inference via MCMC is used in these models. Considering the lack of ability to
capture the relationship between factors, a transition matrix is included in Poisson-Gamma Dynamical
System (PGDS) [2]. However, these models may still have some shortcomings in exploring the
long-time dependence among the time steps, as the independence assumption is made on θ t−1 and
θ t+1 if θ t is given. In text analysis problem, temporal Dirichlet process [3] is used to catch the time
dependence on each topic using a given decay rate. This method may have weak points in analyzing
other data with different pattern long-time dependence, such as fanatical data and disaster data [3].
Deep models, which are also called hierarchical models in Bayesian learning field, are widely used in
Bayesian models to fit the deep relationship between latent variables. Examples of this include the
nested Chinese Restaurant Process [4], nest hierarchical Dirichlet process [5], deep Gaussian process
[6, 7] and so on. Some models based on neural network structure or recurrent structure is also used,
such as the Deep Exponential Families [8], the Deep Poisson Factor Analysis based on RBM or SBN
[9, 10], the Neural Autoregressive Density Estimator based on neural networks [11], Deep Poisson
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

