Kernel functions based on triplet comparisons
Matthäus Kleindessner⇤
Department of Computer Science
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ 08854
mk1572@cs.rutgers.edu

Ulrike von Luxburg
Department of Computer Science
University of Tübingen
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
luxburg@informatik.uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
Given only information in the form of similarity triplets “Object A is more similar
to object B than to object C” about a data set, we propose two ways of defining
a kernel function on the data set. While previous approaches construct a lowdimensional Euclidean embedding of the data set that reflects the given similarity
triplets, we aim at defining kernel functions that correspond to high-dimensional
embeddings. These kernel functions can subsequently be used to apply any kernel
method to the data set.

1

Introduction

Assessing similarity between objects is an inherent part of many machine learning problems, be
it in an unsupervised task like clustering, in which similar objects should be grouped together, or
in classification, where many algorithms are based on the assumption that similar inputs should
produce similar outputs. In a typical machine learning setting one assumes to be given a data set D of
objects together with a dissimilarity function d (or, equivalently, a similarity function s) quantifying
how “close” objects are to each other. In recent years, however, a new branch of the machine
learning literature has emerged that relaxes this scenario (see the next paragraph and Section 3 for
references). Instead of being able to evaluate d itself, we only get to see a collection of similarity
triplets of the form “Object A is more similar to object B than to object C”, which claims that
d(A, B) < d(A, C). The main motivation for this relaxation comes from human-based computation:
It is widely accepted that humans are better and more reliable at providing similarity triplets, which
means assessing similarity on a relative scale, than at providing similarity estimates on an absolute
scale (“The similarity between objects A and B is 0.8”). This can be seen as a special case of the
general observation that humans are better at comparing two stimuli than at identifying a single one
(Stewart et al., 2005). For this reason, whenever one is lacking a meaningful dissimilarity function
that can be evaluated automatically and has to incorporate human expertise into the machine learning
process, collecting similarity triplets (e.g., via crowdsourcing) may be an appropriate means.
Given a data set D and similarity triplets for its objects, it is not immediately clear how to solve
machine learning problems on D. A general approach is to construct an ordinal embedding of D, that
is to map objects to a Euclidean space of a small dimension such that the given triplets are preserved
as well as possible (Agarwal et al., 2007; Tamuz et al., 2011; van der Maaten and Weinberger, 2012;
Terada and von Luxburg, 2014; Amid and Ukkonen, 2015; Heim et al., 2015; Amid et al., 2016; Jain
et al., 2016). Once such an ordinal embedding has been constructed, one can solve a problem on D by
solving it on the embedding. Only recently, algorithms have been proposed for solving various specific
problems directly without constructing an ordinal embedding as an intermediate step (Heikinheimo
and Ukkonen, 2013; Kleindessner and von Luxburg, 2017). With this paper we provide another
generic means for solving machine learning problems based on similarity triplets that is different from
⇤

Work done while being a PhD student at the University of Tübingen.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

