Rotting Bandits

Nir Levine
Electrical Engineering Department
The Technion
Haifa 32000, Israel
levin.nir1@gmail.com

Koby Crammer
Electrical Engineering Department
The Technion
Haifa 32000, Israel
koby@ee.technion.ac.il

Shie Mannor
Electrical Engineering Department
The Technion
Haifa 32000, Israel
shie@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
The Multi-Armed Bandits (MAB) framework highlights the trade-off between
acquiring new knowledge (Exploration) and leveraging available knowledge (Exploitation). In the classical MAB problem, a decision maker must choose an arm at
each time step, upon which she receives a reward. The decision maker’s objective
is to maximize her cumulative expected reward over the time horizon. The MAB
problem has been studied extensively, specifically under the assumption of the
arms’ rewards distributions being stationary, or quasi-stationary, over time. We
consider a variant of the MAB framework, which we termed Rotting Bandits, where
each arm’s expected reward decays as a function of the number of times it has been
pulled. We are motivated by many real-world scenarios such as online advertising, content recommendation, crowdsourcing, and more. We present algorithms,
accompanied by simulations, and derive theoretical guarantees.

1

Introduction

One of the most fundamental trade-offs in stochastic decision theory is the well celebrated Exploration
vs. Exploitation dilemma. Should one acquire new knowledge on the expense of possible sacrifice in
the immediate reward (Exploration), or leverage past knowledge in order to maximize instantaneous
reward (Exploitation)? Solutions that have been demonstrated to perform well are those which
succeed in balancing the two. First proposed by Thompson [1933] in the context of drug trials, and
later formulated in a more general setting by Robbins [1985], MAB problems serve as a distilled
framework for this dilemma. In the classical setting of the MAB, at each time step, the decision maker
must choose (pull) between a fixed number of arms. After pulling an arm, she receives a reward
which is a realization drawn from the arm’s underlying reward distribution. The decision maker’s
objective is to maximize her cumulative expected reward over the time horizon. An equivalent, more
typically studied, is the regret, which is defined as the difference between the optimal cumulative
expected reward (under full information) and that of the policy deployed by the decision maker.
MAB formulation has been studied extensively, and was leveraged to formulate many real-world
problems. Some examples for such modeling are online advertising [Pandey et al., 2007], routing of
packets [Awerbuch and Kleinberg, 2004], and online auctions [Kleinberg and Leighton, 2003].
Most past work (Section 6) on the MAB framework has been performed under the assumption that
the underlying distributions are stationary, or possibly quasi-stationary. In many real-world scenarios,
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

