Lookahead Bayesian Optimization
with Inequality Constraints

Remi R. Lam
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA
rlam@mit.edu

Karen E. Willcox
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA
kwillcox@mit.edu

Abstract
We consider the task of optimizing an objective function subject to inequality
constraints when both the objective and the constraints are expensive to evaluate.
Bayesian optimization (BO) is a popular way to tackle optimization problems
with expensive objective function evaluations, but has mostly been applied to
unconstrained problems. Several BO approaches have been proposed to address
expensive constraints but are limited to greedy strategies maximizing immediate
reward. To address this limitation, we propose a lookahead approach that selects
the next evaluation in order to maximize the long-term feasible reduction of the
objective function. We present numerical experiments demonstrating the performance improvements of such a lookahead approach compared to several greedy
BO algorithms, including constrained expected improvement (EIC) and predictive
entropy search with constraint (PESC).

1

Introduction

Constrained optimization problems are often challenging to solve, due to complex interactions between the goals of minimizing (or maximizing) the objective function while satisfying the constraints.
In particular, non-linear constraints can result in complicated feasible spaces, sometimes partitioned
in disconnected regions. Such feasible spaces can be difficult to explore for a local optimizer, potentially preventing the algorithm from converging to a global solution. Global optimizers, on the
other hand, are designed to tackle disconnected feasible spaces and optimization of multi-modal
objective functions. Such algorithms typically require a large number of evaluations to converge.
This can be prohibitive when the evaluation of the objective function or the constraints is expensive,
or when there is a finite budget of evaluations allocated for the optimization, as it is often the case
with expensive models. This evaluation budget typically results from resource scarcity such as the
restricted availability of a high-performance computer, finite financial resources to build prototypes,
or even time when working on a paper submission deadline.
Bayesian optimization (BO) [19] is a global optimization technique designed to address problems
with expensive function evaluations. Its constrained extension, constrained Bayesian optimization
(CBO), iteratively builds a statistical model for the objective function and the constraints. Based on
this model that leverages all the past evaluations, a utility function quantifies the merit of evaluating
any design under consideration. At each iteration, a CBO algorithm evaluates the expensive objective
function and constraints at the design which maximizes this utility function.
In most existing methods, the utility function only quantifies the reward obtained over the immediate
next step, and ignores the gains that could be collected at future steps. This results in greedy CBO
algorithms. However, quantifying long-term rewards may be beneficial. For instance, in the presence
of constraints, it could be valuable to learn the boundaries of the feasible space. In order to do so, it
is likely that an infeasible design would need to be evaluated, bringing no immediate improvement,
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

