High-Order Attention Models for Visual Question
Answering

Idan Schwartz
Department of Computer Science
Technion
idansc@cs.technion.ac.il

Alexander G. Schwing
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
aschwing@illinois.edu

Tamir Hazan
Department of Industrial Engineering & Management
Technion
tamir.hazan@gmail.com

Abstract
The quest for algorithms that enable cognitive abilities is an important part of
machine learning. A common trait in many recently investigated cognitive-like
tasks is that they take into account different data modalities, such as visual and
textual input. In this paper we propose a novel and generally applicable form
of attention mechanism that learns high-order correlations between various data
modalities. We show that high-order correlations effectively direct the appropriate
attention to the relevant elements in the different data modalities that are required
to solve the joint task. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our high-order attention
mechanism on the task of visual question answering (VQA), where we achieve
state-of-the-art performance on the standard VQA dataset.

1

Introduction

The quest for algorithms which enable cognitive abilities is an important part of machine learning
and appears in many facets, e.g., in visual question answering tasks [6], image captioning [26],
visual question generation [18, 10] and machine comprehension [8]. A common trait in these recent
cognitive-like tasks is that they take into account different data modalities, for example, visual and
textual data.
To address these tasks, recently, attention mechanisms have emerged as a powerful common theme,
which provides not only some form of interpretability if applied to deep net models, but also often
improves performance [8]. The latter effect is attributed to more expressive yet concise forms of the
various data modalities. Present day attention mechanisms, like for example [15, 26], are however
often lacking in two main aspects. First, the systems generally extract abstract representations of
data in an ad-hoc and entangled manner. Second, present day attention mechanisms are often geared
towards a specific form of input and therefore hand-crafted for a particular task.
To address both issues, we propose a novel and generally applicable form of attention mechanism
that learns high-order correlations between various data modalities. For example, second order
correlations can model interactions between two data modalities, e.g., an image and a question, and
more generally, k−th order correlations can model interactions between k modalities. Learning these
correlations effectively directs the appropriate attention to the relevant elements in the different data
modalities that are required to solve the joint task.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our novel attention mechanism on the task of visual question
answering (VQA), where we achieve state-of-the-art performance on the VQA dataset [2]. Some
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

