Multiscale Semi-Markov Dynamics for
Intracortical Brain-Computer Interfaces

Daniel J. Milstein ∗

Jason L. Pacheco †

Leigh R. Hochberg ‡ § ¶

daniel_milstein@alumni.brown.edu

pachecoj@mit.edu

leigh_hochberg@brown.edu

John D. Simeral ‡ §

Beata Jarosiewicz k § ∗∗

Erik B. Sudderth †† ∗

john_simeral@brown.edu

beataj@stanford.edu

sudderth@uci.edu

Abstract
Intracortical brain-computer interfaces (iBCIs) have allowed people with tetraplegia
to control a computer cursor by imagining the movement of their paralyzed arm
or hand. State-of-the-art decoders deployed in human iBCIs are derived from a
Kalman filter that assumes Markov dynamics on the angle of intended movement,
and a unimodal dependence on intended angle for each channel of neural activity.
Due to errors made in the decoding of noisy neural data, as a user attempts to
move the cursor to a goal, the angle between cursor and goal positions may change
rapidly. We propose a dynamic Bayesian network that includes the on-screen goal
position as part of its latent state, and thus allows the person’s intended angle of
movement to be aggregated over a much longer history of neural activity. This
multiscale model explicitly captures the relationship between instantaneous angles
of motion and long-term goals, and incorporates semi-Markov dynamics for motion
trajectories. We also introduce a multimodal likelihood model for recordings
of neural populations which can be rapidly calibrated for clinical applications.
In offline experiments with recorded neural data, we demonstrate significantly
improved prediction of motion directions compared to the Kalman filter. We derive
an efficient online inference algorithm, enabling a clinical trial participant with
tetraplegia to control a computer cursor with neural activity in real time. The
observed kinematics of cursor movement are objectively straighter and smoother
than prior iBCI decoding models without loss of responsiveness.

1

Introduction

Paralysis of all four limbs from injury or disease, or tetraplegia, can severely limit function, independence, and even sometimes communication. Despite its inability to effect movement in muscles,
neural activity in motor cortex still modulates according to people’s intentions to move their paralyzed
arm or hand, even years after injury [Hochberg et al., 2006, Simeral et al., 2011, Hochberg et al.,
∗

Department of Computer Science, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA.
‡
School of Engineering, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA; and Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
§
Rehabilitation R&D Service, Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Providence, RI, USA; and
Brown Institute for Brain Science, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.
¶
Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
k
Department of Neuroscience, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.
∗∗
Present affiliation: Dept. of Neurosurgery, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
††
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Irvine, CA, USA.
†

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

