DPSCREEN: Dynamic Personalized Screening

Kartik Ahuja
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department
University of California, Los Angeles
ahujak@ucla.edu

William R. Zame
Economics Department
University of California, Los Angeles
zame@econ.ucla.edu

Mihaela van der Schaar
Engineering Science Department, University of Oxford
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of California, Los Angeles
mihaela.vanderschaar@oxford-man.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Screening is important for the diagnosis and treatment of a wide variety of diseases.
A good screening policy should be personalized to the features of the patient
and to the dynamic history of the patient (including the history of screening).
The growth of electronic health records data has led to the development of many
models to predict the onset and progression of different diseases. However, there
has been limited work to address the personalized screening for these different
diseases. In this work, we develop the first framework to construct screening
policies for a large class of disease models. The disease is modeled as a finite state
stochastic process with an absorbing disease state. The patient observes an external
information process (for instance, self-examinations, discovering comorbidities,
etc.) which can trigger the patient to arrive at the clinician earlier than scheduled
screenings. The clinician carries out the tests; based on the test results and the
external information it schedules the next arrival. Computing the exactly optimal
screening policy that balances the delay in the detection against the frequency of
screenings is computationally intractable; this paper provides a computationally
tractable construction of an approximately optimal policy. As an illustration, we
make use of a large breast cancer data set. The constructed policy screens patients
more or less often according to their initial risk – it is personalized to the features
of the patient – and according to the results of previous screens – it is personalized
to the history of the patient. In comparison with existing clinical policies, the
constructed policy leads to large reductions (28-68%) in the number of screens
performed while achieving the same expected delays in disease detection.

1

Introduction

Screening plays an important role in the diagnosis and treatment of a wide variety of diseases,
including cancer, cardiovascular disease, HIV, diabetes and many others by leading to early detection
of disease [1]-[3]. For some diseases (e.g., breast cancer, pancreatic cancer), the benefit of early
detection is enormous [4] [5]. Because screening – especially screening that requires invasive
procedures such as mammograms, CT scans, biopsies, angiograms, etc. – imposes financial and
health costs on the patient and resource costs on society, good screening policies should trade off
benefit and cost [6]. The best screening policies should take into account that the trade-off between
benefit and cost should be different for different diseases – but also for different patients – patients
whose features suggest that they are at high risk should be screened more often; patients whose
features suggest that they are at low risk should be screened less often – and even different for the
same individual at different points in time, as the perceived risk for that patient changes. Thus the
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

