Shallow Updates for Deep Reinforcement Learning

Nir Levine∗
Dept. of Electrical Engineering
The Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Israel, Haifa 3200003
levin.nir1@gmail.com

Tom Zahavy∗
Dept. of Electrical Engineering
The Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Israel, Haifa 3200003
tomzahavy@campus.technion.ac.il

Daniel J. Mankowitz
Dept. of Electrical Engineering
The Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Israel, Haifa 3200003
danielm@tx.technion.ac.il

Aviv Tamar
Dept. of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Sciences, UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
avivt@berkeley.edu

Shie Mannor
Dept. of Electrical Engineering
The Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Israel, Haifa 3200003
shie@ee.technion.ac.il
* Joint first authors. Ordered alphabetically by first name.

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) methods such as the Deep Q-Network (DQN)
have achieved state-of-the-art results in a variety of challenging, high-dimensional
domains. This success is mainly attributed to the power of deep neural networks to
learn rich domain representations for approximating the value function or policy.
Batch reinforcement learning methods with linear representations, on the other
hand, are more stable and require less hyper parameter tuning. Yet, substantial
feature engineering is necessary to achieve good results. In this work we propose a
hybrid approach – the Least Squares Deep Q-Network (LS-DQN), which combines
rich feature representations learned by a DRL algorithm with the stability of a
linear least squares method. We do this by periodically re-training the last hidden
layer of a DRL network with a batch least squares update. Key to our approach
is a Bayesian regularization term for the least squares update, which prevents
over-fitting to the more recent data. We tested LS-DQN on five Atari games and
demonstrate significant improvement over vanilla DQN and Double-DQN. We also
investigated the reasons for the superior performance of our method. Interestingly,
we found that the performance improvement can be attributed to the large batch
size used by the LS method when optimizing the last layer.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a field of research that uses dynamic programing (DP; Bertsekas
2008), among other approaches, to solve sequential decision making problems. The main challenge
in applying DP to real world problems is an exponential growth of computational requirements as the
problem size increases, known as the curse of dimensionality (Bertsekas, 2008).
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

