On Optimal Generalizability in Parametric Learning

Ahmad Beirami∗
beirami@seas.harvard.edu

Meisam Razaviyayn†
razaviya@usc.edu

Shahin Shahrampour∗
shahin@seas.harvard.edu

Vahid Tarokh∗
vahid@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
We consider the parametric learning problem, where the objective of the learner is
determined by a parametric loss function. Employing empirical risk minimization
with possibly regularization, the inferred parameter vector will be biased toward
the training samples. Such bias is measured by the cross validation procedure
in practice where the data set is partitioned into a training set used for training
and a validation set, which is not used in training and is left to measure the outof-sample performance. A classical cross validation strategy is the leave-one-out
cross validation (LOOCV) where one sample is left out for validation and training
is done on the rest of the samples that are presented to the learner, and this process
is repeated on all of the samples. LOOCV is rarely used in practice due to the
high computational complexity. In this paper, we first develop a computationally
efficient approximate LOOCV (ALOOCV) and provide theoretical guarantees for
its performance. Then we use ALOOCV to provide an optimization algorithm
for finding the regularizer in the empirical risk minimization framework. In our
numerical experiments, we illustrate the accuracy and efficiency of ALOOCV as
well as our proposed framework for the optimization of the regularizer.

1

Introduction

We consider the parametric supervised/unsupervised learning problem, where the objective of the
learner is to build a predictor based on a set of historical data. Let z n = {zi }ni=1 , where zi ∈
Z denotes the data samples at the learner’s disposal that are assumed to be drawn i.i.d. from an
unknown density function p(·), and Z is compact.
We assume that the learner expresses the objective in terms of minimizing a parametric loss function
`(z; θ), which is a function of the parameter vector θ. The learner solves for the unknown parameter
vector θ ∈ Θ ⊆ Rk , where k denotes the number of parameters in the model class, and Θ is a
convex, compact set.
Let

L(θ) , E{`(z; θ)}

(1)

be the risk associated with the parameter vector θ, where the expectation is with respect to the density p(·) that is unknown to the learner. Ideally, the goal of the learner is to choose the parameter
vector θ ∗ such that θ ∗ ∈ arg minθ∈Θ L(θ) = arg minθ∈Θ E{`(z; θ)}. Since the density function
p(·) is unknown, the learner cannot compute θ ∗ and hence cannot achieve the ideal performance of
L(θ ∗ ) = minθ∈Θ L(θ) associated with the model class Θ. Instead, one can consider the minimiza∗

School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA
90089, USA.
†

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

