Sample and Computationally Efficient Learning
Algorithms under S-Concave Distributions

Hongyang Zhang∗
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University, USA
hongyanz@cs.cmu.edu

Maria-Florina Balcan
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University, USA
ninamf@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We provide new results for noise-tolerant and sample-efficient learning algorithms
under s-concave distributions. The new class of s-concave distributions is a broad
and natural generalization of log-concavity, and includes many important additional
distributions, e.g., the Pareto distribution and t-distribution. This class has been
studied in the context of efficient sampling, integration, and optimization, but
much remains unknown about the geometry of this class of distributions and their
applications in the context of learning. The challenge is that unlike the commonly
used distributions in learning (uniform or more generally log-concave distributions),
this broader class is not closed under the marginalization operator and many such
distributions are fat-tailed. In this work, we introduce new convex geometry
tools to study the properties of s-concave distributions and use these properties
to provide bounds on quantities of interest to learning including the probability
of disagreement between two halfspaces, disagreement outside a band, and the
disagreement coefficient. We use these results to significantly generalize prior
results for margin-based active learning, disagreement-based active learning, and
passive learning of intersections of halfspaces. Our analysis of geometric properties
of s-concave distributions might be of independent interest to optimization more
broadly.

1

Introduction

Developing provable learning algorithms is one of the central challenges in learning theory. The study
of such algorithms has led to significant advances in both the theory and practice of passive and active
learning. In the passive learning model, the learning algorithm has access to a set of labeled examples
sampled i.i.d. from some unknown distribution over the instance space and labeled according to
some underlying target function. In the active learning model, however, the algorithm can access
unlabeled examples and request labels of its own choice, and the goal is to learn the target function
with significantly fewer labels. In this work, we study both learning models in the case where the
underlying distribution belongs to the class of s-concave distributions.
Prior work on noise-tolerant and sample-efficient algorithms mostly relies on the assumption that
the distribution over the instance space is log-concave [1, 12, 7, 30]. A distribution is log-concave
if the logarithm of its density is a concave function. The assumption of log-concavity has been
made for a few purposes: for computational efficiency reasons and for sample efficiency reasons.
For computational efficiency reasons, it was made to obtain a noise-tolerant algorithm even for
seemingly simple decision surfaces like linear separators. These simple algorithms exist for noiseless
scenarios, e.g., via linear programming [28], but they are notoriously hard once we have noise [15,
25, 19]; This is why progress on noise-tolerant algorithms has focused on uniform [22, 26] and
∗

Corresponding author.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

