Toward Goal-Driven Neural Network Models for the
Rodent Whisker-Trigeminal System

Chengxu Zhuang
Department of Psychology
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
chengxuz@stanford.edu

Mitra Hartmann
Departments of Biomedical Engineering
and Mechanical Engineering
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
hartmann@northwestern.edu

Jonas Kubilius
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
Brain and Cognition, KU Leuven, Belgium
qbilius@mit.edu
Daniel Yamins
Departments of Psychology and Computer Science
Stanford Neurosciences Institute
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
yamins@stanford.edu

Abstract
In large part, rodents “see” the world through their whiskers, a powerful tactile
sense enabled by a series of brain areas that form the whisker-trigeminal system.
Raw sensory data arrives in the form of mechanical input to the exquisitely sensitive,
actively-controllable whisker array, and is processed through a sequence of neural
circuits, eventually arriving in cortical regions that communicate with decisionmaking and memory areas. Although a long history of experimental studies has
characterized many aspects of these processing stages, the computational operations
of the whisker-trigeminal system remain largely unknown. In the present work,
we take a goal-driven deep neural network (DNN) approach to modeling these
computations. First, we construct a biophysically-realistic model of the rat whisker
array. We then generate a large dataset of whisker sweeps across a wide variety
of 3D objects in highly-varying poses, angles, and speeds. Next, we train DNNs
from several distinct architectural families to solve a shape recognition task in
this dataset. Each architectural family represents a structurally-distinct hypothesis
for processing in the whisker-trigeminal system, corresponding to different ways
in which spatial and temporal information can be integrated. We find that most
networks perform poorly on the challenging shape recognition task, but that specific
architectures from several families can achieve reasonable performance levels.
Finally, we show that Representational Dissimilarity Matrices (RDMs), a tool for
comparing population codes between neural systems, can separate these higherperforming networks with data of a type that could plausibly be collected in a
neurophysiological or imaging experiment. Our results are a proof-of-concept that
DNN models of the whisker-trigeminal system are potentially within reach.

1

Introduction

The sensory systems of brains do remarkable work in extracting behaviorally useful information from
noisy and complex raw sense data. Vision systems process intensities from retinal photoreceptor
arrays, auditory systems interpret the amplitudes and frequencies of hair-cell displacements, and
somatosensory systems integrate data from direct physical interactions. [28] Although these systems
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

