Effective Parallelisation for Machine Learning

Michael Kamp
University of Bonn
and Fraunhofer IAIS
kamp@cs.uni-bonn.de
Olana Missura
Google Inc.
olanam@google.com

Mario Boley
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
and Saarland University
mboley@mpi-inf.mpg.de
Thomas Gärtner
University of Nottingham
thomas.gaertner@nottingham.ac.uk

Abstract
We present a novel parallelisation scheme that simplifies the adaptation of learning algorithms to growing amounts of data as well as growing needs for accurate
and confident predictions in critical applications. In contrast to other parallelisation techniques, it can be applied to a broad class of learning algorithms without further mathematical derivations and without writing dedicated code, while
at the same time maintaining theoretical performance guarantees. Moreover, our
parallelisation scheme is able to reduce the runtime of many learning algorithms
to polylogarithmic time on quasi-polynomially many processing units. This is a
significant step towards a general answer to an open question on the efficient parallelisation of machine learning algorithms in the sense of Nick’s Class (NC). The
cost of this parallelisation is in the form of a larger sample complexity. Our empirical study confirms the potential of our parallelisation scheme with fixed numbers
of processors and instances in realistic application scenarios.

1

Introduction

This paper contributes a novel and provably effective parallelisation scheme for a broad class of
learning algorithms. The significance of this result is to allow the confident application of machine
learning algorithms with growing amounts of data. In critical application scenarios, i.e., when errors
have almost prohibitively high cost, this confidence is essential [27, 36]. To this end, we consider the
parallelisation of an algorithm to be effective if it achieves the same confidence and error bounds as
the sequential execution of that algorithm in much shorter time. Indeed, our parallelisation scheme
can reduce the runtime of learning algorithms from polynomial to polylogarithmic. For that, it
consumes more data and is executed on a quasi-polynomial number of processing units.
To formally describe and analyse our parallelisation scheme, we consider the regularised risk minimisation setting. For a fixed but unknown joint probability distribution D over an input space X
and an output space Y, a dataset D ⊆ X × Y of size N ∈ N drawn iid from D, a convex hypothesis
space F of functions f : X → Y, a loss function ` : F × X × Y → R that is convex in F, and a
convex regularisation term Ω : F → R, regularised risk minimisation algorithms solve
X
L(D) = argmin
` (f, x, y) + Ω(f ) .
(1)
f ∈F

(x,y)∈D

The aim of this approach is to obtain a hypothesis f ∈ F with small regret
Q (f ) = E [` (f, x, y)] − argmin E [` (f 0 , x, y)] .
f 0 ∈F

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

(2)

