PRUNE: Preserving Proximity and Global Ranking
for Network Embedding

Yi-An Lai ∗‡
National Taiwan University
b99202031@ntu.edu.tw

Chin-Chi Hsu †‡
Academia Sinica
chinchi@iis.sinica.edu.tw

Mi-Yen Yeh †
Academia Sinica
miyen@iis.sinica.edu.tw

Wen-Hao Chen ∗
National Taiwan University
b02902023@ntu.edu.tw

Shou-De Lin ∗
National Taiwan University
sdlin@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
We investigate an unsupervised generative approach for network embedding. A
multi-task Siamese neural network structure is formulated to connect embedding
vectors and our objective to preserve the global node ranking and local proximity
of nodes. We provide deeper analysis to connect the proposed proximity objective
to link prediction and community detection in the network. We show our model can
satisfy the following design properties: scalability, asymmetry, unity and simplicity.
Experiment results not only verify the above design properties but also demonstrate
the superior performance in learning-to-rank, classification, regression, and link
prediction tasks.

1

Introduction

Network embedding aims at constructing a low-dimensional latent feature matrix from a sparse
high-dimensional adjacency matrix in an unsupervised manner [1–3, 6, 15, 18–21, 23, 24, 26, 31].
Most previous works [1–3, 6, 15, 18–20, 23, 31] try to preserve k-order proximity while performing
embedding. That is, given a pair of nodes (i, j), the similarity between their embedding vectors
shall be to certain extent reflect their k-hop distances (e.g. the number of k-hop distinct paths from
node i to j, or the probability that node j is visited via a random walk from i). Proximity reflects
local network topology, and could even preserve global network topology like communities. There
are some other works directly formulate node embedding to fit the community distributions by
maximizing the modularity [21, 24].
Although through experiments some of the proximity-based embedding methods had visualized the
community separation in two-dimensional vector space [2, 3, 6, 18, 20, 23], and some demonstrate an
effective usage scenario in link prediction [6, 15, 19, 23], so far we have not yet seen a theoretical
analysis to connect these three concepts. The first goal of this paper is to propose a proximity
model that connects node embedding with link prediction and community detection. There has been
some research focusing on a similar direction. [24] tries to propose an embedding model preserving
both proximity and community. However, the objective functions for proximity and community are
separately designed, not showing the connection between them. [26] models an embedding approach
considering link prediction, but not connect it to the preservation of the network proximity.
∗

Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering
Institute of Information Science
‡
These authors contributed equally to this paper.
†

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

