Subspace Clustering via Tangent Cones
Amin Jalali
Wisconsin Institute for Discovery
University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI 53715
amin.jalali@wisc.edu

Rebecca Willett
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI 53706
willett@discovery.wisc.edu

Abstract
Given samples lying on any of a number of subspaces, subspace clustering is the
task of grouping the samples based on the their corresponding subspaces. Many
subspace clustering methods operate by assigning a measure of affinity to each
pair of points and feeding these affinities into a graph clustering algorithm. This
paper proposes a new paradigm for subspace clustering that computes affinities
based on the corresponding conic geometry. The proposed conic subspace clustering (CSC) approach considers the convex hull of a collection of normalized
data points and the corresponding tangent cones. The union of subspaces underlying the data imposes a strong association between the tangent cone at a sample x
and the original subspace containing x. In addition to describing this novel geometric perspective, this paper provides a practical algorithm for subspace clustering that leverages this perspective, where a tangent cone membership test is
used to estimate the affinities. This algorithm is accompanied with deterministic
and stochastic guarantees on the properties of the learned affinity matrix, on the
true and false positive rates and spread, which directly translate into the overall
clustering accuracy.

1

Introduction

Finding a low-dimensional representation of high-dimensional data is central to many tasks in science and engineering. Union-of-subspaces have been a popular data representation tool for the past
decade. These models, while still parsimonious, offer more flexibility and better approximations
to non-linear data manifolds than single-subspace models. To fully leverage union-of-subspaces
models, we must be able to determine which data point lies in which subspace. This subproblem is
referred to as subspace clustering [16].
Formally, given a set of points x1 , . . . , xN ∈ Rn lying on k linear subspaces S1 , . . . , Sk ⊂ Rn ,
subspace clustering is the pursuit of partitioning those points into k clusters so that all points in each
cluster lie within the same subspace among S1 , . . . , Sk . Once the points have been clustered into
subspaces, standard dimensionality reduction methods such as principal component analysis can be
used to identify the underlying subspaces. A generic approach in the literature is to construct a
graph with each vertex corresponding to one of the given samples and each edge indicating whether
(or the degree to which) a pair of points could have come from the same subspace. We refer to the
(weighted) adjacency matrix of this graph as the affinity matrix. An ideal affinity matrix A would
have A(i, j) = 1 if and only if xi and xj are in the same subspace, and otherwise A(i, j) = 0. Given
an estimated affinity matrix, a variety of graph clustering methods, such as spectral clustering [17],
can be used to cluster the samples, so forming the affinity matrix is a critical step.
Many existing methods for subspace clustering with provable guarantees leverage the self-expressive
property of the data. Such approaches pursue a representation of each data point in terms of the
other data points, and then the representation coefficients are used to construct an affinity matrix.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

