Adversarial Surrogate Losses for Ordinal Regression

Rizal Fathony

Mohammad Bashiri
Brian D. Ziebart
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607
{rfatho2, mbashi4, bziebart}@uic.edu

Abstract
Ordinal regression seeks class label predictions when the penalty incurred for
mistakes increases according to an ordering over the labels. The absolute error
is a canonical example. Many existing methods for this task reduce to binary
classification problems and employ surrogate losses, such as the hinge loss. We
instead derive uniquely defined surrogate ordinal regression loss functions by
seeking the predictor that is robust to the worst-case approximations of training
data labels, subject to matching certain provided training data statistics. We
demonstrate the advantages of our approach over other surrogate losses based on
hinge loss approximations using UCI ordinal prediction tasks.

1

Introduction

For many classification tasks, the discrete class labels being predicted have an inherent order (e.g.,
poor, fair, good, very good, and excellent labels). Confusing two classes that are distant from one
another (e.g., poor instead of excellent) is more detrimental than confusing two classes that are nearby.
The absolute error, |ŷ − y| between label prediction (ŷ ∈ Y) and actual label (y ∈ Y) is a canonical
ordinal regression loss function. The ordinal regression task seeks class label predictions for new
datapoints that minimize losses of this kind.
Many prevalent methods reduce the ordinal regression task to subtasks solved using existing supervised learning techniques. Some view the task from the regression perspective and learn both a linear
regression function and a set of thresholds that define class boundaries [1–5]. Other methods take a
classification perspective and use tools from cost-sensitive classification [6–8]. However, since the
absolute error of a predictor on training data is typically a non-convex (and non-continuous) function
of the predictor’s parameters for each of these formulations, surrogate losses that approximate the
absolute error must be optimized instead. Under both perspectives, surrogate losses for ordinal regression are constructed by transforming the surrogate losses for binary zero-one loss problems—such as
the hinge loss, the logistic loss, and the exponential loss—to take into account the different penalties
of the ordinal regression problem. Empirical evaluations have compared the appropriateness of
different surrogate losses, but these still leave the possibility of undiscovered surrogates that align
better with the ordinal regression loss.
To address these limitations, we seek the most robust [9] ordinal regression predictions by focusing
on the following adversarial formulation of the ordinal regression task: what predictor best minimizes
absolute error in the worst case given partial knowledge of the conditional label distribution? We
answer this question by considering the Nash equilibrium for a game defined by combining the loss
function with Lagrangian potential functions [10]. We derive a surrogate loss function for empirical
risk minimization that realizes this same adversarial predictor. We show that different types of
available knowledge about the conditional label distribution lead to thresholded regression-based
predictions or classification-based predictions. In both cases, the surrogate loss is novel compared to
existing surrogate losses. We also show that our surrogate losses enjoy Fisher consistency, a desirable
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

