Doubly Stochastic Variational Inference
for Deep Gaussian Processes

Hugh Salimbeni
Imperial College London and PROWLER.io
hrs13@ic.ac.uk

Marc Peter Deisenroth
Imperial College London and PROWLER.io
m.deisenroth@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Gaussian processes (GPs) are a good choice for function approximation as they are
flexible, robust to overfitting, and provide well-calibrated predictive uncertainty.
Deep Gaussian processes (DGPs) are multi-layer generalizations of GPs, but
inference in these models has proved challenging. Existing approaches to inference
in DGP models assume approximate posteriors that force independence between the
layers, and do not work well in practice. We present a doubly stochastic variational
inference algorithm that does not force independence between layers. With our
method of inference we demonstrate that a DGP model can be used effectively
on data ranging in size from hundreds to a billion points. We provide strong
empirical evidence that our inference scheme for DGPs works well in practice in
both classification and regression.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes (GPs) achieve state-of-the-art performance in a range of applications including
robotics (Ko and Fox, 2008; Deisenroth and Rasmussen, 2011), geostatistics (Diggle and Ribeiro,
2007), numerics (Briol et al., 2015), active sensing (Guestrin et al., 2005) and optimization (Snoek
et al., 2012). A Gaussian process is defined by its mean and covariance function. In some situations
prior knowledge can be readily incorporated into these functions. Examples include periodicities
in climate modelling (Rasmussen and Williams, 2006), change-points in time series data (Garnett
et al., 2009) and simulator priors for robotics (Cutler and How, 2015). In other settings, GPs are
used successfully as black-box function approximators. There are compelling reasons to use GPs,
even when little is known about the data: a GP grows in complexity to suit the data; a GP is robust
to overfitting while providing reasonable error bars on predictions; a GP can model a rich class of
functions with few hyperparameters.
Single-layer GP models are limited by the expressiveness of the kernel/covariance function. To some
extent kernels can be learned from data, but inference over a large and richly parameterized space
of kernels is expensive, and approximate methods may be at risk of overfitting. Optimization of
the marginal likelihood with respect to hyperparameters approximates Bayesian inference only if
the number of hyperparameters is small (Mackay, 1999). Attempts to use, for example, a highly
parameterized neural network as a kernel function (Calandra et al., 2016; Wilson et al., 2016) incur the
downsides of deep learning, such as the need for application-specific architectures and regularization
techniques. Kernels can be combined through sums and products (Duvenaud et al., 2013) to create
more expressive compositional kernels, but this approach is limited to simple base kernels, and their
optimization is expensive.
A Deep Gaussian Process (DGP) is a hierarchical composition of GPs that can overcome the
limitations of standard (single-layer) GPs while retaining the advantages. DGPs are richer models
than standard GPs, just as deep networks are richer than generalized linear models. In contrast to
models with highly parameterized kernels, DGPs learn a representation hierarchy non-parametrically
with very few hyperparmeters to optimize.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

