A Decomposition of Forecast Error in
Prediction Markets
Miroslav Dudík
Microsoft Research, New York, NY
mdudik@microsoft.com
Ryan Rogers
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
rrogers386@gmail.com

Sébastien Lahaie
Google, New York, NY
slahaie@google.com
Jennifer Wortman Vaughan
Microsoft Research, New York, NY
jenn@microsoft.com

Abstract
We analyze sources of error in prediction market forecasts in order to bound
the difference between a security’s price and the ground truth it estimates. We
consider cost-function-based prediction markets in which an automated market
maker adjusts security prices according to the history of trade. We decompose the
forecasting error into three components: sampling error, arising because traders
only possess noisy estimates of ground truth; market-maker bias, resulting from
the use of a particular market maker (i.e., cost function) to facilitate trade; and
convergence error, arising because, at any point in time, market prices may still be
in flux. Our goal is to make explicit the tradeoffs between these error components,
influenced by design decisions such as the functional form of the cost function
and the amount of liquidity in the market. We consider a specific model in which
traders have exponential utility and exponential-family beliefs representing noisy
estimates of ground truth. In this setting, sampling error vanishes as the number
of traders grows, but there is a tradeoff between the other two components. We
provide both upper and lower bounds on market-maker bias and convergence error,
and demonstrate via numerical simulations that these bounds are tight. Our results
yield new insights into the question of how to set the market’s liquidity parameter
and into the forecasting benefits of enforcing coherent prices across securities.

1

Introduction

A prediction market is a marketplace in which participants can trade securities with payoffs that
depend on the outcomes of future events [19]. Consider the simple setting in which we are interested
in predicting the outcome of a political election: whether the incumbent or challenger will win.
A prediction market might issue a security that pays out $1 per share if the incumbent wins, and
$0 otherwise. The market price p of this security should always lie between 0 and 1, and can be
construed as an event probability. If a trader believes that the likelihood of the incumbent winning is
greater than p, she will buy shares with the expectation of making a profit. Market prices increase
when there is more interest in buying and decrease when there is more interest in selling. By this
process, the market aggregates traders’ information into a consensus forecast, represented by the
market price. With sufficient activity, prediction markets are competitive with alternative forecasting
methods such as polls [4], but while there is a mature literature on sources of error and bias in polls,
the impact of prediction market structure on forecast accuracy is still an active area of research [17].
We consider prediction markets in which all trades occur through a centralized entity known as a
market maker. Under this market structure, security prices are dictated by a fixed cost function and
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

