Hierarchical Attentive Recurrent Tracking

Adam R. Kosiorek
Department of Engineering Science
University of Oxford
adamk@robots.ox.ac.uk

Alex Bewley
Department of Engineering Science
University of Oxford
bewley@robots.ox.ac.uk

Ingmar Posner
Department of Engineering Science
University of Oxford
ingmar@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Class-agnostic object tracking is particularly difficult in cluttered environments
as target specific discriminative models cannot be learned a priori. Inspired by
how the human visual cortex employs spatial attention and separate “where” and
“what” processing pathways to actively suppress irrelevant visual features, this
work develops a hierarchical attentive recurrent model for single object tracking
in videos. The first layer of attention discards the majority of background by
selecting a region containing the object of interest, while the subsequent layers
tune in on visual features particular to the tracked object. This framework is
fully differentiable and can be trained in a purely data driven fashion by gradient
methods. To improve training convergence, we augment the loss function with
terms for auxiliary tasks relevant for tracking. Evaluation of the proposed model is
performed on two datasets: pedestrian tracking on the KTH activity recognition
dataset and the more difficult KITTI object tracking dataset.

1

Introduction

In computer vision, designing an algorithm for model-free tracking of anonymous objects is challenging, since no target-specific information can be gathered a priori and yet the algorithm has to handle
target appearance changes, varying lighting conditions and occlusion. To make it even more difficult,
the tracked object often constitutes but a small fraction of the visual field. The remaining parts may
contain distractors, which are visually salient objects resembling the target but hold no relevant
information. Despite this fact, recent models often process the whole image, which exposes them
to noise and increases the associated computational cost or they use heuristic methods to decrease
the size of search regions. This in contrast to human visual perception, which does not process the
visual field in its entirety, but rather acknowledges it briefly and focuses on processing small fractions
thereof, which we dub visual attention.
Attention mechanisms have recently been explored in machine learning in a wide variety of contexts
[27, 14], often providing new capabilities to machine learning algorithms [11, 12, 7]. While they
improve efficiency [22] and performance on state-of-the-art machine learning benchmarks [27], their
architecture is much simpler than that of the mechanisms found in the human visual cortex [5].
Attention has also been long studied by neuroscientists [18], who believe that it is crucial for visual
perception and cognition [4], since it is inherently tied to the architecture of the visual cortex and
can affect the information flow inside it. Whenever more than one visual stimulus is present in the
receptive field of a neuron, all the stimuli compete for computational resources due to the limited
processing capacity. Visual attention can lead to suppression of distractors by reducing the size of
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

