Speeding Up Latent Variable Gaussian Graphical
Model Estimation via Nonconvex Optimization
Pan Xu
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22904
px3ds@virginia.edu

Jian Ma
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
jianma@cs.cmu.edu

Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22904
qg5w@virginia.edu

Abstract
We study the estimation of the latent variable Gaussian graphical model (LVGGM),
where the precision matrix is the superposition of a sparse matrix and a low-rank
matrix. In order to speed up the estimation of the sparse plus low-rank components,
we propose a sparsity constrained maximum likelihood estimator based on matrix
factorization, and an efficient alternating gradient descent algorithm with hard
thresholding to solve it. Our algorithm is orders of magnitude faster than the
convex relaxation based methods for LVGGM. In addition, we prove that our
algorithm is guaranteed to linearly converge to the unknown sparse and low-rank
components up to the optimal statistical precision. Experiments on both synthetic
and genomic data demonstrate the superiority of our algorithm over the state-ofthe-art algorithms and corroborate our theory.

1

Introduction

For a d-dimensional Gaussian graphical model (i.e., multivariate Gaussian distribution) N (0, ⌃⇤ ),
the inverse of covariance matrix ⌦⇤ = (⌃⇤ ) 1 (also known as the precision matrix or concentration
matrix) measures the conditional dependence relationship between marginal random variables [19].
When the number of observations is comparable to the ambient dimension of the Gaussian graphical
model, additional structural assumptions are needed for consistent estimation. Sparsity is one of
the most common structures imposed on the precision matrix in Gaussian graphical models (GGM),
because it gives rise to a sparse graph, which characterizes the conditional dependence of the marginal
variables. The problem of estimating the sparse precision matrix in Gaussian graphical models has
been studied by a large body of literature [23, 29, 12, 28, 6, 34, 37, 38, 33]. However, the real world
data may not follow a sparse GGM, especially when some of the variables are unobservable.
To alleviate this problem, the latent variable Gaussian graphical model (LVGGM) [9, 24] has been
studied, where the precision matrix of the observed variables is conditionally sparse given the latent
variables (i.e., unobserved) , but marginally not sparse. It is well-known that in LVGGM, the precision
matrix ⌦⇤ can be represented as the superposition of a sparse matrix S⇤ and a low-rank matrix L⇤ ,
where the latent variables contribute to the low rank component in the precision matrix. In other
words, we have ⌦⇤ = S⇤ + L⇤ .
In the learning problem of LVGGM, the goal is to estimate both the unknown sparse component
S⇤ and the low-rank component L⇤ of the precision matrix simultaneously. In the seminal work,
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

