A multi-agent reinforcement learning model of
common-pool resource appropriation
Julien Perolat⇤
DeepMind
London, UK
perolat@google.com

Joel Z. Leibo⇤
DeepMind
London, UK
jzl@google.com

Charles Beattie
DeepMind
London, UK
cbeattie@google.com

Karl Tuyls
University of Liverpool
Liverpool, UK
karltuyls@google.com

Vinicius Zambaldi
DeepMind
London, UK
vzambaldi@google.com
Thore Graepel
DeepMind
London, UK
thore@google.com

Abstract
Humanity faces numerous problems of common-pool resource appropriation. This
class of multi-agent social dilemma includes the problems of ensuring sustainable
use of fresh water, common fisheries, grazing pastures, and irrigation systems.
Abstract models of common-pool resource appropriation based on non-cooperative
game theory predict that self-interested agents will generally fail to find socially
positive equilibria—a phenomenon called the tragedy of the commons. However,
in reality, human societies are sometimes able to discover and implement stable
cooperative solutions. Decades of behavioral game theory research have sought
to uncover aspects of human behavior that make this possible. Most of that work
was based on laboratory experiments where participants only make a single choice:
how much to appropriate. Recognizing the importance of spatial and temporal
resource dynamics, a recent trend has been toward experiments in more complex
real-time video game-like environments. However, standard methods of noncooperative game theory can no longer be used to generate predictions for this case.
Here we show that deep reinforcement learning can be used instead. To that end,
we study the emergent behavior of groups of independently learning agents in a
partially observed Markov game modeling common-pool resource appropriation.
Our experiments highlight the importance of trial-and-error learning in commonpool resource appropriation and shed light on the relationship between exclusion,
sustainability, and inequality.

1

Introduction

Natural resources like fisheries, groundwater basins, and grazing pastures, as well as technological
resources like irrigation systems and access to geosynchronous orbit are all common-pool resources
(CPRs). It is difficult or impossible for agents to exclude one another from accessing them. But
whenever an agent obtains an individual benefit from such a resource, the remaining amount available
for appropriation by others is ever-so-slightly diminished. These two seemingly-innocent properties
of CPRs combine to yield numerous subtle problems of motivation in organizing collective action [12,
26, 27, 6]. The necessity of organizing groups of humans for effective CPR appropriation, combined
with its notorious difficulty, has shaped human history. It remains equally critical today.
⇤

indicates equal contribution

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

