Query Complexity of Clustering with
Side Information
Arya Mazumdar and Barna Saha
College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
{arya,barna}@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Suppose, we are given a set of n elements to be clustered into k (unknown) clusters,
and an oracle/expert labeler that can interactively answer pair-wise queries of the
form, “do two elements u and v belong to the same cluster?”. The goal is to recover
the optimum clustering by asking the minimum number of queries. In this paper,
we provide a rigorous theoretical study of this basic problem of query complexity
of interactive clustering, and give strong information theoretic lower bounds, as
well as nearly matching upper bounds. Most clustering problems come with a
similarity matrix, which is used by an automated process to cluster similar points
together. However, obtaining an ideal similarity function is extremely challenging
due to ambiguity in data representation, poor data quality etc., and this is one of
the primary reasons that makes clustering hard. To improve accuracy of clustering,
a fruitful approach in recent years has been to ask a domain expert or crowd to
obtain labeled data interactively. Many heuristics have been proposed, and all of
these use a similarity function to come up with a querying strategy. Even so, there
is a lack systematic theoretical study. Our main contribution in this paper is to
show the dramatic power of side information aka similarity matrix on reducing
the query complexity of clustering. A similarity matrix represents noisy pair-wise
relationships such as one computed by some function on attributes of the elements.
A natural noisy model is where similarity values are drawn independently from
some arbitrary probability distribution f+ when the underlying pair of elements
belong to the same cluster, and from some f− otherwise. We show that given
such a similarity matrix, the query complexity reduces drastically from Θ(nk)
2
n
) where H2 denotes the squared Hellinger
(no similarity matrix) to O( H2k(flog
+ kf− )
divergence. Moreover, this is also information-theoretic optimal within an O(log n)
factor. Our algorithms are all efficient, and parameter free, i.e., they work without
any knowledge of k, f+ and f− , and only depend logarithmically with n. Our
lower bounds could be of independent interest, and provide a general framework
for proving lower bounds for classification problems in the interactive setting.
Along the way, our work also reveals intriguing connection to popular community
detection models such as the stochastic block model and opens up many avenues
for interesting future research.

1

Introduction

Clustering is one of the most fundamental and popular methods for data classification. In this paper
we provide a rigorous theoretical study of clustering with the help of an oracle, a model that saw a
recent surge of popular heuristic algorithms.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

