Hierarchical Clustering Beyond the Worst-Case

Vincent Cohen-Addad
University of Copenhagen
vcohenad@gmail.com

Varun Kanade
University of Oxford
Alan Turing Institute
varunk@cs.ox.ac.uk

Frederik Mallmann-Trenn
MIT
mallmann@mit.edu

Abstract
Hiererachical clustering, that is computing a recursive partitioning of a dataset to
obtain clusters at increasingly finer granularity is a fundamental problem in data
analysis. Although hierarchical clustering has mostly been studied through procedures such as linkage algorithms, or top-down heuristics, rather than as optimization
problems, Dasgupta [9] recently proposed an objective function for hierarchical clustering and initiated a line of work developing algorithms that explicitly optimize an
objective (see also [7, 22, 8]). In this paper, we consider a fairly general random graph
model for hierarchical clustering, called the hierarchical stochastic block model
(HSBM), and show that in certain regimes the SVD approach of McSherry [18] combined with specific linkage methods results in a clustering that give an Op1q approximation to Dasgupta’s cost function. Finally, we report empirical evaluation on synthetic and real-world data showing that our proposed SVD-based method does indeed
achieve a better cost than other widely-used heurstics and also results in a better classification accuracy when the underlying problem was that of multi-class classification.

1

Introduction

Computing a recursive partitioning of a dataset to obtain a finer and finer classification of the data is a
classic problem in data analysis. Such a partitioning is often refered to as a hierarchical clustering and
represented as a rooted tree whose leaves correspond to data elements and where each internal node
induces a cluster of the leaves of its subtree. There exists a large literature on the design and analysis of
algorithms for hierarchical clustering (see e.g., [21]). Two main approaches have proven to be successful in practice so far: on the one hand divisive heuristics compute the hierarchical clustering tree in a
top-down fashion by recursively partitioning the data (see e.g., [14]). On the other hand, agglomerative
heuristics produce a tree by first defining a cluster for each data elements and successively merging
clusters according to a carefully defined function (see e.g., [19]). These heuristics are widely used in
practice and are now part of the data scientists’ toolkit—standard machine learning libraries contain
implementations of both types of heuristics.
Agglomerative heuristics have several appealing features: they are easy to implement, easy to tune, and
r 2 polylognq on a dataset of size n. Standard divisive heuristics based on graph
their running time is Opn
partitioning or clustering methods (like for example the bisection k-means or the recursive sparsest-cut
approaches) often involve solving or approximating NP-hard problems.1 Therefore, it is natural to
1

In some cases, it may be possible to have a very fast algorithms based on heuristics to compute partitions,
however, we are unaware of any such methods that would have provable guarantees for the kinds of graphs that
appear in hierarchical clustering.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

