The Expxorcist: Nonparametric Graphical Models
Via Conditional Exponential Densities

Arun Sai Suggala ∗
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Mladen Kolar †
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637

Pradeep Ravikumar ‡
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Abstract
Non-parametric multivariate density estimation faces strong statistical and computational bottlenecks, and the more practical approaches impose near-parametric
assumptions on the form of the density functions. In this paper, we leverage recent developments to propose a class of non-parametric models which have very
attractive computational and statistical properties. Our approach relies on the
simple function space assumption that the conditional distribution of each variable
conditioned on the other variables has a non-parametric exponential family form.

1

Introduction

Let X = (X1 , . . . , Xp ) be a p-dimensional random vector. Let G = (V, E) be the graph that encodes
conditional independence assumptions underlying the distribution of X, that is, each node of the
⊥ Xb | X¬ab with
graph corresponds to a component of vector X and (a, b) ∈ E if and only if Xa 6⊥
X¬ab := {Xc | c ∈ V \{a, b}}. The graphical model represented by G is then the set of distributions
over X that satisfy the conditional independence assumptions specified by the graph G.
There has been a considerable line of work on learning parametric families of such graphical model
distributions from data [22, 20, 13, 28], where the distribution is indexed by a finite-dimensional
parameter vector. The goal of this paper, however, is on specifying and learning nonparametric
families of graphical model distributions, indexed by infinite-dimensional parameters, and for which
there has been comparatively limited work. Non-parametric multivariate density estimation broadly,
even without the graphical model constraint, has not proved as popular in practical machine learning
contexts, for both statistical and computational reasons. Loosely, estimating a non-parametric
multivariate density, with mild assumptions, typically requires the number of samples to scale
exponentially in the dimension p of the data, which is infeasible even in the big-data era when n is
very large. And the resulting estimators are typically computationally expensive or intractable, for
instance requiring repeated computations of multivariate integrals.
We present a review of multivariate density estimation, that is necessarily incomplete but sets up
our proposed approach. A common approach dating back to [15] uses the logistic density transform
to satisfy the unity and positivity constraints for densities, and considers densities of the form
f (X) = R exp(η(X))
, with some constraints on η for identifiability such as η(X0 ) = 0 for some
exp(η(x))dx
XR
X0 ∈ X or X η(x)dx = 0.
With the logistic density transform, differing approaches for non-parametric density estimation can
be contrasted in part by their assumptions on the infinite-dimensional function space domain of η(·).
An early approach [8] considered function spaces of functions with bounded “roughness” functionals.
The predominant line of work however has focused on the setting where η(·) lies in a Reproducing
Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS), dating back to [21]. Consider the estimation of these logistic density
∗

asuggala@cs.cmu.edu

†

mkolar@chicagobooth.edu

‡

pradeepr@cs.cmu.edu

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

