Learning Causal Structures Using Regression
Invariance
AmirEmad Ghassami⇤† , Saber Salehkaleybar† , Negar Kiyavash⇤† , Kun Zhang‡
⇤
Department of ECE, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, USA.
†
Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, USA.
‡
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA.
†
{ghassam2,sabersk,kiyavash}@illinois.edu, ‡ kunz1@cmu.edu

Abstract
We study causal discovery in a multi-environment setting, in which the functional
relations for producing the variables from their direct causes remain the same
across environments, while the distribution of exogenous noises may vary. We
introduce the idea of using the invariance of the functional relations of the variables
to their causes across a set of environments for structure learning. We define a
notion of completeness for a causal inference algorithm in this setting and prove
the existence of such algorithm by proposing the baseline algorithm. Additionally,
we present an alternate algorithm that has significantly improved computational
and sample complexity compared to the baseline algorithm. Experiment results
show that the proposed algorithm outperforms the other existing algorithms.

1

Introduction

Causal structure learning is a fundamental problem in machine learning with applications in multiple
fields such as biology, economics, epidemiology, and computer science. When performing interventions in the system is not possible or too expensive (observation-only setting), the main approach
to identifying direction of influences and learning the causal structure is to run a constraint-based
or a score-based causal discovery algorithm over the data. In this case, a “complete” observational
algorithm allows learning the causal structure to the extent possible, which is the Markov equivalence
of the ground truth structure. When the experimenter is capable of intervening in the system to see
the effect of varying one variable on the other variables (interventional setting), the causal structure
could be exactly learned. In this setting, the most common identification procedure considers that
the variables whose distributions have varied are the descendants of the intervened variable and
hence the causal structure is reconstructed by performing interventions on different variables in the
system [4, 11]. However, due to issues such as cost constraints and infeasibility of performing certain
interventions, the experimenter is usually not capable of performing arbitrary interventions.
In many real-life systems, due to changes in the variables of the environment, the data generating
distribution will vary over time. Considering the setup after each change as a new environment, our
goal is to exploit the differences across environments to learn the underlying causal structure. In this
setting, we do not intervene in the system and only use the observational data taken from environments.
We consider a multi-environment setting, in which the functional relations for producing the variables
from their parents remain the same across environments, while the distribution of exogenous noises
may vary. Note that the standard interventional setting could be viewed as a special case of multienvironment setting in which the location and distribution of the changes across environments are
designed by the experimenter. Furthermore, as will be seen in Figure 1(a), there are cases where the
ordinary interventional approaches cannot take advantages of changes across environments while
these changes could be utilized to learn the causal structure uniquely. The multi-environment setting
was also studied in [35, 23, 37]; we will put our work into perspective in relationship to these in the
Related Work.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

