Discovering Potential Correlations via
Hypercontractivity
Hyeji Kim1⇤ Weihao Gao1⇤ Sreeram Kannan2† Sewoong Oh1‡ Pramod Viswanath1⇤
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign1 and University of Washington2
{hyejikim,wgao9}@illinois.edu,ksreeram@uw.edu,{swoh,pramodv}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Discovering a correlation from one variable to another variable is of fundamental
scientific and practical interest. While existing correlation measures are suitable
for discovering average correlation, they fail to discover hidden or potential correlations. To bridge this gap, (i) we postulate a set of natural axioms that we expect a
measure of potential correlation to satisfy; (ii) we show that the rate of information
bottleneck, i.e., the hypercontractivity coefficient, satisfies all the proposed axioms;
(iii) we provide a novel estimator to estimate the hypercontractivity coefficient
from samples; and (iv) we provide numerical experiments demonstrating that this
proposed estimator discovers potential correlations among various indicators of
WHO datasets, is robust in discovering gene interactions from gene expression
time series data, and is statistically more powerful than the estimators for other
correlation measures in binary hypothesis testing of canonical examples of potential
correlations.

1

Introduction

Measuring the strength of an association between two random variables is a fundamental topic
of broad scientific interest. Pearson’s correlation coefficient [1] dates from over a century ago
and has been generalized seven decades ago as maximal correlation (mCor) to handle nonlinear
dependencies [2–4]. Novel correlation measures to identify different kinds of associations continue
to be proposed in the literature; these include maximal information coefficient (MIC) [5] and distance
correlation (dCor) [6]. Despite the differences, a common theme of measurement of the empirical
average dependence unites the different dependence measures. Alternatively, these are factual
measures of dependence and their relevance is restricted when we seek a potential dependence of
one random variable on another. For instance, consider a hypothetical city with very few smokers.
A standard measure of correlation on the historical data in this town on smoking and lung cancer
will fail to discover the fact that smoking causes cancer, since the average correlation is very small.
On the other hand, clearly, there is a potential correlation between smoking and lung cancer; indeed
applications of this nature abound in several scenarios in modern data science, including a recent one
on genetic pathway discovery [7].
Discovery of a potential correlation naturally leads one to ask for a measure of potential correlation
that is statistically well-founded and addresses practical needs. Such is the focus of this work, where
our proposed measure of potential correlation is based on a novel interpretation of the Information
Bottleneck (IB) principle [8]. The IB principle has been used to address one of the fundamental tasks
in supervised learning: given samples {Xi , Yi }ni=1 , how do we find a compact summary of a variable
⇤

Coordinated Science Lab and and Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
‡
Coordinated Science Lab and Department of Industrial and Enterprise Systems Engineering
†

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

