Variational Walkback: Learning a Transition
Operator as a Stochastic Recurrent Net

Anirudh Goyal
MILA, Université de Montréal
anirudhgoyal9119@gmail.com
Surya Ganguli
Stanford University
sganguli@stanford.edu

Nan Rosemary Ke
MILA, École Polytechnique de Montréal
rosemary.nan.ke@gmail.com
Yoshua Bengio
MILA, Université de Montréal
yoshua.umontreal@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose a novel method to directly learn a stochastic transition operator whose
repeated application provides generated samples. Traditional undirected graphical
models approach this problem indirectly by learning a Markov chain model whose
stationary distribution obeys detailed balance with respect to a parameterized energy
function. The energy function is then modified so the model and data distributions
match, with no guarantee on the number of steps required for the Markov chain to
converge. Moreover, the detailed balance condition is highly restrictive: energy
based models corresponding to neural networks must have symmetric weights,
unlike biological neural circuits. In contrast, we develop a method for directly
learning arbitrarily parameterized transition operators capable of expressing nonequilibrium stationary distributions that violate detailed balance, thereby enabling
us to learn more biologically plausible asymmetric neural networks and more general non-energy based dynamical systems. The proposed training objective, which
we derive via principled variational methods, encourages the transition operator to
"walk back" (prefer to revert its steps) in multi-step trajectories that start at datapoints, as quickly as possible back to the original data points. We present a series
of experimental results illustrating the soundness of the proposed approach, Variational Walkback (VW), on the MNIST, CIFAR-10, SVHN and CelebA datasets,
demonstrating superior samples compared to earlier attempts to learn a transition
operator. We also show that although each rapid training trajectory is limited to a
finite but variable number of steps, our transition operator continues to generate
good samples well past the length of such trajectories, thereby demonstrating the
match of its non-equilibrium stationary distribution to the data distribution. Source
Code: http://github.com/anirudh9119/walkback_nips17

1

Introduction

A fundamental goal of unsupervised learning involves training generative models that can understand
sensory data and employ this understanding to generate, or sample new data and make new inferences.
In machine learning, the vast majority of probabilistic generative models that can learn complex probability distributions over data fall into one of two classes: (1) directed graphical models, corresponding
to a finite time feedforward generative process (e.g. variants of the Helmholtz machine (Dayan
et al., 1995) like the Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE) (Kingma and Welling, 2013; Rezende et al.,
2014)), or (2) energy function based undirected graphical models, corresponding to sampling from a
stochastic process whose equilibrium stationary distribution obeys detailed balance with respect to the
energy function (e.g. various Boltzmann machines (Salakhutdinov and Hinton, 2009)). This detailed
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

