Online to Offline Conversions, Universality and
Adaptive Minibatch Sizes
Kfir Y. Levy
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich.
yehuda.levy@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
We present an approach towards convex optimization that relies on a novel scheme
which converts adaptive online algorithms into offline methods. In the offline
optimization setting, our derived methods are shown to obtain favourable adaptive
guarantees which depend on the harmonic sum of the queried gradients. We
further show that our methods implicitly adapt to the objective’s structure: in the
smooth case fast convergence rates are ensured without any prior knowledge of
the smoothness parameter, while still maintaining guarantees in the non-smooth
setting. Our approach has a natural extension to the stochastic setting, resulting in
a lazy version of SGD (stochastic GD), where minibathces are chosen adaptively
depending on the magnitude of the gradients. Thus providing a principled approach
towards choosing minibatch sizes.

1

Introduction

Over the past years data adaptiveness has proven to be crucial to the success of learning algorithms.
The objective function underlying “big data" applications often demonstrates intricate structure:
the scale and smoothness are often unknown and may change substantially in between different
regions/directions, [1]. Learning methods that acclimatize to these changes may exhibit superior
performance compared to non adaptive procedures.
State-of-the-art first order methods like AdaGrad, [1], and Adam, [2], adapt the learning rate on the
fly according to the feedback (i.e. gradients) received during the optimization process. AdaGrad and
Adam are guaranteed to work well in the online convex optimization setting, where loss functions
may be chosen adversarially and change between rounds. Nevertheless, this setting is harder than the
stochastic/offline settings, which may better depict practical applications. Interestingly, even in the
offline convex optimization setting it could be shown that in several scenarios very simple schemes
may substantially outperform the output of AdaGrad/Adam. An example of such a simple scheme is
choosing the point with the smallest gradient norm among all rounds. In the first part of this work we
address this issue and design adaptive methods for the offline convex optimization setting. At heart of
our derivations is a novel scheme which converts adaptive online algorithms into offline methods with
favourable guarantees1 . Our shceme is inspired by standard online to batch conversions, [3].
A seemingly different issue is choosing the minibatch size, b, in the stochastic setting. Stochastic
optimization algorithms that can access a noisy gradient oracle may choose to invoke the oracle
b times in every query point, subsequently employing an averaged gradient estimate. Theory p
for
stochastic convex optimization suggests to use a minibatch of b = 1, and predicts a degradation of b
factor upon using larger minibatch sizes2 . Nevertheless in practice larger minibatch sizes are usually
found to be effective. In the second part of this work we design stochastic optimization methods in
1

For concreteness we concentrate in this work on converting AdaGrad, [1]. Note that our conversion scheme
applies more widely to other
p adaptive online methods.
2
A degradation by a b factor in the general case and by a b factor in the strongly-convex case.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

