Maxing and Ranking with Few Assumptions
Moein Falahatgar Yi Hao Alon Orlitsky Venkatadheeraj Pichapati Vaishakh Ravindrakumar
University of California, San Deigo
{moein,yih179,alon,dheerajpv7,vaishakhr}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
PAC maximum selection (maxing) and ranking of n elements via random pairwise
comparisons have diverse applications and have been studied under many models
and assumptions. With just one simple natural assumption: strong stochastic transitivity, we show that maxing can be performed with linearly many comparisons
yet ranking requires quadratically many. With no assumptions at all, we show that
for the Borda-score metric, maximum selection can be performed with linearly
many comparisons and ranking can be performed with O(n log n) comparisons.

1

Introduction

1.1

Motivation

Maximum selection (maxing) and sorting using pairwise comparisons are among the most practical
and fundamental algorithmic problems in computer science. As is well-known, maxing requires
n − 1 comparisons, while sorting takes ⇥(n log n) comparisons.

The probabilistic version of this problem, where comparison outcomes are random, is of significant
theoretical interest as well, and it too arises in many applications and diverse disciplines. In sports,
pairwise games with random outcomes are used to determine the best, or the order, of teams or
players. Similarly Trueskill [1] matches video gamers to create their ranking. It is also used for a
variety of online applications such as to learn consumer preferences with the popular A/B tests, in
recommender systems [2], for ranking documents from user clickthrough data [3, 4], and more. The
popular crowd sourcing website GIFGIF [5] shows how pairwise comparisons can help associate
emotions with many animated GIF images. Visitors are presented with two images and asked to
select the one that better corresponds to a given emotion. For these reasons, and because of its
intrinsic theoretical interest, the problem received a fair amount of attention.
1.2

Terminology and previous results

One of the first studies in the area, [6] assumed n totally-ordered elements, where each comparison
errs with the same, known, probability ↵ < 12 . It presented a maxing algorithm that uses O( ↵n2 log 1 )
comparisons to output the maximum with probability ≥ 1 − , and a ranking algorithm that uses
O( ↵n2 log n ) comparisons to output the ranking with probability ≥ 1 − .
These results have been and continue to be of great interest. Yet this model has two shortcomings.
It assumes that there is only one random comparison probability, ↵, and that its value is known. In
practice, comparisons have different, and arbitrary, probabilities, and they are not known in advance.
To address more realistic scenarios, researchers considered more general probabilistic models.

Consider a set of n elements, without loss of generality [n] = {1, 2, . . . , n}. A probabilistic model,
or model for short, is an assignment of a preference probability pi,j ∈ [0, 1] for every i ≠ j ∈
[n], reflecting the probability that i is preferred when compared with j. We assume that repeated
comparisons are independent and that there are no “draws”, hence pj,i = 1 − pi,j .
def

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

