YASS: Yet Another Spike Sorter
JinHyung Lee1 , David Carlson2 , Hooshmand Shokri1 , Weichi Yao1 , Georges Goetz3 , Espen Hagen4 ,
Eleanor Batty1 , EJ Chichilnisky3 , Gaute Einevoll5 , and Liam Paninski1
1

Columbia University, 2 Duke University, 3 Stanford University, 4 University of Oslo, 5 Norwegian
University of Life Sciences

Abstract
Spike sorting is a critical first step in extracting neural signals from large-scale
electrophysiological data. This manuscript describes an efficient, reliable pipeline
for spike sorting on dense multi-electrode arrays (MEAs), where neural signals
appear across many electrodes and spike sorting currently represents a major
computational bottleneck. We present several new techniques that make dense MEA
spike sorting more robust and scalable. Our pipeline is based on an efficient multistage “triage-then-cluster-then-pursuit” approach that initially extracts only clean,
high-quality waveforms from the electrophysiological time series by temporarily
skipping noisy or “collided” events (representing two neurons firing synchronously).
This is accomplished by developing a neural network detection method followed
by efficient outlier triaging. The clean waveforms are then used to infer the set
of neural spike waveform templates through nonparametric Bayesian clustering.
Our clustering approach adapts a “coreset” approach for data reduction and uses
efficient inference methods in a Dirichlet process mixture model framework to
dramatically improve the scalability and reliability of the entire pipeline. The
“triaged” waveforms are then finally recovered with matching-pursuit deconvolution
techniques. The proposed methods improve on the state-of-the-art in terms of
accuracy and stability on both real and biophysically-realistic simulated MEA data.
Furthermore, the proposed pipeline is efficient, learning templates and clustering
faster than real-time for a ' 500-electrode dataset, largely on a single CPU core.

1

Introduction

The analysis of large-scale multineuronal spike train data is crucial for current and future neuroscience
research. These analyses are predicated on the existence of reliable and reproducible methods that
feasibly scale to the increasing rate of data acquisition. A standard approach for collecting these data
is to use dense multi-electrode array (MEA) recordings followed by “spike sorting” algorithms to
turn the obtained raw electrical signals into spike trains.
A crucial consideration going forward is the ability to scale to massive datasets: MEAs currently scale
up to the order of 104 electrodes, but efforts are underway to increase this number to 106 electrodes1 .
At this scale any manual processing of the obtained data is infeasible. Therefore, automatic spike
sorting for dense MEAs has enjoyed significant recent attention [15, 9, 51, 24, 36, 20, 33, 12]. Despite
these efforts, spike sorting remains the major computational bottleneck in the scientific pipeline when
using dense MEAs, due both to the high computational cost of the algorithms and the human time
spent on manual postprocessing.
To accelerate progress on this critical scientific problem, our proposed methodology is guided by
several main principles. First, robustness is critical, since hand-tuning and post-processing is not
1

DARPA Neural Engineering System Design program BAA-16-09

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

