Safe and Nested Subgame Solving for
Imperfect-Information Games

Noam Brown
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15217
noamb@cs.cmu.edu

Tuomas Sandholm
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15217
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
In imperfect-information games, the optimal strategy in a subgame may depend
on the strategy in other, unreached subgames. Thus a subgame cannot be solved
in isolation and must instead consider the strategy for the entire game as a whole,
unlike perfect-information games. Nevertheless, it is possible to first approximate
a solution for the whole game and then improve it in individual subgames. This
is referred to as subgame solving. We introduce subgame-solving techniques that
outperform prior methods both in theory and practice. We also show how to adapt
them, and past subgame-solving techniques, to respond to opponent actions that
are outside the original action abstraction; this significantly outperforms the prior
state-of-the-art approach, action translation. Finally, we show that subgame solving
can be repeated as the game progresses down the game tree, leading to far lower
exploitability. These techniques were a key component of Libratus, the first AI to
defeat top humans in heads-up no-limit Texas hold’em poker.

1

Introduction

Imperfect-information games model strategic settings that have hidden information. They have a
myriad of applications including negotiation, auctions, cybersecurity, and physical security.
In perfect-information games, determining the optimal strategy at a decision point only requires
knowledge of the game tree’s current node and the remaining game tree beyond that node (the
subgame rooted at that node). This fact has been leveraged by nearly every AI for perfect-information
games, including AIs that defeated top humans in chess [7] and Go [29]. In checkers, the ability to
decompose the game into smaller independent subgames was even used to solve the entire game [27].
However, it is not possible to determine a subgame’s optimal strategy in an imperfect-information
game using only knowledge of that subgame, because the game tree’s exact node is typically unknown.
Instead, the optimal strategy may depend on the value an opponent could have received in some other,
unreached subgame. Although this is counter-intuitive, we provide a demonstration in Section 2.
Rather than rely on subgame decomposition, past approaches for imperfect-information games
typically solved the game as a whole upfront. For example, heads-up limit Texas hold’em, a relatively
simple form of poker with 1013 decision points, was essentially solved without decomposition [2].
However, this approach cannot extend to larger games, such as heads-up no-limit Texas hold’em—the
primary benchmark in imperfect-information game solving—which has 10161 decision points [16].
The standard approach to computing strategies in such large games is to first generate an abstraction
of the game, which is a smaller version of the game that retains as much as possible the strategic
characteristics of the original game [24, 26, 25]. For example, a continuous action space might
be discretized. This abstract game is solved and its solution is used when playing the full game
by mapping states in the full game to states in the abstract game. We refer to the solution of an
abstraction (or more generally any approximate solution to a game) as a blueprint strategy.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

