Q-LDA: Uncovering Latent Patterns in Text-based
Sequential Decision Processes
Jianshu Chen⇤ , Chong Wang† , Lin Xiao⇤ , Ji He‡ , Lihong Li† and Li Deng‡
⇤
Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, USA
{jianshuc,lin.xiao}@microsoft.com
†
Google Inc., Kirkland, WA, USA⇤
{chongw,lihong}@google.com
‡
Citadel LLC, Seattle/Chicago, USA
{Ji.He,Li.Deng}@citadel.com

Abstract
In sequential decision making, it is often important and useful for end users to
understand the underlying patterns or causes that lead to the corresponding decisions. However, typical deep reinforcement learning algorithms seldom provide
such information due to their black-box nature. In this paper, we present a probabilistic model, Q-LDA, to uncover latent patterns in text-based sequential decision
processes. The model can be understood as a variant of latent topic models that
are tailored to maximize total rewards; we further draw an interesting connection
between an approximate maximum-likelihood estimation of Q-LDA and the celebrated Q-learning algorithm. We demonstrate in the text-game domain that our
proposed method not only provides a viable mechanism to uncover latent patterns
in decision processes, but also obtains state-of-the-art rewards in these games.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning [21] plays an important role in solving sequential decision making problems,
and has seen considerable successes in many applications [16, 18, 20]. With these methods, however,
it is often difficult to understand or examine the underlying patterns or causes that lead to the sequence
of decisions. Being more interpretable to end users can provide more insights to the problem itself
and be potentially useful for downstream applications based on these results [5].
To investigate new approaches to uncovering underlying patterns of a text-based sequential decision
process, we use text games (also known as interactive fictions) [11, 19] as the experimental domain.
Specifically, we focus on choice-based and hypertext-based games studied in the literature [11],
where both the action space and the state space are characterized in natural languages. At each time
step, the decision maker (i.e., agent) observes one text document (i.e., observation text) that describes
the current observation of the game environment, and several text documents (i.e., action texts) that
characterize different possible actions that can be taken. Based on the history of these observations,
the agent selects one of the provided actions and the game transits to a new state with an immediate
reward. This game continues until the agent reaches a final state and receives a terminal reward.
In this paper, we present a probabilistic model called Q-LDA that is tailored to maximize total
rewards in a decision process. Specially, observation texts and action texts are characterized by two
separate topic models, which are variants of latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) [4]. In each topic
model, topic proportions are chained over time to model the dependencies for actions or states. And
⇤

The work was done while Chong Wang, Ji He, Lihong Li and Li Deng were at Microsoft Research.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

