MMD GAN: Towards Deeper Understanding of
Moment Matching Network
Chun-Liang Li1,⇤ Wei-Cheng Chang1,⇤ Yu Cheng2 Yiming Yang1 Barnabás Póczos1
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 AI Foundations, IBM Research
{chunlial,wchang2,yiming,bapoczos}@cs.cmu.edu chengyu@us.ibm.com
(⇤ denotes equal contribution)

Abstract
Generative moment matching network (GMMN) is a deep generative model that
differs from Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) by replacing the discriminator
in GAN with a two-sample test based on kernel maximum mean discrepancy
(MMD). Although some theoretical guarantees of MMD have been studied, the
empirical performance of GMMN is still not as competitive as that of GAN on
challenging and large benchmark datasets. The computational efficiency of GMMN
is also less desirable in comparison with GAN, partially due to its requirement for
a rather large batch size during the training. In this paper, we propose to improve
both the model expressiveness of GMMN and its computational efficiency by
introducing adversarial kernel learning techniques, as the replacement of a fixed
Gaussian kernel in the original GMMN. The new approach combines the key ideas
in both GMMN and GAN, hence we name it MMD GAN. The new distance measure
in MMD GAN is a meaningful loss that enjoys the advantage of weak⇤ topology
and can be optimized via gradient descent with relatively small batch sizes. In our
evaluation on multiple benchmark datasets, including MNIST, CIFAR-10, CelebA
and LSUN, the performance of MMD GAN significantly outperforms GMMN, and
is competitive with other representative GAN works.

1

Introduction

The essence of unsupervised learning models the underlying distribution PX of the data X . Deep
generative model [1, 2] uses deep learning to approximate the distribution of complex datasets with
promising results. However, modeling arbitrary density is a statistically challenging task [3]. In many
applications, such as caption generation [4], accurate density estimation is not even necessary since
we are only interested in sampling from the approximated distribution.
Rather than estimating the density of PX , Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [5] starts from a
base distribution PZ over Z, such as Gaussian distribution, then trains a transformation network g✓
such that P✓ ⇡ PX , where P✓ is the underlying distribution of g✓ (z) and z ⇠ PZ . During the training,
GAN-based algorithms require an auxiliary network f to estimate the distance between PX and P✓ .
Different probabilistic (pseudo) metrics have been studied [5–8] under GAN framework.
Instead of training an auxiliary network f for measuring the distance between PX and P✓ , Generative
moment matching network (GMMN) [9, 10] uses kernel maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) [11],
which is the centerpiece of nonparametric two-sample test, to determine the distribution distances.
During the training, g✓ is trained to pass the hypothesis test (minimize MMD distance). [11] shows
even the simple Gaussian kernel enjoys the strong theoretical guarantees (Theorem 1). However, the
empirical performance of GMMN does not meet its theoretical properties. There is no promising
empirical results comparable with GAN on challenging benchmarks [12, 13]. Computationally,
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

