A Greedy Approach for
Budgeted Maximum Inner Product Search
Hsiang-Fu Yu⇤
Amazon Inc.
rofuyu@cs.utexas.edu

Cho-Jui Hsieh
University of California, Davis
chohsieh@ucdavis.edu

Qi Lei
The University of Texas at Austin
leiqi@ices.utexas.edu

Inderjit S. Dhillon
The University of Texas at Austin
inderjit@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Maximum Inner Product Search (MIPS) is an important task in many machine
learning applications such as the prediction phase of low-rank matrix factorization
models and deep learning models. Recently, there has been substantial research
on how to perform MIPS in sub-linear time, but most of the existing work does
not have the flexibility to control the trade-off between search efficiency and
search quality. In this paper, we study the important problem of MIPS with a
computational budget. By carefully studying the problem structure of MIPS, we
develop a novel Greedy-MIPS algorithm, which can handle budgeted MIPS by
design. While simple and intuitive, Greedy-MIPS yields surprisingly superior
performance compared to state-of-the-art approaches. As a specific example, on a
candidate set containing half a million vectors of dimension 200, Greedy-MIPS
runs 200x faster than the naive approach while yielding search results with the
top-5 precision greater than 75%.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we study the computational issue in the prediction phase for many embedding based
models such as matrix factorization and deep learning models in recommender systems, which can be
mathematically formulated as a Maximum Inner Product Search (MIPS) problem. Specifically, given
a large collection of n candidate vectors: H = hj 2 Rk : 1, . . . , n and a query vector w 2 Rk ,
MIPS aims to identify a subset of candidates that have top largest inner product values with w. We
also denote H = [h1 , . . . , hj , . . . , hn ]> as the candidate matrix. A naive linear search procedure
to solve MIPS for a given query w requires O(nk) operations to compute n inner products and
O(n log n) operations to obtain the sorted ordering of the n candidates.
Recently, MIPS has drawn a lot of attention in the machine learning community due to its wide
applicability, such as the prediction phase of embedding based recommender systems [6, 7, 10].
In such an embedding based recommender system, each user i is associated with a vector wi of
dimension k, while each item j is associated with a vector hj of dimension k. The interaction (such
as preference) between a user and an item is modeled by wiT hj . It is clear that identifying top-ranked
items in such a system for a user is exactly a MIPS problem. Because both the number of users
(the number of queries) and the number of items (size of vector pool in MIPS) can easily grow to
millions, a naive linear search is extremely expensive; for example, to compute the preference for all
m users over n items with latent embeddings of dimension k in a recommender system requires at
least O(mnk) operations. When both m and n are large, the prediction procedure is extremely time
consuming; it is even slower than the training procedure used to obtain the m + n embeddings, which
⇤

Work done while at the University of Texas at Austin.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

