Sticking the Landing: Simple, Lower-Variance
Gradient Estimators for Variational Inference
Geoffrey Roeder
University of Toronto
roeder@cs.toronto.edu

Yuhuai Wu
University of Toronto
ywu@cs.toronto.edu

David Duvenaud
University of Toronto
duvenaud@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
We propose a simple and general variant of the standard reparameterized gradient
estimator for the variational evidence lower bound. Specifically, we remove a part
of the total derivative with respect to the variational parameters that corresponds to
the score function. Removing this term produces an unbiased gradient estimator
whose variance approaches zero as the approximate posterior approaches the exact
posterior. We analyze the behavior of this gradient estimator theoretically and
empirically, and generalize it to more complex variational distributions such as
mixtures and importance-weighted posteriors.

Introduction

Recent advances in variational inference have begun to
make approximate inference practical in large-scale latent
variable models. One of the main recent advances has
been the development of variational autoencoders along
with the reparameterization trick [Kingma and Welling,
2013, Rezende et al., 2014]. The reparameterization
trick is applicable to most continuous latent-variable models, and usually provides lower-variance gradient estimates than the more general REINFORCE gradient estimator [Williams, 1992].

KL( φinit k φtrue )

1

Optimization using:
Path Derivative
Total Derivative

400
600
800
1000
1200
Intuitively, the reparameterization trick provides more informative gradients by exposing the dependence of samIterations
pled latent variables z on variational parameters φ. In
contrast, the REINFORCE gradient estimate only de- Figure 1: Fitting a 100-dimensional variapends on the relationship between the density function tional posterior to another Gaussian, using
log qφ (z|x, φ) and its parameters.
standard gradient versus our proposed path

derivative gradient estimator.

Surprisingly, even the reparameterized gradient estimate
contains the score function—a special case of the REINFORCE gradient estimator. We show that this term can
easily be removed, and that doing so gives even lower-variance gradient estimates in many circumstances. In particular, as the variational posterior approaches the true posterior, this gradient estimator
approaches zero variance faster, making stochastic gradient-based optimization converge and "stick"
to the true variational parameters, as seen in figure 1.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

