Adaptive SVRG Methods under Error Bound
Conditions with Unknown Growth Parameter
Yi Xu† , Qihang Lin‡ , Tianbao Yang†
Department of Computer Science, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA
‡
Department of Management Sciences, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA
{yi-xu, qihang-lin, tianbao-yang}@uiowa.edu
†

Abstract
Error bound, an inherent property of an optimization problem, has recently revived
in the development of algorithms with improved global convergence without strong
convexity. The most studied error bound is the quadratic error bound, which
generalizes strong convexity and is satisfied by a large family of machine learning
problems. Quadratic error bound have been leveraged to achieve linear convergence
in many first-order methods including the stochastic variance reduced gradient
(SVRG) method, which is one of the most important stochastic optimization
methods in machine learning. However, the studies along this direction face the
critical issue that the algorithms must depend on an unknown growth parameter (a
generalization of strong convexity modulus) in the error bound. This parameter is
difficult to estimate exactly and the algorithms choosing this parameter heuristically
do not have theoretical convergence guarantee. To address this issue, we propose
novel SVRG methods that automatically search for this unknown parameter on the
fly of optimization while still obtain almost the same convergence rate as when this
parameter is known. We also analyze the convergence property of SVRG methods
under Hölderian error bound, which generalizes the quadratic error bound.

1

Introduction

Finite-sum optimization problems have broad applications in machine learning, including regression by minimizing the (regularized) empirical square losses and classification by minimizing the
(regularized) empirical logistic losses. In this paper, we consider the following finite-sum problem:
n

1X
min F (x) ,
fi (x) + Ψ(x),
x∈Ω
n i=1

(1)

where fi (x) is a continuously differential convex function whose gradient is Lipschitz continuous
and Ψ(x) is a proper, lower-semicontinuous convex function [24]. Traditional proximal gradient (PG)
methods or accelerated proximal gradient (APG) methods for solving (1) become prohibited when
the number of components n is very large, which has spurred many studies on developing stochastic
optimization algorithms with fast convergence [4, 8, 25, 1].
An important milestone among several others is the stochastic variance reduced gradient (SVRG)
method [8] and its proximal variant [26]. Under the strong convexity of the objective function F (x),
linear convergence of SVRG and its proximal variant has been established. Many variations of SVRG
have also been proposed [2, 1]. However, the key assumption of strong convexity limits the power of
SVRG for many interesting problems in machine learning without strong convexity. For example, in
regression with high-dimensional data one is usually interested in solving the least-squares regression
with an `1 norm regularization or constraint (known as the LASSO-type problem). A common
practice for solving non-strongly convex finite-sum problems by SVRG is to add a small strongly
convex regularizer (e.g., λ2 kxk22 ) [26]. Recently, a variant of SVRG (named SVRG++ [2]) was
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

