Adaptive Batch Size for Safe Policy Gradients

Matteo Papini
DEIB
Politecnico di Milano, Italy

Matteo Pirotta
SequeL Team
Inria Lille, France

Marcello Restelli
DEIB
Politecnico di Milano, Italy

matteo.papini@polimi.it

matteo.pirotta@inria.fr

marcello.restelli@polimi.it

Abstract
Policy gradient methods are among the best Reinforcement Learning (RL) techniques to solve complex control problems. In real-world RL applications, it is
common to have a good initial policy whose performance needs to be improved and
it may not be acceptable to try bad policies during the learning process. Although
several methods for choosing the step size exist, research paid less attention to
determine the batch size, that is the number of samples used to estimate the gradient
direction for each update of the policy parameters. In this paper, we propose a set
of methods to jointly optimize the step and the batch sizes that guarantee (with
high probability) to improve the policy performance after each update. Besides
providing theoretical guarantees, we show numerical simulations to analyse the
behaviour of our methods.

1

Introduction

In many real-world sequential decision-making problems (e.g., industrial robotics, natural resource
management, smart grids), engineers have developed automatic control policies usually derived
from modelling approaches. The performance of such policies strictly depends on the model
accuracy that for some tasks (e.g., financial applications) may be quite poor. Furthermore, even when
accurate models are available and good control policies are obtained, their performance may degrade
over time due to the non-stationary dynamics of the problem, thus requiring human intervention
to adjust the policy parameters (think about equipment wear in smart manufacturing). In such
scenarios, Reinforcement Learning (RL) techniques represent an interesting solution to get an online
optimization of the control policies and to hinder the performance loss caused by unpredictable
environment changes, thus allowing to improve the autonomy of the control system.
In the last years, several RL studies [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7] have shown that policy-search methods can
effectively be employed to solve complex control tasks (e.g., robotic ones) due to their capabilities to
handle high-dimensional continuous problems, face uncertain and partial observations of the state,
and incorporate prior knowledge about the problem by means of the definition of a proper policy
model whose parameters need to be optimized (refer to [8, 9] for recent surveys). This last property is
particularly appealing when the reinforcement learning algorithm needs to operate online in scenarios
where bad exploratory policies may damage the system. A proper design of the policy model may
allow excluding such policies. On the other hand, in order to speed up the learning process, most RL
methods need to explore the policy space by executing policies that may be worse than the initial
one. This is not acceptable in many relevant applications. Under this perspective, we are interested in
developing RL methods that are (in high probability) monotonically improving.
Inspired by the conservative policy iteration approach [10], recently, new advances have been done
in the field of approximate policy iteration algorithms [11, 12], obtaining methods that can learn
faster while still giving statistical guarantees of improvement after each policy update [13, 14]. These
methods are usually referred to as conservative, monotonically improving, or safe (as we do in this
paper). These ideas have been exploited also for deriving novel safe policy-search approaches [15, 16,
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

