Unifying PAC and Regret: Uniform PAC Bounds for
Episodic Reinforcement Learning

Tor Lattimore∗
tor.lattimore@gmail.com

Christoph Dann
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie-Mellon University
cdann@cdann.net

Emma Brunskill
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
ebrun@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Statistical performance bounds for reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms can be
critical for high-stakes applications like healthcare. This paper introduces a new
framework for theoretically measuring the performance of such algorithms called
Uniform-PAC, which is a strengthening of the classical Probably Approximately
Correct (PAC) framework. In contrast to the PAC framework, the uniform version
may be used to derive high probability regret guarantees and so forms a bridge
between the two setups that has been missing in the literature. We demonstrate
the benefits of the new framework for finite-state episodic MDPs with a new
algorithm that is Uniform-PAC and simultaneously achieves optimal regret and
PAC guarantees except for a factor of the horizon.

1

Introduction

The recent empirical successes of deep reinforcement learning (RL) are tremendously exciting, but the
performance of these approaches still varies significantly across domains, each of which requires the
user to solve a new tuning problem [1]. Ultimately we would like reinforcement learning algorithms
that simultaneously perform well empirically and have strong theoretical guarantees. Such algorithms
are especially important for high stakes domains like health care, education and customer service,
where non-expert users demand excellent outcomes.
We propose a new framework for measuring the performance of reinforcement learning algorithms
called Uniform-PAC. Briefly, an algorithm is Uniform-PAC if with high probability it simultaneously
for all ε > 0 selects an ε-optimal policy on all episodes except for a number that scales polynomially
with 1/ε. Algorithms that are Uniform-PAC converge to an optimal policy with high probability
and immediately yield both PAC and high probability regret bounds, which makes them superior to
algorithms that come with only PAC or regret guarantees. Indeed,
(a) Neither PAC nor regret guarantees imply convergence to optimal policies with high probability;
(b) (ε, δ)-PAC algorithms may be ε/2-suboptimal in every episode;
(c) Algorithms with small regret may be maximally suboptimal infinitely often.
∗

Tor Lattimore is now at DeepMind, London

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

