A graph-theoretic approach to multitasking

Noga Alon∗
Tel-Aviv University
Sebastian Musslick
Princeton University

Daniel Reichman†
UC Berkeley
Jonathan D. Cohen ‡
Princeton University

Igor Shinkar∗
UC Berkeley

Thomas L. Griffiths
UC Berkeley

Tal Wagner∗
MIT
Biswadip Dey
Princeton University

Kayhan Ozcimder
Princeton University

Abstract
A key feature of neural network architectures is their ability to support the simultaneous interaction among large numbers of units in the learning and processing of
representations. However, how the richness of such interactions trades off against
the ability of a network to simultaneously carry out multiple independent processes
– a salient limitation in many domains of human cognition – remains largely unexplored. In this paper we use a graph-theoretic analysis of network architecture
to address this question, where tasks are represented as edges in a bipartite graph
G = (A ∪ B, E). We define a new measure of multitasking capacity of such
networks, based on the assumptions that tasks that need to be multitasked rely on
independent resources, i.e., form a matching, and that tasks can be multitasked
without interference if they form an induced matching. Our main result is an
inherent tradeoff between the multitasking capacity and the average degree of the
network that holds regardless of the network architecture. These results are also
extended to networks of depth greater than 2. On the positive side, we demonstrate
that networks that are random-like (e.g., locally sparse) can have desirable multitasking properties. Our results shed light into the parallel-processing limitations of
neural systems and provide insights that may be useful for the analysis and design
of parallel architectures.

1

Introduction

One of the primary features of neural network architectures is their ability to support parallel
distributed processing [RMG+ 86]. The decentralized nature of biological and artificial nets results in
greater robustness and fault tolerance when compared to serial architectures such as Turing machines.
On the other hand, the lack of a central coordination mechanism in neural networks can result
in interference between units (neurons) and such interference effects have been demonstrated in
several settings such as the analysis of associative memories [AGS85] and multitask learning [MC89].
∗

Equal contribution.
Equal contribution. Supported by DARPA contract N66001-15-2-4048, Value Alignment in Autonomous
Systems and Grant: 2014-1600, Sponsor: William and Flora Hewlett Foundation, Project Title: Cybersecurity
and Internet Policy
‡
This publication was made possible through the support of a grant from the John Templeton Foundation.
The opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
John Templeton Foundation
†

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

