Online Influence Maximization under Independent
Cascade Model with Semi-Bandit Feedback
Zheng Wen
Adobe Research
zwen@adobe.com

Branislav Kveton
Adobe Research
kveton@adobe.com

Michal Valko
SequeL team, INRIA Lille - Nord Europe
michal.valko@inria.fr

Sharan Vaswani
University of British Columbia
sharanv@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
We study the online influence maximization problem in social networks under
the independent cascade model. Specifically, we aim to learn the set of “best
influencers” in a social network online while repeatedly interacting with it. We address the challenges of (i) combinatorial action space, since the number of feasible
influencer sets grows exponentially with the maximum number of influencers, and
(ii) limited feedback, since only the influenced portion of the network is observed.
Under a stochastic semi-bandit feedback, we propose and analyze IMLinUCB, a
computationally efficient UCB-based algorithm. Our bounds on the cumulative
regret are polynomial in all quantities of interest, achieve near-optimal dependence
on the number of interactions and reflect the topology of the network and the activation probabilities of its edges, thereby giving insights on the problem complexity.
To the best of our knowledge, these are the first such results. Our experiments show
that in several representative graph topologies, the regret of IMLinUCB scales as
suggested by our upper bounds. IMLinUCB permits linear generalization and thus
is both statistically and computationally suitable for large-scale problems. Our
experiments also show that IMLinUCB with linear generalization can lead to low
regret in real-world online influence maximization.

1

Introduction

Social networks are increasingly important as media for spreading information, ideas, and influence. Computational advertising studies models of information propagation or diffusion in such
networks [16, 6, 10]. Viral marketing aims to use this information propagation to spread awareness
about a specific product. More precisely, agents (marketers) aim to select a fixed number of influencers (called seeds or source nodes) and provide them with free products or discounts. They expect
that these users will influence their neighbours and, transitively, other users in the social network to
adopt the product. This will thus result in information propagating across the network as more users
adopt or become aware of the product. The marketer has a budget on the number of free products and
must choose seeds in order to maximize the influence spread, which is the expected number of users
that become aware of the product. This problem is referred to as influence maximization (IM) [16].
For IM, the social network is modeled as a directed graph with the nodes representing users, and
the edges representing relations (e.g., friendships on Facebook, following on Twitter) between them.
Each directed edge (i, j) is associated with an activation probability w(i, j) that models the strength
of influence that user i has on user j. We say a node j is a downstream neighbor of node i if
there is a directed edge (i, j) from i to j. The IM problem has been studied under a number of
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

