Decoding with Value Networks for Neural Machine
Translation
Di He1
di_he@pku.edu.cn
Tao Qin4
taoqin@microsoft.com

Hanqing Lu2
hanqinglu@cmu.edu
Liwei Wang1,5
wanglw@cis.pku.edu.cn

Yingce Xia3
xiayingc@mail.ustc.edu.cn
Tie-Yan Liu4
tie-yan.liu@microsoft.com

1

Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE, School of EECS, Peking University
2
Carnegie Mellon University 3 University of Science and Technology of China
4
Microsoft Research
5
Center for Data Science, Peking University, Beijing Institute of Big Data Research

Abstract
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) has become a popular technology in recent
years, and beam search is its de facto decoding method due to the shrunk search
space and reduced computational complexity. However, since it only searches
for local optima at each time step through one-step forward looking, it usually
cannot output the best target sentence. Inspired by the success and methodology of
AlphaGo, in this paper we propose using a prediction network to improve beam
search, which takes the source sentence x, the currently available decoding output
y1 , · · · , yt−1 and a candidate word w at step t as inputs and predicts the long-term
value (e.g., BLEU score) of the partial target sentence if it is completed by the NMT
model. Following the practice in reinforcement learning, we call this prediction
network value network. Specifically, we propose a recurrent structure for the value
network, and train its parameters from bilingual data. During the test time, when
choosing a word w for decoding, we consider both its conditional probability
given by the NMT model and its long-term value predicted by the value network.
Experiments show that such an approach can significantly improve the translation
accuracy on several translation tasks.

1

Introduction

Neural Machine Translation (NMT), which is based on deep neural networks and provides an endto-end solution to machine translation, has attracted much attention from the research community
[2, 6, 12, 20] and gradually been adopted by industry in past several years [18, 22]. NMT uses
an RNN-based encoder-decoder framework to model the entire translation process. In training, it
maximizes the likelihood of a target sentence given a source sentence. In testing, given a source
sentence x, it tries to find a sentence y ∗ in the target language that maximizes the conditional
probability P (y|x). Since the number of possible target sentences is exponentially large, finding the
optimal y ∗ is NP-hard. Thus beam search is commonly employed to find a reasonably good y.
Beam search is a heuristic search algorithm that maintains the top-scoring partial sequences expanded
in a left-to-right fashion. In particular, it keeps a pool of candidates each of which is a partial sequence.
At each time step, the algorithm expands each candidate by appending a new word, and then keeps
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

