Learning ReLUs via Gradient Descent

Mahdi Soltanolkotabi
Ming Hsieh Department of Electrical Engineering
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
soltanol@usc.edu

Abstract
In this paper we study the problem of learning Rectified Linear Units (ReLUs)
which are functions of the form x ↦ max(0, ⟨w, x⟩) with w ∈ Rd denoting the
weight vector. We study this problem in the high-dimensional regime where the
number of observations are fewer than the dimension of the weight vector. We
assume that the weight vector belongs to some closed set (convex or nonconvex)
which captures known side-information about its structure. We focus on the
realizable model where the inputs are chosen i.i.d. from a Gaussian distribution
and the labels are generated according to a planted weight vector. We show that
projected gradient descent, when initialized at 0, converges at a linear rate to the
planted model with a number of samples that is optimal up to numerical constants.
Our results on the dynamics of convergence of these very shallow neural nets may
provide some insights towards understanding the dynamics of deeper architectures.

1

Introduction

Nonlinear data-fitting problems are fundamental to many supervised learning tasks in signal processing and machine learning. Given training data consisting of n pairs of input features xi ∈ Rd and
desired outputs yi ∈ R we wish to infer a function that best explains the training data. In this paper
we focus on fitting Rectified Linear Units (ReLUs) to the data which are functions φw ∶ Rd → R of
the form
φw (x) = max (0, ⟨w, x⟩) .
A natural approach to fitting ReLUs to data is via minimizing the least-squares misfit aggregated over
the data. This optimization problem takes the form
min

w∈Rd

L(w) ∶=

1 n
2
∑ (max (0, ⟨w, xi ⟩) − yi )
n i=1

subject to R(w) ≤ R,

(1.1)

with R ∶ Rd → R denoting a regularization function that encodes prior information on the weight
vector.
Fitting nonlinear models such as ReLUs have a rich history in statistics and learning theory [12]
with interesting new developments emerging [6] (we shall discuss all these results in greater detail in
Section 5). Most recently, nonlinear data fitting problems in the form of neural networks (a.k.a. deep
learning) have emerged as powerful tools for automatically extracting interpretable and actionable
information from raw forms of data, leading to striking breakthroughs in a multitude of applications
[13, 15, 4]. In these and many other empirical domains it is common to use local search heuristics
such as gradient or stochastic gradient descent for nonlinear data fitting. These local search heuristics
are surprisingly effective on real or randomly generated data. However, despite their empirical success
the reasons for their effectiveness remains mysterious.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

