Online Learning for Multivariate Hawkes Processes

Yingxiang Yang∗
Jalal Etesami†
Niao He†
Negar Kiyavash∗†
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801
{yyang172,etesami2,niaohe,kiyavash} @illinois.edu

Abstract
We develop a nonparametric and online learning algorithm that estimates the
triggering functions of a multivariate Hawkes process (MHP). The approach we
take approximates the triggering function fi,j (t) by functions in a reproducing
kernel Hilbert space (RKHS), and maximizes a time-discretized version of the
log-likelihood, with Tikhonov regularization. Theoretically, our algorithm achieves
an O(log T ) regret bound. Numerical results show that our algorithm offers a
competing performance to that of the nonparametric batch learning algorithm, with
a run time comparable to parametric online learning algorithms.

1

Introduction

Multivariate Hawkes processes (MHPs) are counting processes where an arrival in one dimension can
affect the arrival rates of other dimensions. They were originally proposed to statistically model the
arrival patterns of earthquakes [16]. However, MHP’s ability to capture mutual excitation between
dimensions of a process also makes it a popular model in many other areas, including high frequency
trading [3], modeling neural spike trains [24], and modeling diffusion in social networks [28], and
capturing causality [12, 18].
For a p-dimensional MHP, the intensity function of the i-th dimension takes the following form:
p Z t
X
λi (t) = µi +
fi,j (t − τ )dNj (τ ),
(1)
j=1

0

where the constant µi is the base intensity of the i-th dimension, Nj (t) counts the number of arrivals
in the j-th dimension within [0, t], and fi,j (t) is the triggering function that embeds the underlying
causal structure of the model. In particular, one arrival in the j-th dimension at time τ will affect the
intensity of the arrivals in the i-th dimension at time t by the amount fi,j (t − τ ) for t > τ . Therefore,
learning the triggering function is the key to learning an MHP model. In this work, we consider the
problem of estimating the fi,j (t)s using nonparametric online learning techniques.
1.1

Motivations

Why nonparametric? Most of existing works consider exponential triggering functions:
fi,j (t) = αi,j exp{−βi,j t}1{t > 0},

(2)

where αi,j is unknown while βi,j is given a priori. Under this assumption, learning fi,j (t) is
equivalent to learning a real number, αi,j . However, there are many scenarios where (2) fails to
∗

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering. † Department of Industrial and Enterprise Systems
Engineering. This work was supported in part by MURI grant ARMY W911NF-15-1-0479 and ONR grant
W911NF-15-1-0479.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

