Universal Style Transfer via Feature Transforms

Yijun Li
UC Merced
yli62@ucmerced.edu
Zhaowen Wang
Adobe Research
zhawang@adobe.com

Chen Fang
Adobe Research
cfang@adobe.com
Xin Lu
Adobe Research
xinl@adobe.com

Jimei Yang
Adobe Research
jimyang@adobe.com
Ming-Hsuan Yang
UC Merced, NVIDIA Research
mhyang@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
Universal style transfer aims to transfer arbitrary visual styles to content images.
Existing feed-forward based methods, while enjoying the inference efficiency, are
mainly limited by inability of generalizing to unseen styles or compromised visual
quality. In this paper, we present a simple yet effective method that tackles these
limitations without training on any pre-defined styles. The key ingredient of our
method is a pair of feature transforms, whitening and coloring, that are embedded
to an image reconstruction network. The whitening and coloring transforms reflect
a direct matching of feature covariance of the content image to a given style
image, which shares similar spirits with the optimization of Gram matrix based
cost in neural style transfer. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm by
generating high-quality stylized images with comparisons to a number of recent
methods. We also analyze our method by visualizing the whitened features and
synthesizing textures via simple feature coloring.

1

Introduction

Style transfer is an important image editing task which enables the creation of new artistic works.
Given a pair of examples, i.e., the content and style image, it aims to synthesize an image that
preserves some notion of the content but carries characteristics of the style. The key challenge is how
to extract effective representations of the style and then match it in the content image. The seminal
work by Gatys et al. [8, 9] show that the correlation between features, i.e., Gram matrix or covariance
matrix (shown to be as effective as Gram matrix in [20]), extracted by a trained deep neural network
has remarkable ability of capturing visual styles. Since then, significant efforts have been made to
synthesize stylized images by minimizing Gram/covariance matrices based loss functions, through
either iterative optimization [9] or trained feed-forward networks [27, 16, 20, 2, 6]. Despite the recent
rapid progress, these existing works often trade off between generalization, quality and efficiency,
which means that optimization-based methods can handle arbitrary styles with pleasing visual quality
but at the expense of high computational costs, while feed-forward approaches can be executed
efficiently but are limited to a fixed number of styles or compromised visual quality.
By far, the problem of universal style transfer remains a daunting task as it is challenging to develop
neural networks that achieve generalization, quality and efficiency at the same time. The main issue
is how to properly and effectively apply the extracted style characteristics (feature correlations) to
content images in a style-agnostic manner.
In this work, we propose a simple yet effective method for universal style transfer, which enjoys
the style-agnostic generalization ability with marginally compromised visual quality and execution
efficiency. The transfer task is formulated as image reconstruction processes, with the content features
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

