Approximation and Convergence Properties of
Generative Adversarial Learning

Shuang Liu
University of California, San Diego
shuangliu@ucsd.edu

Olivier Bousquet
Google Brain
obousquet@google.com

Kamalika Chaudhuri
University of California, San Diego
kamalika@cs.ucsd.edu

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GAN) approximate a target data distribution by
jointly optimizing an objective function through a "two-player game" between a
generator and a discriminator. Despite their empirical success, however, two very
basic questions on how well they can approximate the target distribution remain
unanswered. First, it is not known how restricting the discriminator family affects
the approximation quality. Second, while a number of different objective functions
have been proposed, we do not understand when convergence to the global minima
of the objective function leads to convergence to the target distribution under
various notions of distributional convergence.
In this paper, we address these questions in a broad and unified setting by defining
a notion of adversarial divergences that includes a number of recently proposed
objective functions. We show that if the objective function is an adversarial
divergence with some additional conditions, then using a restricted discriminator
family has a moment-matching effect. Additionally, we show that for objective
functions that are strict adversarial divergences, convergence in the objective
function implies weak convergence, thus generalizing previous results.

1

Introduction

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have attracted an enormous amount of recent attention in
machine learning. In a generative adversarial network, the goal is to produce an approximation to
a target data distribution  from which only samples are available. This is done iteratively via two
components – a generator and a discriminator, which are usually implemented by neural networks.
The generator takes in random (usually Gaussian or uniform) noise as input and attempts to transform
it to match the target distribution ; the discriminator aims to accurately discriminate between
samples from the target distribution and those produced by the generator. Estimation proceeds by
iteratively refining the generator and the discriminator to optimize an objective function until the
target distribution is indistinguishable from the distribution induced by the generator. The practical
success of GANs has led to a large volume of recent literature on variants which have many desirable
properties; examples are the f-GAN [10], the MMD-GAN [5, 9], the Wasserstein-GAN [2], among
many others.
In spite of their enormous practical success, unlike more traditional methods such as maximum
likelihood inference, GANs are theoretically rather poorly-understood. In particular, two very basic
questions on how well they can approximate the target distribution , even in the presence of a very
large number of samples and perfect optimization, remain largely unanswered. The first relates to the
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

