Learning Efficient Object Detection Models with
Knowledge Distillation

Guobin Chen1,2 Wongun Choi1 Xiang Yu1 Tony Han2 Manmohan Chandraker1,3
1
2
3
NEC Labs America
University of Missouri
University of California, San Diego

Abstract
Despite significant accuracy improvement in convolutional neural networks (CNN)
based object detectors, they often require prohibitive runtimes to process an image
for real-time applications. State-of-the-art models often use very deep networks
with a large number of floating point operations. Efforts such as model compression
learn compact models with fewer number of parameters, but with much reduced
accuracy. In this work, we propose a new framework to learn compact and fast object detection networks with improved accuracy using knowledge distillation [20]
and hint learning [34]. Although knowledge distillation has demonstrated excellent
improvements for simpler classification setups, the complexity of detection poses
new challenges in the form of regression, region proposals and less voluminous labels. We address this through several innovations such as a weighted cross-entropy
loss to address class imbalance, a teacher bounded loss to handle the regression
component and adaptation layers to better learn from intermediate teacher distributions. We conduct comprehensive empirical evaluation with different distillation
configurations over multiple datasets including PASCAL, KITTI, ILSVRC and
MS-COCO. Our results show consistent improvement in accuracy-speed trade-offs
for modern multi-class detection models.

1

Introduction

Recent years have seen tremendous increase in the accuracy of object detection, relying on deep
convolutional neural networks (CNNs). This has made visual object detection an attractive possibility
for domains ranging from surveillance to autonomous driving. However, speed is a key requirement in
many applications, which fundamentally contends with demands on accuracy. Thus, while advances
in object detection have relied on increasingly deeper architectures, they are associated with an
increase in computational expense at runtime. But it is also known that deep neural networks are
over-parameterized to aid generalization. Thus, to achieve faster speeds, some prior works explore
new structures such as fully convolutional networks, or lightweight models with fewer channels and
small filters [22, 25]. While impressive speedups are obtained, they are still far from real-time, with
careful redesign and tuning necessary for further improvements.
Deeper networks tend to have better performance under proper training, since they have ample
network capacity. Tasks such as object detection for a few categories might not necessarily need
that model capacity. In that direction, several works in image classification use model compression,
whereby weights in each layer are decomposed, followed by layer-wise reconstruction or fine-tuning
to recover some of the accuracy [9, 26, 41, 42]. This results in significant speed-ups, but there is
often a gap between the accuracies of original and compressed models, which is especially large
when using compressed models for more complex problems such as object detection. On the other
hand, seminal works on knowledge distillation show that a shallow or compressed model trained
to mimic the behavior of a deeper or more complex model can recover some or all of the accuracy
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

