Variational Inference via
χ Upper Bound Minimization

Adji B. Dieng
Columbia University

Dustin Tran
Columbia University

John Paisley
Columbia University

Rajesh Ranganath
Princeton University

David M. Blei
Columbia University

Abstract
Variational inference (VI) is widely used as an efficient alternative to Markov
chain Monte Carlo. It posits a family of approximating distributions q and finds
the closest member to the exact posterior p. Closeness is usually measured via a
divergence D(q||p) from q to p. While successful, this approach also has problems.
Notably, it typically leads to underestimation of the posterior variance. In this paper
we propose CHIVI, a black-box variational inference algorithm that minimizes
Dχ (p||q), the χ-divergence from p to q. CHIVI minimizes an upper bound of the
model evidence, which we term the χ upper bound (CUBO). Minimizing the
CUBO leads to improved posterior uncertainty, and it can also be used with the
classical VI lower bound (ELBO) to provide a sandwich estimate of the model
evidence. We study CHIVI on three models: probit regression, Gaussian process
classification, and a Cox process model of basketball plays. When compared to
expectation propagation and classical VI, CHIVI produces better error rates and
more accurate estimates of posterior variance.

1

Introduction

Bayesian analysis provides a foundation for reasoning with probabilistic models. We first set a joint
distribution p(x, z) of latent variables z and observed variables x. We then analyze data through the
posterior, p(z | x). In most applications, the posterior is difficult to compute because the marginal
likelihood p(x) is intractable. We must use approximate posterior inference methods such as Monte
Carlo [1] and variational inference [2]. This paper focuses on variational inference.
Variational inference approximates the posterior using optimization. The idea is to posit a family of
approximating distributions and then to find the member of the family that is closest to the posterior.
Typically, closeness is defined by the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence KL(q k p), where q(z; λ) is
a variational family indexed by parameters λ. This approach, which we call KLVI, also provides the
evidence lower bound (ELBO), a convenient lower bound of the model evidence log p(x).
KLVI scales well and is suited to applications that use complex models to analyze large data sets [3].
But it has drawbacks. For one, it tends to favor underdispersed approximations relative to the exact
posterior [4, 5]. This produces difficulties with light-tailed posteriors when the variational distribution
has heavier tails. For example, KLVI for Gaussian process classification typically uses a Gaussian
approximation; this leads to unstable optimization and a poor approximation [6].

One alternative to KLVI is expectation propagation (EP), which enjoys good empirical performance
on models with light-tailed posteriors [7, 8]. Procedurally, EP reverses the arguments in the KL divergence and performs local minimizations of KL(p k q); this corresponds to iterative moment matching
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

