First-Order Adaptive Sample Size Methods to
Reduce Complexity of Empirical Risk Minimization
Aryan Mokhtari
University of Pennsylvania
aryanm@seas.upenn.edu

Alejandro Ribeiro
University of Pennsylvania
aribeiro@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
This paper studies empirical risk minimization (ERM) problems for large-scale
datasets and incorporates the idea of adaptive sample size methods to improve the
guaranteed convergence bounds for first-order stochastic and deterministic methods. In contrast to traditional methods that attempt to solve the ERM problem
corresponding to the full dataset directly, adaptive sample size schemes start with
a small number of samples and solve the corresponding ERM problem to its statistical accuracy. The sample size is then grown geometrically – e.g., scaling by a
factor of two – and use the solution of the previous ERM as a warm start for the
new ERM. Theoretical analyses show that the use of adaptive sample size methods
reduces the overall computational cost of achieving the statistical accuracy of the
whole dataset for a broad range of deterministic and stochastic first-order methods. The gains are specific to the choice of method. When particularized to, e.g.,
accelerated gradient descent and stochastic variance reduce gradient, the computational cost advantage is a logarithm of the number of training samples. Numerical
experiments on various datasets confirm theoretical claims and showcase the gains
of using the proposed adaptive sample size scheme.

1

Introduction

Finite sum minimization (FSM) problems involve objectives that are expressed as the sum of a
typically large number of component functions. Since evaluating descent directions is costly, it is
customary to utilize stochastic descent methods that access only one of the functions at each iteration. When considering first order methods, a fitting measure of complexity is the total number of
gradient evaluations that are needed to achieve optimality of order ✏. The paradigmatic deterministic
gradient descent (GD) method serves as a naive complexity upper bound and has long been known
to obtain an ✏-suboptimal solution with O(N  log(1/✏)) gradient evaluations for an FSM problem
with N component functions and condition number  [13].
p Accelerated gradient descent (AGD) [14]
improves the computational complexity of GD to O(N  log(1/✏)), which is known to be the optimal bound for deterministic first-order methods [13]. In terms of stochastic optimization, it has been
only recently that linearly convergent methods have been proposed. Stochastic averaging gradient
[15, 8], stochastic variance reduction [10], and stochastic dual coordinate ascent [17, 18], have all
been shown to converge to ✏-accuracy at a cost of O((N +) log(1/✏)) gradient
p evaluations. The accelerating catalyst framework in [11] further
reduces
complexity
to
O((N
+
N ) log() log(1/✏))
p
and the works in [1] and [7] to O((N + N ) log(1/✏)). The latter matches the upper bound on
the complexity of stochastic methods [20].
Perhaps the main motivation for studying FSM is the solution of empirical risk minimization (ERM)
problems associated with a large training set. ERM problems are particular cases of FSM, but they
do have two specific qualities that come from the fact that ERM is a proxy for statistical loss minimization. The first property is that since the empirical risk and the statistical loss have different
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

