Quantifying how much sensory information in a
neural code is relevant for behavior
Giuseppe Pica1,2
giuseppe.pica@iit.it
Houman Safaai1,3
houman_safaai@hms.harvard.edu
Tommaso Fellin2,6
tommaso.fellin@iit.it

Eugenio Piasini1
eugenio.piasini@iit.it
Caroline A. Runyan3,4
runyan@pitt.edu

Christoph Kayser7,8
christoph.kayser@uni-bielefeld.de

Christopher D. Harvey3
Christopher_Harvey@hms.harvard.edu

1

Mathew E. Diamond5
diamond@sissa.it

Stefano Panzeri1,2
stefano.panzeri@iit.it

Neural Computation Laboratory, Center for Neuroscience and Cognitive Systems@UniTn,
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Rovereto (TN) 38068, Italy
2
Neural Coding Laboratory, Center for Neuroscience and Cognitive Systems@UniTn,
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Rovereto (TN) 38068, Italy
3
Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA
4
Department of Neuroscience, University of Pittsburgh,
Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition, Pittsburgh, USA
5
Tactile Perception and Learning Laboratory,
International School for Advanced Studies (SISSA), Trieste, Italy
6
Optical Approaches to Brain Function Laboratory,
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genova 16163, Italy
7
Institute of Neuroscience and Psychology, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK
8
Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Faculty of Biology,
Bielefeld University, Universitätsstr. 25, 33615 Bielefeld, Germany

Abstract
Determining how much of the sensory information carried by a neural code contributes to behavioral performance is key to understand sensory function and neural
information flow. However, there are as yet no analytical tools to compute this information that lies at the intersection between sensory coding and behavioral readout.
Here we develop a novel measure, termed the information-theoretic intersection
information III (S; R; C), that quantifies how much of the sensory information
carried by a neural response R is used for behavior during perceptual discrimination tasks. Building on the Partial Information Decomposition framework, we
define III (S; R; C) as the part of the mutual information between the stimulus S
and the response R that also informs the consequent behavioral choice C. We
compute III (S; R; C) in the analysis of two experimental cortical datasets, to show
how this measure can be used to compare quantitatively the contributions of spike
timing and spike rates to task performance, and to identify brain areas or neural
populations that specifically transform sensory information into choice.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

