Polynomial Codes: an Optimal Design for
High-Dimensional Coded Matrix Multiplication

∗

Qian Yu∗ , Mohammad Ali Maddah-Ali† , and A. Salman Avestimehr∗
Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
†
Nokia Bell Labs, Holmdel, NJ, USA

Abstract
We consider a large-scale matrix multiplication problem where the computation
is carried out using a distributed system with a master node and multiple worker
nodes, where each worker can store parts of the input matrices. We propose a
computation strategy that leverages ideas from coding theory to design intermediate
computations at the worker nodes, in order to optimally deal with straggling
workers. The proposed strategy, named as polynomial codes, achieves the optimum
recovery threshold, defined as the minimum number of workers that the master
needs to wait for in order to compute the output. This is the first code that
achieves the optimal utilization of redundancy for tolerating stragglers or failures
in distributed matrix multiplication. Furthermore, by leveraging the algebraic
structure of polynomial codes, we can map the reconstruction problem of the final
output to a polynomial interpolation problem, which can be solved efficiently.
Polynomial codes provide order-wise improvement over the state of the art in
terms of recovery threshold, and are also optimal in terms of several other metrics
including computation latency and communication load. Moreover, we extend this
code to distributed convolution and show its order-wise optimality.

1

Introduction

Matrix multiplication is one of the key building blocks underlying many data analytics and machine
learning algorithms. Many such applications require massive computation and storage power to
process large-scale datasets. As a result, distributed computing frameworks such as Hadoop MapReduce [1] and Spark [2] have gained significant traction, as they enable processing of data sizes at the
order of tens of terabytes and more.
As we scale out computations across many distributed nodes, a major performance bottleneck is the
latency in waiting for slowest nodes, or “stragglers” to finish their tasks [3]. The current approaches
to mitigate the impact of stragglers involve creation of some form of “computation redundancy”.
For example, replicating the straggling task on another available node is a common approach to
deal with stragglers (e.g., [4]). However, there have been recent results demonstrating that coding
can play a transformational role for creating and exploiting computation redundancy to effectively
alleviate the impact of stragglers [5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. Our main result in this paper is the development
of optimal codes, named polynomial codes, to deal with stragglers in distributed high-dimensional
matrix multiplication, which also provides order-wise improvement over the state of the art.
More specifically, we consider a distributed matrix multiplication problem where we aim to compute
C = A| B from input matrices A and B. As shown in Fig. 1, the computation is carried out using
1
a distributed system with a master node and N worker nodes that can each store m
fraction of A
1
+
and n fraction of B, for some parameters m, n ∈ N . We denote the stored submtarices at each
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

