Adversarial Symmetric Variational Autoencoder

Yunchen Pu, Weiyao Wang, Ricardo Henao, Liqun Chen, Zhe Gan, Chunyuan Li
and Lawrence Carin
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University
{yp42, ww109, r.henao, lc267, zg27,cl319, lcarin}@duke.edu

Abstract
A new form of variational autoencoder (VAE) is developed, in which the joint
distribution of data and codes is considered in two (symmetric) forms: (i) from
observed data fed through the encoder to yield codes, and (ii) from latent codes
drawn from a simple prior and propagated through the decoder to manifest data.
Lower bounds are learned for marginal log-likelihood fits observed data and latent
codes. When learning with the variational bound, one seeks to minimize the
symmetric Kullback-Leibler divergence of joint density functions from (i) and (ii),
while simultaneously seeking to maximize the two marginal log-likelihoods. To
facilitate learning, a new form of adversarial training is developed. An extensive
set of experiments is performed, in which we demonstrate state-of-the-art data
reconstruction and generation on several image benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Recently there has been increasing interest in developing generative models of data, offering the
promise of learning based on the often vast quantity of unlabeled data. With such learning, one
typically seeks to build rich, hierarchical probabilistic models that are able to fit to the distribution of
complex real data, and are also capable of realistic data synthesis.
Generative models are often characterized by latent variables (codes), and the variability in the codes
encompasses the variation in the data [1, 2]. The generative adversarial network (GAN) [3] employs
a generative model in which the code is drawn from a simple distribution (e.g., isotropic Gaussian),
and then the code is fed through a sophisticated deep neural network (decoder) to manifest the data.
In the context of data synthesis, GANs have shown tremendous capabilities in generating realistic,
sharp images from models that learn to mimic the structure of real data [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. The quality
of GAN-generated images has been evaluated by somewhat ad hoc metrics like inception score [9].
However, the original GAN formulation does not allow inference of the underlying code, given
observed data. This makes it difficult to quantify the quality of the generative model, as it is not
possible to compute the quality of model fit to data. To provide a principled quantitative analysis of
model fit, not only should the generative model synthesize realistic-looking data, one also desires the
ability to infer the latent code given data (using an encoder). Recent GAN extensions [10, 11] have
sought to address this limitation by learning an inverse mapping (encoder) to project data into the
latent space, achieving encouraging results on semi-supervised learning. However, these methods still
fail to obtain faithful reproductions of the input data, partly due to model underfitting when learning
from a fully adversarial objective [10, 11].
Variational autoencoders (VAEs) are designed to learn both an encoder and decoder, leading to
excellent data reconstruction and the ability to quantify a bound on the log-likelihood fit of the
model to data [12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19]. In addition, the inferred latent codes can be utilized
in downstream applications, including classification [20] and image captioning [21]. However, new
images synthesized by VAEs tend to be unspecific and/or blurry, with relatively low resolution. These
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

