A simple model of recognition and recall memory

Nisheeth Srivastava
Computer Science, IIT Kanpur
Kanpur, UP 208016
nsrivast@cse.iitk.ac.in

Edward Vul
Dept of Psychology, UCSD
9500 Gilman Drive La Jolla CA 92093
evul@ucsd.edu

Abstract
We show that several striking differences in memory performance between recognition and recall tasks are explained by an ecological bias endemic in classic memory
experiments - that such experiments universally involve more stimuli than retrieval
cues. We show that while it is sensible to think of recall as simply retrieving
items when probed with a cue - typically the item list itself - it is better to think
of recognition as retrieving cues when probed with items. To test this theory, by
manipulating the number of items and cues in a memory experiment, we show
a crossover effect in memory performance within subjects such that recognition
performance is superior to recall performance when the number of items is greater
than the number of cues and recall performance is better than recognition when
the converse holds. We build a simple computational model around this theory,
using sampling to approximate an ideal Bayesian observer encoding and retrieving
situational co-occurrence frequencies of stimuli and retrieval cues. This model
robustly reproduces a number of dissociations in recognition and recall previously
used to argue for dual-process accounts of declarative memory.

1

Introduction

Over half a century, differences in memory performance in recognition and recall-based experiments
have been a prominent nexus of controversy and confusion. There is broad agreement among
memory researchers, following Mandler’s influential lead, that there are at least two different types
of memory activities - recollection, wherein we simply remember something we want to remember,
and familiarity, wherein we remember having seen something before, but nothing more beyond
it [8]. Recall-based experiments are obvious representatives of recollection. Mandler suggested that
recognition was a good example of familiarity activity.
Dual-process accounts of memory question Mandler’s premise that recognition is exclusively a
familiarity operation. They argue, phenomenologically, that recognition could also succeed successful
recollection, making the process a dual composition of recollection and familiarity [20]. Experimental
procedures and analysis methods have been designed to test for the relative presence of both processes
in recognition experiments, with variable success. These endeavors contrast with strength-based
single-process models of memory that treat recognition as the retrieval of a weak trace of item
memory, and recall as retrieval of a stronger trace of the same item [19].
The single/dual process dispute also spills over into the computational modeling of memory. Gillund
and Shiffrin’s influential SAM model is a single-process account of both recognition and recall [4]. In
SAM and other strength-based models of declarative memory, recognition is modeled as item-relevant
associative activation of memory breaching a threshold, while recall is modeled as sampling items
from memory using the relative magnitudes of these associative activations. In contrast, McClelland’s
equally influential CLS model is explicitly a dual-process model, where a fast learning hippocampal
component primarily responsible for recollection sits atop a slow learning neocortical component
responsible for familiarity [9]. Wixted’s signal detection model tries to bridge the gap between
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

