A Linear-Time Kernel Goodness-of-Fit Test
Wittawat Jitkrittum
Gatsby Unit, UCL

Wenkai Xu
Gatsby Unit, UCL

Zoltán Szabó∗
CMAP, École Polytechnique

wittawatj@gmail.com

wenkaix@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk

zoltan.szabo@polytechnique.edu

Kenji Fukumizu
The Institute of Statistical Mathematics
fukumizu@ism.ac.jp

Arthur Gretton∗
Gatsby Unit, UCL
arthur.gretton@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose a novel adaptive test of goodness-of-fit, with computational cost
linear in the number of samples. We learn the test features that best indicate the
differences between observed samples and a reference model, by minimizing the
false negative rate. These features are constructed via Stein’s method, meaning that
it is not necessary to compute the normalising constant of the model. We analyse
the asymptotic Bahadur efficiency of the new test, and prove that under a mean-shift
alternative, our test always has greater relative efficiency than a previous linear-time
kernel test, regardless of the choice of parameters for that test. In experiments, the
performance of our method exceeds that of the earlier linear-time test, and matches
or exceeds the power of a quadratic-time kernel test. In high dimensions and where
model structure may be exploited, our goodness of fit test performs far better than
a quadratic-time two-sample test based on the Maximum Mean Discrepancy, with
samples drawn from the model.

1

Introduction

The goal of goodness of fit testing is to determine how well a model density p(x) fits an observed
sample D = {xi }ni=1 ⊂ X ⊆ Rd from an unknown distribution q(x). This goal may be achieved via
a hypothesis test, where the null hypothesis H0 : p = q is tested against H1 : p 6= q. The problem
of testing goodness of fit has a long history in statistics [11], with a number of tests proposed for
particular parametric models. Such tests can require space partitioning [18, 3], which works poorly in
high dimensions; or closed-form integrals under the model, which may be difficult to obtain, besides
in certain special cases [2, 5, 30, 26]. An alternative is to conduct a two-sample test using samples
drawn from both p and q. This approach was taken by [23], using a test based on the (quadratic-time)
Maximum Mean Discrepancy [16], however this does not take advantage of the known structure of p
(quite apart from the increased computational cost of dealing with samples from p).
More recently, measures of discrepancy with respect to a model have been proposed based on Stein’s
method [21]. A Stein operator for p may be applied to a class of test functions, yielding functions that
have zero expectation under p. Classes of test functions can include the W 2,∞ Sobolev space [14],
and reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces (RKHS) [25]. Statistical tests have been proposed by [9, 22]
based on classes of Stein transformed RKHS functions, where the test statistic is the norm of the
smoothness-constrained function with largest expectation under q . We will refer to this statistic as
the Kernel Stein Discrepancy (KSD). For consistent tests, it is sufficient to use C0 -universal kernels
[6, Definition 4.1], as shown by [9, Theorem 2.2], although inverse multiquadric kernels may be
preferred if uniform tightness is required [15].2
∗

Zoltán Szabó’s ORCID ID: 0000-0001-6183-7603. Arthur Gretton’s ORCID ID: 0000-0003-3169-7624.
Briefly, [15] show that when an exponentiated quadratic kernel is used, a sequence of sets D may be
constructed that does not correspond to any q, but for which the KSD nonetheless approaches zero. In a statistical
testing setting, however, we assume identically distributed samples from q, and the issue does not arise.
2

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

