Neural Variational Inference and Learning
in Undirected Graphical Models

Volodymyr Kuleshov
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
kuleshov@cs.stanford.edu

Stefano Ermon
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
ermon@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Many problems in machine learning are naturally expressed in the language of
undirected graphical models. Here, we propose black-box learning and inference
algorithms for undirected models that optimize a variational approximation to the
log-likelihood of the model. Central to our approach is an upper bound on the logpartition function parametrized by a function q that we express as a flexible neural
network. Our bound makes it possible to track the partition function during learning,
to speed-up sampling, and to train a broad class of hybrid directed/undirected
models via a unified variational inference framework. We empirically demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method on several popular generative modeling datasets.

1

Introduction

Many problems in machine learning are naturally expressed in the language of undirected graphical
models. Undirected models are used in computer vision [1], speech recognition [2], social science [3],
deep learning [4], and other fields. Many fundamental machine learning problems center on undirected
models [5]; however, inference and learning in this class of distributions give rise to significant
computational challenges.
Here, we attempt to tackle these challenges via new variational inference and learning techniques
aimed at undirected probabilistic graphical models p. Central to our approach is an upper bound on
the log-partition function of p parametrized by a an approximating distribution q that we express as a
flexible neural network [6]. Our bound is tight when q = p and is convex in the parameters of q for
interesting classes of q. Most interestingly, it leads to a lower bound on the log-likelihood function
log p, which enables us to fit undirected models in a variational framework similar to black-box
variational inference [7].
Our approach offers a number of advantages over previous methods. First, it enables training
undirected models in a black-box manner, i.e. we do not need to know the structure of the model to
compute gradient estimators (e.g., as in Gibbs sampling); rather, our estimators only require evaluating
a model’s unnormalized probability. When optimized jointly over q and p, our bound also offers a
way to track the partition function during learning [8]. At inference-time, the learned approximating
distribution q may be used to speed-up sampling from the undirected model by initializing an MCMC
chain (or it may itself provide samples). Furthermore, our approach naturally integrates with recent
variational inference methods [6, 9] for directed graphical models. We anticipate that our approach
will be most useful in automated probabilistic inference systems [10].
As a practical example for how our methods can be used, we study a broad class of hybrid directed/undirected models and show how they can be trained in a unified black-box neural variational
inference framework. Hybrid models like the ones we consider have been popular in the early deep
learning literature [4, 11] and take inspiration from the principles of neuroscience [12]. They also
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

