Limitations on Variance-Reduction and Acceleration
Schemes for Finite Sum Optimization

Yossi Arjevani
Department of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics
Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot 7610001, Israel
yossi.arjevani@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
We study the conditions under which one is able to efficiently apply variancereduction and acceleration schemes on finite sum optimization problems. First, we
show that, perhaps surprisingly, the finite sum structure by itself, is not sufficient
for obtaining a complexity bound of Õ((n + L/µ) ln(1/)) for L-smooth and
µ-strongly convex individual functions - one must also know which individual
function is being referred to by the oracle at each iteration. Next, we show that for
a broad class of first-order and coordinate-descent finite sum algorithms (including,
e.g., SDCA, SVRG,
p SAG), it is not possible to get an ‘accelerated’ complexity
bound of Õ((n+ nL/µ) ln(1/)), unless the strong convexity parameter is given
explicitly. Lastly, we show that when this class of algorithms is used for minimizing
L-smooth and convex finite sums, the iteration complexity is bounded from below
by Ω(n + L/), assuming
p that (on average) the same update rule is used in any
iteration, and Ω(n + nL/) otherwise.

1

Introduction

An optimization problem principal to machine learning and statistics is that of finite sums:
n

min F (w) :=

w∈Rd

1X
fi (w),
n i=1

(1)

where the individual functions fi are assumed to possess some favorable analytical properties, such as
Lipschitz-continuity, smoothness or strong convexity (see [16] for details). We measure the iteration
complexity of a given optimization algorithm by determining how many evaluations of individual
functions (via some external oracle procedure, along with their gradient, Hessian, etc.) are needed in
order to obtain an -solution, i.e., a point w ∈ Rd which satisfies E[F (w) − minw∈Rd F (w)] < 
(where the expectation is taken w.r.t. the algorithm and the oracle randomness).
Arguably, the simplest way of minimizing finite sum problems is by using optimization algorithms
for general optimization problems. For concreteness of the following discussion, let us assume for the
moment that the individual functions are L-smooth and µ-strongly convex. In this case, by applying
vanilla Gradient Descent (GD) or Accelerated Gradient Descent (AGD, [16]), one obtains iteration
complexity of

√
(2)
Õ(nκ ln(1/)) or Õ n κ ln(1/) ,
respectively, where κ := L/µ denotes the condition number of the problem and Õ hides logarithmic
factors in the problem parameters. However, whereas such bounds enjoy logarithmic dependence on
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

