Convolutional Gaussian Processes
Mark van der Wilk
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge, UK
mv310@cam.ac.uk

Carl Edward Rasmussen
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge, UK
cer54@cam.ac.uk

James Hensman
prowler.io
Cambridge, UK
james@prowler.io

Abstract
We present a practical way of introducing convolutional structure into Gaussian
processes, making them more suited to high-dimensional inputs like images. The
main contribution of our work is the construction of an inter-domain inducing point
approximation that is well-tailored to the convolutional kernel. This allows us to
gain the generalisation benefit of a convolutional kernel, together with fast but
accurate posterior inference. We investigate several variations of the convolutional
kernel, and apply it to MNIST and CIFAR-10, where we obtain significant improvements over existing Gaussian process models. We also show how the marginal
likelihood can be used to find an optimal weighting between convolutional and
RBF kernels to further improve performance. This illustration of the usefulness
of the marginal likelihood may help automate discovering architectures in larger
models.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes (GPs) [1] can be used as a flexible prior over functions, which makes them an
elegant building block in Bayesian nonparametric models. In recent work, there has been much
progress in addressing the computational issues preventing GPs from scaling to large problems
[2, 3, 4, 5]. However, orthogonal to being able to algorithmically handle large quantities of data is the
question of how to build GP models that generalise well. The properties of a GP prior, and hence its
ability to generalise in a specific problem, are fully encoded by its covariance function (or kernel).
Most common kernel functions rely on rather rudimentary and local metrics for generalisation, like
the Euclidean distance. This has been widely criticised, notably by Bengio [6], who argued that deep
architectures allow for more non-local generalisation. While deep architectures have seen enormous
success in recent years, it is an interesting research question to investigate what kind of non-local
generalisation structures can be encoded in shallow structures like kernels, while preserving the
elegant properties of GPs.
Convolutional structures have non-local influence and have successfully been applied in neural
networks to improve generalisation for image data [see e.g. 7, 8]. In this work, we investigate
how Gaussian processes can be equipped with convolutional structures, together with accurate
approximations that make them applicable in practice. A previous approach by Wilson et al. [9]
transforms the inputs to a kernel using a convolutional neural network. This produces a valid kernel
since applying a deterministic transformation to kernel inputs results in a valid kernel [see e.g. 1, 10],
with the (many) parameters of the transformation becoming kernel hyperparameters. We stress that
our approach is different in that the process itself is convolved, which does not require the introduction
of additional parameters. Although our method does have inducing points that play a similar role
to the filters in a convolutional neural network (convnet), these are variational parameters and are
therefore more protected from over-fitting.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

