Bayesian Compression for Deep Learning

Christos Louizos
University of Amsterdam
TNO Intelligent Imaging
c.louizos@uva.nl

Karen Ullrich
University of Amsterdam
k.ullrich@uva.nl

Max Welling
University of Amsterdam
CIFAR∗
m.welling@uva.nl

Abstract
Compression and computational efficiency in deep learning have become a problem
of great significance. In this work, we argue that the most principled and effective
way to attack this problem is by adopting a Bayesian point of view, where through
sparsity inducing priors we prune large parts of the network. We introduce two
novelties in this paper: 1) we use hierarchical priors to prune nodes instead of
individual weights, and 2) we use the posterior uncertainties to determine the
optimal fixed point precision to encode the weights. Both factors significantly
contribute to achieving the state of the art in terms of compression rates, while
still staying competitive with methods designed to optimize for speed or energy
efficiency.

1

Introduction

While deep neural networks have become extremely successful in in a wide range of applications,
often exceeding human performance, they remain difficult to apply in many real world scenarios. For
instance, making billions of predictions per day comes with substantial energy costs given the energy
consumption of common Graphical Processing Units (GPUs). Also, real-time predictions are often
about a factor 100 away in terms of speed from what deep NNs can deliver, and sending NNs with
millions of parameters through band limited channels is still impractical. As a result, running them on
hardware limited devices such as smart phones, robots or cars requires substantial improvements on
all of these issues. For all those reasons, compression and efficiency have become a topic of interest
in the deep learning community.
While all of these issues are certainly related, compression and performance optimizing procedures
might not always be aligned. As an illustration, consider the convolutional layers of Alexnet, which
account for only 4% of the parameters but 91% of the computation [65]. Compressing these layers
will not contribute much to the overall memory footprint.
There is a variety of approaches to address these problem settings. However, most methods have
the common strategy of reducing both the neural network structure and the effective fixed point
precision for each weight. A justification for the former is the finding that NNs suffer from significant
parameter redundancy [14]. Methods in this line of thought are network pruning, where unnecessary
connections are being removed [38, 24, 21], or student-teacher learning where a large network is
used to train a significantly smaller network [5, 26].
From a Bayesian perspective network pruning and reducing bit precision for the weights is aligned
with achieving high accuracy, because Bayesian methods search for the optimal model structure
(which leads to pruning with sparsity inducing priors), and reward uncertain posteriors over parameters
through the bits back argument [27] (which leads to removing insignificant bits). This relation is
made explicit in the MDL principle [20] which is known to be related to Bayesian inference.
∗

Canadian Institute For Advanced Research.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

