Revenue Optimization with Approximate Bid
Predictions
Andrés Muñoz Medina
Google Research
76 9th Ave
New York, NY 10011

Sergei Vassilvitskii
Google Research
76 9th Ave
New York, NY 10011

Abstract
In the context of advertising auctions, finding good reserve prices is a notoriously
challenging learning problem. This is due to the heterogeneity of ad opportunity
types, and the non-convexity of the objective function. In this work, we show how
to reduce reserve price optimization to the standard setting of prediction under
squared loss, a well understood problem in the learning community. We further
bound the gap between the expected bid and revenue in terms of the average loss
of the predictor. This is the first result that formally relates the revenue gained to
the quality of a standard machine learned model.

1

Introduction

A crucial task for revenue optimization in auctions is setting a good reserve (or minimum) price. Set
it too low, and the sale may yield little revenue, set it too high and there may not be anyone willing
to buy the item. The celebrated work by Myerson [1981] shows how to optimally set reserves in
second price auctions, provided the value distribution of each bidder is known.
In practice there are two challenges that make this problem significantly more complicated. First,
the value distribution is never known directly; rather, the auctioneer can only observe samples drawn
from it. Second, in the context of ad auctions, the items for sale (impressions) are heterogeneous, and
there are literally trillions of different types of items being sold. It is therefore likely that a specific
type of item has never been observed previously, and no information about its value is known.
A standard machine learning approach addressing the heterogeneity problem is to parametrize each
impression by a feature vector, with the underlying assumption that bids observed from auctions
with similar features will be similar. In online advertising. these features encode, for instance, the
ad size, whether it’s mobile or desktop, etc.
The question is, then, how to use the features to set a good reserve price for a particular ad opportunity. On the face of it, this sounds like a standard machine learning question—given a set of features,
predict the value of the maximum bid. The difficulty comes from the shape of the loss function.
Much of the machine learning literature is concerned with optimizing well behaved loss functions,
such as squared loss, or hinge loss. The revenue function, on the other hand is non-continuous and
strongly non-concave, making a direct attack a challenging proposition.
In this work we take a different approach and reduce the problem of finding good reserve prices to
a prediction problem under the squared loss. In this way we can rely upon many widely available
and scalable algorithms developed to minimize this objective. We proceed by using the predictor to
define a judicious clustering of the data, and then compute the empirically maximizing reserve price
for each group. Our reduction is simple and practical, and directly ties the revenue gained by the
algorithm to the prediction error.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

