Collaborative PAC Learning

Avrim Blum
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
avrim@ttic.edu

Ariel D. Procaccia
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
arielpro@cs.cmu.edu

Nika Haghtalab
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
nhaghtal@cs.cmu.edu

Mingda Qiao
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China 100084
qmd14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We consider a collaborative PAC learning model, in which k players attempt to
learn the same underlying concept. We ask how much more information is required to learn an accurate classifier for all players simultaneously. We refer to
the ratio between the sample complexity of collaborative PAC learning and its
non-collaborative (single-player) counterpart as the overhead. We design learning
algorithms with O(ln(k)) and O(ln2 (k)) overhead in the personalized and centralized variants our model. This gives an exponential improvement upon the naïve
algorithm that does not share information among players. We complement our
upper bounds with an Ω(ln(k)) overhead lower bound, showing that our results are
tight up to a logarithmic factor.

1

Introduction

According to Wikipedia, collaborative learning is a “situation in which two or more people learn ...
something together,” e.g., by “capitalizing on one another’s resources” and “asking one another for
information.” Indeed, it seems self-evident that collaboration, and the sharing of information, can
make learning more efficient. Our goal is to formalize this intuition and study its implications.
As an example, suppose k branches of a department store, which have sales data for different items in
different locations, wish to collaborate on learning which items should be sold at each location. In
this case, we would like to use the sales information across different branches to learn a good policy
for each branch. Another example is given by k hospitals with different patient demographics, e.g.,
in terms of racial or socio-economic factors, which want to predict occurrence of a disease in patients.
In addition to requiring a classifier that performs well on the population served by each hospital, it is
natural to assume that all hospitals deploy a common classifier.
Motivated by these examples, we consider a model of collaborative PAC learning, in which k players
attempt to learn the same underlying concept. We then ask how much information is needed for all
players to simultaneously succeed in learning a desirable classifier. Specifically, we focus on the
classic probably approximately correct (PAC) setting of Valiant [14], where there is an unknown target
function f ∗ ∈ F. We consider k players with distributions D1 , . . . , Dk that are labeled according to
f ∗ . Our goal is to learn f ∗ up to an error of  on each and every player distribution while requiring
only a small number of samples overall.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

