Deep Hyperalignment

Muhammad Yousefnezhad, Daoqiang Zhang
College of Computer Science and Technology
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
{myousefnezhad,dqzhang}@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper proposes Deep Hyperalignment (DHA) as a regularized, deep extension,
scalable Hyperalignment (HA) method, which is well-suited for applying functional alignment to fMRI datasets with nonlinearity, high-dimensionality (broad
ROI), and a large number of subjects. Unlink previous methods, DHA is not limited
by a restricted fixed kernel function. Further, it uses a parametric approach, rank-m
Singular Value Decomposition (SVD), and stochastic gradient descent for optimization. Therefore, DHA has a suitable time complexity for large datasets, and
DHA does not require the training data when it computes the functional alignment
for a new subject. Experimental studies on multi-subject fMRI analysis confirm
that the DHA method achieves superior performance to other state-of-the-art HA
algorithms.

1

Introduction

The multi-subject fMRI analysis is a challenging problem in the human brain decoding [1–7]. On
the one hand, the multi-subject analysis can verify the developed models across subjects. On the
other hand, this analysis requires authentic functional and anatomical alignments among neuronal
activities of different subjects, which these alignments can significantly improve the performance
of the developed models [1, 4]. In fact, multi-subject fMRI images must be aligned across subjects
in order to take between-subject variability into account. There are technically two main alignment
methods, including anatomical alignment and functional alignment, which can work in unison.
Indeed, anatomical alignment is only utilized in the majority of the fMRI studies as a preprocessing
step. It is applied by aligning fMRI images based on anatomical features of standard structural MRI
images, e.g. Talairach [2, 7]. However, anatomical alignment can limitedly improve the accuracy
because the size, shape and anatomical location of functional loci differ across subjects [1, 2, 7]. By
contrast, functional alignment explores to precisely align the fMRI images across subjects. Indeed, it
has a broad range of applications in neuroscience, such as localization of the Brain’s tumor [8].
As the widely used functional alignment method [1–7], Hyperalignment (HA) [1] is an ‘anatomy free’
functional alignment method, which can be mathematically formulated as a multiple-set Canonical
Correlation Analysis (CCA) problem [2, 3, 5]. Original HA does not work in a very high dimensional
space. In order to extend HA into the real-world problems, Xu et al. developed the Regularized
Hyperalignment (RHA) by utilizing an EM algorithm to iteratively seek the regularized optimum
parameters [2]. Further, Chen et al. developed Singular Value Decomposition Hyperalignment
(SVDHA), which firstly provides dimensionality reduction by SVD, and then HA aligns the functional
responses in the reduced space [4]. In another study, Chen et al. introduced Shared Response Model
(SRM), which is technically equivalent to Probabilistic CCA [5]. In addition, Guntupalli et al.
developed SearchLight (SL) model, which is actually an ensemble of quasi-CCA models fits on
patches of the brain images [9]. Lorbert et al. illustrated the limitation of HA methods on the
linear representation of fMRI responses. They also proposed Kernel Hyperalignment (KHA) as
a nonlinear alternative in an embedding space for solving the HA limitation [3]. Although KHA
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

