Policy Gradient With Value Function Approximation
For Collective Multiagent Planning

Duc Thien Nguyen Akshat Kumar Hoong Chuin Lau
School of Information Systems
Singapore Management University
80 Stamford Road, Singapore 178902
{dtnguyen.2014,akshatkumar,hclau}@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
Decentralized (PO)MDPs provide an expressive framework for sequential decision making in a multiagent system. Given their computational complexity, recent research has focused on tractable yet practical subclasses of Dec-POMDPs.
We address such a subclass called CDec-POMDP where the collective behavior
of a population of agents affects the joint-reward and environment dynamics. Our
main contribution is an actor-critic (AC) reinforcement learning method for optimizing CDec-POMDP policies. Vanilla AC has slow convergence for larger problems. To address this, we show how a particular decomposition of the approximate
action-value function over agents leads to effective updates, and also derive a new
way to train the critic based on local reward signals. Comparisons on a synthetic
benchmark and a real world taxi fleet optimization problem show that our new AC
approach provides better quality solutions than previous best approaches.

1

Introduction

Decentralized partially observable MDPs (Dec-POMDPs) have emerged in recent years as a promising framework for multiagent collaborative sequential decision making (Bernstein et al., 2002).
Dec-POMDPs model settings where agents act based on different partial observations about the
environment and each other to maximize a global objective. Applications of Dec-POMDPs include
coordinating planetary rovers (Becker et al., 2004b), multi-robot coordination (Amato et al., 2015)
and throughput optimization in wireless network (Winstein and Balakrishnan, 2013; Pajarinen et al.,
2014). However, solving Dec-POMDPs is computationally challenging, being NEXP-Hard even for
2-agent problems (Bernstein et al., 2002).
To increase scalability and application to practical problems, past research has explored restricted
interactions among agents such as state transition and observation independence (Nair et al., 2005;
Kumar et al., 2011, 2015), event driven interactions (Becker et al., 2004a) and weak coupling among
agents (Witwicki and Durfee, 2010). Recently, a number of works have focused on settings where
agent identities do not affect interactions among agents. Instead, environment dynamics are primarily driven by the collective influence of agents (Varakantham et al., 2014; Sonu et al., 2015;
Robbel et al., 2016; Nguyen et al., 2017), similar to well known congestion games (Meyers and
Schulz, 2012). Several problems in urban transportation such as taxi supply-demand matching can
be modeled using such collective planning models (Varakantham et al., 2012; Nguyen et al., 2017).
In this work, we focus on the collective Dec-POMDP framework (CDec-POMDP) that formalizes
such a collective multiagent sequential decision making problem under uncertainty (Nguyen et al.,
2017). Nguyen et al. present a sampling based approach to optimize policies in the CDec-POMDP
model. A key drawback of this previous approach is that policies are represented in a tabular form
which scales poorly with the size of observation space of agents. Motivated by the recent suc31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

