Subset Selection and Summarization
in Sequential Data
Ehsan Elhamifar
Computer and Information Science College
Northeastern University
Boston, MA 02115
eelhami@ccs.neu.edu

M. Clara De Paolis Kaluza
Computer and Information Science College
Northeastern University
Boston, MA 02115
clara@ccs.neu.edu

Abstract
Subset selection, which is the task of finding a small subset of representative items
from a large ground set, finds numerous applications in different areas. Sequential
data, including time-series and ordered data, contain important structural relationships among items, imposed by underlying dynamic models of data, that should
play a vital role in the selection of representatives. However, nearly all existing
subset selection techniques ignore underlying dynamics of data and treat items
independently, leading to incompatible sets of representatives. In this paper, we
develop a new framework for sequential subset selection that finds a set of representatives compatible with the dynamic models of data. To do so, we equip items with
transition dynamic models and pose the problem as an integer binary optimization
over assignments of sequential items to representatives, that leads to high encoding,
diversity and transition potentials. Our formulation generalizes the well-known
facility location objective to deal with sequential data, incorporating transition
dynamics among facilities. As the proposed formulation is non-convex, we derive a
max-sum message passing algorithm to solve the problem efficiently. Experiments
on synthetic and real data, including instructional video summarization, show that
our sequential subset selection framework not only achieves better encoding and
diversity than the state of the art, but also successfully incorporates dynamics of
data, leading to compatible representatives.

1

Introduction

Subset selection is the task of finding a small subset of most informative items from a ground set.
Besides helping to reduce the computational time and memory of algorithms, due to working on a
much smaller representative set [1], it has found numerous applications, including, image and video
summarization [2, 3, 4], speech and document summarization [5, 6, 7], clustering [8, 9, 10, 11, 12],
feature and model selection [13, 14, 15, 16], sensor placement [17, 18], social network marketing [19]
and product recommendation [20]. Compared to dictionary learning methods such as Kmeans [21],
KSVD [22] and HMMs [23], that learn centers/atoms in the input-space, subset selection methods
choose centers/atoms from the given set of items.
Sequential data, including time-series such as video, speech, audio and sensor measurements as well
as ordered data such as text, form an important large part of modern datasets, requiring effective subset
selection techniques. Such datasets contain important structural relationships among items, often
imposed by underlying dynamic models, that should play a vital role in the selection of representatives.
For example, there exists a logical way in which segments of a video or sentences of a document are
connected together and treating segments/sentences as a bag of randomly permutable items results
in losing the semantic content of the video/document. However, existing subset selection methods
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

