Position-based Multiple-play Bandit Problem with
Unknown Position Bias
Junpei Komiyama
The University of Tokyo
junpei@komiyama.info

Junya Honda
The University of Tokyo / RIKEN
honda@stat.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Akiko Takeda
The Institute of Statistical Mathematics / RIKEN
atakeda@ism.ac.jp

Abstract
Motivated by online advertising, we study a multiple-play multi-armed bandit
problem with position bias that involves several slots and the latter slots yield
fewer rewards. We characterize the hardness of the problem by deriving an asymptotic regret bound. We propose the Permutation Minimum Empirical Divergence
(PMED) algorithm and derive its asymptotically optimal regret bound. Because
of the uncertainty of the position bias, the optimal algorithm for such a problem
requires non-convex optimizations that are different from usual partial monitoring and semi-bandit problems. We propose a cutting-plane method and related
bi-convex relaxation for these optimizations by using auxiliary variables.

1

Introduction

One of the most important industries related to computer science is online advertising. In the United
States, 72.5 billion dollars was spent on online advertising [19] in 2016. Most online advertising is
viewed on web pages during Internet browsing. A web-site owner has a set of possible advertisements
(ads): some of them are more attractive than others, and the owner would like to maximize the
attention of visiting users. One of the observable metrics of the user attention is the number of
clicks on the ads. By considering each ad (resp. click) to be an arm (resp. reward) and assuming
only one slot is available for advertisements, the maximization of clicks boils down to the so-called
multi-armed bandit problem, where the arm with the largest expected reward is sought.
When two or more ad slots are available on the web page, the problem boils down to a multiple-play
multi-armed bandit problem. Several variants of the multiple play bandit problem and its extension
called semi-bandit problem have been considered in the literature. Arguably, the simplest is one
assuming that an ad receives equal clicks regardless of its position [2, 24]. In practice, ads receive
less clicks when they are placed at bottom slots; this is so-called position bias.
A well-known model that explains position bias is the cascade model [23], which assumes that the
users’ attention goes from top to bottom until they lose interest. While this model explains position
bias in early positions well [10], a drawback to the cascade model when it is applied to the bandit
setting [26] is that the order of the allocated ads does not affect the reward, which is not very natural.
To resolve this issue, Combes et al. [8] introduced a weight for each slot that corresponds to the
reward obtained by clicking on that slot. However, no principled way of defining the weight has been
described.
An extension of the cascade model, called the dependent click model (DCM) [14], addresses these
issues by admitting multiple clicks of a user. In DCM, each slot is associated with a probability that
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

