Action Centered Contextual Bandits
Kristjan Greenewald
Department of Statistics
Harvard University
kgreenewald@fas.harvard.edu

Ambuj Tewari
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
tewaria@umich.edu

Predrag Klasnja
School of Information
University of Michigan
klasnja@umich.edu

Susan Murphy
Departments of Statistics and Computer Science
Harvard University
samurphy@fas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Contextual bandits have become popular as they offer a middle ground between
very simple approaches based on multi-armed bandits and very complex approaches
using the full power of reinforcement learning. They have demonstrated success in
web applications and have a rich body of associated theoretical guarantees. Linear
models are well understood theoretically and preferred by practitioners because
they are not only easily interpretable but also simple to implement and debug.
Furthermore, if the linear model is true, we get very strong performance guarantees.
Unfortunately, in emerging applications in mobile health, the time-invariant linear
model assumption is untenable. We provide an extension of the linear model for
contextual bandits that has two parts: baseline reward and treatment effect. We
allow the former to be complex but keep the latter simple. We argue that this
model is plausible for mobile health applications. At the same time, it leads to
algorithms with strong performance guarantees as in the linear model setting, while
still allowing for complex nonlinear baseline modeling. Our theory is supported by
experiments on data gathered in a recently concluded mobile health study.

1

Introduction

In the theory of sequential decision-making, contextual bandit problems (Tewari & Murphy, 2017)
occupy a middle ground between multi-armed bandit problems (Bubeck & Cesa-Bianchi, 2012) and
full-blown reinforcement learning (usually modeled using Markov decision processes along with
discounted or average reward optimality criteria (Sutton & Barto, 1998; Puterman, 2005)). Unlike
bandit algorithms, which cannot use any side-information or context, contextual bandit algorithms
can learn to map the context into appropriate actions. However, contextual bandits do not consider
the impact of actions on the evolution of future contexts. Nevertheless, in many practical domains
where the impact of the learner’s action on future contexts is limited, contextual bandit algorithms
have shown great promise. Examples include web advertising (Abe & Nakamura, 1999) and news
article selection on web portals (Li et al., 2010).
An influential thread within the contextual bandit literature models the expected reward for any
action in a given context using a linear mapping from a d-dimensional context vector to a real-valued
reward. Algorithms using this assumption include LinUCB and Thompson Sampling, for both of
which regret bounds have been derived. These analyses often allow the context sequence to be chosen
adversarially, but require the linear model, which links rewards to contexts, to be time-invariant.
There has been little effort to extend these algorithms and analyses when the data follow an unknown
nonlinear or time-varying model.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

