An Error Detection and Correction Framework for
Connectomics
Jonathan Zung
Princeton University
jzung@princeton.edu

Ignacio Tartavull
Princeton University
tartavull@princeton.edu

Kisuk Lee
Princeton University and MIT
kisuklee@mit.edu

H. Sebastian Seung
Princeton University
sseung@princeton.edu

Abstract
We define and study error detection and correction tasks that are useful for 3D
reconstruction of neurons from electron microscopic imagery, and for image segmentation more generally. Both tasks take as input the raw image and a binary
mask representing a candidate object. For the error detection task, the desired
output is a map of split and merge errors in the object. For the error correction task,
the desired output is the true object. We call this object mask pruning, because
the candidate object mask is assumed to be a superset of the true object. We train
multiscale 3D convolutional networks to perform both tasks. We find that the
error-detecting net can achieve high accuracy. The accuracy of the error-correcting
net is enhanced if its input object mask is “advice” (union of erroneous objects)
from the error-detecting net.

1

Introduction

While neuronal circuits can be reconstructed from volumetric electron microscopic imagery, the
process has historically [30] and even recently [28] been highly laborious. One of the most timeconsuming reconstruction tasks is the tracing of the brain’s “wires,” or neuronal branches. This task
is an example of instance segmentation, and can be automated through computer detection of the
boundaries between neurons. Convolutional nets were first applied to neuronal boundary detection
a decade ago [10, 29]. Since then convolutional nets have become the standard approach, and the
accuracy of boundary detection has become impressively high [31, 1, 15, 6].
Given the low error rates, it becomes helpful to think of subsequent processing steps in terms of
modules that detect and correct errors. In the error detection task (Figure 1a), the input is the raw
image and a binary mask that represents a candidate object. The desired output is a map containing
the locations of split and merge errors in the candidate object. Related work on this problem has been
restricted to detection of merge errors only by either hand-designed [18] or learned [24] computations.
However, a typical segmentation contains both split and merge errors, so it would be desirable to
include both in the error detection task.
In the error correction task (Figure 1b), the input is again the raw image and a binary mask that
represents a candidate object. The candidate object mask is assumed to be a superset of a true object,
which is the desired output. With this assumption, error correction is formulated as object mask
pruning. Object mask pruning can be regarded as the splitting of undersegmented objects to create
true objects. In this sense, it is the opposite of agglomeration, which merges oversegmented objects
to create true objects [11, 21]. Object mask pruning can also be viewed as the subtraction of voxels
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

