Learning the Morphology of Brain Signals Using
Alpha-Stable Convolutional Sparse Coding

Mainak Jas1 , Tom Dupré La Tour1 , Umut Şimşekli1 , Alexandre Gramfort1,2
1: LTCI, Telecom ParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay, Paris, France
2: INRIA, Université Paris-Saclay, Saclay, France

Abstract
Neural time-series data contain a wide variety of prototypical signal waveforms
(atoms) that are of significant importance in clinical and cognitive research. One of
the goals for analyzing such data is hence to extract such ‘shift-invariant’ atoms.
Even though some success has been reported with existing algorithms, they are
limited in applicability due to their heuristic nature. Moreover, they are often
vulnerable to artifacts and impulsive noise, which are typically present in raw
neural recordings. In this study, we address these issues and propose a novel
probabilistic convolutional sparse coding (CSC) model for learning shift-invariant
atoms from raw neural signals containing potentially severe artifacts. In the core of
our model, which we call αCSC, lies a family of heavy-tailed distributions called
α-stable distributions. We develop a novel, computationally efficient Monte Carlo
expectation-maximization algorithm for inference. The maximization step boils
down to a weighted CSC problem, for which we develop a computationally efficient
optimization algorithm. Our results show that the proposed algorithm achieves
state-of-the-art convergence speeds. Besides, αCSC is significantly more robust to
artifacts when compared to three competing algorithms: it can extract spike bursts,
oscillations, and even reveal more subtle phenomena such as cross-frequency
coupling when applied to noisy neural time series.

1

Introduction

Neural time series data, either non-invasive such as electroencephalograhy (EEG) or invasive such as
electrocorticography (ECoG) and local field potentials (LFP), are fundamental to modern experimental
neuroscience. Such recordings contain a wide variety of ‘prototypical signals’ that range from beta
rhythms (12–30 Hz) in motor imagery tasks and alpha oscillations (8–12 Hz) involved in attention
mechanisms, to spindles in sleep studies, and the classical P300 event related potential, a biomarker for
surprise. These prototypical waveforms are considered critical in clinical and cognitive research [1],
thereby motivating the development of computational tools for learning such signals from data.
Despite the underlying complexity in the morphology of neural signals, the majority of the computational tools in the community are based on representing the signals with rather simple, predefined
bases, such as the Fourier or wavelet bases [2]. While such bases lead to computationally efficient
algorithms, they often fall short at capturing the precise morphology of signal waveforms, as demonstrated by a number of recent studies [3, 4]. An example of such a failure is the disambiguation of
the alpha rhythm from the mu rhythm [5], both of which have a component around 10 Hz but with
different morphologies that cannot be captured by Fourier- or wavelet-based representations.
Recently, there have been several attempts for extracting more realistic and precise morphologies
directly from unfiltered electrophysiology signals, via dictionary learning approaches [6–9]. These
methods all aim to extract certain shift-invariant prototypical waveforms (called ‘atoms’ in this
context) to better capture the temporal structure of the signals. As opposed to using generic bases
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

