ExtremeWeather: A large-scale climate dataset for
semi-supervised detection, localization, and
understanding of extreme weather events

Evan Racah1,2 , Christopher Beckham1,3 , Tegan Maharaj1,3 ,
Samira Ebrahimi Kahou4 , Prabhat2 , Christopher Pal1,3
1
MILA, Université de Montréal, evan.racah@umontreal.ca.
2
Lawrence Berkeley National Lab, Berkeley, CA, prabhat@lbl.gov.
3
École Polytechnique de Montréal, firstname.lastname@polymtl.ca.
4
Microsoft Maluuba, samira.ebrahimi@microsoft.com.

Abstract
Then detection and identification of extreme weather events in large-scale climate
simulations is an important problem for risk management, informing governmental
policy decisions and advancing our basic understanding of the climate system.
Recent work has shown that fully supervised convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
can yield acceptable accuracy for classifying well-known types of extreme weather
events when large amounts of labeled data are available. However, many different
types of spatially localized climate patterns are of interest including hurricanes,
extra-tropical cyclones, weather fronts, and blocking events among others. Existing
labeled data for these patterns can be incomplete in various ways, such as covering
only certain years or geographic areas and having false negatives. This type of
climate data therefore poses a number of interesting machine learning challenges.
We present a multichannel spatiotemporal CNN architecture for semi-supervised
bounding box prediction and exploratory data analysis. We demonstrate that our
approach is able to leverage temporal information and unlabeled data to improve
the localization of extreme weather events. Further, we explore the representations
learned by our model in order to better understand this important data. We present
a dataset, ExtremeWeather, to encourage machine learning research in this area and
to help facilitate further work in understanding and mitigating the effects of climate
change. The dataset is available at extremeweatherdataset.github.io and
the code is available at https://github.com/eracah/hur-detect.

1

Introduction

Climate change is one of the most important challenges facing humanity in the 21st century, and
climate simulations are one of the only viable mechanisms for understanding the future impact of
various carbon emission scenarios and intervention strategies. Large climate simulations produce
massive datasets: a simulation of 27 years from a 25 square km, 3 hour resolution model produces on
the order of 10TB of multi-variate data. This scale of data makes post-processing and quantitative
assessment challenging, and as a result, climate analysts and policy makers typically take global
and annual averages of temperature or sea-level rise. While these coarse measurements are useful
for public and media consumption, they ignore spatially (and temporally) resolved extreme weather
events such as extra-tropical cyclones and tropical cyclones (hurricanes). Because the general public
and policy makers are concerned about the local impacts of climate change, it is critical that we be
able to examine how localized weather patterns (such as tropical cyclones), which can have dramatic
impacts on populations and economies, will change in frequency and intensity under global warming.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

