Practical Locally Private Heavy Hitters

Raef Bassily∗

Kobbi Nissim†

Uri Stemmer‡

Abhradeep Thakurta§

Abstract
We present new practical local differentially private heavy hitters algorithms
achieving optimal or near-optimal worst-case error – TreeHist and Bitstogram.
In both algorithms, server running time is Õ(n) and user running time is Õ(1),
hence improving on the prior state-of-the-art result of Bassily and Smith [STOC
2015] requiring Õ(n5/2 ) server time and Õ(n3/2 ) user time. With a typically
large number of participants in local algorithms (n in the millions), this reduction
in time complexity, in particular at the user side, is crucial for the use of such
algorithms in practice. We implemented Algorithm TreeHist to verify our theoretical analysis and compared its performance with the performance of Google’s
RAPPOR code.

1

Introduction

We revisit the problem of computing heavy hitters with local differential privacy. Such computations
have already been implemented to provide organizations with valuable information about their user
base while providing users with the strong guarantee that their privacy would be preserved even if
the organization is subpoenaed for the entire information seen during an execution. Two prominent
examples are Google’s use of RAPPOR in the Chrome browser [10] and Apple’s use of differential
privacy in iOS-10 [16]. These tools are used for learning new words typed by users and identifying
frequently used emojis and frequently accessed websites.
Differential privacy in the local model. Differential privacy [9] provides a framework for rigorously analyzing privacy risk and hence can help organization mitigate users’ privacy concerns as it
ensures that what is learned about any individual user would be (almost) the same whether the user’s
information is used as input to an analysis or not.
Differentially private algorithms work in two main modalities – the curator model and the local
model. The curator model assumes a trusted centralized curator that collects all the personal information and then analyzes it. The local model on the other hand, does not involve a central repository.
Instead, each piece of personal information is randomized by its provider to protect privacy even if
all information provided to the analysis is revealed. Holding a central repository of personal information can become a liability to organizations in face of security breaches, employee misconduct,
subpoenas, etc. This makes the local model attractive for implementation. Indeed in the last few
years Google and Apple have deployed local differentially private analyses [10, 16].
Challenges of the local model. A disadvantage of the local model is that it requires introducing
noise at a significantly higher level than what is required in the curator model. Furthermore, some
tasks which are possible in the curator model are impossible in the local model [9, 14, 7]. To see
the effect of noise, consider estimating the number of HIV positives in a given population of n
participants. In the curated model, it suffices to add Laplace noise of magnitude O(1/) [9], i.e.,
∗

Department of Computer Science & Engineering, The Ohio State University. bassily.1@osu.edu
Department of Computer Science, Georgetown University. kobbi.nissim@georgetown.edu
‡
Center for Research on Computation and Society (CRCS), Harvard University. u@uri.co.il
§
Department of Computer Science, University of California Santa Cruz. aguhatha@ucsc.edu.
†

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

