Deep Reinforcement Learning
from Human Preferences
Paul F Christiano
OpenAI
paul@openai.com
Miljan Martic
DeepMind
miljanm@google.com

Jan Leike
DeepMind
leike@google.com
Shane Legg
DeepMind
legg@google.com

Tom B Brown
Google Brain⇤
tombbrown@google.com
Dario Amodei
OpenAI
damodei@openai.com

Abstract
For sophisticated reinforcement learning (RL) systems to interact usefully with
real-world environments, we need to communicate complex goals to these systems.
In this work, we explore goals defined in terms of (non-expert) human preferences
between pairs of trajectory segments. We show that this approach can effectively
solve complex RL tasks without access to the reward function, including Atari
games and simulated robot locomotion, while providing feedback on less than
1% of our agent’s interactions with the environment. This reduces the cost of
human oversight far enough that it can be practically applied to state-of-the-art
RL systems. To demonstrate the flexibility of our approach, we show that we can
successfully train complex novel behaviors with about an hour of human time.
These behaviors and environments are considerably more complex than any which
have been previously learned from human feedback.

1

Introduction

Recent success in scaling reinforcement learning (RL) to large problems has been driven in domains
that have a well-specified reward function (Mnih et al., 2015, 2016; Silver et al., 2016). Unfortunately,
many tasks involve goals that are complex, poorly-defined, or hard to specify. Overcoming this
limitation would greatly expand the possible impact of deep RL and could increase the reach of
machine learning more broadly.
For example, suppose that we wanted to use reinforcement learning to train a robot to clean a table or
scramble an egg. It’s not clear how to construct a suitable reward function, which will need to be a
function of the robot’s sensors. We could try to design a simple reward function that approximately
captures the intended behavior, but this will often result in behavior that optimizes our reward
function without actually satisfying our preferences. This difficulty underlies recent concerns about
misalignment between our values and the objectives of our RL systems (Bostrom, 2014; Russell,
2016; Amodei et al., 2016). If we could successfully communicate our actual objectives to our agents,
it would be a significant step towards addressing these concerns.
If we have demonstrations of the desired task, we can use inverse reinforcement learning (Ng and
Russell, 2000) or imitation learning to copy the demonstrated behavior. But these approaches are not
directly applicable to behaviors that are difficult for humans to demonstrate (such as controlling a
robot with many degrees of freedom but non-human morphology).
⇤

Work done while at OpenAI.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

