Rényi Differential Privacy Mechanisms for Posterior
Sampling

Joseph Geumlek
University of California, San Diego
jgeumlek@cs.ucsd.edu

Shuang Song
University of California, San Diego
shs037@eng.ucsd.edu

Kamalika Chaudhuri
University of California, San Diego
kamalika@cs.ucsd.edu

Abstract
With the newly proposed privacy definition of Rényi Differential Privacy (RDP)
in [14], we re-examine the inherent privacy of releasing a single sample from a
posterior distribution. We exploit the impact of the prior distribution in mitigating
the influence of individual data points. In particular, we focus on sampling from
an exponential family and specific generalized linear models, such as logistic
regression. We propose novel RDP mechanisms as well as offering a new RDP
analysis for an existing method in order to add value to the RDP framework. Each
method is capable of achieving arbitrary RDP privacy guarantees, and we offer
experimental results of their efficacy.

1

Introduction

As data analysis continues to expand and permeate ever more facets of life, the concerns over the
privacy of one’s data grow too. Many results have arrived in recent years to tackle the inherent
conflict of extracting usable knowledge from a data set without over-extracting or leaking the private
data of individuals. Before one can strike a balance between these competing goals, one needs a
framework by which to quantify what it means to preserve an individual’s privacy.
Since 2006, Differential Privacy (DP) has reigned as the privacy framework of choice [6]. It quantifies
privacy by measuring how indistinguishability of the mechanism output across whether or not any
one individual is in or out of the data set. This gave not just privacy semantics, but also robust
mathematical guarantees. However, the requirements have been cumbersome for utility, leading to
many proposed relaxations. One common relaxation is approximate DP, which allows arbitrarily bad
events to occur with probability at most δ. A more recent relaxation is Rényi Differential Privacy
(RDP) proposed in [14], which uses the measure of Rényi divergences to smoothly vary between
bounding the average and maximum privacy loss. However, RDP has very few mechanisms compared
to the more established approximate DP. We expand the RDP repertoire with novel mechanisms
inspired by Rényi divergences, as well as re-analyzing an existing method in this new light.
Inherent to DP and RDP is that there must be some uncertainty in the mechanism; they cannot be
deterministic. Many privacy methods have been motivated by exploiting pre-existing sources of
randomness in machine learning algorithms. One promising area has been Bayesian data analysis,
which focuses on maintaining and tracking the uncertainty within probabilistic models. Posterior
sampling is prevalent in many Bayesian methods, serving to introduce randomness that matches the
currently held uncertainty.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

