Beyond Parity:
Fairness Objectives for Collaborative Filtering

Sirui Yao
Department of Computer Science
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA 24061
ysirui@vt.edu

Bert Huang
Department of Computer Science
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA 24061
bhuang@vt.edu

Abstract
We study fairness in collaborative-filtering recommender systems, which are
sensitive to discrimination that exists in historical data. Biased data can lead
collaborative-filtering methods to make unfair predictions for users from minority
groups. We identify the insufficiency of existing fairness metrics and propose four
new metrics that address different forms of unfairness. These fairness metrics can
be optimized by adding fairness terms to the learning objective. Experiments on
synthetic and real data show that our new metrics can better measure fairness than
the baseline, and that the fairness objectives effectively help reduce unfairness.

1

Introduction

This paper introduces new measures of unfairness in algorithmic recommendation and demonstrates
how to optimize these metrics to reduce different forms of unfairness. Recommender systems study
user behavior and make recommendations to support decision making. They have been widely applied
in various fields to recommend items such as movies, products, jobs, and courses. However, since
recommender systems make predictions based on observed data, they can easily inherit bias that may
already exist. To address this issue, we first formalize the problem of unfairness in recommender
systems and identify the insufficiency of demographic parity for this setting. We then propose four
new unfairness metrics that address different forms of unfairness. We compare our fairness measures
with non-parity on biased, synthetic training data and prove that our metrics can better measure
unfairness. To improve model fairness, we provide five fairness objectives that can be optimized, each
adding unfairness penalties as regularizers. Experimenting on real and synthetic data, we demonstrate
that each fairness metric can be optimized without much degradation in prediction accuracy, but that
trade-offs exist among the different forms of unfairness.
We focus on a frequently practiced approach for recommendation called collaborative filtering,
which makes recommendations based on the ratings or behavior of other users in the system. The
fundamental assumption behind collaborative filtering is that other users’ opinions can be selected
and aggregated in such a way as to provide a reasonable prediction of the active user’s preference [7].
For example, if a user likes item A, and many other users who like item A also like item B, then it is
reasonable to expect that the user will also like item B. Collaborative filtering methods would predict
that the user will give item B a high rating.
With this approach, predictions are made based on co-occurrence statistics, and most methods assume
that the missing ratings are missing at random. Unfortunately, researchers have shown that sampled
ratings have markedly different properties from the users’ true preferences [21, 22]. Sampling is
heavily influenced by social bias, which results in more missing ratings in some cases than others.
This non-random pattern of missing and observed rating data is a potential source of unfairness.
For the purpose of improving recommendation accuracy, there are collaborative filtering models
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

