LightGBM: A Highly Efficient Gradient Boosting
Decision Tree
Guolin Ke1 , Qi Meng2 , Thomas Finley3 , Taifeng Wang1 ,
Wei Chen1 , Weidong Ma1 , Qiwei Ye1 , Tie-Yan Liu1
1
Microsoft Research 2 Peking University 3 Microsoft Redmond
1
{guolin.ke, taifengw, wche, weima, qiwye, tie-yan.liu}@microsoft.com;
2
qimeng13@pku.edu.cn; 3 tfinely@microsoft.com;

Abstract
Gradient Boosting Decision Tree (GBDT) is a popular machine learning algorithm, and has quite a few effective implementations such as XGBoost and pGBRT.
Although many engineering optimizations have been adopted in these implementations, the efficiency and scalability are still unsatisfactory when the feature
dimension is high and data size is large. A major reason is that for each feature,
they need to scan all the data instances to estimate the information gain of all
possible split points, which is very time consuming. To tackle this problem, we
propose two novel techniques: Gradient-based One-Side Sampling (GOSS) and
Exclusive Feature Bundling (EFB). With GOSS, we exclude a significant proportion of data instances with small gradients, and only use the rest to estimate the
information gain. We prove that, since the data instances with larger gradients play
a more important role in the computation of information gain, GOSS can obtain
quite accurate estimation of the information gain with a much smaller data size.
With EFB, we bundle mutually exclusive features (i.e., they rarely take nonzero
values simultaneously), to reduce the number of features. We prove that finding
the optimal bundling of exclusive features is NP-hard, but a greedy algorithm
can achieve quite good approximation ratio (and thus can effectively reduce the
number of features without hurting the accuracy of split point determination by
much). We call our new GBDT implementation with GOSS and EFB LightGBM.
Our experiments on multiple public datasets show that, LightGBM speeds up the
training process of conventional GBDT by up to over 20 times while achieving
almost the same accuracy.

1

Introduction

Gradient boosting decision tree (GBDT) [1] is a widely-used machine learning algorithm, due to
its efficiency, accuracy, and interpretability. GBDT achieves state-of-the-art performances in many
machine learning tasks, such as multi-class classification [2], click prediction [3], and learning to
rank [4]. In recent years, with the emergence of big data (in terms of both the number of features
and the number of instances), GBDT is facing new challenges, especially in the tradeoff between
accuracy and efficiency. Conventional implementations of GBDT need to, for every feature, scan all
the data instances to estimate the information gain of all the possible split points. Therefore, their
computational complexities will be proportional to both the number of features and the number of
instances. This makes these implementations very time consuming when handling big data.
To tackle this challenge, a straightforward idea is to reduce the number of data instances and the
number of features. However, this turns out to be highly non-trivial. For example, it is unclear how to
perform data sampling for GBDT. While there are some works that sample data according to their
weights to speed up the training process of boosting [5, 6, 7], they cannot be directly applied to GBDT
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

