Cortical microcircuits as
gated-recurrent neural networks

Rui Ponte Costa∗
Centre for Neural Circuits and Behaviour
Dept. of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
rui.costa@cncb.ox.ac.uk

Yannis M. Assael∗
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
and DeepMind, London, UK
yannis.assael@cs.ox.ac.uk

Brendan Shillingford∗
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
and DeepMind, London, UK
brendan.shillingford@cs.ox.ac.uk

Nando de Freitas
DeepMind
London, UK
nandodefreitas@google.com

Tim P. Vogels
Centre for Neural Circuits and Behaviour
Dept. of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
tim.vogels@cncb.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Cortical circuits exhibit intricate recurrent architectures that are remarkably similar
across different brain areas. Such stereotyped structure suggests the existence of
common computational principles. However, such principles have remained largely
elusive. Inspired by gated-memory networks, namely long short-term memory
networks (LSTMs), we introduce a recurrent neural network in which information
is gated through inhibitory cells that are subtractive (subLSTM). We propose a
natural mapping of subLSTMs onto known canonical excitatory-inhibitory cortical
microcircuits. Our empirical evaluation across sequential image classification
and language modelling tasks shows that subLSTM units can achieve similar
performance to LSTM units. These results suggest that cortical circuits can be
optimised to solve complex contextual problems and proposes a novel view on
their computational function. Overall our work provides a step towards unifying
recurrent networks as used in machine learning with their biological counterparts.

1

Introduction

Over the last decades neuroscience research has collected enormous amounts of data on the architecture and dynamics of cortical circuits, unveiling complex but stereotypical structures across
the neocortex (Markram et al., 2004; Harris and Mrsic-Flogel, 2013; Jiang et al., 2015). One of
the most prevalent features of cortical nets is their laminar organisation and their high degree of
recurrence, even at the level of local (micro-)circuits (Douglas et al., 1995; Song et al., 2005; Harris
and Mrsic-Flogel, 2013; Jiang et al., 2015) (Fig. 1a). Another key feature of cortical circuits is
the detailed and tight balance of excitation and inhibition, which has received growing support
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

