Learning with Bandit Feedback in Potential Games

Johanne Cohen
LRI-CNRS, Université Paris-Sud,Université Paris-Saclay, France
johanne.cohen@lri.fr
Amélie Héliou
LIX, Ecole Polytechnique, CNRS, AMIBio, Inria, Université Paris-Saclay
amelie.heliou@polytechnique.edu
Panayotis Mertikopoulos
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, LIG, F-38000, Grenoble, France
panayotis.mertikopoulos@imag.fr

Abstract
This paper examines the equilibrium convergence properties of no-regret learning
with exponential weights in potential games. To establish convergence with minimal information requirements on the players’ side, we focus on two frameworks:
the semi-bandit case (where players have access to a noisy estimate of their payoff
vectors, including strategies they did not play), and the bandit case (where players
are only able to observe their in-game, realized payoffs). In the semi-bandit case,
we show that the induced sequence of play converges almost surely to a Nash
equilibrium at a quasi-exponential rate. In the bandit case, the same result holds for
ε-approximations of Nash equilibria if we introduce an exploration factor ε > 0
that guarantees that action choice probabilities never fall below ε. In particular, if
the algorithm is run with a suitably decreasing exploration factor, the sequence of
play converges to a bona fide Nash equilibrium with probability 1.

1

Introduction

Given the manifest complexity of computing Nash equilibria, a central question that arises is whether
such outcomes could result from a dynamic process in which players act on empirical information
on their strategies’ performance over time. This question becomes particularly important when the
players’ view of the game is obstructed by situational uncertainty and the “fog of war”: for instance,
when deciding which route to take to work each morning, a commuter is typically unaware of how
many other commuters there are at any given moment, what their possible strategies are, how to
best respond to their choices, etc. In fact, in situations of this kind, players may not even know that
they are involved in a game; as such, it does not seem reasonable to assume full rationality, common
knowledge of rationality, flawless execution, etc. to justify the Nash equilibrium prediction.
A compelling alternative to this “rationalistic” viewpoint is provided by the framework of online
learning, where players are treated as oblivious entities facing a repeated decision process with a
priori unknown rules and outcomes. In this context, when the players have no Bayesian prior on their
environment, the most widely used performance criterion is that of regret minimization, a worst-case
guarantee that was first introduced by Hannan [1], and which has given rise to a vigorous literature at
the interface of optimization, statistics and theoretical computer science – for a survey, see [2, 3]. By
this token, our starting point in this paper is the following question:
If all players of a repeated game follow a no-regret algorithm,
does the induced sequence of play converge to Nash equilibrium?
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

