Probabilistic Models for Integration Error in the
Assessment of Functional Cardiac Models
Chris. J. Oates1,5 , Steven Niederer2 , Angela Lee2 , François-Xavier Briol3 , Mark Girolami4,5
1
Newcastle University, 2 King’s College London, 3 University of Warwick,
4
Imperial College London, 5 Alan Turing Institute

Abstract
This paper studies the numerical computation of integrals, representing estimates
or predictions, over the output f (x) of a computational model with respect to
a distribution p(dx) over uncertain inputs x to the model. For the functional
cardiac models that motivate this work, neither f nor p possess a closed-form
expression and evaluation of either requires ≈ 100 CPU hours, precluding standard
numerical integration methods. Our proposal is to treat integration as an estimation
problem, with a joint model for both the a priori unknown function f and the a
priori unknown distribution p. The result is a posterior distribution over the integral
that explicitly accounts for dual sources of numerical approximation error due to a
severely limited computational budget. This construction is applied to account, in
a statistically principled manner, for the impact of numerical errors that (at present)
are confounding factors in functional cardiac model assessment.

1

Motivation: Predictive Assessment of Computer Models

This paper considers the problem of assessment for computer models [7], motivated by an urgent
need to assess the performance of sophisticated functional cardiac models [25]. In concrete terms,
the problem that we consider can be expressed as the numerical approximation of integrals
Z
p(f ) =
f (x)p(dx),
(1)
where f (x) denotes a functional of the output from a computer model and x denotes unknown inputs
(or ‘parameters’) of the model. The term p(x) denotes a posterior distribution over model inputs.
Although not our focus in this paper, we note that p(x) is defined based on a prior π0 (x) over these
inputs and training data y assumed to follow the computer model π(y|x) itself. The integral p(f ), in
our context, represents a posterior prediction of actual cardiac behaviour. The computational model
can be assessed through comparison of these predictions to test data generated from an experiment.
The challenging nature of cardiac models – and indeed computer models in general – is such that a
closed-form for both f (x) and p(dx) is precluded [23]. Instead, it is typical to be provided with a
finite collection of samples {xi }ni=1 obtained from p(dx) through Monte Carlo (or related) methods
[32]. The integrand f (x) is then evaluated at these n input configurations, to obtain {f (xi )}ni=1 .
Limited computational budgets necessitate that the number n is small and, in such situations, the error
of an estimator for the integral p(f ) based on the data {(xi , f (xi ))}ni=1 is subject to strict informationtheoretic lower bounds [26]. The practical consequence is that an unknown (non-negligible) numerical
error is introduced in the numerical approximation of p(f ), unrelated to the performance of the model.
If this numerical error is ignored, it will constitute a confounding factor in the assessment of predictive
performance for the computer model. It is therefore unclear how a fair model assessment can proceed.
This motivates an attempt to understand the extent of numerical error in any estimate of p(f ). This is
non-trivial; for example, the error distribution of the arithmetic mean n1 Σni=1 f (xi ) depends on the
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

