Conic Scan-and-Cover algorithms for
nonparametric topic modeling

Mikhail Yurochkin
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
moonfolk@umich.edu

Aritra Guha
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
aritra@umich.edu

XuanLong Nguyen
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
xuanlong@umich.edu

Abstract
We propose new algorithms for topic modeling when the number of topics is
unknown. Our approach relies on an analysis of the concentration of mass and
angular geometry of the topic simplex, a convex polytope constructed by taking
the convex hull of vertices representing the latent topics. Our algorithms are shown
in practice to have accuracy comparable to a Gibbs sampler in terms of topic
estimation, which requires the number of topics be given. Moreover, they are one
of the fastest among several state of the art parametric techniques.1 Statistical
consistency of our estimator is established under some conditions.

1

Introduction

A well-known challenge associated with topic modeling inference can be succinctly summed up
by the statement that sampling based approaches may be accurate but computationally very slow,
e.g., Pritchard et al. (2000); Griffiths & Steyvers (2004), while the variational inference approaches
are faster but their estimates may be inaccurate, e.g., Blei et al. (2003); Hoffman et al. (2013). For
nonparametric topic inference, i.e., when the number of topics is a priori unknown, the problem
becomes more acute. The Hierarchical Dirichlet Process model (Teh et al., 2006) is an elegant
Bayesian nonparametric approach which allows for the number of topics to grow with data size, but
its sampling based inference is much more inefficient compared to the parametric counterpart. As
pointed out by Yurochkin & Nguyen (2016), the root of the inefficiency can be traced to the need for
approximating the posterior distributions of the latent variables representing the topic labels — these
are not geometrically intrinsic as any permutation of the labels yields the same likelihood.
A promising approach in addressing the aforementioned challenges is to take a convex geometric
perspective, where topic learning and inference may be formulated as a convex geometric problem: the
observed documents correspond to points randomly drawn from a topic polytope, a convex set whose
vertices represent the topics to be inferred. This perspective has been adopted to establish posterior
contraction behavior of the topic polytope in both theory and practice (Nguyen, 2015; Tang et al.,
2014). A method for topic estimation that exploits convex geometry, the Geometric Dirichlet Means
(GDM) algorithm, was proposed by Yurochkin & Nguyen (2016), which demonstrates attractive
behaviors both in terms of running time and estimation accuracy. In this paper we shall continue to
amplify this viewpoint to address nonparametric topic modeling, a setting in which the number of
topics is unknown, as is the distribution inside the topic polytope (in some situations).
We will propose algorithms for topic estimation by explicitly accounting for the concentration of
mass and angular geometry of the topic polytope, typically a simplex in topic modeling applications.
The geometric intuition is fairly clear: each vertex of the topic simplex can be identified by a ray
emanating from its center (to be defined formally), while the concentration of mass can be quantified
1

Code is available at https://github.com/moonfolk/Geometric-Topic-Modeling.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

