Sparse Embedded k-Means Clustering

Weiwei Liu†,\,∗, Xiaobo Shen‡,∗ , Ivor W. Tsang\
School of Computer Science and Engineering, The University of New South Wales
‡
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
\
Centre for Artificial Intelligence, University of Technology Sydney
{liuweiwei863,njust.shenxiaobo}@gmail.com
ivor.tsang@uts.edu.au

†

Abstract
The k-means clustering algorithm is a ubiquitous tool in data mining and machine
learning that shows promising performance. However, its high computational
cost has hindered its applications in broad domains. Researchers have successfully addressed these obstacles with dimensionality reduction methods. Recently,
[1] develop a state-of-the-art random projection (RP) method for faster k-means
clustering. Their method delivers many improvements over other dimensionality
reduction methods. For example, compared to the advanced singular value decomposition based feature extraction approach, [1] reduce the running time by a
factor of min{n, d}2 log(d)/k for data matrix X ∈ Rn×d with n data points and
d features, while losing only a factor of one in approximation accuracy. Unfortundk
) for matrix multiplication and this cost will
nately, they still require O( 2 log(d)
be prohibitive for large values of n and d. To break this bottleneck, we carefully
build a sparse embedded k-means clustering algorithm which requires O(nnz(X))
(nnz(X) denotes the number of non-zeros in X) for fast matrix multiplication.
Moreover, our proposed algorithm improves on [1]’s results for approximation
accuracy by a factor of one. Our empirical studies corroborate our theoretical findings, and demonstrate that our approach is able to significantly accelerate k-means
clustering, while achieving satisfactory clustering performance.

1

Introduction

Due to its simplicity and flexibility, the k-means clustering algorithm [2, 3, 4] has been identified
as one of the top 10 data mining algorithms. It has shown promising results in various real world
applications, such as bioinformatics, image processing, text mining and image analysis. Recently, the
dimensionality and scale of data continues to grow in many applications, such as biological, finance,
computer vision and web [5, 6, 7, 8, 9], which poses a serious challenge in designing efficient and
accurate algorithmic solutions for k-means clustering.
To address these obstacles, one prevalent technique is dimensionality reduction, which embeds the
original features into low dimensional space before performing k-means clustering. Dimensionality
reduction encompasses two kinds of approaches: 1) feature selection (FS), which embeds the
data into a low dimensional space by selecting the actual dimensions of the data; and 2) feature
extraction (FE), which finds an embedding by constructing new artificial features that are, for
example, linear combinations of the original features. Laplacian scores [10] and Fisher scores
[11] are two basic feature selection methods. However, they lack a provable guarantee. [12] first
propose a provable singular value decomposition (SVD) feature selection method. It uses the SVD
to find O(klog(k/)/2 ) actual features such that with constant probability the clustering structure
∗

The first two authors make equal contributions.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

