Federated Multi-Task Learning

Virginia Smith
Stanford

Chao-Kai Chiang∗
USC

smithv@stanford.edu

chaokaic@usc.edu

Maziar Sanjabi∗
USC

Ameet Talwalkar
CMU

maziarsanjabi@gmail.com talwalkar@cmu.edu

Abstract
Federated learning poses new statistical and systems challenges in training machine
learning models over distributed networks of devices. In this work, we show that
multi-task learning is naturally suited to handle the statistical challenges of this
setting, and propose a novel systems-aware optimization method, M OCHA, that is
robust to practical systems issues. Our method and theory for the first time consider
issues of high communication cost, stragglers, and fault tolerance for distributed
multi-task learning. The resulting method achieves significant speedups compared
to alternatives in the federated setting, as we demonstrate through simulations on
real-world federated datasets.

1

Introduction

Mobile phones, wearable devices, and smart homes are just a few of the modern distributed networks
generating massive amounts of data each day. Due to the growing storage and computational
power of devices in these networks, it is increasingly attractive to store data locally and push more
network computation to the edge. The nascent field of federated learning explores training statistical
models directly on devices [37]. Examples of potential applications include: learning sentiment,
semantic location, or activities of mobile phone users; predicting health events like low blood sugar
or heart attack risk from wearable devices; or detecting burglaries within smart homes [3, 39, 42].
Following [25, 36, 26], we summarize the unique challenges of federated learning below.
1. Statistical Challenges: The aim in federated learning is to fit a model to data, {X1 , . . . , Xm },
generated by m distributed nodes. Each node, t ∈ [m], collects data in a non-IID manner across the
network, with data on each node being generated by a distinct distribution Xt ∼ Pt . The number
of data points on each node, nt , may also vary significantly, and there may be an underlying
structure present that captures the relationship amongst nodes and their associated distributions.
2. Systems Challenges: There are typically a large number of nodes, m, in the network, and
communication is often a significant bottleneck. Additionally, the storage, computational, and
communication capacities of each node may differ due to variability in hardware (CPU, memory),
network connection (3G, 4G, WiFi), and power (battery level). These systems challenges, compounded with unbalanced data and statistical heterogeneity, make issues such as stragglers and
fault tolerance significantly more prevalent than in typical data center environments.
In this work, we propose a modeling approach that differs significantly from prior work on federated
learning, where the aim thus far has been to train a single global model across the network [25, 36, 26].
Instead, we address statistical challenges in the federated setting by learning separate models for each
node, {w1 , . . . , wm }. This can be naturally captured through a multi-task learning (MTL) framework,
where the goal is to consider fitting separate but related models simultaneously [14, 2, 57, 28].
Unfortunately, current multi-task learning methods are not suited to handle the systems challenges
that arise in federated learning, including high communication cost, stragglers, and fault tolerance.
Addressing these challenges is therefore a key component of our work.
∗

Authors contributed equally.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

