Eigenvalue Decay Implies Polynomial-Time
Learnability for Neural Networks

Surbhi Goel ∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
surbhi@cs.utexas.edu

Adam Klivans †
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
klivans@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning function classes computed by neural networks with various activations (e.g. ReLU or Sigmoid), a task believed to be computationally intractable in the worst-case. A major open problem is to understand
the minimal assumptions under which these classes admit provably efficient algorithms. In this work we show that a natural distributional assumption corresponding to eigenvalue decay of the Gram matrix yields polynomial-time algorithms in
the non-realizable setting for expressive classes of networks (e.g. feed-forward
networks of ReLUs). We make no assumptions on the structure of the network or
the labels. Given sufficiently-strong eigenvalue decay, we obtain fully-polynomial
time algorithms in all the relevant parameters with respect to square-loss. This is
the first purely distributional assumption that leads to polynomial-time algorithms
for networks of ReLUs. Further, unlike prior distributional assumptions (e.g., the
marginal distribution is Gaussian), eigenvalue decay has been observed in practice
on common data sets.

1

Introduction

Understanding the computational complexity of learning neural networks from random examples
is a fundamental problem in machine learning. Several researchers have proved results showing
computational hardness for the worst-case complexity of learning various networks– that is, when
no assumptions are made on the underlying distribution or the structure of the network [10, 16,
21, 26, 43]. As such, it seems necessary to take some assumptions in order to develop efficient
algorithms for learning deep networks (the most expressive class of networks known to be learnable
in polynomial-time without any assumptions is a sum of one hidden layer of sigmoids [16]). A
major open question is to understand what are the “correct” or minimal assumptions to take in
order to guarantee efficient learnability3 . An oft-taken assumption is that the marginal distribution is
equal to some smooth distribution such as a multivariate Gaussian. Even under such a distributional
assumption, however, there is evidence that fully polynomial-time algorithms are still hard to obtain
for simple classes of networks [19, 36]. As such, several authors have made further assumptions on
the underlying structure of the model (and/or work in the noiseless or realizable setting).
In fact, in an interesting recent work, Shamir [34] has given evidence that both distributional assumptions and assumptions on the network structure are necessary for efficient learnability using
gradient-based methods. Our main result is that under only an assumption on the marginal distribution, namely eigenvalue decay of the Gram matrix, there exist efficient algorithms for learning broad
∗

Work supported by a Microsoft Data Science Initiative Award.
Part of this work was done while visiting the Simons Institute for Theoretical Computer Science.
3
For example, a very recent paper of Song, Vempala, Xie, and Williams [36] asks “What form would such
an explanation take, in the face of existing complexity-theoretic lower bounds?”
†

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

