Process-constrained batch Bayesian Optimisation

Pratibha Vellanki1 , Santu Rana1 , Sunil Gupta1 , David Rubin2
Alessandra Sutti2 , Thomas Dorin2 , Murray Height2 ,Paul Sandars3 , Svetha Venkatesh1
1
Centre for Pattern Recognition and Data Analytics
Deakin University, Geelong, Australia
[pratibha.vellanki, santu.rana, sunil.gupta, svetha.venkatesh@deakin.edu.au]
2
Institute for Frontier Materials, GTP Research
Deakin University, Geelong, Australia
[d.rubindecelisleal, alessandra.sutti, thomas.dorin, murray.height@deakin.edu.au]
3
Materials Science and Engineering, Michigan Technological University, USA
[sanders@mtu.edu]

Abstract
Prevailing batch Bayesian optimisation methods allow all control variables to be
freely altered at each iteration. Real-world experiments, however, often have physical limitations making it time-consuming to alter all settings for each recommendation in a batch. This gives rise to a unique problem in BO: in a recommended
batch, a set of variables that are expensive to experimentally change need to be
fixed, while the remaining control variables can be varied. We formulate this
as a process-constrained batch Bayesian optimisation problem. We propose two
algorithms, pc-BO(basic) and pc-BO(nested). pc-BO(basic) is simpler but lacks
convergence guarantee. In contrast pc-BO(nested) is slightly more complex, but
admits convergence analysis. We show that the regret of pc-BO(nested) is sublinear. We demonstrate the performance of both pc-BO(basic) and pc-BO(nested) by
optimising benchmark test functions, tuning hyper-parameters of the SVM classifier, optimising the heat-treatment process for an Al-Sc alloy to achieve target
hardness, and optimising the short polymer fibre production process.

1

Introduction

Experimental optimisation is used to design almost all products and processes, scientific and industrial, around us. Experimental optimisation involves optimising input control variables in order to
achieve a target output. Design of experiments (DOE) [16] is the conventional laboratory and industrial standard methodology used to efficiently plan experiments. The method is rigid - not adaptive
based on the completed experiments so far. This is where Bayesian optimisation offers an effective
alternative.
Bayesian optimisation [13, 17] is a powerful probabilistic framework for efficient, global optimisation of expensive, black box functions. The field is undergoing a recent resurgence, spurred by
new theory and problems and is impacting computer science broadly - tuning complex algorithms
[3, 22, 18, 21], combinatorial optimisation [24, 12], reinforcement learning [4]. Usually, a prior belief in the form of Gaussian process is maintained over the possible set of objective functions and the
posterior is the refined belief after updating the model with experimental data. The updated model
is used to seek the most promising location of function extrema by using a variety of criteria, e.g.
expected improvement (EI), and upper confidence bound (UCB). The maximiser of such a criteria
function is then recommended for the function evaluation. Iteratively the model is updated and recommendations are made till the target outcome is achieved. When concurrent function evaluations
are possible, Bayesian optimisation returns multiple suggestions, and this is termed as the batch
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

