Nonlinear random matrix theory for deep learning
Jeffrey Pennington
Google Brain
jpennin@google.com

Pratik Worah
Google Research
pworah@google.com

Abstract
Neural network configurations with random weights play an important role in the
analysis of deep learning. They define the initial loss landscape and are closely
related to kernel and random feature methods. Despite the fact that these networks
are built out of random matrices, the vast and powerful machinery of random matrix
theory has so far found limited success in studying them. A main obstacle in this
direction is that neural networks are nonlinear, which prevents the straightforward
utilization of many of the existing mathematical results. In this work, we open
the door for direct applications of random matrix theory to deep learning by
demonstrating that the pointwise nonlinearities typically applied in neural networks
can be incorporated into a standard method of proof in random matrix theory
known as the moments method. The test case for our study is the Gram matrix
Y T Y , Y = f (W X), where W is a random weight matrix, X is a random data
matrix, and f is a pointwise nonlinear activation function. We derive an explicit
representation for the trace of the resolvent of this matrix, which defines its limiting
spectral distribution. We apply these results to the computation of the asymptotic
performance of single-layer random feature networks on a memorization task and
to the analysis of the eigenvalues of the data covariance matrix as it propagates
through a neural network. As a byproduct of our analysis, we identify an intriguing
new class of activation functions with favorable properties.

1

Introduction

The list of successful applications of deep learning is growing at a staggering rate. Image
recognition (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), audio synthesis (Oord et al., 2016), translation (Wu et al.,
2016), and speech recognition (Hinton et al., 2012) are just a few of the recent achievements. Our
theoretical understanding of deep learning, on the other hand, has progressed at a more modest pace.
A central difficulty in extending our understanding stems from the complexity of neural network loss
surfaces, which are highly non-convex functions, often of millions or even billions (Shazeer et al.,
2017) of parameters.
In the physical sciences, progress in understanding large complex systems has often come by
approximating their constituents with random variables; for example, statistical physics and
thermodynamics are based in this paradigm. Since modern neural networks are undeniably large
complex systems, it is natural to consider what insights can be gained by approximating their
parameters with random variables. Moreover, such random configurations play at least two privileged
roles in neural networks: they define the initial loss surface for optimization, and they are closely
related to random feature and kernel methods. Therefore it is not surprising that random neural
networks have attracted significant attention in the literature over the years.
Another useful technique for simplifying the study of large complex systems is to approximate
their size as infinite. For neural networks, the concept of size has at least two axes: the number
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

