Dualing GANs

Yujia Li1∗
Alexander Schwing3
Kuan-Chieh Wang1,2
Richard Zemel1,2
1
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
Vector Institute
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{yujiali, wangkua1, zemel}@cs.toronto.edu
aschwing@illinois.edu

Abstract
Generative adversarial nets (GANs) are a promising technique for modeling a
distribution from samples. It is however well known that GAN training suffers from
instability due to the nature of its saddle point formulation. In this paper, we explore
ways to tackle the instability problem by dualizing the discriminator. We start from
linear discriminators in which case conjugate duality provides a mechanism to
reformulate the saddle point objective into a maximization problem, such that both
the generator and the discriminator of this ‘dualing GAN’ act in concert. We then
demonstrate how to extend this intuition to non-linear formulations. For GANs
with linear discriminators our approach is able to remove the instability in training,
while for GANs with nonlinear discriminators our approach provides an alternative
to the commonly used GAN training algorithm.

1

Introduction

Generative adversarial nets (GANs) [5] are, among others like variational auto-encoders [10] and
auto-regressive models [19], a promising technique for modeling a distribution from samples. A lot
of empirical evidence shows that GANs are able to learn to generate images with good visual quality
at unprecedented resolution [22, 17], and recently there has been a lot of research interest in GANs,
to better understand their properties and the training process.
Training GANs can be viewed as a duel between a discriminator and a generator. Both players
are instantiated as deep nets. The generator is required to produce realistic-looking samples that
cannot be differentiated from real data by the discriminator. In turn, the discriminator does as good a
job as possible to tell the samples apart from real data. Due to the complexity of the optimization
problem, training GANs is notoriously hard, and usually suffers from problems such as mode collapse,
vanishing gradient, and divergence. Moreover, the training procedures are very unstable and sensitive
to hyper-parameters. Therefore, a number of techniques have been proposed to address these issues,
some empirically justified [17, 18], and others more theoretically motivated [15, 1, 16, 23].
This tremendous amount of recent work, together with the wide variety of heuristics applied by
practitioners, indicates that many questions regarding the properties of GANs are still unanswered. In
this work we provide another perspective on the properties of GANs, aiming toward better training
algorithms in some cases. Our study in this paper is motivated by the alternating gradient update
between discriminator and generator, employed during training of GANs. This form of update is one
source of instability, and it is known to diverge even for some simple problems [18]. Ideally, when
the discriminator is optimized to optimality, the GAN objective is a deterministic function of the
generator. In this case, the optimization problem would be much easier to solve. This motivates our
idea to dualize parts of the GAN objective, offering a mechanism to better optimize the discriminator.
Interestingly, our dual formulation provides a direct relationship between the GAN objective and the
maximum mean-discrepancy framework discussed in [6]. When restricted to linear discriminators,
where we can find the optimal discriminator by solving the dual, this formulation permits the
derivation of an optimization algorithm that monotonically increases the objective. Moreover, for
∗

Now at DeepMind.

