Multiresolution Kernel Approximation for
Gaussian Process Regression

Yi Ding∗ , Risi Kondor∗† , Jonathan Eskreis-Winkler†
Department of Computer Science, † Department of Statistics
The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60637
{dingy,risi,eskreiswinkler}@uchicago.edu

∗

Abstract
Gaussian process regression generally does not scale to beyond a few thousands
data points without applying some sort of kernel approximation method. Most
approximations focus on the high eigenvalue part of the spectrum of the kernel
matrix, K, which leads to bad performance when the length scale of the kernel is
small. In this paper we introduce Multiresolution Kernel Approximation (MKA),
the first true broad bandwidth kernel approximation algorithm. Important points
about MKA are that it is memory efficient, and it is a direct method, which means
that it also makes it easy to approximate K −1 and det(K).

1

Introduction

Gaussian Process (GP) regression, and its frequentist cousin, kernel ridge regression, are such natural and canonical algorithms that they have been reinvented many times by different communities
under different names. In machine learning, GPs are considered one of the standard methods of
Bayesian nonparametric inference [1]. Meanwhile, the same model, under the name Kriging or
Gaussian Random Fields, is the de facto standard for modeling a range of natural phenomena from
geophyics to biology [2]. One of the most appealing features of GPs is that, ultimately, the algorithm reduces to “just” having to compute the inverse of a kernel matrix, K. Unfortunately, this also
turns out to be the algorithm’s Achilles heel, since in the general case, the complexity of inverting a
dense n×n matrix scales with O(n3 ), meaning that when the number of training examples exceeds
104 ∼ 105 , GP inference becomes problematic on virtually any computer1 . Over the course of the
last 15 years, devising approximations to address this problem has become a burgeoning field.
The most common approach is to use one of the so-called Nyström methods [3], which select a small
subset {xi1 , . . . , xim } of the original training data points as “anchors” and approximate K in the
>
form K ≈ K∗,I CK∗,I
, where K∗,I is the submatrix of K consisting of columns {i1 , . . . , im }, and
C is a matrix such as the pseudo-inverse of KI,I . Nyström methods often work well in practice and
have a mature literature offering strong theoretical guarantees. Still, Nyström is inherently a global
low rank approximation, and, as pointed out in [4], a priori there is no reason to believe that K
should be well approximable by a low rank matrix: for example, in the case of the popular Gaussian
kernel k(x, x0 ) = exp(−(x − x0 )2 /(2`2 )), as ` decreases and the kernel becomes more and more
“local” the number of significant eigenvalues quickly increases. This observation has motivated
alternative types of approximations, including local, hierarchical and distributed ones (see Section
2). In certain contexts involving translation invariant kernels yet other strategies may be applicable
[5], but these are beyond the scope of the present paper.
In this paper we present a new kernel approximation method, Multiresolution Kernel Approximation (MKA), which is inspired by a combination of ideas from hierarchical matrix decomposition
1
In the limited case of evaluating a GP with a fixed Gram matrix on a single training set, GP inference
reduces to solving a linear system in K, which scales better with n, but might be problematic behavior when
the condition number of K is large.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

