Deep Mean-Shift Priors for Image Restoration

Siavash A. Bigdeli
University of Bern
bigdeli@inf.unibe.ch

Meiguang Jin
University of Bern
jin@inf.unibe.ch

Paolo Favaro
University of Bern
favaro@inf.unibe.ch

Matthias Zwicker
University of Bern, and University of Maryland, College Park
zwicker@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
In this paper we introduce a natural image prior that directly represents a Gaussiansmoothed version of the natural image distribution. We include our prior in a
formulation of image restoration as a Bayes estimator that also allows us to solve
noise-blind image restoration problems. We show that the gradient of our prior
corresponds to the mean-shift vector on the natural image distribution. In addition,
we learn the mean-shift vector field using denoising autoencoders, and use it in a
gradient descent approach to perform Bayes risk minimization. We demonstrate
competitive results for noise-blind deblurring, super-resolution, and demosaicing.

1

Introduction

Image restoration tasks, such as deblurring and denoising, are ill-posed problems, whose solution
requires effective image priors. In the last decades, several natural image priors have been proposed,
including total variation [29], gradient sparsity priors [12], models based on image patches [5], and
Gaussian mixtures of local filters [25], just to name a few of the most successful ideas. See Figure 1
for a visual comparison of some popular priors. More recently, deep learning techniques have been
used to construct generic image priors.
Here, we propose an image prior that is directly based on an estimate of the natural image probability
distribution. Although this seems like the most intuitive and straightforward idea to formulate a prior,
only few previous techniques have taken this route [20]. Instead, most priors are built on intuition or
statistics of natural images (e.g., sparse gradients). Most previous deep learning priors are derived
in the context of specific algorithms to solve the restoration problem, but it is not clear how these
priors relate to the probability distribution of natural images. In contrast, our prior directly represents
the natural image distribution smoothed with a Gaussian kernel, an approximation similar to using
a Gaussian kernel density estimate. Note that we cannot hope to use the true image probability
distribution itself as our prior, since we only have a finite set of samples from this distribution. We
show a visual comparison in Figure 1, where our prior is able to capture the structure of the underlying
image, but others tend to simplify the texture to straight lines and sharp edges.
We formulate image restoration as a Bayes estimator, and define a utility function that includes the
smoothed natural image distribution. We approximate the estimator with a bound, and show that
the gradient of the bound includes the gradient of the logarithm of our prior, that is, the Gaussian
smoothed density. In addition, the gradient of the logarithm of the smoothed density is proportional
to the mean-shift vector [8], and it has recently been shown that denoising autoencoders (DAEs) learn
such a mean-shift vector field for a given set of data samples [1, 4]. Hence we call our prior a deep
mean-shift prior, and our framework is an example of Bayesian inference using deep learning.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

