Label Distribution Learning Forests

Wei Shen1,2 , Kai Zhao1 , Yilu Guo1 , Alan Yuille2
Key Laboratory of Specialty Fiber Optics and Optical Access Networks,
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Communication and Data Science,
School of Communication and Information Engineering, Shanghai University
2
Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University
1

{shenwei1231,zhaok1206,gyl.luan0,alan.l.yuille}@gmail.com

Abstract
Label distribution learning (LDL) is a general learning framework, which assigns
to an instance a distribution over a set of labels rather than a single label or multiple
labels. Current LDL methods have either restricted assumptions on the expression
form of the label distribution or limitations in representation learning, e.g., to
learn deep features in an end-to-end manner. This paper presents label distribution
learning forests (LDLFs) - a novel label distribution learning algorithm based on
differentiable decision trees, which have several advantages: 1) Decision trees
have the potential to model any general form of label distributions by a mixture
of leaf node predictions. 2) The learning of differentiable decision trees can be
combined with representation learning. We define a distribution-based loss function
for a forest, enabling all the trees to be learned jointly, and show that an update
function for leaf node predictions, which guarantees a strict decrease of the loss
function, can be derived by variational bounding. The effectiveness of the proposed
LDLFs is verified on several LDL tasks and a computer vision application, showing
significant improvements to the state-of-the-art LDL methods.

1

Introduction

Label distribution learning (LDL) [6, 11] is a learning framework to deal with problems of label
ambiguity. Unlike single-label learning (SLL) and multi-label learning (MLL) [26], which assume an
instance is assigned to a single label or multiple labels, LDL aims at learning the relative importance
of each label involved in the description of an instance, i.e., a distribution over the set of labels. Such
a learning strategy is suitable for many real-world problems, which have label ambiguity. An example
is facial age estimation [8]. Even humans cannot predict the precise age from a single facial image.
They may say that the person is probably in one age group and less likely to be in another. Hence it is
more natural to assign a distribution of age labels to each facial image (Fig. 1(a)) instead of using a
single age label. Another example is movie rating prediction [7]. Many famous movie review web
sites, such as Netflix, IMDb and Douban, provide a crowd opinion for each movie specified by the
distribution of ratings collected from their users (Fig. 1(b)). If a system could precisely predict such a
rating distribution for every movie before it is released, movie producers can reduce their investment
risk and the audience can better choose which movies to watch.
Many LDL methods assume the label distribution can be represented by a maximum entropy model [2]
and learn it by optimizing an energy function based on the model [8, 11, 28, 6]. But, the exponential
part of this model restricts the generality of the distribution form, e.g., it has difficulty in representing
mixture distributions. Some other LDL methods extend the existing learning algorithms, e.g, by
boosting and support vector regression, to deal with label distributions [7, 27], which avoid making
this assumption, but have limitations in representation learning, e.g., they do not learn deep features
in an end-to-end manner.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

