Spectrally-normalized margin bounds
for neural networks
Peter L. Bartlett∗

Dylan J. Foster†

Matus Telgarsky‡

Abstract
This paper presents a margin-based multiclass generalization bound for neural networks that scales with their margin-normalized spectral complexity: their Lipschitz
constant, meaning the product of the spectral norms of the weight matrices, times
a certain correction factor. This bound is empirically investigated for a standard
AlexNet network trained with SGD on the mnist and cifar10 datasets, with both
original and random labels; the bound, the Lipschitz constants, and the excess risks
are all in direct correlation, suggesting both that SGD selects predictors whose
complexity scales with the difficulty of the learning task, and secondly that the
presented bound is sensitive to this complexity.

1

Overview

Neural networks owe their astonishing success not only to their ability to fit any data set: they also
generalize well, meaning they provide a close fit on unseen data. A classical statistical adage is that
models capable of fitting too much will generalize poorly; what’s going on here?
Let’s navigate the many possible explanations provided by statistical theory. A first observation is
that any analysis based solely on the number of possible labellings on a finite training set — as is
the case with VC dimension — is doomed: if the function class can fit all possible labels (as is the
case with neural networks in standard configurations [Zhang et al., 2017]), then this analysis can not
distinguish it from the collection of all possible functions!
excess risk 0.9
cifar excess risk
cifar Lipschitz
cifar Lipschitz/margin
cifar [random] excess risk
cifar [random] Lipschitz
excess risk 0.3

epoch 10

epoch 100

Figure 1: An analysis of AlexNet [Krizhevsky et al., 2012] trained with SGD on cifar10, both with
original and with random labels. Triangle-marked curves track excess risk across training epochs (on
a log scale), with an ‘x’ marking the earliest epoch with zero training error. Circle-marked curves
track Lipschitz constants, normalized so that the two curves for random labels meet. The Lipschitz
constants tightly correlate with excess risk, and moreover normalizing them by margins (resulting in
the square-marked curve) neutralizes growth across epochs.
∗

<peter@berkeley.edu>; University of California, Berkeley and Queensland University of Technology.
<djf244@cornell.edu>; Cornell University.
‡
<mjt@illinois.edu>; University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.
†

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

