A Universal Analysis of Large-Scale Regularized
Least Squares Solutions

Ashkan Panahi
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC 27606
apanahi@ncsu.edu

Babak Hassibi
Department of Electrical Engineering
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
hassibi@caltech.edu

Abstract
A problem that has been of recent interest in statistical inference, machine learning
and signal processing is that of understanding the asymptotic behavior of regularized least squares solutions under random measurement matrices (or dictionaries).
The Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO or least-squares
with `1 regularization) is perhaps one of the most interesting examples. Precise
expressions for the asymptotic performance of LASSO have been obtained for
a number of different cases, in particular when the elements of the dictionary
matrix are sampled independently from a Gaussian distribution. It has also been
empirically observed that the resulting expressions remain valid when the entries
of the dictionary matrix are independently sampled from certain non-Gaussian
distributions. In this paper, we confirm these observations theoretically when the
distribution is sub-Gaussian. We further generalize the previous expressions for
a broader family of regularization functions and under milder conditions on the
underlying random, possibly non-Gaussian, dictionary matrix. In particular, we
establish the universality of the asymptotic statistics (e.g., the average quadratic
risk) of LASSO with non-Gaussian dictionaries.

1

Introduction

During the last few decades, retrieving structured data from an incomplete set of linear observations
has received enormous attention in a wide range of applications. This problem is especially interesting
when the ambient dimension of the data is very large, so that it cannot be directly observed and
manipulated. One of the main approaches is to solve regularized least-squares optimization problems
that are tied to the underlying data model. This can be generally expressed as:
1
min ky − Axk22 + f (x),
x 2

(1)

where x ∈ Rm and y ∈ Rn are the desired data and observation vectors, respectively. The matrix
A ∈ Rm×n is the sensing matrix, representing the observation process, and the regularization
function f : Rn → R imposes the desired structure on the observed data. When f is convex, the
optimization in (1) can be solved reliably with a reasonable amount of calculations. In particular,
the case where f is the `1 norm is known as the LASSO, which has been extremely successful in
retrieving sparse data vectors. During the past years, random sensing matrices A have been widely
used and studied in the context of the convex regularized least squares problems. From the perspective
of data retrieval, this choice is supported by a number of studies in the so-called Compressed Sensing
(CS) literature, which show that under reasonable assumptions, random matrices may lead to good
performance [1, 2, 3].
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

