Maximum Margin Interval Trees

Alexandre Drouin
Département d’informatique et de génie logiciel
Université Laval, Québec, Canada
alexandre.drouin.8@ulaval.ca

Toby Dylan Hocking
McGill Genome Center
McGill University, Montréal, Canada
toby.hocking@r-project.org

François Laviolette
Département d’informatique et de génie logiciel
Université Laval, Québec, Canada
francois.laviolette@ift.ulaval.ca

Abstract
Learning a regression function using censored or interval-valued output data is an
important problem in fields such as genomics and medicine. The goal is to learn a
real-valued prediction function, and the training output labels indicate an interval of
possible values. Whereas most existing algorithms for this task are linear models,
in this paper we investigate learning nonlinear tree models. We propose to learn
a tree by minimizing a margin-based discriminative objective function, and we
provide a dynamic programming algorithm for computing the optimal solution in
log-linear time. We show empirically that this algorithm achieves state-of-the-art
speed and prediction accuracy in a benchmark of several data sets.

1

Introduction

In the typical supervised regression setting, we are given set of learning examples, each associated
with a real-valued output. The goal is to learn a predictor that accurately estimates the outputs,
given new examples. This fundamental problem has been extensively studied and has given rise to
algorithms such as Support Vector Regression (Basak et al., 2007). A similar, but far less studied,
problem is that of interval regression, where each learning example is associated with an interval
(y i , y i ), indicating a range of acceptable output values, and the expected predictions are real numbers.
Interval-valued outputs arise naturally in fields such as computational biology and survival analysis.
In the latter setting, one is interested in predicting the time until some adverse event, such as
death, occurs. The available information is often limited, giving rise to outputs that are said to be
either un-censored (−∞ < y i = y i < ∞), left-censored (−∞ = y i < y i < ∞), right-censored
(−∞ < y i < y i = ∞), or interval-censored (−∞ < y i < y i < ∞) (Klein and Moeschberger, 2005).
For instance, right censored data occurs when all that is known is that an individual is still alive after
a period of time. Another recent example is from the field of genomics, where interval regression
was used to learn a penalty function for changepoint detection in DNA copy number and ChIP-seq
data (Rigaill et al., 2013). Despite the ubiquity of this type of problem, there are surprisingly few
existing algorithms that have been designed to learn from such outputs, and most are linear models.
Decision tree algorithms have been proposed in the 1980s with the pioneering work of Breiman et al.
(1984) and Quinlan (1986). Such algorithms rely on a simple framework, where trees are grown by
recursive partitioning of leaves, each time maximizing some task-specific criterion. Advantages of
these algorithms include the ability to learn non-linear models from both numerical and categorical
data of various scales, and having a relatively low training time complexity. In this work, we extend
the work of Breiman et al. (1984) to learning non-linear interval regression tree models.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

