Train longer, generalize better: closing the
generalization gap in large batch training of neural
networks
Elad Hoffer∗,
Itay Hubara∗,
Daniel Soudry
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
{elad.hoffer, itayhubara, daniel.soudry}@gmail.com

Abstract
Background: Deep learning models are typically trained using stochastic gradient
descent or one of its variants. These methods update the weights using their
gradient, estimated from a small fraction of the training data. It has been observed
that when using large batch sizes there is a persistent degradation in generalization
performance - known as the "generalization gap" phenomenon. Identifying the
origin of this gap and closing it had remained an open problem.
Contributions: We examine the initial high learning rate training phase. We
find that the weight distance from its initialization grows logarithmically with the
number of weight updates. We therefore propose a "random walk on a random
landscape" statistical model which is known to exhibit similar "ultra-slow" diffusion
behavior. Following this hypothesis we conducted experiments to show empirically
that the "generalization gap" stems from the relatively small number of updates
rather than the batch size, and can be completely eliminated by adapting the
training regime used. We further investigate different techniques to train models
in the large-batch regime and present a novel algorithm named "Ghost Batch
Normalization" which enables significant decrease in the generalization gap without
increasing the number of updates. To validate our findings we conduct several
additional experiments on MNIST, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and ImageNet. Finally,
we reassess common practices and beliefs concerning training of deep models and
suggest they may not be optimal to achieve good generalization.

1

Introduction

For quite a few years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have persistently enabled significant improvements in many application domains, such as object recognition from images (He et al., 2016); speech
recognition (Amodei et al., 2015); natural language processing (Luong et al., 2015) and computer
games control using reinforcement learning (Silver et al., 2016; Mnih et al., 2015).
The optimization method of choice for training highly complex and non-convex DNNs, is typically
stochastic gradient decent (SGD) or some variant of it. Since SGD, at best, finds a local minimum of
the non-convex objective function, substantial research efforts are invested to explain DNNs ground
breaking results. It has been argued that saddle-points can be avoided (Ge et al., 2015) and that
"bad" local minima in the training error vanish exponentially (Dauphin et al., 2014; Choromanska
et al., 2015; Soudry & Hoffer, 2017). However, it is still unclear why these complex models tend to
generalize well to unseen data despite being heavily over-parameterized (Zhang et al., 2017).
A specific aspect of generalization has recently attracted much interest. Keskar et al. (2017) focused
on a long observed phenomenon (LeCun et al., 1998a) – that when a large batch size is used while
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.
∗

Equal contribution

