QMDP-Net: Deep Learning for Planning under
Partial Observability
Peter Karkus1,2
1

David Hsu1,2

Wee Sun Lee2

NUS Graduate School for Integrative Sciences and Engineering
2
School of Computing
National University of Singapore
{karkus, dyhsu, leews}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
This paper introduces the QMDP-net, a neural network architecture for planning under
partial observability. The QMDP-net combines the strengths of model-free learning and
model-based planning. It is a recurrent policy network, but it represents a policy for a
parameterized set of tasks by connecting a model with a planning algorithm that solves the
model, thus embedding the solution structure of planning in a network learning architecture.
The QMDP-net is fully differentiable and allows for end-to-end training. We train a QMDPnet on different tasks so that it can generalize to new ones in the parameterized task set
and “transfer” to other similar tasks beyond the set. In preliminary experiments, QMDP-net
showed strong performance on several robotic tasks in simulation. Interestingly, while
QMDP-net encodes the QMDP algorithm, it sometimes outperforms the QMDP algorithm
in the experiments, as a result of end-to-end learning.

1

Introduction

Decision-making under uncertainty is of fundamental importance, but it is computationally hard,
especially under partial observability [24]. In a partially observable world, the agent cannot determine
the state exactly based on the current observation; to plan optimal actions, it must integrate information
over the past history of actions and observations. See Fig. 1 for an example. In the model-based
approach, we may formulate the problem as a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP).
Solving POMDPs exactly is computationally intractable in the worst case [24]. Approximate POMDP
algorithms have made dramatic progress on solving large-scale POMDPs [17, 25, 29, 32, 37]; however,
manually constructing POMDP models or learning them from data remains difficult. In the model-free
approach, we directly search for an optimal solution within a policy class. If we do not restrict the
policy class, the difficulty is data and computational efficiency. We may choose a parameterized
policy class. The effectiveness of policy search is then constrained by this a priori choice.
Deep neural networks have brought unprecedented success in many domains [16, 21, 30] and
provide a distinct new approach to decision-making under uncertainty. The deep Q-network (DQN),
which consists of a convolutional neural network (CNN) together with a fully connected layer,
has successfully tackled many Atari games with complex visual input [21]. Replacing the postconvolutional fully connected layer of DQN by a recurrent LSTM layer allows it to deal with partial
observaiblity [10]. However, compared with planning, this approach fails to exploit the underlying
sequential nature of decision-making.
We introduce QMDP-net, a neural network architecture for planning under partial observability.
QMDP-net combines the strengths of model-free learning and model-based planning. A QMDP-net
is a recurrent policy network, but it represents a policy by connecting a POMDP model with an
algorithm that solves the model, thus embedding the solution structure of planning in a network
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

