On Fairness and Calibration
Geoff Pleiss∗, Manish Raghavan∗, Felix Wu, Jon Kleinberg, Kilian Q. Weinberger
Cornell University, Department of Computer Science
{geoff,manish,kleinber}@cs.cornell.edu,
{fw245,kwq4}@cornell.edu

Abstract
The machine learning community has become increasingly concerned with the
potential for bias and discrimination in predictive models. This has motivated a
growing line of work on what it means for a classification procedure to be “fair.”
In this paper, we investigate the tension between minimizing error disparity across
different population groups while maintaining calibrated probability estimates. We
show that calibration is compatible only with a single error constraint (i.e. equal
false-negatives rates across groups), and show that any algorithm that satisfies this
relaxation is no better than randomizing a percentage of predictions for an existing
classifier. These unsettling findings, which extend and generalize existing results,
are empirically confirmed on several datasets.

1

Introduction

Recently, there has been growing concern about errors of machine learning algorithms in sensitive
domains – including criminal justice, online advertising, and medical testing [33] – which may
systematically discriminate against particular groups of people [2, 4, 8]. A recent high-profile
example of these concerns was raised by the news organization ProPublica, who studied a riskassessment tool that is widely used in the criminal justice system. This tool assigns to each criminal
defendant an estimated probability that they will commit a future crime. ProPublica found that the
risk estimates assigned to defendants who did not commit future crimes were on average higher
among African-American defendants than Caucasian defendants [1]. This is a form of false-positive
error, and in this case it disproportionately affected African-American defendants. To mitigate issues
such as these, the machine learning community has proposed different frameworks that attempt
to quantify fairness in classification [2, 4, 8, 19, 26, 34, 37]. A recent and particularly noteworthy
framework is Equalized Odds [19] (also referred to as Disparate Mistreatment [37]),1 which constrains
classification algorithms such that no error type (false-positive or false-negative) disproportionately
affects any population subgroup. This notion of non-discrimination is feasible in many settings, and
researchers have developed tractable algorithms for achieving it [17, 19, 34, 37].
When risk tools are used in practice, a key goal is that they are calibrated: if we look at the set of
people who receive a predicted probability of p, we would like a p fraction of the members of this
set to be positive instances of the classification problem [11]. Moreover, if we are concerned about
fairness between two groups G1 and G2 (e.g. African-American defendants and white defendants)
then we would like this calibration condition to hold simultaneously for the set of people within each
of these groups as well [16]. Calibration is a crucial condition for risk tools in many settings. If a
risk tool for evaluating defendants were not calibrated with respect to groups defined by race, for
example, then a probability estimate of p could carry different meaning for African-American and
white defendants, and hence the tool would have the unintended and highly undesirable consequence
of incentivizing judges to take race into account when interpreting its predictions. Despite the
∗

1

Equal contribution, alphebetical order.
For the remainder of the paper, we will use Equalized Odds to refer to this notion of non-discrimination.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

