Time-dependent spatially varying graphical models,
with application to brain fMRI data analysis

Kristjan Greenewald
Department of Statistics
Harvard University

Seyoung Park
Department of Biostatistics
Yale University

Shuheng Zhou
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan

Alexander Giessing
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan

Abstract
In this work, we present an additive model for space-time data that splits the data
into a temporally correlated component and a spatially correlated component. We
model the spatially correlated portion using a time-varying Gaussian graphical
model. Under assumptions on the smoothness of changes in covariance matrices,
we derive strong single sample convergence results, confirming our ability to estimate meaningful graphical structures as they evolve over time. We apply our
methodology to the discovery of time-varying spatial structures in human brain
fMRI signals.

1

Introduction

Learning structured models of high-dimensional datasets from relatively few training samples is an
important task in statistics and machine learning. Spatiotemporal data, in the form of n variables
evolving over m time points, often fits this regime due to the high (mn) dimension and potential
difficulty in obtaining independent samples. In this work, we develop a nonparametric framework
for estimating time varying spatiotemporal graphical structure using an `1 regularization method.
The covariance of a spatiotemporal array X = [x1 , . . . , xm ] ∈ Rn×m is an mn by mn matrix


Σ = Cov vec([x1 , . . . , xm ]) ,
(1)
where xi ∈ Rn , i = 1, . . . , m denotes the n variables or features of interest at the ith time point.
Even for moderately large m and n the number of degrees of freedom (mn(mn + 1)/2) in the
covariance matrix can greatly exceed the number of training samples available for estimation. One
way to handle this problem is to introduce structure and/or sparsity, thus reducing the number of
parameters to be estimated. Spatiotemporal data is often highly structured, hence the design of
estimators that model and exploit appropriate covariance structure can provide significant gains.
We aim to develop a nonparametric framework for estimating time varying graphical structure for
matrix-variate distributions. Associated with each xi ∈ Rn is its undirected graph G(i). Under the
assumption that the law L(xi ) of xi changes smoothly, Zhou et al. (2010) introduced a nonparametric method to estimate the graph sequence G(1), G(2), . . . assuming that the xi ∼ N (0, B(i/m))
are independent, where B(t) is a smooth function over t ∈ [0, 1] and we have mapped the indices i
onto points t = i/m on the interval [0, 1]. In this work, we are interested in the general time series
model where the xi , i = 1, . . . , m are dependent and the B −1 (t) graphs change over time.
One way to introduce dependency into the xi is to study the following covariance structure. Let
A = (aij ) ∈ Rm×m , B(t) = (bij (t)) ∈ Rn×n , t ∈ [0, 1] be symmetric positive definite covariance
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

