The Scaling Limit of High-Dimensional Online
Independent Component Analysis

Chuang Wang and Yue M. Lu
John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
33 Oxford Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
{chuangwang,yuelu}@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
We analyze the dynamics of an online algorithm for independent component
analysis in the high-dimensional scaling limit. As the ambient dimension tends to
infinity, and with proper time scaling, we show that the time-varying joint empirical
measure of the target feature vector and the estimates provided by the algorithm
will converge weakly to a deterministic measured-valued process that can be
characterized as the unique solution of a nonlinear PDE. Numerical solutions of this
PDE, which involves two spatial variables and one time variable, can be efficiently
obtained. These solutions provide detailed information about the performance
of the ICA algorithm, as many practical performance metrics are functionals of
the joint empirical measures. Numerical simulations show that our asymptotic
analysis is accurate even for moderate dimensions. In addition to providing a tool
for understanding the performance of the algorithm, our PDE analysis also provides
useful insight. In particular, in the high-dimensional limit, the original coupled
dynamics associated with the algorithm will be asymptotically “decoupled”, with
each coordinate independently solving a 1-D effective minimization problem via
stochastic gradient descent. Exploiting this insight to design new algorithms for
achieving optimal trade-offs between computational and statistical efficiency may
prove an interesting line of future research.

1

Introduction

Online learning methods based on stochastic gradient descent are widely used in many learning and
signal processing problems. Examples includes the classical least mean squares (LMS) algorithm
[1] in adaptive filtering, principal component analysis [2, 3], independent component analysis (ICA)
[4], and the training of shallow or deep artificial neural networks [5–7]. Analyzing the convergence
rate of stochastic gradient descent has already been the subject of a vast literature (see, e.g., [8–11].)
Unlike existing work that analyze the behaviors of the algorithms in finite dimensions, we present
in this paper a framework for studying the exact dynamics of stochastic gradient algorithms in the
high-dimensional limit, using online ICA as a concrete example. Instead of minimizing a generic
function as considered in the optimization literature, the stochastic algorithm we analyze here is
solving an estimation problem. The extra assumptions on the ground truth (e.g., the feature vector)
and the generative models for the observations allow us to obtain the exact asymptotic dynamics of
the algorithms.
As the main result of this work, we show that, as the ambient dimension n → ∞ and with proper
time-scaling, the time-varying joint empirical measure of the true underlying independent component
ξ and its estimate x converges weakly to the unique solution of a nonlinear partial differential
equation (PDE) [see (6).] Since many performance metrics, such as the correlation between ξ and
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

