Random Permutation Online Isotonic Regression

Wojciech Kotłowski
Poznań University of Technology
Poland
wkotlowski@cs.put.poznan.pl

Wouter M. Koolen
Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
wmkoolen@cwi.nl

Alan Malek
MIT
Cambridge, MA
amalek@mit.edu

Abstract
We revisit isotonic regression on linear orders, the problem of fitting monotonic
functions to best explain the data, in an online setting. It was previously shown that
online isotonic regression is unlearnable in a fully adversarial model, which lead to
its study in the fixed design model. Here, we instead develop the more practical
random permutation model. We show that the regret is bounded above by the
excess leave-one-out loss for which we develop efficient algorithms and matching
lower bounds. We also analyze the class of simple and popular forward algorithms
and recommend where to look for algorithms for online isotonic regression on
partial orders.

1

Introduction

A function f : R → R is called isotonic (non-decreasing) if x ≤ y implies f (x) ≤ f (y). Isotonic
functions model monotonic relationships between input and output variables, like those between
drug dose and response [25] or lymph node condition and survival time [24]. The problem of
isotonic regression is to find the isotonic function that best explains a given data set or population
distribution. The isotonic regression problem has been extensively studied in statistics [1, 24], which
resulted in efficient optimization algorithms for fitting isotonic functions to the data [7, 16] and sharp
convergence rates of estimation under various model assumptions [26, 29].
In online learning problems, the data arrive sequentially, and the learner is tasked with predicting
each subsequent data point as it arrives [6]. In online isotonic regression, the natural goal is to predict
the incoming data points as well as the best isotonic function in hindsight. Specifically, for time steps
t = 1, . . . , T , the learner observes an instance xi ∈ R, makes a prediction ybi of the true label yi ,
which is assumed to lie in [0, 1]. There is no restriction that the labels or predictions be isotonic. We
evaluate a prediction ybi by its squared loss (b
yi − yi )2 . The quality of an algorithm is measured by its
PT
yi − yi )2 − L∗T , where L∗T is the loss of the best isotonic function on the entire data
regret, t=1 (b
sequence.
Isotonic regression is nonparametric: the number of parameters grows linearly with the number of
data points. It is thus natural to ask whether there are efficient, provably low regret algorithms for
online isotonic regression. As of yet, the picture is still very incomplete in the online setting. The
first online results were obtained in the recent paper [14] which considered linearly ordered domains
in the adversarial fixed design model, i.e. a model in which all the inputs x1 , . . . , xT are given to the
learner before the start of prediction. The authors show that, due to the nonparametric nature of the
problem, many textbook online learning algorithms fail to learn at all (including Online Gradient
Descent, Follow the Leader and Exponential Weights) in the sense that their worst-case regret grows
1
linearly with the number of data points. They prove a Ω(T 3 ) worst case regret lower bound, and
1
develop a matching algorithm that achieves the optimal Õ(T 3 ) regret. Unfortunately, the fixed design
assumption is often unrealistic. This leads us to our main question: Can we design methods for online
isotonic regression that are practical (do not hinge on fixed design)?
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

