Ranking Data with Continuous Labels
through Oriented Recursive Partitions

Stephan Clémençon
Mastane Achab
LTCI, Télécom ParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay
75013 Paris, France
first.last@telecom-paristech.fr

Abstract
We formulate a supervised learning problem, referred to as continuous ranking,
where a continuous real-valued label Y is assigned to an observable r.v. X taking
its values in a feature space X and the goal is to order all possible observations
x in X by means of a scoring function s : X → R so that s(X) and Y tend to
increase or decrease together with highest probability. This problem generalizes
bi/multi-partite ranking to a certain extent and the task of finding optimal scoring
functions s(x) can be naturally cast as optimization of a dedicated functional criterion, called the IROC curve here, or as maximization of the Kendall τ related to
the pair (s(X), Y ). From the theoretical side, we describe the optimal elements of
this problem and provide statistical guarantees for empirical Kendall τ maximization under appropriate conditions for the class of scoring function candidates. We
also propose a recursive statistical learning algorithm tailored to empirical IROC
curve optimization and producing a piecewise constant scoring function that is
fully described by an oriented binary tree. Preliminary numerical experiments
highlight the difference in nature between regression and continuous ranking and
provide strong empirical evidence of the performance of empirical optimizers of
the criteria proposed.

1

Introduction

The predictive learning problem considered in this paper can be easily stated in an informal fashion,
as follows. Given a collection of objects of arbitrary cardinality, N ≥ 1 say, respectively described
by characteristics x1 , . . . , xN in a feature space X , the goal is to learn how to order them by
increasing order of magnitude of a certain unknown continuous variable y. To fix ideas, the attribute
y can represent the ’size’ of the object and be difficult to measure, as for the physical measurement of
microscopic bodies in chemistry and biology or the cash flow of companies in quantitative finance
and the features x may then correspond to indirect measurements. The most convenient way to
define a preorder on a feature space X is to transport the natural order on the real line onto it by
means of a (measurable) scoring function s : X → R: an object with charcateristics x is then said to
be ’larger’ (’strictly larger’, respectively) than an object described by x0 according to the scoring rule
s when s(x0 ) ≤ s(x) (when s(x) < s(x0 )). Statistical learning boils down here to build a scoring
function s(x), based on a training data set Dn = {(X1 , Y1 ), . . . , (Xn , Yn )} of objects for which
the values of all variables (direct and indirect measurements) have been jointly observed, such that
s(X) and Y tend to increase or decrease together with highest probability or, in other words, such
that the ordering of new objects induced by s(x) matches that defined by their true measures as well
as possible. This problem, that shall be referred to as continuous ranking throughout the article can
be viewed as an extension of bipartite ranking, where the output variable Y is assumed to be binary
and the objective can be naturally formulated as a functional M -estimation problem by means of the
concept of ROC curve, see [7]. Refer also to [4], [11], [1] for approaches based on the optimization
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

