Max-Margin Invariant Features from Transformed
Unlabeled Data
Dipan K. Pal, Ashwin A. Kannan∗, Gautam Arakalgud∗, Marios Savvides
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
{dipanp,aalapakk,garakalgud,marioss}@cmu.edu

Abstract
The study of representations invariant to common transformations of the data
is important to learning. Most techniques have focused on local approximate
invariance implemented within expensive optimization frameworks lacking explicit
theoretical guarantees. In this paper, we study kernels that are invariant to a unitary
group while having theoretical guarantees in addressing the important practical
issue of unavailability of transformed versions of labelled data. A problem we
call the Unlabeled Transformation Problem which is a special form of semisupervised learning and one-shot learning. We present a theoretically motivated
alternate approach to the invariant kernel SVM based on which we propose MaxMargin Invariant Features (MMIF) to solve this problem. As an illustration, we
design an framework for face recognition and demonstrate the efficacy of our
approach on a large scale semi-synthetic dataset with 153,000 images and a new
challenging protocol on Labelled Faces in the Wild (LFW) while out-performing
strong baselines.

1

Introduction

It is becoming increasingly important to learn well generalizing representations that are invariant
to many common nuisance transformations of the data. Indeed, being invariant to intra-class
transformations while being discriminative to between-class transformations can be said to be one of
the fundamental problems in pattern recognition. The nuisance transformations can give rise to many
‘degrees of freedom’ even in a constrained task such as face recognition (e.g. pose, age-variation,
illumination etc.). Explicitly factoring them out leads to improvements in recognition performance as
found in [10, 7, 6]. It has also been shown that that features that are explicitly invariant to intra-class
transformations allow the sample complexity of the recognition problem to be reduced [2]. To this
end, the study of invariant representations and machinery built on the concept of explicit invariance is
important.
Invariance through Data Augmentation. Many approaches in the past have enforced invariance by
generating transformed labelled training samples in some form such as [13, 17, 19, 9, 15, 4]. Perhaps,
one of the most popular method for incorporating invariances in SVMs is the virtual support method
(VSV) in [18], which used sequential runs of SVMs in order to find and augment the support vectors
with transformed versions of themselves.
Indecipherable transformations in data leads to shortage of transformed labelled samples. The
above approaches however, assume that one has explicit knowledge about the transformation. This
is a strong assumption. Indeed, in most general machine learning applications, the transformation
∗

Authors contributed equally

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

