Adaptive Clustering through Semidefinite
Programming

Martin Royer
Laboratoire de Mathématiques d’Orsay, Univ. Paris-Sud, CNRS,
Université Paris-Saclay,
91405 Orsay, France
martin.royer@math.u-psud.fr

Abstract
We analyze the clustering problem through a flexible probabilistic model that
aims to identify an optimal partition on the sample X1 , ..., Xn . We perform
exact clustering with high probability using a convex semidefinite estimator that
interprets as a corrected, relaxed version of K-means. The estimator is analyzed
through a non-asymptotic framework and showed to be optimal or near-optimal in
recovering the partition. Furthermore, its performances are shown to be adaptive
to the problem’s effective dimension, as well as to K the unknown number of
groups in this partition. We illustrate the method’s performances in comparison
to other classical clustering algorithms with numerical experiments on simulated
high-dimensional data.

1

Introduction

Clustering, a form of unsupervised learning, is the classical problem of assembling n observations
X1 , ..., Xn from a p-dimensional space into K groups. Applied fields are craving for robust clustering techniques, such as computational biology with genome classification, data mining or image
segmentation from computer vision. But the clustering problem has proven notoriously hard when
the embedding dimension is large compared to the number of observations (see for instance the recent
discussions from [2, 21]).
A famous early approach to clustering is to solve for the geometrical estimator K-means [19, 13, 14].
The intuition behind its objective is that groups are to be determined in a way to minimize the total
intra-group variance. It can be interpreted as an attempt to "best" represent the observations by
K points, a form of vector quantization. Although the method shows great performances when
observations are homoscedastic, K-means is a NP-hard, ad-hoc method. Clustering with probabilistic
frameworks are usually based on maximum likelihood approaches paired with a variant of the EM
algorithm for model estimation, see for instance the works of Fraley & Raftery [11] and Dasgupta
& Schulman [9]. These methods are widespread and popular, but they tend to be very sensitive to
initialization and model misspecifications.
Several recent developments establish a link between clustering and semidefinite programming. Peng
& Wei [17] show that the K-means objective can be relaxed into a convex, semidefinite program,
leading Mixon et al. [16] to use this relaxation under a subgaussian mixture model to estimate the
cluster centers. Yan and Sarkar [24] use a similar semidefinite program in the context of covariate
clustering, when the network has nodes and covariates. Chrétien et al. [8] use a slightly different form
of a semidefinite program to recover the adjacency matrix of the cluster graph with high probability.
Lastly in the different context of variable clustering, Bunea et al. [6] present a semidefinite program
with a correction step to produce non-asymptotic exact recovery results.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

