Spectral Mixture Kernels for
Multi-Output Gaussian Processes

Gabriel Parra
Department of Mathematical Engineering
Universidad de Chile
gparra@dim.uchile.cl

Felipe Tobar
Center for Mathematical Modeling
Universidad de Chile
ftobar@dim.uchile.cl

Abstract
Early approaches to multiple-output Gaussian processes (MOGPs) relied on linear combinations of independent, latent, single-output Gaussian processes (GPs).
This resulted in cross-covariance functions with limited parametric interpretation,
thus conflicting with the ability of single-output GPs to understand lengthscales,
frequencies and magnitudes to name a few. On the contrary, current approaches to
MOGP are able to better interpret the relationship between different channels by
directly modelling the cross-covariances as a spectral mixture kernel with a phase
shift. We extend this rationale and propose a parametric family of complex-valued
cross-spectral densities and then build on Cramér’s Theorem (the multivariate
version of Bochner’s Theorem) to provide a principled approach to design multivariate covariance functions. The so-constructed kernels are able to model delays
among channels in addition to phase differences and are thus more expressive
than previous methods, while also providing full parametric interpretation of the
relationship across channels. The proposed method is first validated on synthetic
data and then compared to existing MOGP methods on two real-world examples.

1

Introduction

The extension of Gaussian processes (GPs [1]) to multiple outputs is referred to as multi-output
Gaussian processes (MOGPs). MOGPs model temporal or spatial relationships among infinitelymany random variables, as scalar GPs, but also account for the statistical dependence across different
sources of data (or channels). This is crucial in a number of real-world applications such as fault
detection, data imputation and denoising. For any two input points x, x0 , the covariance function of
an m-channel MOGP k(x, x0 ) is a symmetric positive-definite m × m matrix of scalar covariance
functions. The design of this matrix-valued kernel is challenging since we have to deal with the trade
off between (i) choosing a broad class of m(m − 1)/2 cross-covariances and m auto-covariances,
while at the same time (ii) ensuring positive definiteness of the symmetric matrix containing these
m(m+1)/2 covariance functions for any pair of inputs x, x0 . In particular, unlike the widely available
families of auto-covariance functions (e.g., [2]), cross-covariances are not bound to be positive definite
and therefore can be designed freely; the construction of these functions with interpretable functional
form is the main focus of this article.
A classical approach to define cross-covariances for a MOGP is to linearly combine independent
latents GPs, this is the case of the Linear Model of Coregionalization (LMC [3]) and the Convolution
Model (CONV, [4]). In these cases, the resulting kernel is a function of both the covariance functions
of the latent GPs and the parameters of the linear operator considered; this results in symmetric
and centred cross-covariances. While these approaches are simple, they lack interpretability of the
dependencies learnt and force the auto-covariances to have similar behaviour across different channels.
The LMC method has also inspired the Cross-Spectral Mixture (CSM) kernel [5], which uses the
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

