Fair Clustering Through Fairlets

Flavio Chierichetti
Dipartimento di Informatica
Sapienza University
Rome, Italy

Ravi Kumar
Google Research
1600 Amphitheater Parkway
Mountain View, CA 94043

Silvio Lattanzi
Google Research
76 9th Ave
New York, NY 10011

Sergei Vassilvitskii
Google Research
76 9th Ave
New York, NY 10011

Abstract
We study the question of fair clustering under the disparate impact doctrine, where
each protected class must have approximately equal representation in every cluster. We formulate the fair clustering problem under both the k-center and the
k-median objectives, and show that even with two protected classes the problem
is challenging, as the optimum solution can violate common conventions—for
instance a point may no longer be assigned to its nearest cluster center!
En route we introduce the concept of fairlets, which are minimal sets that satisfy
fair representation while approximately preserving the clustering objective. We
show that any fair clustering problem can be decomposed into first finding good
fairlets, and then using existing machinery for traditional clustering algorithms.
While finding good fairlets can be NP-hard, we proceed to obtain efficient approximation algorithms based on minimum cost flow.
We empirically demonstrate the price of fairness by quantifying the value of fair
clustering on real-world datasets with sensitive attributes.

1

Introduction

From self driving cars, to smart thermostats, and digital assistants, machine learning is behind many
of the technologies we use and rely on every day. Machine learning is also increasingly used to
aid with decision making—in awarding home loans or in sentencing recommendations in courts of
law (Kleinberg et al. , 2017a). While the learning algorithms are not inherently biased, or unfair, the
algorithms may pick up and amplify biases already present in the training data that is available to
them. Thus a recent line of work has emerged on designing fair algorithms.
The first challenge is to formally define the concept of fairness, and indeed recent work shows that
some natural conditions for fairness cannot be simultaneously achieved (Kleinberg et al. , 2017b;
Corbett-Davies et al. , 2017). In our work we follow the notion of disparate impact as articulated
by Feldman et al. (2015), following the Griggs v. Duke Power Co. US Supreme Court case.
Informally, the doctrine codifies the notion that not only should protected attributes, such as race and
gender, not be explicitly used in making decisions, but even after the decisions are made they should
not be disproportionately different for applicants in different protected classes. In other words, if
an unprotected feature, for example, height, is closely correlated with a protected feature, such as
gender, then decisions made based on height may still be unfair, as they can be used to effectively
discriminate based on gender.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

