Teaching Machines to Describe Images via Natural
Language Feedback

Huan Ling1 , Sanja Fidler1,2
University of Toronto1 , Vector Institute2
{linghuan,fidler}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Robots will eventually be part of every household. It is thus critical to enable
algorithms to learn from and be guided by non-expert users. In this paper, we
bring a human in the loop, and enable a human teacher to give feedback to a
learning agent in the form of natural language. We argue that a descriptive sentence
can provide a much stronger learning signal than a numeric reward in that it can
easily point to where the mistakes are and how to correct them. We focus on
the problem of image captioning in which the quality of the output can easily be
judged by non-experts. In particular, we first train a captioning model on a subset
of images paired with human written captions. We then let the model describe new
images and collect human feedback on the generated descriptions. We propose a
hierarchical phrase-based captioning model, and design a feedback network that
provides reward to the learner by conditioning on the human-provided feedback.
We show that by exploiting descriptive feedback on new images our model learns
to perform better than when given human written captions on these images.

1

Introduction

In the era where A.I. is slowly finding its way into everyone’s lives, be in the form of social bots [36, 2],
personal assistants [24, 13, 32], or household robots [1], it becomes critical to allow non-expert users
to teach and guide their robots [37, 18]. For example, if a household robot keeps bringing food served
on an ashtray thinking it’s a plate, one should ideally be able to educate the robot about its mistakes,
possibly without needing to dig into the underlying software.
Reinforcement learning has become a standard way of training artificial agents that interact with an
environment. There have been significant advances in a variety of domains such as games [31, 25],
robotics [17], and even fields like vision and NLP [30, 19]. RL agents optimize their action policies
so as to maximize the expected reward received from the environment. Training typically requires a
large number of episodes, particularly in environments with large action spaces and sparse rewards.
Several works explored the idea of incorporating humans in the learning process, in order to help
the reinforcement learning agent to learn faster [35, 12, 11, 6, 5]. In most cases, a human teacher
observes the agent act in an environment, and is allowed to give additional guidance to the learner.
This feedback typically comes in the form of a simple numerical (or “good”/“bad”) reward which is
used to either shape the MDP reward [35] or directly shape the policy of the learner [5].
In this paper, we aim to exploit natural language as a way to guide an RL agent. We argue that a
sentence provides a much stronger learning signal than a numeric reward in that it can easily point
to where the mistakes occur and suggests how to correct them. Such descriptive feedback can thus
naturally facilitate solving the credit assignment problem as well as to help guide exploration. Despite
its clear benefits, very few approaches aimed at incorporating language in Reinforcement Learning.
In pioneering work, [22] translated natural language advice into a short program which was used to
bias action selection. While this is possible in limited domains such as in navigating a maze [22] or
learning to play a soccer game [15], it can hardly scale to the real scenarios with large action spaces
requiring versatile language feedback.

