Scalable Variational Inference for Dynamical Systems

Nico S. Gorbach∗
Dept. of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
ngorbach@inf.ethz.ch

Stefan Bauer∗
Dept. of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
bauers@inf.ethz.ch

Joachim M. Buhmann
Dept. of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
jbuhmann@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Gradient matching is a promising tool for learning parameters and state dynamics
of ordinary differential equations. It is a grid free inference approach, which,
for fully observable systems is at times competitive with numerical integration.
However, for many real-world applications, only sparse observations are available
or even unobserved variables are included in the model description. In these cases
most gradient matching methods are difficult to apply or simply do not provide
satisfactory results. That is why, despite the high computational cost, numerical
integration is still the gold standard in many applications. Using an existing gradient
matching approach, we propose a scalable variational inference framework which
can infer states and parameters simultaneously, offers computational speedups,
improved accuracy and works well even under model misspecifications in a partially
observable system.

1

Introduction

Parameter estimation for ordinary differential equations (ODE’s) is challenging due to the high
computational cost of numerical integration. In recent years, gradient matching techniques established
themselves as successful tools [e.g. Babtie et al., 2014] to circumvent the high computational
cost of numerical integration for parameter and state estimation in ordinary differential equations.
Gradient matching is based on minimizing the difference between the interpolated slopes and the time
derivatives of the state variables in the ODE’s. First steps go back to spline based methods [Varah,
1982, Ramsay et al., 2007] where in an iterated two-step procedure coefficients and parameters are
estimated. Often cubic B-splines are used as basis functions while more advanced approaches [Niu
et al., 2016] use kernel functions derived from the ODE’s. An overview of recent approaches with a
focus on the application for systems biology is provided in Macdonald and Husmeier [2015]. It is
unfortunately not straightforward to extend spline based approaches to include unobserved variables
since they usually require full observability of the system. Moreover, these methods critically
depend on the estimation of smoothing parameters, which are difficult to estimate when only sparse
observations are available. As a solution for both problems, Gaussian process (GP) regression was
proposed in Calderhead et al. [2008] and further improved in Dondelinger et al. [2013]. While both
Bayesian approaches work very well for fully observable systems, they (opposite to splines) cannot
simultaneously infer parameters and unobserved states and perform poorly when only combinations
of variables are observed or the differential equations contain unobserved variables. Unfortunately
this is the case for most practical applications [e.g. Barenco et al., 2006].
Related work. Archambeau et al. [2008] proposed variational inference to approximate the true
process of the dynamical system by a time-varying linear system. Their approach was later signficantly
extended [Ruttor et al., 2013, Ruttor and Opper, 2010, Vrettas et al., 2015]. However, similiar to
[Lyons et al., 2012] they study parameter estimation in stochastic dynamical systems while our work
∗

The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

