Certified Defenses for Data Poisoning Attacks
Jacob Steinhardt⇤
Stanford University
jsteinha@stanford.edu

Pang Wei Koh⇤
Stanford University
pangwei@cs.stanford.edu

Percy Liang
Stanford University
pliang@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Machine learning systems trained on user-provided data are susceptible to data
poisoning attacks, whereby malicious users inject false training data with the aim of
corrupting the learned model. While recent work has proposed a number of attacks
and defenses, little is understood about the worst-case loss of a defense in the
face of a determined attacker. We address this by constructing approximate upper
bounds on the loss across a broad family of attacks, for defenders that first perform
outlier removal followed by empirical risk minimization. Our approximation relies
on two assumptions: (1) that the dataset is large enough for statistical concentration
between train and test error to hold, and (2) that outliers within the clean (nonpoisoned) data do not have a strong effect on the model. Our bound comes paired
with a candidate attack that often nearly matches the upper bound, giving us a
powerful tool for quickly assessing defenses on a given dataset. Empirically, we
find that even under a simple defense, the MNIST-1-7 and Dogfish datasets are
resilient to attack, while in contrast the IMDB sentiment dataset can be driven from
12% to 23% test error by adding only 3% poisoned data.

1

Introduction

Traditionally, computer security seeks to ensure a system’s integrity against attackers by creating
clear boundaries between the system and the outside world (Bishop, 2002). In machine learning,
however, the most critical ingredient of all–the training data–comes directly from the outside world.
For a system trained on user data, an attacker can inject malicious data simply by creating a user
account. Such data poisoning attacks require us to re-think what it means for a system to be secure.
The focus of the present work is on data poisoning attacks against classification algorithms, first
studied by Biggio et al. (2012) and later by a number of others (Xiao et al., 2012; 2015b; Newell
et al., 2014; Mei and Zhu, 2015b; Burkard and Lagesse, 2017; Koh and Liang, 2017). This body
of work has demonstrated data poisoning attacks that can degrade classifier accuracy, sometimes
dramatically. Moreover, while some defenses have been proposed against specific attacks (Laishram
and Phoha, 2016), few have been stress-tested against a determined attacker.
Are there defenses that are robust to a large class of data poisoning attacks? At development time,
one could take a clean dataset and test a defense against a number of poisoning strategies on that
dataset. However, because of the near-limitless space of possible attacks, it is impossible to conclude
from empirical success alone that a defense that works against a known set of attacks will not fail
against a new attack.
In this paper, we address this difficulty by presenting a framework for studying the entire space
of attacks against a given defense. Our framework applies to defenders that (i) remove outliers
residing outside a feasible set, then (ii) minimize a margin-based loss on the remaining data. For such
defenders, we can generate approximate upper bounds on the efficacy of any data poisoning attack,
which hold modulo two assumptions—that the empirical train and test distribution are close together,
⇤

Equal contribution.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

