State Aware Imitation Learning

Yannick Schroecker
College of Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
yannickschroecker@gatech.edu

Charles Isbell
College of Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
isbell@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
Imitation learning is the study of learning how to act given a set of demonstrations
provided by a human expert. It is intuitively apparent that learning to take optimal
actions is a simpler undertaking in situations that are similar to the ones shown by
the teacher. However, imitation learning approaches do not tend to use this insight
directly. In this paper, we introduce State Aware Imitation Learning (SAIL), an
imitation learning algorithm that allows an agent to learn how to remain in states
where it can confidently take the correct action and how to recover if it is lead astray.
Key to this algorithm is a gradient learned using a temporal difference update rule
which leads the agent to prefer states similar to the demonstrated states. We show
that estimating a linear approximation of this gradient yields similar theoretical
guarantees to online temporal difference learning approaches and empirically show
that SAIL can effectively be used for imitation learning in continuous domains
with non-linear function approximators used for both the policy representation and
the gradient estimate.

1

Introduction

One of the foremost challenges in the field of Artificial Intelligence is to program or train an agent
to act intelligently without perfect information and in arbitrary environments. Many avenues have
been explored to derive such agents but one of the most successful and practical approaches has
been to learn how to imitate demonstrations provided by a human teacher. Such imitation learning
approaches provide a natural way for a human expert to program agents and are often combined
with other approaches such as reinforcement learning to narrow the search space and to help find
a near optimal solution. Success stories are numerous in the field of robotics [3] where imitation
learning has long been subject of research but can also be found in software domains with recent
success stories including AlphaGo [23] which learns to play the game of Go from a database of
expert games before improving further and the benchmark domain of Atari games where imitation
learning combined with reinforcement learning has been shown to significantly improve performance
over pure reinforcement learning approaches [9].
Formally, we define the problem domain as a Markov decision process, i.e. by its states, actions
and unknown Markovian transition probabilities p(s0 |s, a) of taking action a in state s leading to
state s0 . Imitation learning aims to find a policy π(a|s) that dictates the action an agent should take
in any state by learning from a set of demonstrated states SD and the corresponding demonstrated
actions AD . The likely most straight-forward approach to imitation learning is to employ a supervised
learning algorithm such as neural networks in order to derive a policy, treating the demonstrated
states and actions as training inputs and outputs respectively. However, while this can work well
in practice and has a long history of successes starting with, among other examples, early ventures
into autonomous driving[18], it also violates a key assumption of statistical supervised learning by
having past predictions affect the distribution of inputs seen in the future. It has been shown that
agents trained this way have a tendency to take actions that lead it to states that are dissimilar from
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

