Fader Networks:
Manipulating Images by Sliding Attributes

Guillaume Lample1,2 , Neil Zeghidour1,3 , Nicolas Usunier1 ,
Antoine Bordes1 , Ludovic Denoyer2 , Marc’Aurelio Ranzato1
{gl,neilz,usunier,abordes,ranzato}@fb.com
ludovic.denoyer@lip6.fr

Abstract
This paper introduces a new encoder-decoder architecture that is trained to reconstruct images by disentangling the salient information of the image and the
values of attributes directly in the latent space. As a result, after training, our
model can generate different realistic versions of an input image by varying the
attribute values. By using continuous attribute values, we can choose how much a
specific attribute is perceivable in the generated image. This property could allow
for applications where users can modify an image using sliding knobs, like faders
on a mixing console, to change the facial expression of a portrait, or to update
the color of some objects. Compared to the state-of-the-art which mostly relies
on training adversarial networks in pixel space by altering attribute values at train
time, our approach results in much simpler training schemes and nicely scales to
multiple attributes. We present evidence that our model can significantly change
the perceived value of the attributes while preserving the naturalness of images.

1

Introduction

We are interested in the problem of manipulating natural images by controlling some attributes
of interest. For example, given a photograph of the face of a person described by their gender,
age, and expression, we want to generate a realistic version of this same person looking older
or happier, or an image of a hypothetical twin of the opposite gender. This task and the related
problem of unsupervised domain transfer recently received a lot of interest [18, 25, 10, 27, 22, 24],
as a case study for conditional generative models but also for applications like automatic image
edition. The key challenge is that the transformations are ill-defined and training is unsupervised: the
training set contains images annotated with the attributes of interest, but there is no example of the
transformation: In many cases such as the “gender swapping” example above, there are no pairs of
images representing the same person as a male or as a female. In other cases, collecting examples
requires a costly annotation process, like taking pictures of the same person with and without glasses.
Our approach relies on an encoder-decoder architecture where, given an input image x with its
attributes y, the encoder maps x to a latent representation z, and the decoder is trained to reconstruct
x given (z, y). At inference time, a test image is encoded in the latent space, and the user chooses
the attribute values y that are fed to the decoder. Even with binary attribute values at train time,
each attribute can be considered as a continuous variable during inference to control how much it is
perceived in the final image. We call our architecture Fader Networks, in analogy to the sliders of an
audio mixing console, since the user can choose how much of each attribute they want to incorporate.
1

Facebook AI Research
Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR 7606, LIP6
3
LSCP, ENS, EHESS, CNRS, PSL Research University, INRIA
2

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

