Associative Embedding: End-to-End Learning for
Joint Detection and Grouping

Alejandro Newell
Computer Science and Engineering
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI

Zhiao Huang*
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

alnewell@umich.edu

hza14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Jia Deng
Computer Science and Engineering
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI
jiadeng@umich.edu

Abstract
We introduce associative embedding, a novel method for supervising convolutional
neural networks for the task of detection and grouping. A number of computer
vision problems can be framed in this manner including multi-person pose estimation, instance segmentation, and multi-object tracking. Usually the grouping of
detections is achieved with multi-stage pipelines, instead we propose an approach
that teaches a network to simultaneously output detections and group assignments.
This technique can be easily integrated into any state-of-the-art network architecture that produces pixel-wise predictions. We show how to apply this method to
multi-person pose estimation and report state-of-the-art performance on the MPII
and MS-COCO datasets.

1

Introduction

Many computer vision tasks can be viewed in the context of detection and grouping: detecting smaller
visual units and grouping them into larger structures. For example, in multi-person pose estimation
we detect body joints and group them into individual people; in instance segmentation we detect
pixels belonging to a semantic class and group them into object instances; in multi-object tracking
we detect objects across video frames and group them into tracks. In all of these cases, the output is a
variable number of visual units and their assignment into a variable number of visual groups.
Such tasks are often approached with two-stage pipelines that perform detection first and grouping
second. But such approaches may be suboptimal because detection and grouping are tightly coupled:
for example, in multiperson pose estimation, the same features used to recognize wrists or elbows in
an image would also suggest whether a wrist and elbow belong to the same limb.
In this paper we ask whether it is possible to jointly perform detection and grouping using a singlestage deep network trained end-to-end. We propose associative embedding, a novel method to express
output for joint detection and grouping. The basic idea is to introduce, for each detection, a vector
embedding that serves as a “tag” to identify its group assignment. All detections associated with the
same tag value belong to the same group. Concretely, the network outputs a heatmap of per-pixel
* Work done while a visiting student at the University of Michigan.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

