Parametric Simplex Method for Sparse Learning

‡

Haotian Pang‡ Robert Vanderbei‡ Han Liu?‡
Tuo Zhao⇧
?
‡
Princeton University Tencent AI Lab Northwestern University ⇧ Georgia Tech⇤

Abstract
High dimensional sparse learning has imposed a great computational challenge to
large scale data analysis. In this paper, we are interested in a broad class of sparse
learning approaches formulated as linear programs parametrized by a regularization
factor, and solve them by the parametric simplex method (PSM). Our parametric
simplex method offers significant advantages over other competing methods: (1)
PSM naturally obtains the complete solution path for all values of the regularization
parameter; (2) PSM provides a high precision dual certificate stopping criterion;
(3) PSM yields sparse solutions through very few iterations, and the solution
sparsity significantly reduces the computational cost per iteration. Particularly,
we demonstrate the superiority of PSM over various sparse learning approaches,
including Dantzig selector for sparse linear regression, LAD-Lasso for sparse robust
linear regression, CLIME for sparse precision matrix estimation, sparse differential
network estimation, and sparse Linear Programming Discriminant (LPD) analysis.
We then provide sufficient conditions under which PSM always outputs sparse
solutions such that its computational performance can be significantly boosted.
Thorough numerical experiments are provided to demonstrate the outstanding
performance of the PSM method.

1

Introduction

A broad class of sparse learning approaches can be formulated as high dimensional optimization
problems. A well known example is Dantzig Selector, which minimizes a sparsity-inducing `1 norm
with an `1 norm constraint. Specifically, let X 2 Rn⇥d be a design matrix, y 2 Rn be a response
vector, and ✓ 2 Rd be the model parameter. Dantzig Selector can be formulated as the solution to the
following convex program,
✓b = argmin k✓k1 s.t. kX > (y X✓)k1  .
(1.1)
✓

where k · k1 and k · k1 denote the `1 and `1 norms respectively, and > 0 is a regularization factor.
Candes and Tao (2007) suggest to rewrite (1.1) as a linear program solved by linear program solvers.
Dantzig Selector motivates many other sparse learning approaches, which also apply a regularization
factor to tune the desired solution. Many of them can be written as a linear program in the following
generic form with either equality constraints:
max(c + c̄)> x

s.t. Ax = b + b̄, x

0,

(1.2)

max(c + c̄)> x

s.t. Ax  b + b̄, x

0.

(1.3)

x

or inequality constraints:
x

Existing literature usually suggests the popular interior point method (IPM) to solve (1.2) and (1.3).
The interior point method is famous for solving linear programs in polynomial time. Specifically,
the interior point method uses the log barrier to handle the constraints, and rewrites (1.2) or (1.3)
⇤

Correspondence to Tuo Zhao: tuo.zhao@isye.gatech.edu.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

