Soft-to-Hard Vector Quantization for End-to-End
Learning Compressible Representations

Eirikur Agustsson
ETH Zurich

Fabian Mentzer
ETH Zurich

Michael Tschannen
ETH Zurich

aeirikur@vision.ee.ethz.ch

mentzerf@vision.ee.ethz.ch

michaelt@nari.ee.ethz.ch

Lukas Cavigelli
ETH Zurich

Radu Timofte
ETH Zurich & Merantix

Luca Benini
ETH Zurich

cavigelli@iis.ee.ethz.ch

timofter@vision.ee.ethz.ch

benini@iis.ee.ethz.ch

Luc Van Gool
KU Leuven & ETH Zurich
vangool@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
We present a new approach to learn compressible representations in deep architectures with an end-to-end training strategy. Our method is based on a soft
(continuous) relaxation of quantization and entropy, which we anneal to their
discrete counterparts throughout training. We showcase this method for two challenging applications: Image compression and neural network compression. While
these tasks have typically been approached with different methods, our soft-to-hard
quantization approach gives results competitive with the state-of-the-art for both.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have led to many breakthrough results in machine
learning and computer vision [20, 28, 10], and are now widely deployed in industry. Modern DNN
models often have millions or tens of millions of parameters, leading to highly redundant structures,
both in the intermediate feature representations they generate and in the model itself. Although
overparametrization of DNN models can have a favorable effect on training, in practice it is often
desirable to compress DNN models for inference, e.g., when deploying them on mobile or embedded
devices with limited memory. The ability to learn compressible feature representations, on the other
hand, has a large potential for the development of (data-adaptive) compression algorithms for various
data types such as images, audio, video, and text, for all of which various DNN architectures are now
available.
DNN model compression and lossy image compression using DNNs have both independently attracted
a lot of attention lately. In order to compress a set of continuous model parameters or features, we
need to approximate each parameter or feature by one representative from a set of quantization
levels (or vectors, in the multi-dimensional case), each associated with a symbol, and then store the
assignments (symbols) of the parameters or features, as well as the quantization levels. Representing
each parameter of a DNN model or each feature in a feature representation by the corresponding
quantization level will come at the cost of a distortion D, i.e., a loss in performance (e.g., in
classification accuracy for a classification DNN with quantized model parameters, or in reconstruction
error in the context of autoencoders with quantized intermediate feature representations). The rate
R, i.e., the entropy of the symbol stream, determines the cost of encoding the model or features in a
bitstream.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

