Predicting Scene Parsing and Motion Dynamics
in the Future
Xiaojie Jin1 , Huaxin Xiao2 , Xiaohui Shen3 , Jimei Yang3 , Zhe Lin3
Yunpeng Chen2 , Zequn Jie4 , Jiashi Feng2 , Shuicheng Yan5,2
1

2

NUS Graduate School for Integrative Science and Engineering (NGS), NUS
Department of ECE, NUS 3 Adobe Research 4 Tencent AI Lab 5 Qihoo 360 AI Institute

Abstract
The ability of predicting the future is important for intelligent systems, e.g. autonomous vehicles and robots to plan early and make decisions accordingly. Future
scene parsing and optical flow estimation are two key tasks that help agents better
understand their environments as the former provides dense semantic information,
i.e. what objects will be present and where they will appear, while the latter provides dense motion information, i.e. how the objects will move. In this paper, we
propose a novel model to simultaneously predict scene parsing and optical flow in
unobserved future video frames. To our best knowledge, this is the first attempt in
jointly predicting scene parsing and motion dynamics. In particular, scene parsing
enables structured motion prediction by decomposing optical flow into different
groups while optical flow estimation brings reliable pixel-wise correspondence
to scene parsing. By exploiting this mutually beneficial relationship, our model
shows significantly better parsing and motion prediction results when compared
to well-established baselines and individual prediction models on the large-scale
Cityscapes dataset. In addition, we also demonstrate that our model can be used to
predict the steering angle of the vehicles, which further verifies the ability of our
model to learn latent representations of scene dynamics.

1

Introduction

Future prediction is an important problem for artificial intelligence. To enable intelligent systems like
autonomous vehicles and robots to react to their environments, it is necessary to endow them with the
ability of predicting what will happen in the near future and plan accordingly, which still remains an
open challenge for modern artificial vision systems.
In a practical visual navigation system, scene parsing and dense motion estimation are two essential
components for understanding the scene environment. The former provides pixel-wise prediction
of semantic categories (thus the system understands what and where the objects are) and the latter
describes dense motion trajectories (thus the system learns how the objects move). The visual
system becomes “smarter” by leveraging the prediction of these two types of information, e.g.
predicting how the car coming from the opposite direction moves to plan the path ahead of time
and predict/control the steering angle of the vehicle. Despite numerous models have been proposed
on scene parsing [4, 7, 17, 26, 28, 30, 15] and motion estimation [2, 9, 21], most of them focus on
processing observed images, rather than predicting in unobserved future scenes. Recently, a few
works [22, 16, 3] explore how to anticipate the scene parsing or motion dynamics, but they all tackle
these two tasks separately and fail to utilize the benefits that one task brings to the other.
In this paper, we try to close this research gap by presenting a novel model for jointly predicting scene
parsing and motion dynamics (in terms of the dense optical flow) for future frames. More importantly,
we leverage one task as the auxiliary of the other in a mutually boosting way. See Figure 1 for
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

