Local Aggregative Games

Vikas K. Garg
CSAIL, MIT
vgarg@csail.mit.edu

Tommi Jaakkola
CSAIL, MIT
tommi@csail.mit.edu

Aggregative games provide a rich abstraction to model strategic multi-agent interactions. We introduce
local aggregative games, where the payoff of each player is a function of its own action and the
aggregate behavior of its neighbors in a connected digraph. We show the existence of a pure strategy
-Nash equilibrium in such games when the payoff functions are convex or sub-modular. We prove
an information theoretic lower bound, in a value oracle model, on approximating the structure of the
digraph with non-negative monotone sub-modular cost functions on the edge set cardinality. We also
define a new notion of structural stability, and introduce γ-aggregative games that generalize local
aggregative games and admit -Nash equilibrium that is stable with respect to small changes in some
specified graph property. Moreover, we provide algorithms for our models that can meaningfully
estimate the game structure and the parameters of the aggregator function from real voting data.

1

Introduction

Structured prediction methods have been remarkably successful in learning mappings between input
observations and output configurations [1; 2; 3]. The central guiding formulation involves learning a
scoring function that recovers the configuration as the highest scoring assignment. In contrast, in
a game theoretic setting, myopic strategic interactions among players lead to a Nash equilibrium
or locally optimal configuration rather than highest scoring global configuration. Learning games
therefore involves, at best, enforcement of local consistency constraints as recently advocated [4].
[4] introduced the notion of contextual potential games, and proposed a dual decomposition algorithm
for learning these games from a set of pure strategy Nash equilibria. However, since their setting was
restricted to learning undirected tree structured potential games, it cannot handle (a) asymmetries in
the strategic interactions, and (b) higher order interactions. Moreover, a wide class of strategic games
(e.g. anonymous games [5]) do not admit a potential function and thus locally optimal configurations
do not coincide with pure strategy Nash equilibria. In such games, the existence of only (approximate)
mixed strategy equilibria is guaranteed [6].
In this work, we focus on learning local aggregative games to address some of these issues. In an
aggregative game [7; 8; 9], every player gets a payoff that depends only on its own strategy and the
aggregate of all the other players’ strategies. Aggregative games and their generalizations form a very
rich class of strategic games that subsumes Cournot oligopoly, public goods, anonymous, mean field,
and cost and surplus sharing games [10; 11; 12; 13]. In a local aggregative game, a player’s payoff is
a function of its own strategy and the aggregate strategy of its neighbors (i.e. only a subset of other
players). We do not assume that the interactions are symmetric or confined to a tree structure, and
therefore the game structure could, in general, be a spanning digraph, possibly with cycles.
We consider local aggregative games where each player’s payoff is a convex or submodular Lipschitz
function of the aggregate of its neighbors. We prove sufficient conditions under which such games
admit some pure strategy -Nash equilibrium. We then prove an information theoretic lower bound
that for a specified , approximating a game structure that minimizes a non-negative monotone
submodular cost objective on the cardinality of the edge set may require exponentially many queries
under a zero-order or value oracle model. Our result generalizes the approximability of the submodular
minimum spanning tree problem to degree constrained spanning digraphs [14]. We argue that this
lower bound might be averted with a dataset of multiple -Nash equilibrium configurations sampled
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

