Fully Decentralized Policies for Multi-Agent Systems:
An Information Theoretic Approach

Roel Dobbe∗
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
dobbe@eecs.berkeley.edu

David Fridovich-Keil∗
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
dfk@eecs.berkeley.edu

Claire Tomlin
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
tomlin@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Learning cooperative policies for multi-agent systems is often challenged by partial
observability and a lack of coordination. In some settings, the structure of a problem
allows a distributed solution with limited communication. Here, we consider a
scenario where no communication is available, and instead we learn local policies
for all agents that collectively mimic the solution to a centralized multi-agent static
optimization problem. Our main contribution is an information theoretic framework
based on rate distortion theory which facilitates analysis of how well the resulting
fully decentralized policies are able to reconstruct the optimal solution. Moreover,
this framework provides a natural extension that addresses which nodes an agent
should communicate with to improve the performance of its individual policy.

1

Introduction

Finding optimal decentralized policies for multiple agents is often a hard problem hampered by
partial observability and a lack of coordination between agents. The distributed multi-agent problem
has been approached from a variety of angles, including distributed optimization [Boyd et al., 2011],
game theory [Aumann and Dreze, 1974] and decentralized or networked partially observable Markov
decision processes (POMDPs) [Oliehoek and Amato, 2016, Goldman and Zilberstein, 2004, Nair
et al., 2005]. In this paper, we analyze a different approach consisting of a simple learning scheme to
design fully decentralized policies for all agents that collectively mimic the solution to a common
optimization problem, while having no access to a global reward signal and either no or restricted
access to other agents’ local state. This algorithm is a generalization of that proposed in our prior
work [Sondermeijer et al., 2016] related to decentralized optimal power flow (OPF). Indeed, the
success of regression-based decentralization in the OPF domain motivated us to understand when and
how well the method works in a more general decentralized optimal control setting.
The key contribution of this work is to view decentralization as a compression problem, and then
apply classical results from information theory to analyze performance limits. More specifically, we
treat the ith agent’s optimal action in the centralized problem as a random variable u∗i , and model
its conditional dependence on the global state variables x = (x1 , . . . , xn ), i.e. p(u∗i |x), which we
∗

Indicates equal contribution.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

