A Screening Rule for `1-Regularized
Ising Model Estimation

Zhaobin Kuang1 , Sinong Geng2 , David Page3
University of Wisconsin
zkuang@wisc.edu1 , sgeng2@wisc.edu2 , page@biostat.wisc.edu3

Abstract
We discover a screening rule for `1 -regularized Ising model estimation. The simple
closed-form screening rule is a necessary and sufficient condition for exactly
recovering the blockwise structure of a solution under any given regularization
parameters. With enough sparsity, the screening rule can be combined with various
optimization procedures to deliver solutions efficiently in practice. The screening
rule is especially suitable for large-scale exploratory data analysis, where the
number of variables in the dataset can be thousands while we are only interested
in the relationship among a handful of variables within moderate-size clusters for
interpretability. Experimental results on various datasets demonstrate the efficiency
and insights gained from the introduction of the screening rule.

1

Introduction

While the field of statistical learning with sparsity [Hastie et al., 2015] has been steadily rising to
prominence ever since the introduction of the lasso (least absolute shrinkage and selection operator)
at the end of the last century [Tibshirani, 1996], it was not until the recent decade that various
screening rules debuted to further equip the ever-evolving optimization arsenals for some of the
most fundamental problems in sparse learning such as `1 -regularized generalized linear models
(GLMs, Friedman et al. 2010) and inverse covariance matrix estimation [Friedman et al., 2008].
Screening rules, usually in the form of an analytic formula or an optimization procedure that is
extremely fast to solve, can accelerate learning drastically by leveraging the inherent sparsity of many
high-dimensional problems. Generally speaking, screening rules can identify a significant portion of
the zero components of an optimal solution beforehand at the cost of minimal computational overhead,
and hence substantially reduce the dimension of the parameterization, which makes possible efficient
computation for large-scale sparse learning problems.
Pioneered by Ghaoui et al. 2010, various screening rules have emerged to speed up learning for
generative models (e.g. Gaussian graphical models) as well as for discriminative models (e.g. GLMs),
and for continuous variables (e.g. lasso) as well as for discrete variables (e.g. logistic regression,
support vector machines). Table 1 summarizes some of the iconic work in the literature, where, to the
best of our knowledge, screening rules for generative models with discrete variables are still notably
absent.
Contrasted with this notable absence is the ever stronger craving in the big data era for scaling
up the learning of generative models with discrete variables, especially in a blockwise structure
identification setting. For example, in gene mutation analysis [Wan et al., 2015, 2016], among tens of
thousands of sparse binary variables representing mutations of genes, we are interested in identifying
a handful of mutated genes that are connected into various blocks and exert synergistic effects on
the cancer. While a sparse Ising model is a desirable choice, for such an application the scalability
of the model could fail due to the innate N P-hardness [Karger and Srebro, 2001] of inference, and
hence maximum likelihood learning, owing to the partition function. To date, even with modern
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

