Random Projection Filter Bank for Time Series Data

Amir-massoud Farahmand
Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL)
Cambridge, MA, USA
farahmand@merl.com
Sepideh Pourazarm
Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL)
Cambridge, MA, USA
sepid@bu.edu
Daniel Nikovski
Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL)
Cambridge, MA, USA
nikovski@merl.com

Abstract
We propose Random Projection Filter Bank (RPFB) as a generic and simple
approach to extract features from time series data. RPFB is a set of randomly
generated stable autoregressive filters that are convolved with the input time series
to generate the features. These features can be used by any conventional machine
learning algorithm for solving tasks such as time series prediction, classification
with time series data, etc. Different filters in RPFB extract different aspects of
the time series, and together they provide a reasonably good summary of the time
series. RPFB is easy to implement, fast to compute, and parallelizable. We provide
an error upper bound indicating that RPFB provides a reasonable approximation
to a class of dynamical systems. The empirical results in a series of synthetic and
real-world problems show that RPFB is an effective method to extract features
from time series.

1

Introduction

This paper introduces Random Projection Filter Bank (RPFB) for feature extraction from time series
data. RPFB generates a feature vector that summarizes the input time series by projecting the time
series onto the span of a set of randomly generated dynamical filters. The output of RPFB can
then be used as the input to any conventional estimator (e.g., ridge regression, SVM, and Random
Forest [Hastie et al., 2001; Bishop, 2006; Wasserman, 2007]) to solve problems such as time series
prediction, and classification and fault prediction with time series input data. RPFB is easy to
implement, is fast to compute, and can be parallelized easily.
RPFB consists of a set of randomly generated filters (i.e., dynamical systems that receive inputs),
which are convolved with the input time series. The filters are stable autoregressive (AR) filters, so
they can capture information from the distant past of the time series. This is in contrast with more
conventional approach of considering only a fixed window of the past time steps, which may not
capture all relevant information. RPFB is inspired from the random projection methods [Vempala,
2004; Baraniuk and Wakin, 2009], which reduce the input dimension while preserving important
properties of the data, e.g., being an approximate isometric map. It is also closely related to
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

