Stein Variational Gradient Descent as Gradient Flow
Qiang Liu
Department of Computer Science
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
qiang.liu@dartmouth.edu

Abstract
Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD) is a deterministic sampling algorithm
that iteratively transports a set of particles to approximate given distributions, based
on a gradient-based update that guarantees to optimally decrease the KL divergence
within a function space. This paper develops the first theoretical analysis on SVGD.
We establish that the empirical measures of the SVGD samples weakly converge
to the target distribution, and show that the asymptotic behavior of SVGD is
characterized by a nonlinear Fokker-Planck equation known as Vlasov equation
in physics. We develop a geometric perspective that views SVGD as a gradient
flow of the KL divergence functional under a new metric structure on the space of
distributions induced by Stein operator.

1

Introduction

Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD) [1] is a particle-based algorithm for approximating complex
distributions. Unlike typical Monte Carlo algorithms that rely on randomness for approximation,
SVGD constructs a set of points (or particles) by iteratively applying deterministic updates that
is constructed to optimally decrease the KL divergence to the target distribution at each iteration.
SVGD has a simple form that efficient leverages the gradient information of the distribution, and
can be readily applied to complex models with massive datasets for which typical gradient descent
has been found efficient. A nice property of SVGD is that it strictly reduces to the typical gradient
ascent for maximum a posteriori (MAP) when using only a single particle (n = 1), while turns into a
full sampling method with more particles. Because MAP often provides reasonably good results in
practice, SVGD is found more particle-efficient than typical Monte Carlo methods which require
much larger numbers of particles to achieve good results.
SVGD can be viewed as a variational inference algorithm [e.g., 2], but is significantly different from
the typical parametric variational inference algorithms that use parametric sets to approximate given
distributions and have the disadvantage of introducing deterministic biases and (often) requiring
non-convex optimization. The non-parametric nature of SVGD allows it to provide consistent
estimation for generic distributions like Monte Carlo does. There are also particle algorithms based
on optimization, or variational principles, with theoretical guarantees [e.g., 3–5], but they often do
not use the gradient information effectively and do not scale well in high dimensions.
However, SVGD is difficult to analyze theoretically because it involves a system of particles that
interact with each other in a complex way. In this work, we take an initial step towards analyzing
SVGD. We characterize the SVGD dynamics using an evolutionary process of the empirical measures
of the particles that is known as Vlasov process in physics, and establish that empirical measures of
the particles weakly converge to the given target distribution. We develop a geometric interpretation
of SVGD that views SVGD as a gradient flow of KL divergence, defined on a new Riemannian-like
metric structure imposed on the space of density functions.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

