Emergence of Language with Multi-agent Games:
Learning to Communicate with Sequences of Symbols

Serhii Havrylov
ILCC, School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
s.havrylov@inf.ed.ac.uk

Ivan Titov
ILCC, School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
ILLC, University of Amsterdam
ititov@inf.ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Learning to communicate through interaction, rather than relying on explicit supervision, is often considered a prerequisite for developing a general AI. We study a
setting where two agents engage in playing a referential game and, from scratch,
develop a communication protocol necessary to succeed in this game. Unlike
previous work, we require that messages they exchange, both at train and test time,
are in the form of a language (i.e. sequences of discrete symbols). We compare a
reinforcement learning approach and one using a differentiable relaxation (straightthrough Gumbel-softmax estimator (Jang et al., 2017)) and observe that the latter is
much faster to converge and it results in more effective protocols. Interestingly, we
also observe that the protocol we induce by optimizing the communication success
exhibits a degree of compositionality and variability (i.e. the same information can
be phrased in different ways), both properties characteristic of natural languages.
As the ultimate goal is to ensure that communication is accomplished in natural
language, we also perform experiments where we inject prior information about
natural language into our model and study properties of the resulting protocol.

1

Introduction

With the rapid advances in machine learning in recent years, the goal of enabling intelligent agents
to communicate with each other and with humans is turning from a hot topic of philosophical
debates into a practical engineering problem. It is believed that supervised learning alone is not
going to provide a solution to this challenge (Mikolov et al., 2015). Moreover, even learning natural
language from an interaction between humans and an agent may not be the most efficient and scalable
approach. These considerations, as well as desire to achieve a better understanding of principles
guiding evolution and emergence of natural languages (Nowak and Krakauer, 1999; Brighton, 2002),
have motivated previous research into setups where agents invent a communication protocol which
lets them succeed in a given collaborative task (Batali, 1998; Kirby, 2002; Steels, 2005; Baronchelli
et al., 2006). For an extensive overview of earlier work in this area, we refer the reader to Kirby
(2002) and Wagner et al. (2003).
We continue this line of research and specifically consider a setting where the collaborative task is a
game. Neural network models have been shown to be able to successfully induce a communication
protocol for this setting (Lazaridou et al., 2017; Jorge et al., 2016; Foerster et al., 2016; Sukhbaatar
et al., 2016). One important difference with these previous approaches is that we assume that
messages exchanged between the agents are variable-length strings of symbols rather than atomic
categories (as in the previous work). Our protocol would have properties more similar to natural
language and, as such, would have more advantages over using atomic categories. For example, it can
support compositionality (Werning et al., 2011) and provide an easy way to regulate the amount of
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

