Perturbative Black Box Variational Inference
Robert Bamler∗
Disney Research
Pittsburgh, USA

Cheng Zhang∗
Disney Research
Pittsburgh, USA

Manfred Opper
TU Berlin
Berlin, Germany

Stephan Mandt∗
Disney Research
Pittsburgh, USA

firstname.lastname@{disneyresearch.com, tu-berlin.de}

Abstract
Black box variational inference (BBVI) with reparameterization gradients triggered
the exploration of divergence measures other than the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, such as alpha divergences. In this paper, we view BBVI with generalized
divergences as a form of estimating the marginal likelihood via biased importance
sampling. The choice of divergence determines a bias-variance trade-off between
the tightness of a bound on the marginal likelihood (low bias) and the variance of
its gradient estimators. Drawing on variational perturbation theory of statistical
physics, we use these insights to construct a family of new variational bounds.
Enumerated by an odd integer order K, this family captures the standard KL bound
for K = 1, and converges to the exact marginal likelihood as K → ∞. Compared
to alpha-divergences, our reparameterization gradients have a lower variance. We
show in experiments on Gaussian Processes and Variational Autoencoders that the
new bounds are more mass covering, and that the resulting posterior covariances
are closer to the true posterior and lead to higher likelihoods on held-out data.

1

Introduction

Variational inference (VI) (Jordan et al., 1999) provides a way to convert Bayesian inference to
optimization by minimizing a divergence measure. Recent advances of VI have been devoted to
scalability (Hoffman et al., 2013; Ranganath et al., 2014), divergence measures (Minka, 2005; Li and
Turner, 2016; Hernandez-Lobato et al., 2016), and structured variational distributions (Hoffman and
Blei, 2015; Ranganath et al., 2016).
While traditional stochastic variational inference (SVI) (Hoffman et al., 2013) was limited to conditionally conjugate Bayesian models, black box variational inference (BBVI) (Ranganath et al., 2014)
enables SVI on a large class of models. It expresses the gradient as an expectation, and estimates it by
Monte-Carlo sampling. A variant of BBVI uses reparameterized gradients and has lower variance (Salimans and Knowles, 2013; Kingma and Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014; Ruiz et al., 2016). BBVI
paved the way for approximate inference in complex and deep generative models (Kingma and Welling,
2014; Rezende et al., 2014; Ranganath et al., 2015; Bamler and Mandt, 2017).
Before the advent of BBVI, divergence measures other than the KL divergence had been of limited
practical use due to their complexity in both mathematical derivation and computation (Minka, 2005),
but have since then been revisited. Alpha-divergences (Hernandez-Lobato et al., 2016; Dieng et al.,
2017; Li and Turner, 2016) achieve a better matching of the variational distribution to different regions
of the posterior and may be tuned to either fit its dominant mode or to cover its entire support. The
problem with reparameterizing the gradient of the alpha-divergence is, however, that the resulting
gradient estimates have large variances. It is therefore desirable to find other divergence measures
with low-variance reparameterization gradients.
∗

Equal contributions. First authorship determined by coin flip among first two authors.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

