Invariance and Stability
of Deep Convolutional Representations

Julien Mairal
Inria∗
julien.mairal@inria.fr

Alberto Bietti
Inria∗
alberto.bietti@inria.fr

Abstract
In this paper, we study deep signal representations that are near-invariant to groups
of transformations and stable to the action of diffeomorphisms without losing signal
information. This is achieved by generalizing the multilayer kernel introduced
in the context of convolutional kernel networks and by studying the geometry
of the corresponding reproducing kernel Hilbert space. We show that the signal
representation is stable, and that models from this functional space, such as a large
class of convolutional neural networks, may enjoy the same stability.

1

Introduction

The results achieved by deep neural networks for prediction tasks have been impressive in domains
where data is structured and available in large amounts. In particular, convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) [14] have shown to model well the local appearance of natural images at multiple scales,
while also representing images with some invariance through pooling operations. Yet, the exact nature
of this invariance and the characteristics of functional spaces where convolutional neural networks
live are poorly understood; overall, these models are sometimes only seen as clever engineering black
boxes that have been designed with a lot of insight collected since they were introduced.
Understanding the geometry of these functional spaces is nevertheless a fundamental question. In
addition to potentially bringing new intuition about the success of deep networks, it may for instance
help solving the issue of regularization, by providing ways to control the variations of prediction
functions in a principled manner. Small deformations of natural signals often preserve their main
characteristics, such as the class label in a classification task (e.g., the same digit with different
handwritings may correspond to the same images up to small deformations), and provide a much
richer class of transformations than translations. Representations that are stable to small deformations
allow more robust models that may exploit these invariances, which may lead to improved sample
complexity. The scattering transform [5, 17] is a recent attempt to characterize convolutional
multilayer architectures based on wavelets. The theory provides an elegant characterization of
invariance and stability properties of signals represented via the scattering operator, through a notion
of Lipschitz stability to the action of diffeomorphisms. Nevertheless, these networks do not involve
“learning” in the classical sense since the filters of the networks are pre-defined, and the resulting
architecture differs significantly from the most used ones.
In this work, we study these theoretical properties for more standard convolutional architectures from
the point of view of positive definite kernels [27]. Specifically, we consider a functional space derived
from a kernel for multi-dimensional signals, which admits a multilayer and convolutional structure
that generalizes the construction of convolutional kernel networks (CKNs) [15, 16]. We show that
this functional space contains a large class of CNNs with smooth homogeneous activation functions
in addition to CKNs [15], allowing us to obtain theoretical results for both classes of models.
∗

Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

