Continual Learning with Deep Generative Replay

Hanul Shin
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
SK T-Brain
skyshin@mit.edu

Jung Kwon Lee∗, Jaehong Kim∗, Jiwon Kim
SK T-Brain
{jklee,xhark,jk}@sktbrain.com

Abstract
Attempts to train a comprehensive artificial intelligence capable of solving multiple
tasks have been impeded by a chronic problem called catastrophic forgetting.
Although simply replaying all previous data alleviates the problem, it requires
large memory and even worse, often infeasible in real world applications where the
access to past data is limited. Inspired by the generative nature of the hippocampus
as a short-term memory system in primate brain, we propose the Deep Generative
Replay, a novel framework with a cooperative dual model architecture consisting
of a deep generative model (“generator”) and a task solving model (“solver”). With
only these two models, training data for previous tasks can easily be sampled and
interleaved with those for a new task. We test our methods in several sequential
learning settings involving image classification tasks.

1

Introduction

One distinctive ability of humans and large primates is to continually learn new skills and accumulate
knowledge throughout the lifetime [6]. Even in small vertebrates such as rodents, established connections between neurons seem to last more than an year [13]. Besides, primates incorporate new
information and expand their cognitive abilities without seriously perturbing past memories. This
flexible memory system results from a good balance between synaptic plasticity and stability [1].
Continual learning in deep neural networks, however, suffers from a phenomenon called catastrophic
forgetting [22], in which a model’s performance on previously learned tasks abruptly degrades when
trained for a new task. In artificial neural networks, inputs coincide with the outputs by implicit
parametric representation. Therefore training them towards a new objective can cause almost complete
forgetting of former knowledge. Such problem has been a key obstacle to continual learning for deep
neural network through sequential training on multiple tasks.
Previous attempts to alleviate catastrophic forgetting often relied on episodic memory system that
stores past data [31]. In particular, recorded examples are regularly replayed with real samples drawn
from the new task, and the network parameters are jointly optimized. While a network trained in this
manner performs as well as separate networks trained solely on each task [29], a major drawback
of memory-based approach is that it requires large working memory to store and replay past inputs.
Moreover, such data storage and replay may not be viable in some real-world situations.
Notably, humans and large primates learn new knowledge even from limited experiences and still
retain past memories. While several biological mechanisms contribute to this at multiple levels, the
most apparent distinction between primate brains and artificial neural networks is the existence of
separate, interacting memory systems [26]. The Complementary Learning Systems (CLS) theory
illustrates the significance of dual memory systems involving the hippocampus and the neocortex.
The hippocampal system rapidly encodes recent experiences, and the memory trace that lasts for
∗

Equal Contribution

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

