Stabilizing Training of Generative Adversarial
Networks through Regularization
Kevin Roth
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich

Aurelien Lucchi
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich

kevin.roth@inf.ethz.ch

aurelien.lucchi@inf.ethz.ch

Sebastian Nowozin
Microsoft Research
Cambridge, UK
sebastian.Nowozin@microsoft.com

Thomas Hofmann
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich
thomas.hofmann@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Deep generative models based on Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have
demonstrated impressive sample quality but in order to work they require a careful
choice of architecture, parameter initialization, and selection of hyper-parameters.
This fragility is in part due to a dimensional mismatch or non-overlapping support
between the model distribution and the data distribution, causing their density ratio
and the associated f -divergence to be undefined. We overcome this fundamental
limitation and propose a new regularization approach with low computational cost
that yields a stable GAN training procedure. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of this regularizer accross several architectures trained on common benchmark
image generation tasks. Our regularization turns GAN models into reliable building
blocks for deep learning. 1

1

Introduction

A recent trend in the world of generative models is the use of deep neural networks as data generating
mechanisms. Two notable approaches in this area are variational auto-encoders (VAEs) [14, 28] as
well as generative adversarial networks (GAN) [8]. GANs are especially appealing as they move
away from the common likelihood maximization viewpoint and instead use an adversarial game
approach for training generative models. Let us denote by P(x) and Q✓ (x) the data and model
distribution, respectively. The basic idea behind GANs is to pair up a ✓-parametrized generator
network that produces Q✓ with a discriminator which aims to distinguish between P and Q✓ , whereas
the generator aims for making Q✓ indistinguishable from P. Effectively the discriminator represents
a class of objective functions F that measures dissimilarity of pairs of probability distributions. The
final objective is then formed via a supremum over F, leading to the saddle point problem

min `(Q✓ ; F) := sup F (P, Q✓ ) .
(1)
✓

F 2F

The standard way of representing a specific F is through a family of statistics or discriminants 2 ,
typically realized by a neural network [8, 26]. In GANs, we use these discriminators in a logistic
classification loss as follows
F (P, Q; ) = EP [g( (x))] + EQ [g(
1

(x))] ,

Code available at https://github.com/rothk/Stabilizing_GANs

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

(2)

