Positive-Unlabeled Learning with
Non-Negative Risk Estimator

Ryuichi Kiryo1,2 Gang Niu1,2 Marthinus C. du Plessis Masashi Sugiyama2,1
1
The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan
2
RIKEN, 1-4-1 Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-0027, Japan
{ kiryo@ms., gang@ms., sugi@ }k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
From only positive (P) and unlabeled (U) data, a binary classifier could be trained
with PU learning, in which the state of the art is unbiased PU learning. However,
if its model is very flexible, empirical risks on training data will go negative, and
we will suffer from serious overfitting. In this paper, we propose a non-negative
risk estimator for PU learning: when getting minimized, it is more robust against
overfitting, and thus we are able to use very flexible models (such as deep neural
networks) given limited P data. Moreover, we analyze the bias, consistency, and
mean-squared-error reduction of the proposed risk estimator, and bound the estimation error of the resulting empirical risk minimizer. Experiments demonstrate
that our risk estimator fixes the overfitting problem of its unbiased counterparts.

1

Introduction

Positive-unlabeled (PU) learning can be dated back to [1, 2, 3] and has been well studied since then.
It mainly focuses on binary classification applied to retrieval and novelty or outlier detection tasks
[4, 5, 6, 7], while it also has applications in matrix completion [8] and sequential data [9, 10].
Existing PU methods can be divided into two categories based on how U data is handled. The first
category (e.g., [11, 12]) identifies possible negative (N) data in U data, and then performs ordinary
supervised (PN) learning; the second (e.g., [13, 14]) regards U data as N data with smaller weights.
The former heavily relies on the heuristics for identifying N data; the latter heavily relies on good
choices of the weights of U data, which is computationally expensive to tune.
In order to avoid tuning the weights, unbiased PU learning comes into play as a subcategory of the
second category. The milestone is [4], which regards a U data as weighted P and N data simultaneously. It might lead to unbiased risk estimators, if we unrealistically assume that the class-posterior
probability is one for all P data.1 A breakthrough in this direction is [15] for proposing the first unbiased risk estimator, and a more general estimator was suggested in [16] as a common foundation.
The former is unbiased but non-convex for loss functions satisfying some symmetric condition; the
latter is always unbiased, and it is further convex for loss functions meeting some linear-odd condition [17, 18]. PU learning based on these unbiased risk estimators is the current state of the art.
However, the unbiased risk estimators will give negative empirical risks, if the model being trained
is very flexible. For the general estimator in [16], there exist three partial risks in the total risk (see
Eq. (2) defined later), especially it has a negative risk regarding P data as N data to cancel the bias
caused by regarding U data as N data. The worst case is that the model can realize any measurable
function and the loss function is not upper bounded, so that the empirical risk is not lower bounded.
This needs to be fixed since the original risk, which is the target to be estimated, is non-negative.
1

It implies the P and N class-conditional densities have disjoint support sets, and then any P and N data (as
the test data) can be perfectly separated by a fixed classifier that is sufficiently flexible.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

