Predicting User Activity Level In Point Processes
With Mass Transport Equation
Yichen Wang⇧ , Xiaojing Ye⇤ , Hongyuan Zha⇧ , Le Song⇧†
⇧
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
⇤
School of Mathematics, Georgia State University
†
Ant Financial
{yichen.wang}@gatech.edu, xye@gsu.edu
{zha,lsong}@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
Point processes are powerful tools to model user activities and have a plethora of
applications in social sciences. Predicting user activities based on point processes
is a central problem. However, existing works are mostly problem specific, use
heuristics, or simplify the stochastic nature of point processes. In this paper, we
propose a framework that provides an efficient estimator of the probability mass
function of point processes. In particular, we design a key reformulation of the
prediction problem, and further derive a differential-difference equation to compute
a conditional probability mass function. Our framework is applicable to general
point processes and prediction tasks, and achieves superb predictive and efficiency
performance in diverse real-world applications compared to the state of the art.

1

Introduction

Online social platforms, such as Facebook and Twitter, enable users to post opinions, share information, and influence peers. Recently, user-generated event data archived in fine-grained temporal
resolutions are becoming increasingly available, which calls for expressive models and algorithms
to understand, predict and distill knowledge from complex dynamics of these data. Particularly,
temporal point processes are well-suited to model the event pattern of user behaviors and have been
successfully applied in modeling event sequence data [6, 10, 12, 21, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 33].
A fundamental task in social networks is to predict user activity levels based on learned point process
models. Mathematically, the goal is to compute E[f (N (t))], where N (·) is a given point process
that is learned from user behaviors, t is a fixed future time, and f is an application-dependent
function. A framework for doing this is critically important. For example, for social networking
services, an accurate inference of the number of reshares of a post enables the network moderator
to detect trending posts and improve its content delivery networks [13, 32]; an accurate estimate of
the change of network topology (the number of new followers of a user) facilitates the moderator to
identify influential users and suppress the spread of terrorist propaganda and cyber-attacks [12]; an
accurate inference of the activity level (number of posts in the network) allows us to gain fundamental
insight into the predictability of collective behaviors [22]. Moreover, for online merchants such as
Amazon, an accurate estimate of the number of future purchases of a product helps optimizing future
advertisement placements [10, 25].
Despite the prevalence of prediction problems, an accurate prediction is very challenging for two
reasons. First, the function f is arbitrary. For instance, to evaluate the homogeneity of user activities,
we set f (x) = x log(x) to compute the Shannon entropy; to measure the distance between a predicted
activity level and a target x⇤ , we set f (x) = (x x⇤ )2 . However, most works [8, 9, 13, 30, 31, 32]
are problem specific and only designed for the simple task with f (x) = x; hence these works are
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

