Practical Bayesian Optimization for Model Fitting
with Bayesian Adaptive Direct Search

Luigi Acerbi∗
Center for Neural Science
New York University
luigi.acerbi@nyu.edu

Wei Ji Ma
Center for Neural Science & Dept. of Psychology
New York University
weijima@nyu.edu

Abstract
Computational models in fields such as computational neuroscience are often
evaluated via stochastic simulation or numerical approximation. Fitting these
models implies a difficult optimization problem over complex, possibly noisy
parameter landscapes. Bayesian optimization (BO) has been successfully applied
to solving expensive black-box problems in engineering and machine learning.
Here we explore whether BO can be applied as a general tool for model fitting.
First, we present a novel hybrid BO algorithm, Bayesian adaptive direct search
(BADS), that achieves competitive performance with an affordable computational
overhead for the running time of typical models. We then perform an extensive
benchmark of BADS vs. many common and state-of-the-art nonconvex, derivativefree optimizers, on a set of model-fitting problems with real data and models
from six studies in behavioral, cognitive, and computational neuroscience. With
default settings, BADS consistently finds comparable or better solutions than
other methods, including ‘vanilla’ BO, showing great promise for advanced BO
techniques, and BADS in particular, as a general model-fitting tool.

1

Introduction

Many complex, nonlinear computational models in fields such as behaviorial, cognitive, and computational neuroscience cannot be evaluated analytically, but require moderately expensive numerical
approximations or simulations. In these cases, finding the maximum-likelihood (ML) solution –
for parameter estimation, or model selection – requires the costly exploration of a rough or noisy
nonconvex landscape, in which gradients are often unavailable to guide the search.
Here we consider the problem of finding the (global) optimum x∗ = argminx∈X E [f (x)] of a
possibly noisy objective f over a (bounded) domain X ⊆ RD , where the function f can be intended
as the (negative) log likelihood of a parameter vector x for a given dataset and model, but is generally
a black box. With many derivative-free optimization algorithms available to the researcher [1], it is
unclear which one should be chosen. Crucially, an inadequate optimizer can hinder progress, limit
the complexity of the models that can be fit, and even cast doubt on the reliability of one’s findings.
Bayesian optimization (BO) is a state-of-the-art machine learning framework for optimizing expensive
and possibly noisy black-box functions [2, 3, 4]. This makes it an ideal candidate for solving difficult
model-fitting problems. Yet there are several obstacles to a widespread usage of BO as a general tool
for model fitting. First, traditional BO methods target very costly problems, such as hyperparameter
tuning [5], whereas evaluating a typical behavioral model might only have a moderate computational
cost (e.g., 0.1-10 s per evaluation). This implies major differences in what is considered an acceptable
algorithmic overhead, and in the maximum number of allowed function evaluations (e.g., hundreds vs.
∗
Current address: Département des neurosciences fondamentales, Université de Genève, CMU, 1 rue
Michel-Servet, 1206 Genève, Switzerland. E-mail: luigi.acerbi@gmail.com.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

