Avoiding Discrimination through Causal Reasoning

Niki Kilbertus†‡
nkilbertus@tue.mpg.de
Moritz Hardt∗
hardt@berkeley.edu

Mateo Rojas-Carulla†‡
mrojas@tue.mpg.de
Dominik Janzing†
janzing@tue.mpg.de

Giambattista Parascandolo†§
gparascandolo@tue.mpg.de
Bernhard Schölkopf†
bs@tue.mpg.de

†

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
‡
University of Cambridge
§
Max Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems
∗
University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
Recent work on fairness in machine learning has focused on various statistical
discrimination criteria and how they trade off. Most of these criteria are observational: They depend only on the joint distribution of predictor, protected attribute,
features, and outcome. While convenient to work with, observational criteria have
severe inherent limitations that prevent them from resolving matters of fairness
conclusively.
Going beyond observational criteria, we frame the problem of discrimination
based on protected attributes in the language of causal reasoning. This viewpoint shifts attention from “What is the right fairness criterion?” to “What do we
want to assume about our model of the causal data generating process?” Through
the lens of causality, we make several contributions. First, we crisply articulate
why and when observational criteria fail, thus formalizing what was before a matter of opinion. Second, our approach exposes previously ignored subtleties and
why they are fundamental to the problem. Finally, we put forward natural causal
non-discrimination criteria and develop algorithms that satisfy them.

1

Introduction

As machine learning progresses rapidly, its societal impact has come under scrutiny. An important
concern is potential discrimination based on protected attributes such as gender, race, or religion.
Since learned predictors and risk scores increasingly support or even replace human judgment, there
is an opportunity to formalize what harmful discrimination means and to design algorithms that
avoid it. However, researchers have found it difficult to agree on a single measure of discrimination.
As of now, there are several competing approaches, representing different opinions and striking
different trade-offs. Most of the proposed fairness criteria are observational: They depend only
on the joint distribution of predictor R, protected attribute A, features X, and outcome Y. For
example, the natural requirement that R and A must be statistically independent is referred to as
demographic parity. Some approaches transform the features X to obfuscate the information they
contain about A [1]. The recently proposed equalized odds constraint [2] demands that the predictor
R and the attribute A be independent conditional on the actual outcome Y. All three are examples
of observational approaches.
A growing line of work points at the insufficiency of existing definitions. Hardt, Price and Srebro [2]
construct two scenarios with intuitively different social interpretations that admit identical joint dis31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

