Learning Combinatorial Optimization Algorithms over Graphs

Hanjun Dai†⇤ , Elias B. Khalil†⇤, Yuyu Zhang† , Bistra Dilkina† , Le Song†§
†
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
§
Ant Financial
{hanjun.dai, elias.khalil, yuyu.zhang, bdilkina, lsong}@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
The design of good heuristics or approximation algorithms for NP-hard combinatorial optimization problems often requires significant specialized knowledge
and trial-and-error. Can we automate this challenging, tedious process, and learn
the algorithms instead? In many real-world applications, it is typically the case
that the same optimization problem is solved again and again on a regular basis,
maintaining the same problem structure but differing in the data. This provides
an opportunity for learning heuristic algorithms that exploit the structure of such
recurring problems. In this paper, we propose a unique combination of reinforcement learning and graph embedding to address this challenge. The learned greedy
policy behaves like a meta-algorithm that incrementally constructs a solution, and
the action is determined by the output of a graph embedding network capturing
the current state of the solution. We show that our framework can be applied to a
diverse range of optimization problems over graphs, and learns effective algorithms
for the Minimum Vertex Cover, Maximum Cut and Traveling Salesman problems.

1

Introduction

Combinatorial optimization problems over graphs arising from numerous application domains, such
as social networks, transportation, telecommunications and scheduling, are NP-hard, and have thus
attracted considerable interest from the theory and algorithm design communities over the years. In
fact, of Karp’s 21 problems in the seminal paper on reducibility [19], 10 are decision versions of graph
optimization problems, while most of the other 11 problems, such as set covering, can be naturally
formulated on graphs. Traditional approaches to tackling an NP-hard graph optimization problem
have three main flavors: exact algorithms, approximation algorithms and heuristics. Exact algorithms
are based on enumeration or branch-and-bound with an integer programming formulation, but may
be prohibitive for large instances. On the other hand, polynomial-time approximation algorithms are
desirable, but may suffer from weak optimality guarantees or empirical performance, or may not even
exist for inapproximable problems. Heuristics are often fast, effective algorithms that lack theoretical
guarantees, and may also require substantial problem-specific research and trial-and-error on the part
of algorithm designers.
All three paradigms seldom exploit a common trait of real-world optimization problems: instances
of the same type of problem are solved again and again on a regular basis, maintaining the same
combinatorial structure, but differing mainly in their data. That is, in many applications, values of
the coefficients in the objective function or constraints can be thought of as being sampled from the
same underlying distribution. For instance, an advertiser on a social network targets a limited set of
users with ads, in the hope that they spread them to their neighbors; such covering instances need
to be solved repeatedly, since the influence pattern between neighbors may be different each time.
Alternatively, a package delivery company routes trucks on a daily basis in a given city; thousands of
similar optimizations need to be solved, since the underlying demand locations can differ.
⇤

Both authors contributed equally to the paper.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

