On-the-fly Operation Batching
in Dynamic Computation Graphs
Graham Neubig⇤
Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
gneubig@cs.cmu.edu

Yoav Goldberg⇤
Computer Science Department
Bar-Ilan University
yogo@cs.biu.ac.il

Chris Dyer
DeepMind
cdyer@google.com

Abstract
Dynamic neural network toolkits such as PyTorch, DyNet, and Chainer offer more
flexibility for implementing models that cope with data of varying dimensions and
structure, relative to toolkits that operate on statically declared computations (e.g.,
TensorFlow, CNTK, and Theano). However, existing toolkits—both static and
dynamic—require that the developer organize the computations into the batches
necessary for exploiting high-performance algorithms and hardware. This batching
task is generally difficult, but it becomes a major hurdle as architectures become
complex. In this paper, we present an algorithm, and its implementation in the
DyNet toolkit, for automatically batching operations. Developers simply write
minibatch computations as aggregations of single instance computations, and the
batching algorithm seamlessly executes them, on the fly, using computationally
efficient batched operations. On a variety of tasks, we obtain throughput similar to
that obtained with manual batches, as well as comparable speedups over singleinstance learning on architectures that are impractical to batch manually.2

1

Introduction

Modern CPUs and GPUs evaluate batches of arithmetic operations significantly faster than the
sequential evaluation of the same operations. For example, performing elementwise operations takes
nearly the same amount of time on the GPU whether operating on tens or on thousands of elements,
and multiplying a few hundred different vectors by the same matrix is significantly slower than
executing a single (equivalent) matrix–matrix product using an optimized GEMM implementation on
either a GPU or a CPU. Thus, careful grouping of operations into batches that can execute efficiently
in parallel is crucial for making the most of available hardware resources.
Today, developers who write code to train neural networks are responsible for crafting most of this
batch handling by hand. In some cases this is easy: when inputs and outputs are naturally represented
as fixed sized tensors (e.g., images of a fixed size such those in the MNIST and CIFAR datasets, or
regression problems on fixed sized vector inputs), and the computations required to process each
instance are instance-invariant and expressible as standard operations on tensors (e.g., a series of
matrix multiplications, convolutions, and elementwise nonlinearities), a suitably flexible tensor library
⇤

Authors contributed equally.
The proposed algorithm is implemented in DyNet (http://dynet.io/), and can be activated by using the
“--dynet-autobatch 1” command line flag.
2

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

