Expectation Propagation for t-Exponential Family
Using q-Algebra

Futoshi Futami
The University of Tokyo, RIKEN
futami@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Issei Sato
The University of Tokyo, RIKEN
sato@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Masashi Sugiyama
RIKEN, The University of Tokyo
sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Exponential family distributions are highly useful in machine learning since their
calculation can be performed eﬃciently through natural parameters. The exponential family has recently been extended to the t-exponential family, which contains
Student-t distributions as family members and thus allows us to handle noisy data
well. However, since the t-exponential family is defined by the deformed exponential, an eﬃcient learning algorithm for the t-exponential family such as expectation
propagation (EP) cannot be derived in the same way as the ordinary exponential
family. In this paper, we borrow the mathematical tools of q-algebra from statistical physics and show that the pseudo additivity of distributions allows us to perform
calculation of t-exponential family distributions through natural parameters. We
then develop an expectation propagation (EP) algorithm for the t-exponential family, which provides a deterministic approximation to the posterior or predictive
distribution with simple moment matching. We finally apply the proposed EP
algorithm to the Bayes point machine and Student-t process classification, and
demonstrate their performance numerically.

1

Introduction

Exponential family distributions play an important role in machine learning, due to the fact that their
calculation can be performed eﬃciently and analytically through natural parameters or expected
suﬃcient statistics [1]. This property is particularly useful in the Bayesian framework since a
conjugate prior always exists for an exponential family likelihood and the prior and posterior are
often in the same exponential family. Moreover, parameters of the posterior distribution can be
evaluated only through natural parameters.
As exponential family members, Gaussian distributions are most commonly used because their
moments, conditional distribution, and joint distribution can be computed analytically. Gaussian
processes are a typical Bayesian method based on Gaussian distributions, which are used for various
purposes such as regression, classification, and optimization [8]. However, Gaussian distributions are
sensitive to outliers and heavier-tailed distributions are often more preferred in practice. For example,
Student-t distributions and Student-t processes are good alternatives to Gaussian distributions [4]
and Gaussian processes [10], respectively.
A technical problem of the Student-t distribution is that it does not belong to the exponential family
unlike the Gaussian distribution and thus cannot enjoy good properties of the exponential family. To
cope with this problem, the exponential family was recently generalized to the t-exponential family [3],
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

