Group Sparse Additive Machine

1

Hong Chen1 , Xiaoqian Wang1 , Cheng Deng2 , Heng Huang1∗
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, USA
2
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, China
chenh@mail.hzau.edu.cn,xqwang1991@gmail.com
chdeng@mail.xidian.edu.cn,heng.huang@pitt.edu

Abstract
A family of learning algorithms generated from additive models have attracted
much attention recently for their flexibility and interpretability in high dimensional
data analysis. Among them, learning models with grouped variables have shown
competitive performance for prediction and variable selection. However, the
previous works mainly focus on the least squares regression problem, not the
classification task. Thus, it is desired to design the new additive classification
model with variable selection capability for many real-world applications which
focus on high-dimensional data classification. To address this challenging problem,
in this paper, we investigate the classification with group sparse additive models
in reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces. A novel classification method, called as
group sparse additive machine (GroupSAM), is proposed to explore and utilize
the structure information among the input variables. Generalization error bound is
derived and proved by integrating the sample error analysis with empirical covering
numbers and the hypothesis error estimate with the stepping stone technique. Our
new bound shows that GroupSAM can achieve a satisfactory learning rate with
polynomial decay. Experimental results on synthetic data and seven benchmark
datasets consistently show the effectiveness of our new approach.

1

Introduction

The additive models based on statistical learning methods have been playing important roles for
the high-dimensional data analysis due to their well performance on prediction tasks and variable
selection (deep learning models often don’t work well when the number of training data is not
large). In essential, additive models inherit the representation flexibility of nonlinear models and
the interpretability of linear models. For a learning approach under additive models, there are two
key components: the hypothesis function space and the regularizer to address certain restrictions
on estimator. Different from traditional learning methods, the hypothesis space used in additive
models is relied on the decomposition of input vector. Usually, each input vector X ∈ Rp is divided
into p parts directly [17, 30, 6, 28] or some subgroups according to prior structural information
among input variables [27, 26]. The component function is defined on each decomposed input and
the hypothesis function is constructed by the sum of all component functions. Typical examples of
hypothesis space include the kernel-based function space [16, 6, 11] and the spline-based function
space [13, 15, 10, 30]. Moreover, the Tikhonov regularization scheme has been used extensively for
constructing the additive models, where the regularizer is employed to control the complexity of
hypothesis space. The examples of regularizer include the kernel-norm regularization associated with
the reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) [5, 6, 11] and various sparse regularization [17, 30, 26].
More recently several group sparse additive models have been proposed to tackle the high-dimensional
regression problem due to their nice theoretical properties and empirical effectiveness [15, 10,
∗

Corresponding author

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

