Using Options and Covariance Testing for Long
Horizon Off-Policy Policy Evaluation

Zhaohan Daniel Guo
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
zguo@cs.cmu.edu

Philip S. Thomas
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
pthomas@cs.umass.edu

Emma Brunskill
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
ebrun@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Evaluating a policy by deploying it in the real world can be risky and costly.
Off-policy policy evaluation (OPE) algorithms use historical data collected from
running a previous policy to evaluate a new policy, which provides a means for
evaluating a policy without requiring it to ever be deployed. Importance sampling
is a popular OPE method because it is robust to partial observability and works
with continuous states and actions. However, the amount of historical data required
by importance sampling can scale exponentially with the horizon of the problem:
the number of sequential decisions that are made. We propose using policies over
temporally extended actions, called options, and show that combining these policies
with importance sampling can significantly improve performance for long-horizon
problems. In addition, we can take advantage of special cases that arise due to
options-based policies to further improve the performance of importance sampling.
We further generalize these special cases to a general covariance testing rule that
can be used to decide which weights to drop in an IS estimate, and derive a new IS
algorithm called Incremental Importance Sampling that can provide significantly
more accurate estimates for a broad class of domains.

1

Introduction

One important problem for many high-stakes sequential decision making under uncertainty domains,
including robotics, health care, education, and dialogue systems, is estimating the performance of a
new policy without requiring it to be deployed. To address this, off-policy policy evaluation (OPE)
algorithms use historical data collected from executing one policy (called the behavior policy), to
predict the performance of a new policy (called the evaluation policy). Importance sampling (IS)
is one powerful approach that can be used to evaluate the potential performance of a new policy
[12]. In contrast to model based approaches to OPE [5], importance sampling provides an unbiased
estimate of the performance of the evaluation policy. In particular, importance sampling is robust
to partial observability, which is often prevalent in real-world domains. Unfortunately, importance
sampling estimates of the performance of the evaluation policy can be inaccurate when the horizon
of the problem is long: the variance of IS estimators can grow exponentially with the number of
sequential decisions made in an episode. This is a serious limitation for applications that involve
decisions made over tens or hundreds of steps, like dialogue systems where a conversation might
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

