Bridging the Gap Between Value and Policy Based
Reinforcement Learning
Ofir Nachum1
Mohammad Norouzi
Kelvin Xu1
Dale Schuurmans
{ofirnachum,mnorouzi,kelvinxx}@google.com, daes@ualberta.ca
Google Brain

Abstract
We establish a new connection between value and policy based reinforcement
learning (RL) based on a relationship between softmax temporal value consistency
and policy optimality under entropy regularization. Specifically, we show that
softmax consistent action values correspond to optimal entropy regularized policy
probabilities along any action sequence, regardless of provenance. From this
observation, we develop a new RL algorithm, Path Consistency Learning (PCL),
that minimizes a notion of soft consistency error along multi-step action sequences
extracted from both on- and off-policy traces. We examine the behavior of PCL
in different scenarios and show that PCL can be interpreted as generalizing both
actor-critic and Q-learning algorithms. We subsequently deepen the relationship
by showing how a single model can be used to represent both a policy and the
corresponding softmax state values, eliminating the need for a separate critic. The
experimental evaluation demonstrates that PCL significantly outperforms strong
actor-critic and Q-learning baselines across several benchmarks.2

1

Introduction

Model-free RL aims to acquire an effective behavior policy through trial and error interaction with a
black box environment. The goal is to optimize the quality of an agent’s behavior policy in terms of
the total expected discounted reward. Model-free RL has a myriad of applications in games [22, 37],
robotics [16, 17], and marketing [18, 38], to name a few. Recently, the impact of model-free RL has
been expanded through the use of deep neural networks, which promise to replace manual feature
engineering with end-to-end learning of value and policy representations. Unfortunately, a key
challenge remains how best to combine the advantages of value and policy based RL approaches in
the presence of deep function approximators, while mitigating their shortcomings. Although recent
progress has been made in combining value and policy based methods, this issue is not yet settled,
and the intricacies of each perspective are exacerbated by deep models.
The primary advantage of policy based approaches, such as REINFORCE [45], is that they directly
optimize the quantity of interest while remaining stable under function approximation (given a
sufficiently small learning rate). Their biggest drawback is sample inefficiency: since policy gradients
are estimated from rollouts the variance is often extreme. Although policy updates can be improved
by the use of appropriate geometry [14, 27, 32], the need for variance reduction remains paramount.
Actor-critic methods have thus become popular [33, 34, 36], because they use value approximators
to replace rollout estimates and reduce variance, at the cost of some bias. Nevertheless, on-policy
learning remains inherently sample inefficient [10]; by estimating quantities defined by the current
policy, either on-policy data must be used, or updating must be sufficiently slow to avoid significant
bias. Naive importance correction is hardly able to overcome these shortcomings in practice [28, 29].
1

Work done as a member of the Google Brain Residency program (g.co/brainresidency)
An implementation of PCL can be found at https://github.com/tensorflow/models/tree/
master/research/pcl_rl
2

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

