The Numerics of GANs
Lars Mescheder
Autonomous Vision Group
MPI Tübingen
lars.mescheder@tuebingen.mpg.de

Sebastian Nowozin
Machine Intelligence and Perception Group
Microsoft Research
sebastian.nowozin@microsoft.com

Andreas Geiger
Autonomous Vision Group
MPI Tübingen
andreas.geiger@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
In this paper, we analyze the numerics of common algorithms for training Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). Using the formalism of smooth two-player
games we analyze the associated gradient vector field of GAN training objectives.
Our findings suggest that the convergence of current algorithms suffers due to two
factors: i) presence of eigenvalues of the Jacobian of the gradient vector field with
zero real-part, and ii) eigenvalues with big imaginary part. Using these findings,
we design a new algorithm that overcomes some of these limitations and has better
convergence properties. Experimentally, we demonstrate its superiority on training
common GAN architectures and show convergence on GAN architectures that are
known to be notoriously hard to train.

1

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [10] have been very successful in learning probability
distributions. Since their first appearance, GANs have been successfully applied to a variety of
tasks, including image-to-image translation [12], image super-resolution [13], image in-painting [27]
domain adaptation [26], probabilistic inference [14, 9, 8] and many more.
While very powerful, GANs are known to be notoriously hard to train. The standard strategy for
stabilizing training is to carefully design the model, either by adapting the architecture [21] or by
selecting an easy-to-optimize objective function [23, 4, 11].
In this work, we examine the general problem of finding local Nash-equilibria of smooth games. We
revisit the de-facto standard algorithm for finding such equilibrium points, simultaneous gradient
ascent. We theoretically show that the main factors preventing the algorithm from converging are
the presence of eigenvalues of the Jacobian of the associated gradient vector field with zero real-part
and eigenvalues with a large imaginary part. The presence of the latter is also one of the reasons that
make saddle-point problems more difficult than local optimization problems. Utilizing these insights,
we design a new algorithm that overcomes some of these problems. Experimentally, we show that
our algorithm leads to stable training on many GAN architectures, including some that are known to
be hard to train.
Our technique is orthogonal to strategies that try to make the GAN-game well-defined, e.g. by adding
instance noise [24] or by using the Wasserstein-divergence [4, 11]: while these strategies try to ensure
the existence of Nash-equilibria, our paper deals with their computation and the numerical difficulties
that can arise in practice.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

