The Expressive Power of Neural Networks: A View
from the Width
Zhou Lu1,3
1400010739@pku.edu.cn

Hongming Pu1
1400010621@pku.edu.cn

Zhiqiang Hu2
huzq@pku.edu.cn

Feicheng Wang1,3
1400010604@pku.edu.cn

Liwei Wang2,3
wanglw@cis.pku.edu.cn

1, Department of Mathematics, Peking University
2, Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE, School of EECS, Peking University
3, Center for Data Science, Peking University, Beijing Institute of Big Data Research

Abstract
The expressive power of neural networks is important for understanding deep
learning. Most existing works consider this problem from the view of the depth of
a network. In this paper, we study how width affects the expressiveness of neural
networks. Classical results state that depth-bounded (e.g. depth-2) networks with
suitable activation functions are universal approximators. We show a universal
approximation theorem for width-bounded ReLU networks: width-(n + 4) ReLU
networks, where n is the input dimension, are universal approximators. Moreover,
except for a measure zero set, all functions cannot be approximated by width-n
ReLU networks, which exhibits a phase transition. Several recent works demonstrate the benefits of depth by proving the depth-efficiency of neural networks. That
is, there are classes of deep networks which cannot be realized by any shallow
network whose size is no more than an exponential bound. Here we pose the dual
question on the width-efficiency of ReLU networks: Are there wide networks
that cannot be realized by narrow networks whose size is not substantially larger?
We show that there exist classes of wide networks which cannot be realized by
any narrow network whose depth is no more than a polynomial bound. On the
other hand, we demonstrate by extensive experiments that narrow networks whose
size exceed the polynomial bound by a constant factor can approximate wide and
shallow network with high accuracy. Our results provide more comprehensive
evidence that depth may be more effective than width for the expressiveness of
ReLU networks.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have achieved state-of-the-art performance in a wide range of tasks such
as speech recognition, computer vision, natural language processing, and so on. Despite their
promising results in applications, our theoretical understanding of neural networks remains limited.
The expressive power of neural networks, being one of the vital properties, is crucial on the way
towards a more thorough comprehension.
The expressive power describes neural networks’ ability to approximate functions. This line of
research dates back at least to 1980’s. The celebrated universal approximation theorem states that
depth-2 networks with suitable activation function can approximate any continuous function on a
compact domain to any desired accuracy [3] [1] [9] [6]. However, the size of such a neural network
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

