Contrastive Learning for Image Captioning

Bo Dai
Dahua Lin
Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
db014@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

dhlin@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Image captioning, a popular topic in computer vision, has achieved substantial
progress in recent years. However, the distinctiveness of natural descriptions is
often overlooked in previous work. It is closely related to the quality of captions,
as distinctive captions are more likely to describe images with their unique aspects.
In this work, we propose a new learning method, Contrastive Learning (CL), for
image captioning. Specifically, via two constraints formulated on top of a reference
model, the proposed method can encourage distinctiveness, while maintaining the
overall quality of the generated captions. We tested our method on two challenging
datasets, where it improves the baseline model by significant margins. We also
showed in our studies that the proposed method is generic and can be used for
models with various structures.

1

Introduction

Image captioning, a task to generate natural descriptions of images, has been an active research
topic in computer vision and machine learning. Thanks to the advances in deep neural networks,
especially the wide adoption of RNN and LSTM, there has been substantial progress on this topic
in recent years [23, 24, 15, 19]. However, studies [1, 3, 2, 10] have shown that even the captions
generated by state-of-the-art models still leave a lot to be desired. Compared to human descriptions,
machine-generated captions are often quite rigid and tend to favor a “safe” (i.e. matching parts of
the training captions in a word-by-word manner) but restrictive way. As a consequence, captions
generated for different images, especially those that contain objects of the same categories, are
sometimes very similar [1], despite their differences in other aspects.
We argue that distinctiveness, a property often overlooked in previous work, is significant in natural
language descriptions. To be more specific, when people describe an image, they often mention or
even emphasize the distinctive aspects of an image that distinguish it from others. With a distinctive
description, someone can easily identify the image it is referring to, among a number of similar
images. In this work, we performed a self-retrieval study (see Section 4.1), which reveals the lack of
distinctiveness affects the quality of descriptions.
From a technical standpoint, the lack of distinctiveness is partly related to the way that the captioning
model was learned. A majority of image captioning models are learned by Maximum Likelihood
Estimation (MLE), where the probabilities of training captions conditioned on corresponding images
are maximized. While well grounded in statistics, this approach does not explicitly promote distinctiveness. Specifically, the differences among the captions of different images are not explicitly taken
into account. We found empirically that the resultant captions highly resemble the training set in a
word-by-word manner, but are not distinctive.
In this paper, we propose Contrastive Learning (CL), a new learning method for image captioning,
which explicitly encourages distinctiveness, while maintaining the overall quality of the generated
captions. Specifically, it employs a baseline, e.g. a state-of-the-art model, as a reference. During
learning, in addition to true image-caption pairs, denoted as (I, c), this method also takes as input
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

