Probabilistic Rule Realization and Selection
Haizi Yu∗ †
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801
haiziyu7@illinois.edu

Tianxi Li∗
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
tianxili@umich.edu

Lav R. Varshney†
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801
varshney@illinois.edu

Abstract
Abstraction and realization are bilateral processes that are key in deriving intelligence and creativity. In many domains, the two processes are approached through
rules: high-level principles that reveal invariances within similar yet diverse examples. Under a probabilistic setting for discrete input spaces, we focus on the
rule realization problem which generates input sample distributions that follow
the given rules. More ambitiously, we go beyond a mechanical realization that
takes whatever is given, but instead ask for proactively selecting reasonable rules to
realize. This goal is demanding in practice, since the initial rule set may not always
be consistent and thus intelligent compromises are needed. We formulate both rule
realization and selection as two strongly connected components within a single and
symmetric bi-convex problem, and derive an efficient algorithm that works at large
scale. Taking music compositional rules as the main example throughout the paper,
we demonstrate our model’s efficiency in not only music realization (composition)
but also music interpretation and understanding (analysis).

1

Introduction

Abstraction is a conceptual process by which high-level principles are derived from specific examples;
realization, the reverse process, applies the principles to generalize [1, 2]. The two, once combined,
form the art and science in developing knowledge and intelligence [3, 4]. Neural networks have
recently become popular in modeling the two processes, with the belief that the neurons, as distributed
data representations, are best organized hierarchically in a layered architecture [5, 6]. Probably the
most relevant such examples are auto-encoders, where the cascaded encoder and decoder respectively
model abstraction and realization. From a different angle that aims for interpretability, this paper first
defines a high-level data representation as a partition of the raw input space, and then formalizes
abstraction and realization as bi-directional probability inferences between the raw inputs and its
high-level representations.
While abstraction and realization is ubiquitous among knowledge domains, this paper embodies the
two as theory and composition in music, and refers to music high-level representations as compositional rules. Historically, theorists [7, 8] devised rules and guidelines to describe compositional
∗

Equal contribution.
Supported in part by the IBM-Illinois Center for Cognitive Computing Systems Research (C3SR), a research
collaboration as part of the IBM Cognitive Horizons Network.
†

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

