Acceleration and Averaging
In Stochastic Descent Dynamics

Walid Krichene
Google, Inc.
walidk@google.com

Peter Bartlett
U.C. Berkeley
bartlett@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
We formulate and study a general family of (continuous-time) stochastic dynamics
for accelerated first-order minimization of smooth convex functions.
Building on an averaging formulation of accelerated mirror descent, we propose a
stochastic variant in which the gradient is contaminated by noise, and study the
resulting stochastic differential equation. We prove a bound on the rate of change
of an energy function associated with the problem, then use it to derive estimates
of convergence rates of the function values (almost surely and in expectation),
both for persistent and asymptotically vanishing noise. We discuss the interaction
between the parameters of the dynamics (learning rate and averaging rates) and the
covariation of the noise process. In particular, we show how the asymptotic rate of
covariation affects the choice of parameters and, ultimately, the convergence rate.

1

Introduction

We consider the constrained convex minimization problem
min f (x),

x∈X

where X is a closed, convex, compact subset of Rn , and f is a proper closed convex function,
assumed to be differentiable with Lipschitz gradient, and we denote X ? ⊂ X the set of its minimizers.
First-order methods play an important role in minimizing such functions, in particular in large-scale
machine learning applications, in which the dimensionality (number of features) and size (number of
samples) in typical datasets makes higher-order methods intractable. Many such algorithms can be
viewed as a discretization of continuous-time dynamics. The simplest example is gradient descent,
which can be viewed as the discretization of the gradient flow dynamics ẋ(t) = −∇f (x(t)), where
ẋ(t) denotes the time derivative of a C 1 trajectory x(t). An important generalization of gradient
descent was developed by Nemirovsky and Yudin [1983], and termed mirror descent: it couples a
dual variable z(t) and its “mirror” primal variable x(t). More specifically, the dynamics are given by

ż(t) = −∇f (x(t))
MD
(1)
x(t) = ∇ψ ∗ (z(t)),
where ∇ψ ∗ : Rn → X is a Lipschitz function defined on the entire dual space Rn , with values in the
feasible set X ; it is often referred to as a mirror map, and we will recall its definition and properties
in Section 2. Mirror descent can be viewed as a generalization of projected gradient descent, where
the Euclidean projection is replaced by the mirror map ∇ψ ∗ [Beck and Teboulle, 2003]. This makes
it possible to adapt the choice of the mirror map to the geometry of the problem, leading to better
dependence on the dimension n, see [Ben-Tal and Nemirovski, 2001], [Ben-Tal et al., 2001].
Continuous-time dynamics Although optimization methods are inherently discrete, the
continuous-time point of view can help in their design and analysis, since it can leverage the
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

