Regret Minimization in MDPs with Options
without Prior Knowledge

Ronan Fruit
Sequel Team - Inria Lille
ronan.fruit@inria.fr

Matteo Pirotta
Sequel Team - Inria Lille
matteo.pirotta@inria.fr

Alessandro Lazaric
Sequel Team - Inria Lille
alessandro.lazaric@inria.fr

Emma Brunskill
Stanford University
ebrun@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
The option framework integrates temporal abstraction into the reinforcement learning model through the introduction of macro-actions (i.e., options). Recent works
leveraged the mapping of Markov decision processes (MDPs) with options to
semi-MDPs (SMDPs) and introduced SMDP-versions of exploration-exploitation
algorithms (e.g., RM AX -SMDP and UCRL-SMDP) to analyze the impact of options
on the learning performance. Nonetheless, the PAC-SMDP sample complexity
of RM AX -SMDP can hardly be translated into equivalent PAC-MDP theoretical
guarantees, while the regret analysis of UCRL-SMDP requires prior knowledge of
the distributions of the cumulative reward and duration of each option, which are
hardly available in practice. In this paper, we remove this limitation by combining
the SMDP view together with the inner Markov structure of options into a novel
algorithm whose regret performance matches UCRL-SMDP’s up to an additive
regret term. We show scenarios where this term is negligible and the advantage
of temporal abstraction is preserved. We also report preliminary empirical results
supporting the theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Tractable learning of how to make good decisions in complex domains over many time steps almost
definitely requires some form of hierarchical reasoning. One powerful and popular framework for
incorporating temporally-extended actions in the context of reinforcement learning is the options
framework [1]. Creating and leveraging options has been the subject of many papers over the last two
decades (see e.g., [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]) and it has been of particular interest recently in combination
with deep reinforcement learning, with a number of impressive empirical successes (see e.g., [9] for
an application to Minecraft). Intuitively (and empirically) temporal abstraction can help speed up
learning (reduce the amount of experience needed to learn a good policy) by shaping the actions
selected towards more promising sequences of actions [10], and it can reduce planning computation
through reducing the need to evaluate over all possible actions (see e.g., Mann and Mannor [11]).
However, incorporating options does not always improve learning efficiency as shown by Jong et al.
[12]. Intuitively, limiting action selection only to temporally-extended options might hamper the
exploration of the environment by restricting the policy space. Therefore, we argue that in addition to
the exciting work being done in heuristic and algorithmic approaches that leverage and/or dynamically
discover options, it is important to build a formal understanding of how and when options may help
or hurt reinforcement learning performance, and that such insights may also help inform empirically
motivated options-RL research.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

