Incorporating Side Information by Adaptive
Convolution
Di Kang

Debarun Dhar
Antoni B. Chan
Department of Computer Science
City University of Hong Kong
{dkang5-c, ddhar2-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk, abchan@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Computer vision tasks often have side information available that is helpful to
solve the task. For example, for crowd counting, the camera perspective (e.g.,
camera angle and height) gives a clue about the appearance and scale of people
in the scene. While side information has been shown to be useful for counting
systems using traditional hand-crafted features, it has not been fully utilized in
counting systems based on deep learning. In order to incorporate the available
side information, we propose an adaptive convolutional neural network (ACNN),
where the convolution filter weights adapt to the current scene context via the
side information. In particular, we model the filter weights as a low-dimensional
manifold within the high-dimensional space of filter weights. The filter weights are
generated using a learned “filter manifold” sub-network, whose input is the side
information. With the help of side information and adaptive weights, the ACNN can
disentangle the variations related to the side information, and extract discriminative
features related to the current context (e.g. camera perspective, noise level, blur
kernel parameters). We demonstrate the effectiveness of ACNN incorporating side
information on 3 tasks: crowd counting, corrupted digit recognition, and image
deblurring. Our experiments show that ACNN improves the performance compared
to a plain CNN with a similar number of parameters. Since existing crowd counting
datasets do not contain ground-truth side information, we collect a new dataset
with the ground-truth camera angle and height as the side information.

1

Introduction

Computer vision tasks often have side information available that is helpful to solve the task. Here we
define “side information” as auxiliary metadata that is associated with the main input, and that affects
the appearance/properties of the main input. For example, the camera angle affects the appearance of
a person in an image (see Fig. 1 top). Even within the same scene, a person’s appearance changes as
they move along the ground-plane, due to changes in the relative angles to the camera sensor. Most
deep learning methods ignore the side information, since if given enough data, a sufficiently large
deep network should be able to learn internal representations that are invariant to the side information.
In this paper, we explore how side information can be directly incorporated into deep networks so as
to improve their effectiveness.
Our motivating application is crowd counting in images, which is challenging due to complicated
backgrounds, severe occlusion, low-resolution images, perspective distortion, and different appearances caused by different camera tilt angles. Recent methods are based on crowd density estimation
[1], where each pixel in the crowd density map represents the fraction of people in that location, and
the crowd count is obtained by integrating over a region in the density map. The current state-of-theart uses convolutional neural networks (CNN) to estimate the density maps [2–4]. Previous works
have also shown that using side information, e.g., the scene perspective, helps to improve crowd
counting accuracy [5, 6]. In particular, when extracting hand-crafted features (e.g., edge and texture
statistics) [5–9] use scene perspective normalization, where a “perspective weight” is applied at each
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

