The Neural Hawkes Process: A Neurally
Self-Modulating Multivariate Point Process
Hongyuan Mei
Jason Eisner
Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University
3400 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21218 U.S.A
{hmei,jason}@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract
Many events occur in the world. Some event types are stochastically excited or
inhibited—in the sense of having their probabilities elevated or decreased—by
patterns in the sequence of previous events. Discovering such patterns can help
us predict which type of event will happen next and when. We model streams
of discrete events in continuous time, by constructing a neurally self-modulating
multivariate point process in which the intensities of multiple event types evolve
according to a novel continuous-time LSTM. This generative model allows past
events to influence the future in complex and realistic ways, by conditioning future
event intensities on the hidden state of a recurrent neural network that has consumed the stream of past events. Our model has desirable qualitative properties.
It achieves competitive likelihood and predictive accuracy on real and synthetic
datasets, including under missing-data conditions.

1

Introduction

Some events in the world are correlated. A single event, or a pattern of events, may help to cause
or prevent future events. We are interested in learning the distribution of sequences of events (and
in future work, the causal structure of these sequences). The ability to discover correlations among
events is crucial to accurately predict the future of a sequence given its past, i.e., which events are
likely to happen next and when they will happen.
We specifically focus on sequences of discrete events in continuous time (“event streams”). Modeling such sequences seems natural and useful in many applied domains:
• Medical events. Each patient has a sequence of acute incidents, doctor’s visits, tests, diagnoses, and medications. By learning from previous patients what sequences tend to look
like, we could predict a new patient’s future from their past.
• Consumer behavior. Each online consumer has a sequence of online interactions. By modeling the distribution of sequences, we can learn purchasing patterns. Buying cookies may
temporarily depress purchases of all desserts, yet increase the probability of buying milk.
• “Quantified self” data. Some individuals use cellphone apps to record their behaviors—
eating, traveling, working, sleeping, waking. By anticipating behaviors, an app could perform helpful supportive actions, including issuing reminders and placing advance orders.
• Social media actions. Previous posts, shares, comments, messages, and likes by a set of
users are predictive of their future actions.
• Other event streams arise in news, animal behavior, dialogue, music, etc.
A basic model for event streams is the Poisson process (Palm, 1943), which assumes that events
occur independently of one another. In a non-homogenous Poisson process, the (infinitesimal)
probability of an event happening at time t may vary with t, but it is still independent of other events.
A Hawkes process (Hawkes, 1971; Liniger, 2009) supposes that past events can temporarily raise
the probability of future events, assuming that such excitation is ¬ positive, ­ additive over the past
events, and ® exponentially decaying with time.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

