Learning from Complementary Labels
Takashi Ishida1,2,3 Gang Niu2,3 Weihua Hu2,3 Masashi Sugiyama3,2
1
Sumitomo Mitsui Asset Management, Tokyo, Japan
2
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
3
RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan
{ishida@ms., gang@ms., hu@ms., sugi@}k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Collecting labeled data is costly and thus a critical bottleneck in real-world classification tasks. To mitigate this problem, we propose a novel setting, namely learning from complementary labels for multi-class classification. A complementary
label specifies a class that a pattern does not belong to. Collecting complementary
labels would be less laborious than collecting ordinary labels, since users do not
have to carefully choose the correct class from a long list of candidate classes.
However, complementary labels are less informative than ordinary labels and thus
a suitable approach is needed to better learn from them. In this paper, we show
that an unbiased estimator to the classification risk can be obtained only from
complementarily labeled data, if a loss function satisfies a particular symmetric
condition. We derive estimation error bounds for the proposed method and prove
that the optimal parametric convergence rate is achieved. We further show that
learning from complementary labels can be easily combined with learning from
ordinary labels (i.e., ordinary supervised learning), providing a highly practical
implementation of the proposed method. Finally, we experimentally demonstrate
the usefulness of the proposed methods.

1

Introduction

In ordinary supervised classification problems, each training pattern is equipped with a label which
specifies the class the pattern belongs to. Although supervised classifier training is effective, labeling
training patterns is often expensive and takes a lot of time. For this reason, learning from less
expensive data has been extensively studied in the last decades, including but not limited to, semisupervised learning [4, 38, 37, 13, 1, 21, 27, 20, 35, 16, 18], learning from pairwise/triple-wise
constraints [34, 12, 6, 33, 25], and positive-unlabeled learning [7, 11, 32, 2, 8, 9, 26, 17].
In this paper, we consider another weakly supervised classification scenario with less expensive
data: instead of any ordinary class label, only a complementary label which specifies a class that
the pattern does not belong to is available. If the number of classes is large, choosing the correct
class label from many candidate classes is laborious, while choosing one of the incorrect class
labels would be much easier and thus less costly. In the binary classification setup, learning with
complementary labels is equivalent to learning with ordinary labels, because complementary label 1
(i.e., not class 1) immediately means ordinary label 2. On the other hand, in K-class classification
for K > 2, complementary labels are less informative than ordinary labels because complementary
label 1 only means either of the ordinary labels 2, 3, . . . , K.
The complementary classification problem may be solved by the method of learning from partial labels [5], where multiple candidate class labels are provided to each training pattern—complementary
label y can be regarded as an extreme case of partial labels given to all K 1 classes other than class
y. Another possibility to solve the complementary classification problem is to consider a multi-label
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

