Sharpness, Restart and Acceleration

Vincent Roulet
INRIA, ENS
Paris France
vincent.roulet@inria.fr

Alexandre d’Aspremont
CNRS, ENS
Paris France
aspremon@ens.fr

Abstract
The Łojasiewicz inequality shows that sharpness bounds on the minimum of convex
optimization problems hold almost generically. Sharpness directly controls the
performance of restart schemes, as observed by Nemirovskii and Nesterov [1985].
The constants quantifying error bounds are of course unobservable, but we show
that optimal restart strategies are robust, and searching for the best scheme only
increases the complexity by a logarithmic factor compared to the optimal bound.
Overall then, restart schemes generically accelerate accelerated methods.

Introduction
We study convex optimization problems of the form
minimize f (x)

(P)

where f is a convex function defined on Rn . The complexity of these problems using first order
methods is generically controlled by smoothness assumptions on f such as Lipschitz continuity of its
gradient. Additional assumptions such as strong convexity or uniform convexity provide respectively
linear [Nesterov, 2013b] and faster polynomial [Juditski and Nesterov, 2014] rates of convergence.
However, these assumptions are often too restrictive to be applied. Here, we make a much weaker and
generic assumption that describes the sharpness of the function around its minimizers by constants
µ ≥ 0 and r ≥ 1 such that
µ
d(x, X ∗ )r ≤ f (x) − f ∗ , for every x ∈ K,
(Sharp)
r
where f ∗ is the minimum of f , K ⊂ Rn is a compact set, d(x, X ∗ ) = miny∈X ∗ kx − yk is the
distance from x to the set X ∗ ⊂ K of minimizers of f 1 for the Euclidean norm k · k. This defines a
lower bound on the function around its minimizers: for r = 1, f shows a kink around its minimizers
and the larger is r the flatter is the function around its minimizers. We tackle this property by restart
schemes of classical convex optimization algorithms.
Sharpness assumption (Sharp) is better known as a Hölderian error bound on the distance to the set
of minimizers. Hoffman [Hoffman, 1952] first introduced error bounds to study system of linear
inequalities. Natural extensions were then developed for convex optimization [Robinson, 1975;
Mangasarian, 1985; Auslender and Crouzeix, 1988], notably through the concept of sharp minima
[Polyak, 1979; Burke and Ferris, 1993; Burke and Deng, 2002]. But the most striking discovery was
made by Łojasiewicz [Łojasiewicz, 1963, 1993] who proved inequality (Sharp) for real analytic and
subanalytic functions. It has then been extended to non-smooth subanalytic convex functions by
Bolte et al. [2007]. Overall, since (Sharp) essentially measures the sharpness of minimizers, it holds
somewhat generically. On the other hand, this inequality is purely descriptive as we have no hope of
ever observing either r or µ, and deriving adaptive schemes is crucial to ensure practical relevance.
1

We assume the problem feasible, i.e. X ∗ 6= ∅.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

