GP CaKe: Effective brain connectivity with causal
kernels
Luca Ambrogioni
Radboud University
l.ambrogioni@donders.ru.nl

Max Hinne
Radboud University
m.hinne@donders.ru.nl

Marcel A. J. van Gerven
Radboud University
m.vangerven@donders.ru.nl

Eric Maris
Radboud University
e.maris@donders.ru.nl

Abstract
A fundamental goal in network neuroscience is to understand how activity in one
brain region drives activity elsewhere, a process referred to as effective connectivity.
Here we propose to model this causal interaction using integro-differential equations and causal kernels that allow for a rich analysis of effective connectivity. The
approach combines the tractability and flexibility of autoregressive modeling with
the biophysical interpretability of dynamic causal modeling. The causal kernels are
learned nonparametrically using Gaussian process regression, yielding an efficient
framework for causal inference. We construct a novel class of causal covariance
functions that enforce the desired properties of the causal kernels, an approach
which we call GP CaKe. By construction, the model and its hyperparameters have
biophysical meaning and are therefore easily interpretable. We demonstrate the
efficacy of GP CaKe on a number of simulations and give an example of a realistic
application on magnetoencephalography (MEG) data.

1

Introduction

In recent years, substantial effort was dedicated to the study of the network properties of neural
systems, ranging from individual neurons to macroscopic brain areas. It has become commonplace to
describe the brain as a network that may be further understood by considering either its anatomical
(static) scaffolding, the functional dynamics that reside on top of that or the causal influence that
the network nodes exert on one another [1–3]. The latter is known as effective connectivity and has
inspired a surge of data analysis methods that can be used to estimate the information flow between
neural sources from their electrical or haemodynamic activity[2, 4]. In electrophysiology, the most
popular connectivity methods are variations on the autoregressive (AR) framework [5]. Specifically,
Granger causality (GC) and related methods, such as partial directed coherence and directed transfer
function, have been successfully applied to many kinds of neuroscientific data [6, 7]. These methods
can be either parametric or non-parametric, but are not based on a specific biophysical model [8, 9].
Consequently, the connectivity estimates obtained from these methods are only statistical in nature
and cannot be directly interpreted in terms of biophysical interactions [10]. This contrasts with the
framework of dynamic causal modeling (DCM), which allows for Bayesian inference (using Bayes
factors) with respect to biophysical models of interacting neuronal populations [11]. These models
are usually formulated in terms of either deterministic or stochastic differential equations, in which
the effective connectivity between neuronal populations depends on a series of scalar parameters
that specify the strength of the interactions and the conduction delays [12]. DCMs are usually
less flexible than AR models since they depend on an appropriate parametrization of the effective
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

