Context Selection for Embedding Models

Li-Ping Liu∗
Tufts University

Francisco J. R. Ruiz
Columbia University
University of Cambridge

Susan Athey
Stanford University

David M. Blei
Columbia University

Abstract
Word embeddings are an effective tool to analyze language. They have been
recently extended to model other types of data beyond text, such as items in
recommendation systems. Embedding models consider the probability of a target
observation (a word or an item) conditioned on the elements in the context (other
words or items). In this paper, we show that conditioning on all the elements in the
context is not optimal. Instead, we model the probability of the target conditioned
on a learned subset of the elements in the context. We use amortized variational
inference to automatically choose this subset. Compared to standard embedding
models, this method improves predictions and the quality of the embeddings.

1

Introduction

Word embeddings are a powerful model to capture latent semantic structure of language. They
can capture the co-occurrence patterns of words (Bengio et al., 2006; Mikolov et al., 2013a,b,c;
Pennington et al., 2014; Mnih and Kavukcuoglu, 2013; Levy and Goldberg, 2014; Vilnis and
McCallum, 2015; Arora et al., 2016), which allows for reasoning about word usage and meaning
(Harris, 1954; Firth, 1957; Rumelhart et al., 1986). The ideas of word embeddings have been extended
to other types of high-dimensional data beyond text, such as items in a supermarket or movies in
a recommendation system (Liang et al., 2016; Barkan and Koenigstein, 2016), with the goal of
capturing the co-occurrence patterns of objects. Here, we focus on exponential family embeddings
(EFE) (Rudolph et al., 2016), a method that encompasses many existing methods for embeddings and
opens the door to bringing expressive probabilistic modeling (Bishop, 2006; Murphy, 2012) to the
problem of learning distributed representations.
In embedding models, the object of interest is the conditional probability of a target given its context.
For instance, in text, the target corresponds to a word in a given position and the context are the words
in a window around it. For an embedding model of items in a supermarket, the target corresponds to
an item in a basket and the context are the other items purchased in the same shopping trip.
In this paper, we show that conditioning on all elements of the context is not optimal. Intuitively,
this is because not all objects (words or items) necessarily interact with each other, though they may
appear together as target/context pairs. For instance, in shopping data, the probability of purchasing
chocolates should be independent of whether bathroom tissue is in the context, even if the latter is
actually purchased in the same shopping trip.
With this in mind, we build a generalization of the EFE model (Rudolph et al., 2016) that relaxes
the assumption that the target depends on all elements in the context. Rather, our model considers
that the target depends only on a subset of the elements in the context. We refer to our approach as
∗

Li-Ping Liu’s contribution was made when he was a postdoctoral researcher at Columbia University.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

