Dual Discriminator Generative Adversarial Nets
Tu Dinh Nguyen, Trung Le, Hung Vu, Dinh Phung
Deakin University, Geelong, Australia
Centre for Pattern Recognition and Data Analytics
{tu.nguyen, trung.l, hungv, dinh.phung}@deakin.edu.au

Abstract
We propose in this paper a novel approach to tackle the problem of mode collapse
encountered in generative adversarial network (GAN). Our idea is intuitive but
proven to be very effective, especially in addressing some key limitations of GAN.
In essence, it combines the Kullback-Leibler (KL) and reverse KL divergences into
a unified objective function, thus it exploits the complementary statistical properties
from these divergences to effectively diversify the estimated density in capturing
multi-modes. We term our method dual discriminator generative adversarial nets
(D2GAN) which, unlike GAN, has two discriminators; and together with a generator, it also has the analogy of a minimax game, wherein a discriminator rewards high
scores for samples from data distribution whilst another discriminator, conversely,
favoring data from the generator, and the generator produces data to fool both two
discriminators. We develop theoretical analysis to show that, given the maximal
discriminators, optimizing the generator of D2GAN reduces to minimizing both
KL and reverse KL divergences between data distribution and the distribution
induced from the data generated by the generator, hence effectively avoiding the
mode collapsing problem. We conduct extensive experiments on synthetic and
real-world large-scale datasets (MNIST, CIFAR-10, STL-10, ImageNet), where we
have made our best effort to compare our D2GAN with the latest state-of-the-art
GAN’s variants in comprehensive qualitative and quantitative evaluations. The
experimental results demonstrate the competitive and superior performance of our
approach in generating good quality and diverse samples over baselines, and the
capability of our method to scale up to ImageNet database.

1

Introduction

Generative models are a subarea of research that has been rapidly growing in recent years, and
successfully applied in a wide range of modern real-world applications (e.g., see chapter 20 in [9]).
Their common approach is to address the density estimation problem where one aims to learn a
model distribution pmodel that approximates the true, but unknown, data distribution pdata . Methods in
this approach deal with two fundamental problems. First, the learning behaviors and performance
of generative models depend on the choice of objective functions to train them [29, 15]. The most
widely-used objective, considered the de-facto standard one, is to follow the principle of maximum
likelihood estimate that seeks model parameters to maximize the likelihood of training data. This is
equivalent to minimizing the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between data and model distributions:
DKL (pdata kpmodel ). It has been observed that this minimization tends to result in pmodel that covers
multiple modes of pdata , but may produce completely unseen and potentially undesirable samples [29].
By contrast, another approach is to swap the arguments and instead, minimize: DKL (pmodel kpdata ),
which is usually referred to as the reverse KL divergence [23, 11, 15, 29]. It is observed that
optimization towards the reverse KL divergence criteria mimics the mode-seeking process where
pmodel concentrates on a single mode of pdata while ignoring other modes, known as the problem of
mode collapse. These behaviors are well-studied in [29, 15, 11].
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

