Beyond normality: Learning sparse probabilistic
graphical models in the non-Gaussian setting

Rebecca E. Morrison
MIT
rmorriso@mit.edu

Ricardo Baptista
MIT
rsb@mit.edu

Youssef Marzouk
MIT
ymarz@mit.edu

Abstract
We present an algorithm to identify sparse dependence structure in continuous
and non-Gaussian probability distributions, given a corresponding set of data. The
conditional independence structure of an arbitrary distribution can be represented
as an undirected graph (or Markov random field), but most algorithms for learning
this structure are restricted to the discrete or Gaussian cases. Our new approach
allows for more realistic and accurate descriptions of the distribution in question,
and in turn better estimates of its sparse Markov structure. Sparsity in the graph is
of interest as it can accelerate inference, improve sampling methods, and reveal
important dependencies between variables. The algorithm relies on exploiting the
connection between the sparsity of the graph and the sparsity of transport maps,
which deterministically couple one probability measure to another.

1

Undirected probabilistic graphical models

Given n samples from the joint probability distribution of some random variables X1 , . . . , Xp , a
common goal is to discover the underlying Markov random field. This field is specified by an
undirected graph G, comprising the set of vertices V = {1, . . . , p} and the set of edges E. The edge
set E encodes the conditional independence structure of the distribution, i.e., ejk ∈
/ E ⇐⇒ Xj ⊥⊥
Xk | XV \{jk} . Finding the edges of the graph is useful for several reasons: knowledge of conditional
independence relations can accelerate inference and improve sampling methods, as well as illuminate
structure underlying the process that generated the data samples. This problem—identifying an
undirected graph given samples—is quite well studied for Gaussian or discrete distributions. In the
Gaussian setting, the inverse covariance, or precision, matrix precisely encodes the sparsity of the
graph. That is, a zero appears in the jk-th entry of the precision if and only if variables Xj and Xk
are conditionally independent given the rest. Estimation of the support of the precision matrix is often
achieved using a maximum likelihood estimate with `1 penalties. Coordinate descent (glasso) [4] and
neighborhood selection [14] algorithms can be consistent for sparse recovery with few samples, i.e.,
p > n. In the discrete setting, [12] showed that for some particular graph structure, the support of a
generalized covariance matrix encodes the conditional independence structure of the graph, while
[21] employed sparse `1 -penalized logistic regression to identify Ising Markov random fields.
Many physical processes, however, generate data that are continuous but non-Gaussian. One example
is satellite images of cloud cover formation, which may greatly impact weather conditions and
climate [25, 20]. Other examples include biological processes such as bacteria growth [5], heartbeat
behavior [19], and transport in biological tissues [9]. Normality assumptions about the data may
prevent the detection of important conditional dependencies. Some approaches have allowed for
non-Gaussianity, such as the nonparanormal approach of [11, 10], which uses copula functions to
estimate a joint non-Gaussian density while preserving conditional independence. However, this
approach is still restricted by the choice of copula function, and as far as we know, no fully general
approach is yet available. Our goal in this work is to consistently estimate graph structure when
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

