Convergent Block Coordinate Descent for Training
Tikhonov Regularized Deep Neural Networks

Ziming Zhang and Matthew Brand
Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL)
Cambridge, MA 02139-1955
{zzhang, brand}@merl.com

Abstract
By lifting the ReLU function into a higher dimensional space, we develop a smooth
multi-convex formulation for training feed-forward deep neural networks (DNNs).
This allows us to develop a block coordinate descent (BCD) training algorithm
consisting of a sequence of numerically well-behaved convex optimizations. Using
ideas from proximal point methods in convex analysis, we prove that this BCD
algorithm will converge globally to a stationary point with R-linear convergence
rate of order one. In experiments with the MNIST database, DNNs trained with
this BCD algorithm consistently yielded better test-set error rates than identical
DNN architectures trained via all the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) variants in
the Caffe toolbox.

1

Introduction

Feed-forward deep neural networks (DNNs) are function approximators wherein weighted combinations inputs are filtered through nonlinear activation functions that are organized into a cascade of
fully connected (FC) hidden layers. In recent years DNNs have become the tool of choice for many
research areas such as machine translation and computer vision.
The objective function for training a DNN is highly non-convex, leading to numerous obstacles
to global optimization [10], notably proliferation of saddle points [11] and prevalence of local
extrema that offer poor generalization off the training sample [8]. These observations have motivated
regularization schemes to smooth or simplify the energy surface, either explicitly such as weight
decay [23] or implicitly such as dropout [32] and batch normalization [19], so that the solutions are
more robust, i.e. better generalized to test data.
Training algorithms face many numerically difficulties that can make it difficult to even find a local
optimum. One of the well-known issues is so-called vanishing gradient in back propagation (chain
rule differentiation) [18], i.e. the long dependency chains between hidden layers (and corresponding
variables) tend to drive gradients to zero far from the optimum. This issue leads to very slow
improvements of the model parameters, an issue that becomes more and more serious in deeper
networks [16]. The vanishing gradient problem can be partially ameliorated by using non-saturating
activation functions such as rectified linear unit (ReLU) [25], and network architectures that have
shorter input-to-output paths such as ResNet [17]. The saddle-point problem has been addressed
by switching from deterministic gradient descent to stochastic gradient descent (SGD), which can
achieve weak convergence in probability [6]. Classic proximal-point optimization methods such as
the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) have also shown promise for DNN training
[34; 41], but in the DNN setting their convergence properties remain unknown.
Contributions: In this paper,
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

