Lower bounds on the robustness to adversarial
perturbations
Jonathan Peck1,2 , Joris Roels2,3 , Bart Goossens3 , and Yvan Saeys1,2
1

Department of Applied Mathematics, Computer Science and Statistics, Ghent University, Ghent, 9000, Belgium
2
Data Mining and Modeling for Biomedicine, VIB Inflammation Research Center, Ghent, 9052, Belgium
3
Department of Telecommunications and Information Processing, Ghent University, Ghent, 9000, Belgium

Abstract
The input-output mappings learned by state-of-the-art neural networks are significantly discontinuous. It is possible to cause a neural network used for image
recognition to misclassify its input by applying very specific, hardly perceptible
perturbations to the input, called adversarial perturbations. Many hypotheses have
been proposed to explain the existence of these peculiar samples as well as several
methods to mitigate them, but a proven explanation remains elusive. In this work,
we take steps towards a formal characterization of adversarial perturbations by
deriving lower bounds on the magnitudes of perturbations necessary to change the
classification of neural networks. The proposed bounds can be computed efficiently,
requiring time at most linear in the number of parameters and hyperparameters
of the model for any given sample. This makes them suitable for use in model
selection, when one wishes to find out which of several proposed classifiers is
most robust to adversarial perturbations. They may also be used as a basis for
developing techniques to increase the robustness of classifiers, since they enjoy the
theoretical guarantee that no adversarial perturbation could possibly be any smaller
than the quantities provided by the bounds. We experimentally verify the bounds
on the MNIST and CIFAR-10 data sets and find no violations. Additionally, the
experimental results suggest that very small adversarial perturbations may occur
with non-zero probability on natural samples.

1

Introduction

Despite their big successes in various AI tasks, neural networks are basically black boxes: there is no
clear fundamental explanation how they are able to outperform the more classical approaches. This
has led to the identification of several unexpected and counter-intuitive properties of neural networks.
In particular, Szegedy et al. [2014] discovered that the input-output mappings learned by state-of-theart neural networks are significantly discontinuous. It is possible to cause a neural network used for
image recognition to misclassify its input by applying a very specific, hardly perceptible perturbation
to the input. Szegedy et al. [2014] call these perturbations adversarial perturbations, and the inputs
resulting from applying them to natural samples are called adversarial examples.
In this paper, we hope to shed more light on the nature and cause of adversarial examples by
deriving lower bounds on the magnitudes of perturbations necessary to change the classification of
neural network classifiers. Such lower bounds are indispensable for developing rigorous methods
that increase the robustness of classifiers without sacrificing accuracy. Since the bounds enjoy the
theoretical guarantee that no adversarial perturbation could ever be any smaller, a method which
increases these lower bounds potentially makes the classifier more robust. They may also aid model
selection: if the bounds can be computed efficiently, then one can use them to compare different
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

