Tensor Biclustering

Soheil Feizi
Stanford University
sfeizi@stanford.edu

Hamid Javadi
Stanford University
hrhakim@stanford.edu

David Tse
Stanford University
dntse@stanford.edu

Abstract
Consider a dataset where data is collected on multiple features of multiple individuals over multiple times. This type of data can be represented as a three dimensional
individual/feature/time tensor and has become increasingly prominent in various
areas of science. The tensor biclustering problem computes a subset of individuals
and a subset of features whose signal trajectories over time lie in a low-dimensional
subspace, modeling similarity among the signal trajectories while allowing different scalings across different individuals or different features. We study the
information-theoretic limit of this problem under a generative model. Moreover,
we propose an efficient spectral algorithm to solve the tensor biclustering problem
and analyze its achievability bound in an asymptotic regime. Finally, we show the
efficiency of our proposed method in several synthetic and real datasets.

1

Introduction

Let T ∈ Rn1 ×n2 be a data matrix whose rows and columns represent individuals and features,
respectively. Given T, the matrix biclustering problem aims to find a subset of individuals (i.e.,
J1 ⊂ {1, 2, ..., n1 }) which exhibit similar values across a subset of features (i.e., J2 ⊂ {1, 2, ..., n2 })
(Figure 1-a). The matrix biclustering problem has been studied extensively in machine learning and
statistics and is closely related to problems of sub-matrix localization, planted clique and community
detection [1, 2, 3].
In modern datasets, however, instead of collecting data on every individual-feature pair at a single
time, we may collect data at multiple times. One can visualize a trajectory over time for each
individual-feature pair. This type of datasets has become increasingly prominent in different areas of
science. For example, the roadmap epigenomics dataset [4] provides multiple histon modification
marks for genome-tissue pairs, the genotype-tissue expression dataset [5] provides expression data
on multiple genes for individual-tissue pairs, while there have been recent efforts to collect various
omics data in individuals at different times [6].
Suppose we have n1 individuals, n2 features, and we collect data for every individual-feature pair
at m different times. This data can be represented as a three dimensional tensor T ∈ Rn1 ×n2 ×m
(Figure 1-b). The tensor biclustering problem aims to compute a subset of individuals and a subset
of features whose trajectories are highly similar. Similarity is modeled as the trajectories as lying
in a low-dimensional (say one-dimensional) subspace (Figure 1-d). This definition allows different
scalings across different individuals or different features, and is important in many applications
such as in omics datasets [6] because individual-feature trajectories often have their own intrinsic
scalings. In particular, at each time the individual-feature data matrix may not exhibit a matrix
bicluster separately. This means that repeated applications of matrix biclustering cannot solve the
tensor biclustering problem. Moreover, owing to the same reason, trajectories in a bicluster can
have large distances among themselves (Figure 1-d). Thus, a distance-based clustering of signal
trajectories is likely to fail as well.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

