Online Learning with Transductive Regret
Mehryar Mohri
Courant Institute and Google Research
New York, NY
mohri@cims.nyu.edu

Scott Yang⇤
D. E. Shaw & Co.
New York, NY
yangs@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
We study online learning with the general notion of transductive regret, that is
regret with modification rules applying to expert sequences (as opposed to single
experts) that are representable by weighted finite-state transducers. We show how
transductive regret generalizes existing notions of regret, including: (1) external
regret; (2) internal regret; (3) swap regret; and (4) conditional swap regret. We
present a general and efficient online learning algorithm for minimizing transductive
regret. We further extend that to design efficient algorithms for the time-selection
and sleeping expert settings. A by-product of our study is an algorithm for swap
regret, which, under mild assumptions, is more efficient than existing ones, and a
substantially more efficient algorithm for time selection swap regret.

1

Introduction

Online learning is a general framework for sequential prediction. Within that framework, a widely
adopted setting is that of prediction with expert advice [Littlestone and Warmuth, 1994, Cesa-Bianchi
and Lugosi, 2006], where the algorithm maintains a distribution over a set of experts. At each round,
the loss assigned to each expert is revealed. The algorithm then incurs the expected value of these
losses for its current distribution and next updates its distribution.
The standard benchmark for the algorithm in this scenario is the external regret, that is the difference
between its cumulative loss and that of the best (static) expert in hindsight. However, while this
benchmark is useful in a variety of contexts and has led to the design of numerous effective online
learning algorithms, it may not constitute a useful criterion in common cases where no single fixed
expert performs well over the full course of the algorithm’s interaction with the environment. This
had led to several extensions of the notion of external regret, along two main directions.
The first is an extension of the notion of regret so that the learner’s algorithm is compared against
a competitor class consisting of dynamic sequences of experts. Research in this direction started
with the work of Herbster and Warmuth [1998] on tracking the best expert, who studied the scenario
of learning against the best sequence of experts with at most k switches. This work has been
subsequently improved [Monteleoni and Jaakkola, 2003], generalized [Vovk, 1999, Cesa-Bianchi
et al., 2012, Koolen and de Rooij, 2013], and modified [Hazan and Seshadhri, 2009, Adamskiy et al.,
2012, Daniely et al., 2015]. More recently, an efficient algorithm with favorable regret guarantees has
been given for the general case of a competitor class consisting of sequences of experts represented by
a (weighted) finite automaton [Mohri and Yang, 2017, 2018]. This includes as special cases previous
competitor classes considered in the literature.
The second direction is to consider competitor classes based on modifications of the learner’s sequence
of actions. This approach began with the notion of internal regret [Foster and Vohra, 1997, Hart and
Mas-Colell, 2000], which considers how much better an algorithm could have performed if it had
⇤

Work done at the Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

