Learning Identifiable Gaussian Bayesian Networks in
Polynomial Time and Sample Complexity
Asish Ghoshal and Jean Honorio
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN - 47906
{aghoshal, jhonorio}@purdue.edu

Abstract
Learning the directed acyclic graph (DAG) structure of a Bayesian network from observational data is a notoriously difficult problem for which many non-identifiability
and hardness results are known. In this paper we propose a provably polynomialtime algorithm for learning sparse Gaussian Bayesian networks with equal noise
variance — a class of Bayesian networks for which the DAG structure can be
uniquely identified from observational data — under high-dimensional settings.
We show that O(k 4 log p) number of samples suffices for our method to recover
the true DAG structure with high probability, where p is the number of variables
and k is the maximum Markov blanket size. We obtain our theoretical guarantees
under a condition called restricted strong adjacency faithfulness (RSAF), which is
strictly weaker than strong faithfulness — a condition that other methods based on
conditional independence testing need for their success. The sample complexity of
our method matches the information-theoretic limits in terms of the dependence on
p. We validate our theoretical findings through synthetic experiments.

1

Introduction and Related Work

Motivation. The problem of learning the directed acyclic graph (DAG) structure of Bayesian
networks (BNs) in general, and Gaussian Bayesian networks (GBNs) — or equivalently linear
Gaussian structural equation models (SEMs) — in particular, from observational data has a long
history in the statistics and machine learning community. This is, in part, motivated by the desire to
uncover causal relationships between entities in domains as diverse as finance, genetics, medicine,
neuroscience and artificial intelligence, to name a few. Although in general, the DAG structure
of a GBN or linear Gaussian SEM cannot be uniquely identified from purely observational data
(i.e., multiple structures can encode the same conditional independence relationships present in the
observed data set), under certain restrictions on the generative model, the DAG structure can be
uniquely determined. Furthermore, the problem of learning the structure of BNs exactly is known
to be NP-complete even when the number of parents of a node is at most q, for q > 1, [1]. It is
also known that approximating the log-likelihood to a constant factor, even when the model class is
restricted to polytrees with at-most two parents per node, is NP-hard [2].
Peters and Bühlmann [3] recently showed that if the noise variances are the same, then the structure
of a GBN can be uniquely identified from observational data. As observed by them, this “assumption
of equal error variances seems natural for applications with variables from a similar domain and is
commonly used in time series models”. Unfortunately, even for the equal noise-variance case, no
polynomial time algorithm is known.
Contribution. In this paper we develop a polynomial time algorithm for learning a subclass of
BNs exactly: sparse GBNs with equal noise variance. This problem has been considered by [3]
who proposed an exponential time algorithm based on `0 -penalized maximum likelihood estimation
(MLE), and a heuristic greedy search method without any guarantees. Our algorithm involves
estimating a p-dimensional inverse covariance matrix and solving 2(p 1) at-most-k-dimensional
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

