Deliberation Networks: Sequence Generation
Beyond One-Pass Decoding ∗

1

Yingce Xia, 2 Fei Tian, 3 Lijun Wu, 1 Jianxin Lin, 2 Tao Qin, 1 Nenghai Yu, 2 Tie-Yan Liu
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
3
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
1
yingce.xia@gmail.com, linjx@mail.ustc.edu.cn, ynh@ustc.edu.cn
2
{fetia,taoqin,tie-yan.liu}@microsoft.com, 3 wulijun3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
The encoder-decoder framework has achieved promising progress for many sequence generation tasks, including machine translation, text summarization, dialog
system, image captioning, etc. Such a framework adopts an one-pass forward process while decoding and generating a sequence, but lacks the deliberation process:
A generated sequence is directly used as final output without further polishing.
However, deliberation is a common behavior in human’s daily life like reading
news and writing papers/articles/books. In this work, we introduce the deliberation
process into the encoder-decoder framework and propose deliberation networks for
sequence generation. A deliberation network has two levels of decoders, where the
first-pass decoder generates a raw sequence and the second-pass decoder polishes
and refines the raw sentence with deliberation. Since the second-pass deliberation
decoder has global information about what the sequence to be generated might
be, it has the potential to generate a better sequence by looking into future words
in the raw sentence. Experiments on neural machine translation and text summarization demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed deliberation networks. On
the WMT 2014 English-to-French translation task, our model establishes a new
state-of-the-art BLEU score of 41.5.

1

Introduction

The neural network based encoder-decoder framework has been widely adopted for sequence generation tasks, including neural machine translation [1], text summarization [19], image captioning [27],
etc. In such a framework, the encoder encodes the source input x with length m into a sequence of
vectors {h1 , h2 , · · · , hm }. The decoder, which is typically an RNN, generates an output sequence
word by word2 based on the source-side vector representations and previously generated words. The
attention mechanism [1, 35], which dynamically attends to different parts of x while generating
each target-side word, is integrated into the encoder-decoder framework to improve the quality of
generating long sequences [1].
Although the framework has achieved great success, one concern is that while generating one word,
one can only leverage the generated words but not the future words un-generated so far. That is,
when the decoder generates the t-th word yt , only y<t can be used, while the possible words y>t are
not explicitly considered. In contrast, in real-word human cognitive processes, global information,
including both the past and the future parts, is leveraged in an iterative polishing process. Here are
two examples: (1) Consider the situation that we are reading a sentence and meet an unknown word
∗
2

This work was done when Yingce Xia, Lijun Wu and Jianxin Lin were interns at Microsoft Research.
Throughout this work, a word refers to the basic unit in a sequence.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

