VAE Learning via Stein Variational Gradient Descent

Yunchen Pu, Zhe Gan, Ricardo Henao, Chunyuan Li, Shaobo Han, Lawrence Carin
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University
{yp42, zg27, r.henao, cl319, shaobo.han, lcarin}@duke.edu

Abstract
A new method for learning variational autoencoders (VAEs) is developed, based
on Stein variational gradient descent. A key advantage of this approach is that
one need not make parametric assumptions about the form of the encoder distribution. Performance is further enhanced by integrating the proposed encoder with
importance sampling. Excellent performance is demonstrated across multiple unsupervised and semi-supervised problems, including semi-supervised analysis of
the ImageNet data, demonstrating the scalability of the model to large datasets.

1

Introduction

There has been significant recent interest in the variational autoencoder (VAE) [11], a generalization
of the original autoencoder [33]. VAEs are typically trained by maximizing a variational lower
bound of the data log-likelihood [2, 10, 11, 12, 18, 21, 22, 23, 30, 34, 35]. To compute the variational
expression, one must be able to explicitly evaluate the associated distribution of latent features, i.e.,
the stochastic encoder must have an explicit analytic form. This requirement has motivated design
of encoders in which a neural network maps input data to the parameters of a simple distribution,
e.g., Gaussian distributions have been widely utilized [1, 11, 27, 25].
The Gaussian assumption may be too restrictive in some cases [28]. Consequently, recent work has
considered normalizing flows [28], in which random variables from (for example) a Gaussian distribution are fed through a series of nonlinear functions to increase the complexity and representational
power of the encoder. However, because of the need to explicitly evaluate the distribution within the
variational expression used when learning, these nonlinear functions must be relatively simple, e.g.,
planar flows. Further, one may require many layers to achieve the desired representational power.
We present a new approach for training a VAE. We recognize that the need for an explicit form for
the encoder distribution is only a consequence of the fact that learning is performed based on the
variational lower bound. For inference (e.g., at test time), we do not need an explicit form for the
distribution of latent features, we only require fast sampling from the encoder. Consequently, rather
than directly employing the traditional variational lower bound, we seek to minimize the KullbackLeibler (KL) distance between the true posterior of model and latent parameters. Learning then
becomes a novel application of Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD) [15], constituting its first
application to training VAEs. We extend SVGD with importance sampling [1], and also demonstrate
its novel use in semi-supervised VAE learning.
The concepts developed here are demonstrated on a wide range of unsupervised and semi-supervised
learning problems, including a large-scale semi-supervised analysis of the ImageNet dataset. These
experimental results illustrate the advantage of SVGD-based VAE training, relative to traditional
approaches. Moreover, the results demonstrate further improvements realized by integrating SVGD
with importance sampling.
Independent work by [3, 6] proposed the similar models, in which the aurthers incorporated SVGD
with VAEs [3] and importance sampling [6] for unsupervised learning tasks.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

