Gaussian process based nonlinear latent structure
discovery in multivariate spike train data

Anqi Wu, Nicholas A. Roy, Stephen Keeley, & Jonathan W. Pillow
Princeton Neuroscience Institute
Princeton University

Abstract
A large body of recent work focuses on methods for extracting low-dimensional
latent structure from multi-neuron spike train data. Most such methods employ
either linear latent dynamics or linear mappings from latent space to log spike
rates. Here we propose a doubly nonlinear latent variable model that can identify
low-dimensional structure underlying apparently high-dimensional spike train data.
We introduce the Poisson Gaussian-Process Latent Variable Model (P-GPLVM),
which consists of Poisson spiking observations and two underlying Gaussian
processes—one governing a temporal latent variable and another governing a set
of nonlinear tuning curves. The use of nonlinear tuning curves enables discovery
of low-dimensional latent structure even when spike responses exhibit high linear
dimensionality (e.g., as found in hippocampal place cell codes). To learn the model
from data, we introduce the decoupled Laplace approximation, a fast approximate inference method that allows us to efficiently optimize the latent path while
marginalizing over tuning curves. We show that this method outperforms previous
Laplace-approximation-based inference methods in both the speed of convergence
and accuracy. We apply the model to spike trains recorded from hippocampal place
cells and show that it compares favorably to a variety of previous methods for latent
structure discovery, including variational auto-encoder (VAE) based methods that
parametrize the nonlinear mapping from latent space to spike rates with a deep
neural network.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in multi-electrode array recording techniques have made it possible to measure
the simultaneous spiking activity of increasingly large neural populations. These datasets have
highlighted the need for robust statistical methods for identifying the latent structure underlying
high-dimensional spike train data, so as to provide insight into the dynamics governing large-scale
activity patterns and the computations they perform [1–4].
Recent work has focused on the development of sophisticated model-based methods that seek to
extract a shared, low-dimensional latent process underlying population spiking activity. These
methods can be roughly categorized on the basis of two basic modeling choices: (1) the dynamics of
the underlying latent variable; and (2) the mapping from latent variable to neural responses. For choice
of dynamics, one popular approach assumes the latent variable is governed by a linear dynamical
system [5–11], while a second assumes that it evolves according to a Gaussian process, relaxing the
linearity assumption and imposing only smoothness in the evolution of the latent state [1, 12–14].
For choice of mapping function, most previous methods have assumed a fixed linear or log-linear
relationship between the latent variable and the mean response level [1, 5–8, 11, 12]. These methods
seek to find a linear embedding of population spiking activity, akin to PCA or factor analysis. In many
cases, however, the relationship between neural activity and the quantity it encodes can be highly
nonlinear. Hippocampal place cells provide an illustrative example: if each discrete location in a 2D
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

