Kernel Feature Selection via
Conditional Covariance Minimization
Jianbo Chen⇤
University of California, Berkeley
jianbochen@berkeley.edu
Martin J. Wainwright
University of California, Berkeley
wainwrig@berkeley.edu

Mitchell Stern⇤
University of California, Berkeley
mitchell@berkeley.edu
Michael I. Jordan
University of California, Berkeley
jordan@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We propose a method for feature selection that employs kernel-based measures
of independence to find a subset of covariates that is maximally predictive of the
response. Building on past work in kernel dimension reduction, we show how to
perform feature selection via a constrained optimization problem involving the
trace of the conditional covariance operator. We prove various consistency results
for this procedure, and also demonstrate that our method compares favorably with
other state-of-the-art algorithms on a variety of synthetic and real data sets.

1

Introduction

Feature selection is an important issue in statistical machine learning, leading to both computational
benefits (lower storage and faster computation) and statistical benefits, including increased model
interpretability. With large data sets becoming ever more prevalent, feature selection has seen
widespread usage across a variety of real-world tasks in recent years, including text classification,
gene selection from microarray data, and face recognition [3, 14, 17]. In this work, we consider
the supervised variant of feature selection, which entails finding a subset of the input features that
explains the output well. This practice can reduce the computational expense of downstream learning
by removing features that are redundant or noisy, while simultaneously providing insight into the
data through the features that remain.
Feature selection algorithms can generally be divided into two groups: those which are agnostic
to the choice of learning algorithm, and those which attempt to find features that optimize the
performance of a specific learning algorithm.1 Kernel methods have been successfully applied under
each of these paradigms in recent work; for instance, see the papers [1, 8, 16, 19, 23, 25, 26, 29].
Kernel feature selection methods have the advantage of capturing nonlinear relationships between the
features and the labels. Many previous approaches are filter methods based on the Hilbert-Schmidt
Independence Criterion (HSIC), as proposed by Gretton et al. [13] as a measure of dependence.
For instance, Song et al. [24, 25] proposed to optimize HSIC with greedy algorithms on features.
Masaeli et al. [19] proposed Hilbert-Schmidt Feature Selection (HSFS), which optimizes HSIC with
a continuous relaxation. In later work, Yamada et al. [29] proposed the HSIC-LASSO, in which the
dual augmented Lagrangian can be used to find a global optimum. There are also wrapper methods
⇤

Equal contribution.
Feature selection algorithms that operate independently of the choice of predictor are referred to as filter
methods. Algorithms tailored to specific predictors can be further divided into wrapper methods, which use
learning algorithms to evaluate features based on their predictive power, and embedded methods, which combine
feature selection and learning into a single problem [14].
1

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

