Triangle Generative Adversarial Networks

Zhe Gan∗ , Liqun Chen∗ , Weiyao Wang, Yunchen Pu, Yizhe Zhang,
Hao Liu, Chunyuan Li, Lawrence Carin
Duke University
zhe.gan@duke.edu

Abstract
A Triangle Generative Adversarial Network (∆-GAN) is developed for semisupervised cross-domain joint distribution matching, where the training data consists of samples from each domain, and supervision of domain correspondence
is provided by only a few paired samples. ∆-GAN consists of four neural networks, two generators and two discriminators. The generators are designed to
learn the two-way conditional distributions between the two domains, while the
discriminators implicitly define a ternary discriminative function, which is trained
to distinguish real data pairs and two kinds of fake data pairs. The generators
and discriminators are trained together using adversarial learning. Under mild
assumptions, in theory the joint distributions characterized by the two generators
concentrate to the data distribution. In experiments, three different kinds of domain pairs are considered, image-label, image-image and image-attribute pairs.
Experiments on semi-supervised image classification, image-to-image translation
and attribute-based image generation demonstrate the superiority of the proposed
approach.

1

Introduction

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [1] have emerged as a powerful framework for learning
generative models of arbitrarily complex data distributions. When trained on datasets of natural
images, significant progress has been made on generating realistic and sharp-looking images [2, 3].
The original GAN formulation was designed to learn the data distribution in one domain. In practice,
one may also be interested in matching two joint distributions. This is an important task, since
mapping data samples from one domain to another has a wide range of applications. For instance,
matching the joint distribution of image-text pairs allows simultaneous image captioning and textconditional image generation [4], while image-to-image translation [5] is another challenging problem
that requires matching the joint distribution of image-image pairs.
In this work, we are interested in designing a GAN framework to match joint distributions. If paired
data are available, a simple approach to achieve this is to train a conditional GAN model [4, 6],
from which a joint distribution is readily manifested and can be matched to the empirical joint
distribution provided by the paired data. However, fully supervised data are often difficult to acquire.
Several methods have been proposed to achieve unsupervised joint distribution matching without
any paired data, including DiscoGAN [7], CycleGAN [8] and DualGAN [9]. Adversarially Learned
Inference (ALI) [10] and Bidirectional GAN (BiGAN) [11] can be readily adapted to this case as
well. Though empirically achieving great success, in principle, there exist infinitely many possible
mapping functions that satisfy the requirement to map a sample from one domain to another. In
order to alleviate this nonidentifiability issue, paired data are needed to provide proper supervision to
inform the model the kind of joint distributions that are desired.
This motivates the proposed Triangle Generative Adversarial Network (∆-GAN), a GAN framework that allows semi-supervised joint distribution matching, where the supervision of domain
∗

Equal contribution.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

