Phase Transitions in the Pooled Data Problem
Jonathan Scarlett and Volkan Cevher
Laboratory for Information and Inference Systems (LIONS)
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
{jonathan.scarlett,volkan.cevher}@epfl.ch

Abstract
In this paper, we study the pooled data problem of identifying the labels associated with a large collection of items, based on a sequence of pooled tests revealing
the counts of each label within the pool. In the noiseless setting, we identify an
exact asymptotic threshold on the required number of tests with optimal decoding, and prove a phase transition between complete success and complete failure.
In addition, we present a novel noisy variation of the problem, and provide an
information-theoretic framework for characterizing the required number of tests
for general random noise models. Our results reveal that noise can make the problem considerably more difficult, with strict increases in the scaling laws even at
low noise levels. Finally, we demonstrate similar behavior in an approximate recovery setting, where a given number of errors is allowed in the decoded labels.

1

Introduction

Consider the following setting: There exists a large population of items, each of which has an
associated label. The labels are initially unknown, and are to be estimated based on pooled tests.
Each pool consists of some subset of the population, and the test outcome reveals the total number
of items corresponding to each label that are present in the pool (but not the individual labels). This
problem, which we refer to as the pooled data problem, was recently introduced in [1,2], and further
studied in [3, 4]. It is of interest in applications such as medical testing, genetics, and learning with
privacy constraints, and has connections to the group testing problem [5] and its linear variants [6,7].
The best known bounds on the required number of tests under optimal decoding were given in [3];
however, the upper and lower bounds therein do not match, and can exhibit a large gap. In this
paper, we completely close these gaps by providing a new lower bound that exactly matches the
upper bound of [3]. These results collectively reveal a phase transition between success and failure,
with the probability of error vanishing when the number of tests exceeds a given threshold, but
tending to one below that threshold. In addition, we explore the novel aspect of random noise in the
measurements, and show that this can significantly increase the required number of tests. Before
summarizing these contributions in more detail, we formally introduce the problem.
1.1

Problem setup

We consider a large population of items [p] = {1, . . . , p}, each of which has an associated label
in [d] = {1, . . . , d}. We let ⇡ = (⇡1 , . . . , ⇡d ) denote a vector containing the proportions of items
having each label, and we assume that the vector of labels itself, = ( 1 , . . . , p ), is uniformly
distributed over the sequences consistent with these proportions:
⇠ Uniform(B(⇡)),

where B(⇡) is the set of length-p sequences whose empirical distribution is ⇡.

(1)

The goal is to recover based on a sequence of pooled tests. The i-th test is represented by a
(i)
(possibly random) vector X (i) 2 {0, 1}p , whose j-th entry Xj indicates whether the j-th item is
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

