Affine-Invariant Online Optimization
and the Low-rank Experts Problem

Tomer Koren
Google Brain
1600 Amphitheatre Pkwy
Mountain View, CA 94043
tkoren@google.com

Roi Livni
Princeton University
35 Olden St.
Princeton, NJ 08540
rlivni@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
We present a new affine-invariant optimization algorithm called Online Lazy Newton.
The regret of Online Lazy Newton is independent of conditioning: the algorithm’s
performance depends on the best possible preconditioning of the problem in
retrospect and on its intrinsic dimensionality. As an application, we√show how
Online Lazy Newton can be used to achieve
√ an optimal regret of order rT for the
low-rank experts problem, improving by a r factor over the previously best known
bound and resolving an open problem posed by Hazan et al. [15].

1

Introduction

In the online convex optimization setting, a learner is faced with a stream of T convex functions
over a bounded convex domain X ⊆ Rd . At each round t the learner gets to observe a single convex
function ft and has to choose a point xt ∈ X. The aim of the learner is to minimize the cumulative
T-round regret, defined as
T
X
t=1

ft (xt ) − min

T
X

x∈X t=1

ft (x).

√
In this very general setting, Online Gradient Descent [25] achieves an optimal regret rate of Θ(GD T),
where G is a bound on the Lipschitz constants of the ft and D is a bound on the diameter of the
domain, both with respect to the Euclidean norm. For simplicity, let us restrict the exposition to linear
losses ft (xt ) = gTt xt , in which case G bounds the maximal Euclidean norm kgt k; it is well known that
the general convex case can be easily reduced to this case.
One often useful way to obtain faster convergence in optimization is to employ preconditioning,
namely to apply a linear transformation P to the gradients before using them to make update steps.
In an online optimization setting, if we have had access to√the best preconditioner in hindsight we
could have achieved a regret rate of the form Θ(inf P G P D P T), where D P is the diameter of the set
P · X and G P is a bound on the norm of the conditioned gradients kP−1 gt k. We shall thus refer to the
quantity G P D P as the conditioning of the problem when a preconditioner P is used.
In many cases, however, it is more natural to directly assume a bound |gTt xt | ≤ C on the magnitude of
the losses rather than assuming the bounds D and G. In this case, the condition number need not
be bounded and typical guarantees of gradient-based methods such as online gradient descent√do
not directly apply. In principle, it is possible to find a preconditioner P such that G P D P = O(C d),
and if one further assumes that the intrinsic dimensionality of the problem (i.e., the rank of the
loss vectors
g1, . . . , gT ) is r  d, the conditioning of the optimization problem can be improved
√
to O(C r). However, this approach requires one to have access to the transformation P, which is
typically data-dependent and known only in retrospect.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

