Simple and Scalable Predictive Uncertainty
Estimation using Deep Ensembles
Balaji Lakshminarayanan

Alexander Pritzel Charles Blundell
DeepMind
{balajiln,apritzel,cblundell}@google.com

Abstract
Deep neural networks (NNs) are powerful black box predictors that have recently
achieved impressive performance on a wide spectrum of tasks. Quantifying predictive uncertainty in NNs is a challenging and yet unsolved problem. Bayesian
NNs, which learn a distribution over weights, are currently the state-of-the-art
for estimating predictive uncertainty; however these require significant modifications to the training procedure and are computationally expensive compared to
standard (non-Bayesian) NNs. We propose an alternative to Bayesian NNs that
is simple to implement, readily parallelizable, requires very little hyperparameter
tuning, and yields high quality predictive uncertainty estimates. Through a series
of experiments on classification and regression benchmarks, we demonstrate that
our method produces well-calibrated uncertainty estimates which are as good or
better than approximate Bayesian NNs. To assess robustness to dataset shift, we
evaluate the predictive uncertainty on test examples from known and unknown
distributions, and show that our method is able to express higher uncertainty on
out-of-distribution examples. We demonstrate the scalability of our method by
evaluating predictive uncertainty estimates on ImageNet.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (NNs) have achieved state-of-the-art performance on a wide variety of machine
learning tasks [35] and are becoming increasingly popular in domains such as computer vision
[32], speech recognition [25], natural language processing [42], and bioinformatics [2, 61]. Despite
impressive accuracies in supervised learning benchmarks, NNs are poor at quantifying predictive
uncertainty, and tend to produce overconfident predictions. Overconfident incorrect predictions can be
harmful or offensive [3], hence proper uncertainty quantification is crucial for practical applications.
Evaluating the quality of predictive uncertainties is challenging as the ‘ground truth’ uncertainty
estimates are usually not available. In this work, we shall focus upon two evaluation measures that
are motivated by practical applications of NNs. Firstly, we shall examine calibration [12, 13], a
frequentist notion of uncertainty which measures the discrepancy between subjective forecasts and
(empirical) long-run frequencies. The quality of calibration can be measured by proper scoring rules
[17] such as log predictive probabilities and the Brier score [9]. Note that calibration is an orthogonal
concern to accuracy: a network’s predictions may be accurate and yet miscalibrated, and vice versa.
The second notion of quality of predictive uncertainty we consider concerns generalization of the
predictive uncertainty to domain shift (also referred to as out-of-distribution examples [23]), that is,
measuring if the network knows what it knows. For example, if a network trained on one dataset is
evaluated on a completely different dataset, then the network should output high predictive uncertainty
as inputs from a different dataset would be far away from the training data. Well-calibrated predictions
that are robust to model misspecification and dataset shift have a number of important practical uses
(e.g., weather forecasting, medical diagnosis).
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

