Learning Chordal Markov Networks
via Branch and Bound
Kari Rantanen
HIIT, Dept. Comp. Sci.,
University of Helsinki

Antti Hyttinen
HIIT, Dept. Comp. Sci.,
University of Helsinki

Matti Järvisalo
HIIT, Dept. Comp. Sci.,
University of Helsinki

Abstract
We present a new algorithmic approach for the task of finding a chordal Markov
network structure that maximizes a given scoring function. The algorithm is
based on branch and bound and integrates dynamic programming for both domain
pruning and for obtaining strong bounds for search-space pruning. Empirically,
we show that the approach dominates in terms of running times a recent integer
programming approach (and thereby also a recent constraint optimization approach)
for the problem. Furthermore, our algorithm scales at times further with respect to
the number of variables than a state-of-the-art dynamic programming algorithm
for the problem, with the potential of reaching 20 variables and at the same time
circumventing the tight exponential lower bounds on memory consumption of the
pure dynamic programming approach.

1

Introduction

Graphical models offer a versatile and theoretically solid framework for various data analysis
tasks [1, 30, 17]. In this paper we focus on the structure learning task for chordal Markov networks
(or chordal/triangulated Markov random fields or decomposable graphs), a central class of undirected
graphical models [7, 31, 18, 17]. This problem, chordal Markov network structure learning (CMSL), is
computationally notoriously challenging; e.g., finding a maximum likelihood chordal Markov network
with bounded structure complexity (clique size) is known to be NP-hard [23]. Several Markov chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) approaches have been proposed for this task in the literature [19, 27, 10, 11].
Here we take on the challenge of developing a new exact algorithmic approach for finding an optimal
chordal Markov network structure in the score-based setting. Underlining the difficulty of this
challenge, first exact algorithms for CMSL have only recently been proposed [6, 12, 13, 14], and
generally do no scale up to 20 variables. Specifically, the constraint optimization approach introduced
in [6] does not scale up to 10 variables within hours. A similar approach was also taken in [16] in the
form of a direct integer programming encoding for CMSL, but was not empirically evaluated in an
exact setting. Comparably better performance, scaling up to 10 (at most 15) variables, is exhibited
by the integer programming approach implemented in the GOBNILP system [2], extending the core
approach of GOBNILP to CMSL by enforcing additional constraints. The true state-of-the-art exact
algorithm for CMSL, especially when the clique size of the networks to be learned is not restricted, is
Junctor, implementing a dynamic programming approach [13]. The method is based on recursive
characterization of clique trees and storing in memory the scores of already-solved subproblems.
Due to its nature, the algorithm has to iterate through every single solution candidate, although its
effective memoization technique helps to avoid revisiting solution candidates [13]. As typical for
dynamic programming algorithms, the worst-case and best-case performance coincide: Junctor is
guaranteed to use Ω(4n ) time and Ω(3n ) space.
In this work, we develop an alternative exact algorithm for CMSL. While a number of branchand-bound algorithms have been proposed in the past for Bayesian network structure learning
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

