Improved Training of Wasserstein GANs
Ishaan Gulrajani1⇤, Faruk Ahmed1 , Martin Arjovsky2 , Vincent Dumoulin1 , Aaron Courville1,3
1
Montreal Institute for Learning Algorithms
2
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
3
CIFAR Fellow
igul222@gmail.com
{faruk.ahmed,vincent.dumoulin,aaron.courville}@umontreal.ca
ma4371@nyu.edu

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are powerful generative models, but
suffer from training instability. The recently proposed Wasserstein GAN (WGAN)
makes progress toward stable training of GANs, but sometimes can still generate
only poor samples or fail to converge. We find that these problems are often due
to the use of weight clipping in WGAN to enforce a Lipschitz constraint on the
critic, which can lead to undesired behavior. We propose an alternative to clipping
weights: penalize the norm of gradient of the critic with respect to its input. Our
proposed method performs better than standard WGAN and enables stable training of a wide variety of GAN architectures with almost no hyperparameter tuning,
including 101-layer ResNets and language models with continuous generators.
We also achieve high quality generations on CIFAR-10 and LSUN bedrooms. †

1

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [9] are a powerful class of generative models that cast
generative modeling as a game between two networks: a generator network produces synthetic data
given some noise source and a discriminator network discriminates between the generator’s output
and true data. GANs can produce very visually appealing samples, but are often hard to train, and
much of the recent work on the subject [22, 18, 2, 20] has been devoted to finding ways of stabilizing
training. Despite this, consistently stable training of GANs remains an open problem.
In particular, [1] provides an analysis of the convergence properties of the value function being
optimized by GANs. Their proposed alternative, named Wasserstein GAN (WGAN) [2], leverages
the Wasserstein distance to produce a value function which has better theoretical properties than the
original. WGAN requires that the discriminator (called the critic in that work) must lie within the
space of 1-Lipschitz functions, which the authors enforce through weight clipping.
Our contributions are as follows:
1. On toy datasets, we demonstrate how critic weight clipping can lead to undesired behavior.
2. We propose gradient penalty (WGAN-GP), which does not suffer from the same problems.
3. We demonstrate stable training of varied GAN architectures, performance improvements
over weight clipping, high-quality image generation, and a character-level GAN language
model without any discrete sampling.
⇤
†

Now at Google Brain
Code for our models is available at https://github.com/igul222/improved wgan training.

