Deanonymization in the Bitcoin P2P Network
Giulia Fanti and Pramod Viswanath

Abstract
Recent attacks on Bitcoin’s peer-to-peer (P2P) network demonstrated that its
transaction-flooding protocols, which are used to ensure network consistency,
may enable user deanonymization—the linkage of a user’s IP address with her
pseudonym in the Bitcoin network. In 2015, the Bitcoin community responded
to these attacks by changing the network’s flooding mechanism to a different
protocol, known as diffusion. However, it is unclear if diffusion actually improves
the system’s anonymity. In this paper, we model the Bitcoin networking stack and
analyze its anonymity properties, both pre- and post-2015. The core problem is
one of epidemic source inference over graphs, where the observational model and
spreading mechanisms are informed by Bitcoin’s implementation; notably, these
models have not been studied in the epidemic source detection literature before.
We identify and analyze near-optimal source estimators. This analysis suggests
that Bitcoin’s networking protocols (both pre- and post-2015) offer poor anonymity
properties on networks with a regular-tree topology. We confirm this claim in
simulation on a 2015 snapshot of the real Bitcoin P2P network topology.

1

Introduction

The Bitcoin cryptocurrency has seen widespread adoption, due in part to its reputation as a privacypreserving financial system [17, 22]. In practice, though, Bitcoin exhibits serious privacy vulnerabilities [3, 19, 27, 28, 24]. Most of these vulnerabilities arise because of two key properties: (1)
Bitcoin associates each user with a pseudonym, and (2) pseudonyms can be linked to financial transactions through a public transaction ledger, called the blockchain [23]. If an attacker can associate a
pseudonym with a human identity, the attacker may learn the user’s transaction history.
In practice, there are several ways to link a user to her Bitcoin pseudonym. The most commonlystudied methods analyze transaction patterns in the public blockchain, and link those patterns using
side information [3, 19, 27, 28, 24]. In this paper, we are interested in a lower-layer vulnerability: the
networking stack. Like most cryptocurrencies, Bitcoin nodes communicate over a P2P network [23].
Whenever a user (Alice) generates a transaction (i.e., sends bitcoins to another user, Bob), she first
creates a “transaction message” that contains her pseudonym, Bob’s pseudonym, and the transaction
amount. Alice subsequently floods this transaction message over the P2P network, which enables
other users to validate her transaction and incorporate it into the global blockchain.
The anonymity implications of transaction broadcasting were largely ignored until recently, when
researchers demonstrated practical deanonymization attacks on the P2P network [6, 15]. These
attacks use a “supernode” to connect to all active Bitcoin nodes and listen to the transaction traffic
they relay [15, 6, 7]. By using simple estimators to infer the source IP of each transaction broadcast,
this eavesdropper adversary was able to link IP addresses to Bitcoin pseudonyms with an accuracy
of up to 30% [6]. We refer to such linkage as deanonymization.
Giulia Fanti (gfanti@andrew.cmu.edu) is in the ECE Department at Carnegie Mellon University. Pramod
Viswanath (pramodv@illinois.edu) is in the ECE Department at the University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign. This work was funded by NSF grant CCF-1705007.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

