Consistent Multitask Learning with
Nonlinear Output Relations

Carlo Ciliberto •,1

Alessandro Rudi •,∗ ,2

Lorenzo Rosasco 3,4,5

Massimiliano Pontil 1,5

{c.ciliberto,m.pontil}@ucl.ac.uk alessandro.rudi@inria.fr lrosasco@mit.edu
1
Department of Computer Science, University College London, London, UK.
2
INRIA - Sierra Project-team and École Normale Supérieure, Paris, France.
3
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA.
4
Università degli studi di Genova, Genova, Italy.
5
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genova, Italy.
•
Equal Contribution

Abstract
Key to multitask learning is exploiting the relationships between different tasks in
order to improve prediction performance. Most previous methods have focused on
the case where tasks relations can be modeled as linear operators and regularization
approaches can be used successfully. However, in practice assuming the tasks to
be linearly related is often restrictive, and allowing for nonlinear structures is a
challenge. In this paper, we tackle this issue by casting the problem within the
framework of structured prediction. Our main contribution is a novel algorithm for
learning multiple tasks which are related by a system of nonlinear equations that
their joint outputs need to satisfy. We show that our algorithm can be efficiently
implemented and study its generalization properties, proving universal consistency
and learning rates. Our theoretical analysis highlights the benefits of non-linear
multitask learning over learning the tasks independently. Encouraging experimental
results show the benefits of the proposed method in practice.

1

Introduction

Improving the efficiency of learning from human supervision is one of the great challenges in
machine learning. Multitask learning is one of the key approaches in this sense and it is based on
the assumption that different learning problems (i.e. tasks) are often related, a property that can
be exploited to reduce the amount of data needed to learn each individual tasks and in particular
to learn efficiently novel tasks (a.k.a. transfer learning, learning to learn [1]). Special cases of
multitask learning include vector-valued regression and multi-category classification; applications are
numerous, including classic ones in geophysics, recommender systems, co-kriging or collaborative
filtering (see [2, 3, 4] and references therein). Diverse methods have been proposed to tackle this
problem, for examples based on kernel methods [5], sparsity approaches [3] or neural networks [6].
Furthermore, recent theoretical results allowed to quantify the benefits of multitask learning from a
generalization point view when considering specific methods [7, 8].
A common challenge for multitask learning approaches is the problem of incorporating prior assumptions on the task relatedness in the learning process. This can be done implicitly, as in neural
networks [6], or explicitly, as done in regularization methods by designing suitable regularizers
[5]. This latter approach is flexible enough to incorporate different notions of tasks’ relatedness
expressed, for example, in terms of clusters or a graph, see e.g. [9, 10]. Further, it can be extended
to learn the tasks’ structures when they are unknown [3, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. However, most
∗

Work performed while A.R. was at the Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

