Thy Friend is My Friend: Iterative Collaborative
Filtering for Sparse Matrix Estimation

Christian Borgs
Jennifer Chayes
Christina E. Lee
borgs@microsoft.com
jchayes@microsoft.com
celee@mit.edu
Microsoft Research New England
One Memorial Drive, Cambridge MA, 02142
Devavrat Shah
devavrat@mit.edu
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139

Abstract
The sparse matrix estimation problem consists of estimating the distribution of
an n × n matrix Y , from a sparsely observed single instance of this matrix where
the entries of Y are independent random variables. This captures a wide array
of problems; special instances include matrix completion in the context of recommendation systems, graphon estimation, and community detection in (mixed
membership) stochastic block models. Inspired by classical collaborative filtering
for recommendation systems, we propose a novel iterative, collaborative filteringstyle algorithm for matrix estimation in this generic setting. We show that the mean
squared error (MSE) of our estimator converges to 0 at the rate of O(d2 (pn)−2/5 )
as long as ω(d5 n) random entries from a total of n2 entries of Y are observed
(uniformly sampled), E[Y ] has rank d, and the entries of Y have bounded support.
The maximum squared error across all entries converges to 0 with high probability
as long as we observe a little more, Ω(d5 n ln5 (n)) entries. Our results are the best
known sample complexity results in this generality.

1

Introduction

In this work, we propose and analyze an iterative similarity-based collaborative filtering algorithm
for the sparse matrix completion problem with noisily observed entries. As a prototype for such a
problem, consider a noisy observation of a social network where observed interactions are signals
of true underlying connections. We might want to predict the probability that two users would
choose to connect if recommended by the platform, e.g. LinkedIn. As a second example, consider
a recommendation system where we observe movie ratings provided by users, and we may want
to predict the probability distribution over ratings for specific movie-user pairs. The classical
collaborative filtering approach is to compute similarities between pairs of users by comparing their
commonly rated movies. For a social network, similarities between users would be computed by
comparing their sets of friends. We will be particularly interested in the very sparse case where most
pairs of users have no common friends, or most pairs of users have no commonly rated movies; thus
there is insufficient data to compute the traditional similarity metrics.
To overcome this limitation, we propose a novel algorithm which computes similarities iteratively,
incorporating information within a larger radius neighborhood. Whereas traditional collaborative
filtering learns the preferences of a user through the ratings of her/his “friends”, i.e. users who share
similar ratings on commonly rated movies, our algorithm learns about a user through the ratings of
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

