Active Bias: Training More Accurate Neural
Networks by Emphasizing High Variance Samples

Haw-Shiuan Chang, Erik Learned-Miller, Andrew McCallum
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
140 Governors Dr., Amherst, MA 01003
{hschang,elm,mccallum}@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Self-paced learning and hard example mining re-weight training instances to improve learning accuracy. This paper presents two improved alternatives based on
lightweight estimates of sample uncertainty in stochastic gradient descent (SGD):
the variance in predicted probability of the correct class across iterations of minibatch SGD, and the proximity of the correct class probability to the decision
threshold. Extensive experimental results on six datasets show that our methods reliably improve accuracy in various network architectures, including additional gains
on top of other popular training techniques, such as residual learning, momentum,
ADAM, batch normalization, dropout, and distillation.

1

Introduction

Learning easier material before harder material is often beneficial to human learning. Inspired by
this observation, curriculum learning [5] has shown that learning from easier instances first can also
improve neural network training. When it is not known a priori which samples are easy, examples
with lower loss on the current model can be inferred to be easier and can be used in early training.
This strategy has been referred to as self-paced learning [25]. By decreasing the weight of difficult
examples in the loss function, the model may become more robust to outliers [33], and this method
has proven useful in several applications, especially with noisy labels [36].
Nevertheless, selecting easier examples for training often slows down the training process because
easier samples usually contribute smaller gradients, and the current model has already learned how to
make correct predictions on these samples. On the other hand, and somewhat ironically, the opposite
strategy (i.e., sampling harder instances more often) has been shown to accelerate (mini-batch)
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) in some cases, where the difficulty of an example can be defined by
its loss [18, 29, 44] or be proportional to the magnitude of its gradient [51, 1, 12, 13]. This strategy is
sometimes referred to as hard example mining [44].
In the literature, we can see that these two opposing strategies work well in different situations.
Preferring easier examples may be effective when either machines or humans try to solve a challenging
task containing more label noise or outliers. On the other hand, focusing on harder samples may
accelerate and stabilize SGD in cleaner data by minimizing the variance of gradients [1, 12]. However,
we often do not know how noisy our training dataset is. Motivated by this practical need, this paper
explores new methods of re-weighting training examples that are effective in both scenarios.
Intuitively, if a model has already predicted some examples correctly with high confidence, those
samples may be too easy to contain useful information for improving that model further. Similarly,
if some examples are always predicted incorrectly over many iterations of training, these examples
may just be too difficult/noisy and may degrade the model. This suggests that we should somehow
prefer uncertain samples that are predicted incorrectly sometimes during training and correctly at
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

