Gated Recurrent Convolution Neural Network for
OCR
Jianfeng Wang∗
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Beijing 100876, China
jianfengwang1991@gmail.com
Xiaolin Hu
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList)
Department of Computer Science and Technology
Center for Brain-Inspired Computing Research (CBICR)
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
xlhu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Optical Character Recognition (OCR) aims to recognize text in natural images.
Inspired by a recently proposed model for general image classification, Recurrent
Convolution Neural Network (RCNN), we propose a new architecture named
Gated RCNN (GRCNN) for solving this problem. Its critical component, Gated
Recurrent Convolution Layer (GRCL), is constructed by adding a gate to the
Recurrent Convolution Layer (RCL), the critical component of RCNN. The gate
controls the context modulation in RCL and balances the feed-forward information
and the recurrent information. In addition, an efficient Bidirectional Long ShortTerm Memory (BLSTM) is built for sequence modeling. The GRCNN is combined
with BLSTM to recognize text in natural images. The entire GRCNN-BLSTM
model can be trained end-to-end. Experiments show that the proposed model
outperforms existing methods on several benchmark datasets including the IIIT-5K,
Street View Text (SVT) and ICDAR.

1

Introduction

Reading text in scene images can be regarded as an image sequence recognition task. It is an important
problem which has drawn much attention in the past decades. There are two types of scene text
recognition tasks: constrained and unconstrained. In constrained text recognition, there is a fixed
lexicon or dictionary with known length during inference. In unconstrained text recognition, each
word is recognized without a dictionary. Most of the previous works are about the first task.
In recent years, deep neural networks have gained great success in many computer vision tasks
[39, 19, 34, 42, 9, 11]. The fast development of deep neural networks inspires researchers to use
them to solve the problem of scene text recognition. For example, an end-to-end architecture which
combines a convolutional network with a recurrent network is proposed [30]. In this framework, a
plain seven-layer-CNN is used as a feature extractor for the input image while a recurrent neural
network (RNN) is used for image sequence modeling. For another example, to let the recurrent
network focus on the most important segments of incoming features, an end-to-end system which
integrates attention mechanism, recurrent network and recursive CNN is developed [21].
∗

This work was done when Jianfeng Wang was an intern at Tsinghua University.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

