On the Consistency of Quick Shift

Heinrich Jiang
Google Inc.
1600 Amphitheatre Parkway, Mountain View, CA 94043
heinrich.jiang@gmail.com

Abstract
Quick Shift is a popular mode-seeking and clustering algorithm. We present finite
sample statistical consistency guarantees for Quick Shift on mode and cluster
recovery under mild distributional assumptions. We then apply our results to
construct a consistent modal regression algorithm.

1

Introduction

Quick Shift [16] is a clustering and mode-seeking procedure that has received much attention in
computer vision and related areas. It is simple and proceeds as follows: it moves each sample to its
closest sample with a higher empirical density if one exists in a τ radius ball, where the empirical
density is taken to be the Kernel Density Estimator (KDE). The output of the procedure can thus be
seen as a graph whose vertices are the sample points and a directed edge from each sample to its next
point if one exists. Furthermore, it can be seen that Quick Shift partitions the samples into trees which
can be taken as the final clusters, and the root of each such tree is an estimate of a local maxima.
Quick Shift was designed as an alternative to the better known mean-shift procedure [4, 5]. Mean-shift
performs a gradient ascent of the KDE starting at each sample until -convergence. The samples that
correspond to the same points of convergence are in the same cluster and the points of convergence
are taken to be the estimates of the modes. Both procedures aim at clustering the data points by
incrementally hill-climbing to a mode in the underlying density. Some key differences are that Quick
Shift restricts the steps to sample points and has the extra τ parameter. In this paper, we show that
Quick Shift can surprisingly attain strong statistical guarantees without the second-order density
assumptions required to analyze mean-shift.
We prove that Quick Shift recovers the modes of an arbitrary multimodal density at a minimax optimal
rate under mild nonparametric assumptions. This provides an alternative to known procedures with
similar statistical guarantees; however such procedures only recover the modes but fail to inform us
how to assign the sample points to a mode which is critical for clustering. Quick Shift on the other
hand recovers both the modes and the clustering assignments with statistical consistency guarantees.
Moreover, Quick Shift’s ability to do all of this has been extensively validated in practice.
A unique feature of Quick Shift is that it has a segmentation parameter τ which allows practioners
to merge clusters corresponding to certain less salient modes of the distribution. In other words, if
a local mode is not the maximizer of its τ -radius neighborhood, then its corresponding cluster will
become merged to that of another mode. Current consistent mode-seeking procedures [6, 12] fail to
allow one to control such segmentation. We give guarantees on how Quick Shift does this given an
arbitrary setting of τ .
We show that Quick Shift can also be used to recover the cluster tree. In cluster tree estimation, the
known procedures with the strongest statistical consistency guarantees include Robust Single Linkage
(RSL) [2] and its variants e.g. [13, 7]. We show that Quick Shift attains similar guarantees.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

