Multi-Information Source Optimization

Matthias Poloczek
Department of Systems and Industrial Engineering
University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ 85721
poloczek@email.arizona.edu

Jialei Wang
Chief Analytics Office
IBM
Armonk, NY 10504
jw865@cornell.edu

Peter I. Frazier
School of Operations Research and Information Engineering
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
pf98@cornell.edu

Abstract
We consider Bayesian methods for multi-information source optimization (MISO),
in which we seek to optimize an expensive-to-evaluate black-box objective function
while also accessing cheaper but biased and noisy approximations (“information
sources”). We present a novel algorithm that outperforms the state of the art for this
problem by using a Gaussian process covariance kernel better suited to MISO than
those used by previous approaches, and an acquisition function based on a one-step
optimality analysis supported by efficient parallelization. We also provide a novel
technique to guarantee the asymptotic quality of the solution provided by this
algorithm. Experimental evaluations demonstrate that this algorithm consistently
finds designs of higher value at less cost than previous approaches.

1

Introduction

We consider Bayesian multi-information source optimization (MISO), in which we optimize an
expensive-to-evaluate black-box objective function while optionally accessing cheaper biased noisy
approximations, often referred to as “information sources (IS)”. This arises when tuning machine
learning algorithms: instead of using the whole dataset for the hyperparameter optimization, one
may use a small subset or even a smaller related dataset [34, 15, 17]. We also face this problem in
robotics: we can evaluate a parameterized robot control policy in simulation, in a laboratory, or in a
field test [15]. Cheap approximations promise a route to tractability, but bias and noise complicate
their use. An unknown bias arises whenever a computational model incompletely models a real-world
phenomenon, and is pervasive in applications.
We present a novel algorithm for this problem, misoKG, that is tolerant to both noise and bias and
improves substantially over the state of the art. Specifically, our contributions are:
• The algorithm uses a novel acquisition function that maximizes the incremental gain per unit
cost. This acquisition function generalizes and parallelizes previously proposed knowledgegradient methods for single-IS Bayesian optimization [7, 8, 28, 26, 37] to MISO.
• We prove that this algorithm provides an asymptotically near-optimal solution. If the search
domain is finite, this result establishes the consistency of misoKG.
We present a novel proof technique that yields an elegant, short argument and is thus of
independent interest.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

