Batch Renormalization: Towards Reducing
Minibatch Dependence in Batch-Normalized Models

Sergey Ioffe
Google
sioffe@google.com

Abstract
Batch Normalization is quite effective at accelerating and improving the training
of deep models. However, its effectiveness diminishes when the training minibatches are small, or do not consist of independent samples. We hypothesize that
this is due to the dependence of model layer inputs on all the examples in the
minibatch, and different activations being produced between training and inference. We propose Batch Renormalization, a simple and effective extension to
ensure that the training and inference models generate the same outputs that depend on individual examples rather than the entire minibatch. Models trained with
Batch Renormalization perform substantially better than batchnorm when training
with small or non-i.i.d. minibatches. At the same time, Batch Renormalization retains the benefits of batchnorm such as insensitivity to initialization and training
efficiency.

1

Introduction

Batch Normalization (“batchnorm” [6]) has recently become a part of the standard toolkit for training deep networks. By normalizing activations, batch normalization helps stabilize the distributions
of internal activations as the model trains. Batch normalization also makes it possible to use significantly higher learning rates, and reduces the sensitivity to initialization. These effects help accelerate
the training, sometimes dramatically so. Batchnorm has been successfully used to enable state-ofthe-art architectures such as residual networks [5].
Batchnorm works on minibatches in stochastic gradient training, and uses the mean and variance
of the minibatch to normalize the activations. Specifically, consider a particular node in the deep
network, producing a scalar value for each input example. Given a minibatch B of m examples,
consider the values of this node, x1 . . . xm . Then batchnorm takes the form:
xi − µB
x
bi ←
σB
where µB is the sample mean of x1 . . . xm , and σB2 is the sample variance (in practice, a small 
is added to it for numerical stability). It is clear that the normalized activations corresponding to
an input example will depend on the other examples in the minibatch. This is undesirable during
inference, and therefore the mean and variance computed over all training data can be used instead.
In practice, the model usually maintains moving averages of minibatch means and variances, and
during inference uses those in place of the minibatch statistics.
While it appears to make sense to replace the minibatch statistics with whole-data ones during
inference, this changes the activations in the network. In particular, this means that the upper layers
(whose inputs are normalized using the minibatch) are trained on representations different from
those computed in inference (when the inputs are normalized using the population statistics). When
the minibatch size is large and its elements are i.i.d. samples from the training distribution, this
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

