Expectation Propagation with Stochastic Kinetic
Model in Complex Interaction Systems

Le Fang, Fan Yang, Wen Dong, Tong Guan, and Chunming Qiao
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University at Buffalo
{lefang, fyang24, wendong, tongguan, qiao}@buffalo.edu

Abstract
Technological breakthroughs allow us to collect data with increasing spatiotemporal resolution from complex interaction systems. The combination of highresolution observations, expressive dynamic models, and efficient machine learning
algorithms can lead to crucial insights into complex interaction dynamics and the
functions of these systems. In this paper, we formulate the dynamics of a complex
interacting network as a stochastic process driven by a sequence of events, and
develop expectation propagation algorithms to make inferences from noisy observations. To avoid getting stuck at a local optimum, we formulate the problem of
minimizing Bethe free energy as a constrained primal problem and take advantage
of the concavity of dual problem in the feasible domain of dual variables guaranteed by duality theorem. Our expectation propagation algorithms demonstrate
better performance in inferring the interaction dynamics in complex transportation
networks than competing models such as particle filter, extended Kalman filter, and
deep neural networks.

1

Introduction

We live in a complex world, where many collective systems are difficult to interpret. In this paper,
we are interested in complex interaction systems, also called complex interaction networks, which
are large systems of simple units linked by a network of interactions. Many research topics exemplify complex interaction systems in specific domains, such as neural activities in our brain, the
movement of people in an urban system, epidemic and opinion dynamics in social networks, and so
on. Modeling and inference for dynamics on these systems has attracted considerable interest since
it potentially provides valuable new insights, for example about functional areas of the brain and
relevant diagnoses[7], about traffic congestion and more efficient use of roads [19], and about where,
when and to what extent people are infected in an epidemic crisis [23]. Agent-based modeling and
simulation [22] is a classical way to address complex systems with interacting components to explore
general collective rules and principles, especially in the field of systems biology. However, the actual
underlying dynamics of a specific real system are not in the scope. People are not satisfied with only
a macroscopic general description but aims to track down an evolving system.
Unprecedented opportunities for researchers in these fields have recently emerged due to the prosperous of social media and sensor tools. For instance, the functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) and the electroencephalogram (EEG) can directly measure brain activity, something never
possible before. Similarly, signal sensing technologies can now easily track people’s movement and
interactions [12, 24]. Researchers no longer need to worry about acquiring abundant observation
data, and instead are pursuing more powerful theoretical tools to grasp the opportunities afforded by
that data. We, in the machine learning community, are interested in the inference problem — that is
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

