#Exploration: A Study of Count-Based Exploration
for Deep Reinforcement Learning

Haoran Tang1∗ , Rein Houthooft34∗ , Davis Foote2 , Adam Stooke2 , Xi Chen2† ,
Yan Duan2† , John Schulman4 , Filip De Turck3 , Pieter Abbeel 2†
1
UC Berkeley, Department of Mathematics
2
UC Berkeley, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
3
Ghent University – imec, Department of Information Technology
4
OpenAI

Abstract
Count-based exploration algorithms are known to perform near-optimally when
used in conjunction with tabular reinforcement learning (RL) methods for solving
small discrete Markov decision processes (MDPs). It is generally thought that
count-based methods cannot be applied in high-dimensional state spaces, since
most states will only occur once. Recent deep RL exploration strategies are able to
deal with high-dimensional continuous state spaces through complex heuristics,
often relying on optimism in the face of uncertainty or intrinsic motivation. In
this work, we describe a surprising finding: a simple generalization of the classic
count-based approach can reach near state-of-the-art performance on various highdimensional and/or continuous deep RL benchmarks. States are mapped to hash
codes, which allows to count their occurrences with a hash table. These counts
are then used to compute a reward bonus according to the classic count-based
exploration theory. We find that simple hash functions can achieve surprisingly
good results on many challenging tasks. Furthermore, we show that a domaindependent learned hash code may further improve these results. Detailed analysis
reveals important aspects of a good hash function: 1) having appropriate granularity
and 2) encoding information relevant to solving the MDP. This exploration strategy
achieves near state-of-the-art performance on both continuous control tasks and
Atari 2600 games, hence providing a simple yet powerful baseline for solving
MDPs that require considerable exploration.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) studies an agent acting in an initially unknown environment, learning
through trial and error to maximize rewards. It is impossible for the agent to act near-optimally until
it has sufficiently explored the environment and identified all of the opportunities for high reward, in
all scenarios. A core challenge in RL is how to balance exploration—actively seeking out novel states
and actions that might yield high rewards and lead to long-term gains; and exploitation—maximizing
short-term rewards using the agent’s current knowledge. While there are exploration techniques
for finite MDPs that enjoy theoretical guarantees, there are no fully satisfying techniques for highdimensional state spaces; therefore, developing more general and robust exploration techniques is an
active area of research.
∗
These authors contributed equally. Correspondence to: Haoran Tang <hrtang@math.berkeley.edu>, Rein
Houthooft <rein.houthooft@openai.com>
†
Work done at OpenAI

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

