REBAR: Low-variance, unbiased gradient estimates
for discrete latent variable models
George Tucker1,⇤, Andriy Mnih2 , Chris J. Maddison2,3 ,
Dieterich Lawson1,* , Jascha Sohl-Dickstein1
1
Google Brain, 2 DeepMind, 3 University of Oxford
{gjt, amnih, dieterichl, jaschasd}@google.com
cmaddis@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Learning in models with discrete latent variables is challenging due to high variance
gradient estimators. Generally, approaches have relied on control variates to reduce
the variance of the REINFORCE estimator. Recent work (Jang et al., 2016; Maddison et al., 2016) has taken a different approach, introducing a continuous relaxation
of discrete variables to produce low-variance, but biased, gradient estimates. In this
work, we combine the two approaches through a novel control variate that produces
low-variance, unbiased gradient estimates. Then, we introduce a modification
to the continuous relaxation and show that the tightness of the relaxation can be
adapted online, removing it as a hyperparameter. We show state-of-the-art variance
reduction on several benchmark generative modeling tasks, generally leading to
faster convergence to a better final log-likelihood.

1

Introduction

Models with discrete latent variables are ubiquitous in machine learning: mixture models, Markov
Decision Processes in reinforcement learning (RL), generative models for structured prediction,
and, recently, models with hard attention (Mnih et al., 2014) and memory networks (Zaremba &
Sutskever, 2015). However, when the discrete latent variables cannot be marginalized out analytically,
maximizing objectives over these models using REINFORCE-like methods (Williams, 1992) is
challenging due to high-variance gradient estimates obtained from sampling. Most approaches to
reducing this variance have focused on developing clever control variates (Mnih & Gregor, 2014;
Titsias & Lázaro-Gredilla, 2015; Gu et al., 2015; Mnih & Rezende, 2016). Recently, Jang et al. (2016)
and Maddison et al. (2016) independently introduced a novel distribution, the Gumbel-Softmax or
Concrete distribution, that continuously relaxes discrete random variables. Replacing every discrete
random variable in a model with a Concrete random variable results in a continuous model where the
reparameterization trick is applicable (Kingma & Welling, 2013; Rezende et al., 2014). The gradients
are biased with respect to the discrete model, but can be used effectively to optimize large models.
The tightness of the relaxation is controlled by a temperature hyperparameter. In the low temperature
limit, the gradient estimates become unbiased, but the variance of the gradient estimator diverges, so
the temperature must be tuned to balance bias and variance.
We sought an estimator that is low-variance, unbiased, and does not require tuning additional
hyperparameters. To construct such an estimator, we introduce a simple control variate based on the
difference between the REINFORCE and the reparameterization trick gradient estimators for the
relaxed model. This reduces variance, but does not outperform state-of-the-art methods on its own.
Our key contribution is to show that it is possible to conditionally marginalize the control variate
⇤

Work done as part of the Google Brain Residency Program.
Source code for experiments: github.com/tensorflow/models/tree/master/research/rebar

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

