Learning to Compose Domain-Specific
Transformations for Data Augmentation

Alexander J. Ratner∗, Henry R. Ehrenberg∗, Zeshan Hussain,
Jared Dunnmon, Christopher Ré
Stanford University
{ajratner,henryre,zeshanmh,jdunnmon,chrismre}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Data augmentation is a ubiquitous technique for increasing the size of labeled training sets by leveraging task-specific data transformations that preserve class labels.
While it is often easy for domain experts to specify individual transformations,
constructing and tuning the more sophisticated compositions typically needed to
achieve state-of-the-art results is a time-consuming manual task in practice. We
propose a method for automating this process by learning a generative sequence
model over user-specified transformation functions using a generative adversarial
approach. Our method can make use of arbitrary, non-deterministic transformation
functions, is robust to misspecified user input, and is trained on unlabeled data.
The learned transformation model can then be used to perform data augmentation
for any end discriminative model. In our experiments, we show the efficacy of our
approach on both image and text datasets, achieving improvements of 4.0 accuracy
points on CIFAR-10, 1.4 F1 points on the ACE relation extraction task, and 3.4 accuracy points when using domain-specific transformation operations on a medical
imaging dataset as compared to standard heuristic augmentation approaches.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning models, such as deep neural networks, may have billions of free parameters
and accordingly require massive labeled data sets for training. In most settings, labeled data is not
available in sufficient quantities to avoid overfitting to the training set. The technique of artificially
expanding labeled training sets by transforming data points in ways which preserve class labels
– known as data augmentation – has quickly become a critical and effective tool for combatting
this labeled data scarcity problem. Data augmentation can be seen as a form of weak supervision,
providing a way for practitioners to leverage their knowledge of invariances in a task or domain.
And indeed, data augmentation is cited as essential to nearly every state-of-the-art result in image
classification [3, 7, 11, 24] (see Supplemental Materials), and is becoming increasingly common in
other modalities as well [20].
Even on well studied benchmark tasks, however, the choice of data augmentation strategy is known to
cause large variances in end performance and be difficult to select [11, 7], with papers often reporting
their heuristically found parameter ranges [3]. In practice, it is often simple to formulate a large set
of primitive transformation operations, but time-consuming and difficult to find the parameterizations
and compositions of them needed for state-of-the-art results. In particular, many transformation
operations will have vastly different effects based on parameterization, the set of other transformations
they are applied with, and even their particular order of composition. For example, brightness and
saturation enhancements might be destructive when applied together, but produce realistic images
when paired with geometric transformations.
∗

Authors contributed equally

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

