Bandits Dueling on Partially Ordered Sets
Julien Audiffren
CMLA
ENS Paris-Saclay, CNRS
Université Paris-Saclay, France
julien.audiffren@gmail.com

Liva Ralaivola
Lab. Informatique Fondamentale de Marseille
CNRS, Aix Marseille University
Institut Universitaire de France
F-13288 Marseille Cedex 9, France
liva.ralaivola@lif.univ-mrs.fr

Abstract
We address the problem of dueling bandits defined on partially ordered sets, or
posets. In this setting, arms may not be comparable, and there may be several
(incomparable) optimal arms. We propose an algorithm, UnchainedBandits,
that efficiently finds the set of optimal arms —the Pareto front— of any poset
even when pairs of comparable arms cannot be a priori distinguished from pairs
of incomparable arms, with a set of minimal assumptions. This means that UnchainedBandits does not require information about comparability and can be
used with limited knowledge of the poset. To achieve this, the algorithm relies
on the concept of decoys, which stems from social psychology. We also provide
theoretical guarantees on both the regret incurred and the number of comparison
required by UnchainedBandits, and we report compelling empirical results.

1

Introduction

Many real-life optimization problems pose the issue of dealing with a few, possibly conflicting,
objectives: think for instance of the choice of a phone plan, where a right balance between the price,
the network coverage/type, and roaming options has to be found. Such multi-objective optimization
problems may be studied from the multi-armed bandits perspective (see e.g. Drugan and Nowe
[2013]), which is what we do here from a dueling bandits standpoint.
Dueling Bandits on Posets. Dueling bandits [Yue et al., 2012] pertain to the K-armed bandit
framework, with the assumption that there is no direct access to the reward provided by any single
arm and the only information that can be gained is through the simultaneous pull of two arms: when
such a pull is performed the agent is informed about the winner of the duel between the two arms.
We extend the framework of dueling bandits to the situation where there are pairs of arms that are not
comparable, that is, we study the case where there might be no natural order that could help decide
the winner of a duel—this situation may show up, for instance, if the (hidden) values associated with
the arms are multidimensional, as is the case in the multi-objective setting mentioned above. The
notion of incomparability naturally links this problem with the theory of posets and our approach
take inspiration from works dedicated to selecting and sorting on posets [Daskalakis et al., 2011].
Chasing the Pareto Front. In this setting, the best arm may no longer be unique, and we consider
the problem of identifying among all available K arms the set of maximal incomparable arms, or
the Pareto front, with minimal regret. This objective significantly differs from the usual objective
of dueling bandit algorithms, which aim to find one optimal arm—such as a Condorcet winner, a
Copeland winner or a Borda winner—and pull it as frequently as possible to minimize the regret.
Finding the entire Pareto front (denoted P) is more difficult, but pertains to many real-world applications. For instance, in the discussed phone plan setting, P will contain both the cheapest plan and the
plan offering the largest coverage, as well as any non dominated plan in-between; therefore, every
customer may then find a a suitable plan in P in accordance with her personal preferences.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

