Attend and Predict: Understanding Gene Regulation
by Selective Attention on Chromatin

Ritambhara Singh, Jack Lanchantin, Arshdeep Sekhon, Yanjun Qi
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
yanjun@virginia.edu

Abstract
The past decade has seen a revolution in genomic technologies that enabled a flood
of genome-wide profiling of chromatin marks. Recent literature tried to understand
gene regulation by predicting gene expression from large-scale chromatin measurements. Two fundamental challenges exist for such learning tasks: (1) genome-wide
chromatin signals are spatially structured, high-dimensional and highly modular;
and (2) the core aim is to understand what the relevant factors are and how they
work together. Previous studies either failed to model complex dependencies among
input signals or relied on separate feature analysis to explain the decisions. This
paper presents an attention-based deep learning approach, AttentiveChrome, that
uses a unified architecture to model and to interpret dependencies among chromatin
factors for controlling gene regulation. AttentiveChrome uses a hierarchy of multiple Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) modules to encode the input signals and to
model how various chromatin marks cooperate automatically. AttentiveChrome
trains two levels of attention jointly with the target prediction, enabling it to attend
differentially to relevant marks and to locate important positions per mark. We
evaluate the model across 56 different cell types (tasks) in humans. Not only is
the proposed architecture more accurate, but its attention scores provide a better
interpretation than state-of-the-art feature visualization methods such as saliency
maps.1

1

Introduction

Gene regulation is the process of how the cell controls which genes are turned “on” (expressed) or
“off” (not-expressed) in its genome. The human body contains hundreds of different cell types, from
liver cells to blood cells to neurons. Although these cells include the same set of DNA information,
their functions are different 2 . The regulation of different genes controls the destiny and function of
each cell. In addition to DNA sequence information, many factors, especially those in its environment
(i.e., chromatin), can affect which genes the cell expresses. This paper proposes an attention-based
deep learning architecture to learn from data how different chromatin factors influence gene expression
in a cell. Such understanding of gene regulation can enable new insights into principles of life, the
study of diseases, and drug development.
“Chromatin” denotes DNA and its organizing proteins 3 . A cell uses specialized proteins to organize
DNA in a condensed structure. These proteins include histones, which form “bead“-like structures
that DNA wraps around, in turn organizing and compressing the DNA. An important aspect of histone
proteins is that they are prone to chemical modifications that can change the spatial arrangement of
1

Code shared at www.deepchrome.org.

2

DNA is a long string of paired chemical molecules or nucleotides that fall into four different types and are denoted as A, T, C, and G.
DNA carries information organized into units such as genes. The set of genetic material of DNA in a cell is called its genome.
3
The complex of DNA, histones, and other structural proteins is called chromatin.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

