Hybrid Reward Architecture for
Reinforcement Learning

Harm van Seijen1
harm.vanseijen@microsoft.com

Mehdi Fatemi1
mehdi.fatemi@microsoft.com

Joshua Romoff12
joshua.romoff@mail.mcgill.ca

Romain Laroche1
romain.laroche@microsoft.com

Tavian Barnes1
tavian.barnes@microsoft.com

Jeffrey Tsang1
tsang.jeffrey@microsoft.com

1

Microsoft Maluuba, Montreal, Canada
McGill University, Montreal, Canada

2

Abstract
One of the main challenges in reinforcement learning (RL) is generalisation. In
typical deep RL methods this is achieved by approximating the optimal value
function with a low-dimensional representation using a deep network. While
this approach works well in many domains, in domains where the optimal value
function cannot easily be reduced to a low-dimensional representation, learning can
be very slow and unstable. This paper contributes towards tackling such challenging
domains, by proposing a new method, called Hybrid Reward Architecture (HRA).
HRA takes as input a decomposed reward function and learns a separate value
function for each component reward function. Because each component typically
only depends on a subset of all features, the corresponding value function can be
approximated more easily by a low-dimensional representation, enabling more
effective learning. We demonstrate HRA on a toy-problem and the Atari game Ms.
Pac-Man, where HRA achieves above-human performance.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 1998; Szepesvári, 2009), the goal is to find a
behaviour policy that maximises the return—the discounted sum of rewards received over time—in a
data-driven way. One of the main challenges of RL is to scale methods such that they can be applied
to large, real-world problems. Because the state-space of such problems is typically massive, strong
generalisation is required to learn a good policy efficiently.
Mnih et al. (2015) achieved a big breakthrough in this area: by combining standard RL techniques
with deep neural networks, they achieved above-human performance on a large number of Atari 2600
games, by learning a policy from pixels. The generalisation properties of their Deep Q-Networks
(DQN) method is achieved by approximating the optimal value function. A value function plays an
important role in RL, because it predicts the expected return, conditioned on a state or state-action
pair. Once the optimal value function is known, an optimal policy can be derived by acting greedily
with respect to it. By modelling the current estimate of the optimal value function with a deep neural
network, DQN carries out a strong generalisation on the value function, and hence on the policy.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

