V EEGAN: Reducing Mode Collapse in GANs using
Implicit Variational Learning

Akash Srivastava
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
akash.srivastava@ed.ac.uk
Chris Russell
The Alan Turing Institute
London
crussell@turing.ac.uk

Lazar Valkov
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
L.Valkov@sms.ed.ac.uk
Michael U. Gutmann
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
Michael.Gutmann@ed.ac.uk

Charles Sutton
School of Informatics & The Alan Turing Institute
University of Edinburgh
csutton@inf.ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Deep generative models provide powerful tools for distributions over complicated
manifolds, such as those of natural images. But many of these methods, including
generative adversarial networks (GANs), can be difficult to train, in part because
they are prone to mode collapse, which means that they characterize only a few
modes of the true distribution. To address this, we introduce V EEGAN, which
features a reconstructor network, reversing the action of the generator by mapping
from data to noise. Our training objective retains the original asymptotic consistency guarantee of GANs, and can be interpreted as a novel autoencoder loss over
the noise. In sharp contrast to a traditional autoencoder over data points, V EEGAN
does not require specifying a loss function over the data, but rather only over the
representations, which are standard normal by assumption. On an extensive set of
synthetic and real world image datasets, V EEGAN indeed resists mode collapsing
to a far greater extent than other recent GAN variants, and produces more realistic
samples.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models are a topic of enormous recent interest, providing a powerful class of tools
for the unsupervised learning of probability distributions over difficult manifolds such as natural
images [7, 11, 18]. Deep generative models are usually implicit statistical models [3], also called
implicit probability distributions, meaning that they do not induce a density function that can be
tractably computed, but rather provide a simulation procedure to generate new data points. Generative
adversarial networks (GANs) [7] are an attractive such method, which have seen promising recent
successes [17, 20, 23]. GANs train two deep networks in concert: a generator network that maps
random noise, usually drawn from a multi-variate Gaussian, to data items; and a discriminator network
that estimates the likelihood ratio of the generator network to the data distribution, and is trained
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

