Neural Networks for Efficient Bayesian Decoding of
Natural Images from Retinal Neurons

Nikhil Parthasarathy∗
Stanford University
nikparth@gmail.com
Thomas Rutten
Columbia University
tkr2112@columbia.edu

Eleanor Batty∗
Columbia University
erb2180@columbia.edu
Mohit Rajpal
Columbia University
mr3522@columbia.edu

William Falcon
Columbia University
waf2107@columbia.edu
E.J. Chichilnisky†
Stanford University
ej@stanford.edu

Liam Paninski†
Columbia University
liam@stat.columbia.edu

Abstract
Decoding sensory stimuli from neural signals can be used to reveal how we sense
our physical environment, and is valuable for the design of brain-machine interfaces.
However, existing linear techniques for neural decoding may not fully reveal or exploit the fidelity of the neural signal. Here we develop a new approximate Bayesian
method for decoding natural images from the spiking activity of populations of
retinal ganglion cells (RGCs). We sidestep known computational challenges with
Bayesian inference by exploiting artificial neural networks developed for computer
vision, enabling fast nonlinear decoding that incorporates natural scene statistics
implicitly. We use a decoder architecture that first linearly reconstructs an image
from RGC spikes, then applies a convolutional autoencoder to enhance the image.
The resulting decoder, trained on natural images and simulated neural responses,
significantly outperforms linear decoding, as well as simple point-wise nonlinear
decoding. These results provide a tool for the assessment and optimization of retinal prosthesis technologies, and reveal that the retina may provide a more accurate
representation of the visual scene than previously appreciated.

1

Introduction

Neural coding in sensory systems is often studied by developing and testing encoding models that
capture how sensory inputs are represented in neural signals. For example, models of retinal function
are designed to capture how retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) respond to diverse patterns of visual
stimulation. An alternative approach – decoding visual stimuli from RGC responses – provides a
complementary method to assess the information contained in RGC spikes about the visual world
[31, 37]. Understanding decoding can also be useful for the design of retinal prostheses, by providing
a measure of the visual restoration that is possible with a prosthesis [26].
The most common and well-understood decoding approach, linear regression, has been used in various
sensory systems [29, 40]. This method was shown to be successful at reconstructing white noise
temporal signals from RGC activity [37] and revealed that coarse structure of natural image patches
could be recovered from ensemble responses in the early visual system [33]. Other linear methods
∗ †

, Equal contributions

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

