Neural Program Meta-Induction

Jacob Devlin∗
Google
jacobdevlin@google.com

Rudy Bunel∗
University of Oxford
rudy@robots.ox.ac.uk

Rishabh Singh
Microsoft Research
risin@microsoft.com

Pushmeet Kohli∗
DeepMind
pushmeet@google.com

Matthew Hausknecht
Microsoft Research
mahauskn@microsoft.com

Abstract
Most recently proposed methods for Neural Program Induction work under the
assumption of having a large set of input/output (I/O) examples for learning any
underlying input-output mapping. This paper aims to address the problem of data
and computation efficiency of program induction by leveraging information from
related tasks. Specifically, we propose two approaches for cross-task knowledge
transfer to improve program induction in limited-data scenarios. In our first proposal, portfolio adaptation, a set of induction models is pretrained on a set of
related tasks, and the best model is adapted towards the new task using transfer
learning. In our second approach, meta program induction, a k-shot learning approach is used to make a model generalize to new tasks without additional training.
To test the efficacy of our methods, we constructed a new benchmark of programs
written in the Karel programming language [17]. Using an extensive experimental
evaluation on the Karel benchmark, we demonstrate that our proposals dramatically
outperform the baseline induction method that does not use knowledge transfer. We
also analyze the relative performance of the two approaches and study conditions
in which they perform best. In particular, meta induction outperforms all existing
approaches under extreme data sparsity (when a very small number of examples are
available), i.e., fewer than ten. As the number of available I/O examples increase
(i.e. a thousand or more), portfolio adapted program induction becomes the best
approach. For intermediate data sizes, we demonstrate that the combined method
of adapted meta program induction has the strongest performance.

1

Introduction

Neural program induction has been a very active area of research in the last few years, but this past
work has made highly variable set of assumptions about the amount of training data and types of
training signals that are available. One common scenario is example-driven algorithm induction,
where the goal is to learn a model which can perform a specific task (i.e., an underlying program
or algorithm), such as sorting a list of integers[7, 11, 12, 21]. Typically, the goal of these works are
to compare a newly proposed network architecture to a baseline model, and the system is trained
on input/output examples (I/O examples) as a standard supervised learning task. For example, for
integer sorting, the I/O examples would consist of pairs of unsorted and sorted integer lists, and the
model would be trained to maximize cross-entropy loss of the output sequence. In this way, the
induction model is similar to a standard sequence generation task such as machine translation or
image captioning. In these works, the authors typically assume that a near-infinite amount of I/O
examples corresponding to a particular task are available.
∗

Work performed at Microsoft Research.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

