Efficient Modeling of Latent Information in
Supervised Learning using Gaussian Processes

Zhenwen Dai ∗‡
zhenwend@amazon.com

Mauricio A. Álvarez †
mauricio.alvarez@sheffield.ac.uk
Neil D. Lawrence †‡
lawrennd@amazon.com

Abstract
Often in machine learning, data are collected as a combination of multiple conditions, e.g., the voice recordings of multiple persons, each labeled with an ID. How
could we build a model that captures the latent information related to these conditions and generalize to a new one with few data? We present a new model called
Latent Variable Multiple Output Gaussian Processes (LVMOGP) that allows to
jointly model multiple conditions for regression and generalize to a new condition
with a few data points at test time. LVMOGP infers the posteriors of Gaussian
processes together with a latent space representing the information about different
conditions. We derive an efficient variational inference method for LVMOGP for
which the computational complexity is as low as sparse Gaussian processes. We
show that LVMOGP significantly outperforms related Gaussian process methods
on various tasks with both synthetic and real data.

1

Introduction

Machine learning has been very successful in providing tools for learning a function mapping from an
input to an output, which is typically referred to as supervised learning. One of the most pronouncing
examples currently is deep neural networks (DNN), which empowers a wide range of applications
such as computer vision, speech recognition, natural language processing and machine translation
[Krizhevsky et al., 2012, Sutskever et al., 2014]. The modeling in terms of function mapping assumes
a one/many to one mapping between input and output. In other words, ideally the input should
contain sufficient information to uniquely determine the output apart from some sensory noise.
Unfortunately, in most cases, this assumption does not hold. We often collect data as a combination
of multiple scenarios, e.g., the voice recording of multiple persons, the images taken from different
models of cameras. We only have some labels to identify these scenarios in our data, e.g., we can
have the names of the speakers and the specifications of the used cameras. These labels themselves
do not represent the full information about these scenarios. A question therefore is how to use
these labels in a supervised learning task. A common practice in this case would be to ignore the
difference of scenarios, but this will result in low accuracy of modeling, because all the variations
related to the different scenarios are considered as the observation noise, as different scenarios are not
distinguishable anymore in the inputs,. Alternatively, we can either model each scenario separately,
which often suffers from too small training data, or use a one-hot encoding to represent each scenario.
In both of these cases, generalization/transfer to new scenario is not possible.
∗

Inferentia Limited.
Dept. of Computer Science, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.
‡
Amazon.com. The scientific idea and a preliminary version of code were developed prior to joining Amazon.
†

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

