Online Multiclass Boosting

Young Hun Jung

Jack Goetz
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
{yhjung, jrgoetz, tewaria}@umich.edu

Ambuj Tewari

Abstract
Recent work has extended the theoretical analysis of boosting algorithms to multiclass problems and to online settings. However, the multiclass extension is in the
batch setting and the online extensions only consider binary classification. We fill
this gap in the literature by defining, and justifying, a weak learning condition for
online multiclass boosting. This condition leads to an optimal boosting algorithm
that requires the minimal number of weak learners to achieve a certain accuracy.
Additionally, we propose an adaptive algorithm which is near optimal and enjoys
an excellent performance on real data due to its adaptive property.

1

Introduction

Boosting methods are a ensemble learning methods that aggregate several (not necessarily) weak
learners to build a stronger learner. When used to aggregate reasonably strong learners, boosting has
been shown to produce results competitive with other state-of-the-art methods (e.g., Korytkowski
et al. [1], Zhang and Wang [2]). Until recently theoretical development in this area has been focused
on batch binary settings where the learner can observe the entire training set at once, and the labels
are restricted to be binary (cf. Schapire and Freund [3]). In the past few years, progress has been
made to extend the theory and algorithms to more general settings.
Dealing with multiclass classification turned out to be more subtle than initially expected. Mukherjee
and Schapire [4] unify several different proposals made earlier in the literature and provide a general
framework for multiclass boosting. They state their weak learning conditions in terms of cost matrices
that have to satisfy certain restrictions: for example, labeling with the ground truth should have less
cost than labeling with some other labels. A weak learning condition, just like the binary condition,
states that the performance of a learner, now judged using a cost matrix, should be better than a
random guessing baseline. One particular condition they call the edge-over-random condition, proves
to be sufficient for boostability. The edge-over-random condition will also figure prominently in this
paper. They also consider a necessary and sufficient condition for boostability but it turns out to be
computationally intractable to be used in practice.
A recent trend in modern machine learning is to train learners in an online setting where the instances
come sequentially and the learner has to make predictions instantly. Oza [5] initially proposed an
online boosting algorithm that has accuracy comparable with the batch version, but it took several
years to design an algorithm with theoretical justification (Chen et al. [6]). Beygelzimer et al. [7]
achieved a breakthrough by proposing an optimal algorithm in online binary settings and an adaptive
algorithm that works quite well in practice. These theories in online binary boosting have led to
several extensions. For example, Chen et al. [8] combine one vs all method with binary boosting
algorithms to tackle online multiclass problems with bandit feedback, and Hu et al. [9] build a theory
of boosting in regression setting.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

