Collaborative Deep Learning in
Fixed Topology Networks
Zhanhong Jiang1 , Aditya Balu1 , Chinmay Hegde2 , and Soumik Sarkar1
1

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Iowa State University,
zhjiang, baditya, soumiks@iastate.edu
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering , Iowa State University, chinmay@iastate.edu

Abstract
There is significant recent interest to parallelize deep learning algorithms in order
to handle the enormous growth in data and model sizes. While most advances
focus on model parallelization and engaging multiple computing agents via using
a central parameter server, aspect of data parallelization along with decentralized
computation has not been explored sufficiently. In this context, this paper presents
a new consensus-based distributed SGD (CDSGD) (and its momentum variant,
CDMSGD) algorithm for collaborative deep learning over fixed topology networks
that enables data parallelization as well as decentralized computation. Such a framework can be extremely useful for learning agents with access to only local/private
data in a communication constrained environment. We analyze the convergence
properties of the proposed algorithm with strongly convex and nonconvex objective
functions with fixed and diminishing step sizes using concepts of Lyapunov function construction. We demonstrate the efficacy of our algorithms in comparison
with the baseline centralized SGD and the recently proposed federated averaging
algorithm (that also enables data parallelism) based on benchmark datasets such as
MNIST, CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we address the scalability of optimization algorithms for deep learning in a distributed
setting. Scaling up deep learning [1] is becoming increasingly crucial for large-scale applications
where the sizes of both the available data as well as the models are massive [2]. Among various
algorithmic advances, many recent attempts have been made to parallelize stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) based learning schemes across multiple computing agents. An early approach called Downpour
SGD [3], developed within Google’s disbelief software framework, primarily focuses on model
parallelization (i.e., splitting the model across the agents). A different approach known as elastic
averaging SGD (EASGD) [4] attempts to improve perform multiple SGDs in parallel; this method
uses a central parameter server that helps in assimilating parameter updates from the computing
agents. However, none of the above approaches concretely address the issue of data parallelization,
which is an important issue for several learning scenarios: for example, data parallelization enables
privacy-preserving learning in scenarios such as distributed learning with a network of mobile and
Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices. A recent scheme called Federated Averaging SGD [5] attempts
such a data parallelization in the context of deep learning with significant success; however, they still
use a central parameter server.
In contrast, deep learning with decentralized computation can be achieved via gossip SGD algorithms [6, 7], where agents communicate probabilistically without the aid of a parameter server.
However, decentralized computation in the sense of gossip SGD is not feasible in many real life
applications. For instance, consider a large (wide-area) sensor network [8, 9] or multi-agent robotic
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

