SafetyNets: Verifiable Execution of Deep Neural
Networks on an Untrusted Cloud
Zahra Ghodsi, Tianyu Gu, Siddharth Garg
New York University
{zg451, tg1553, sg175}@nyu.edu

Abstract
Inference using deep neural networks is often outsourced to the cloud since it is
a computationally demanding task. However, this raises a fundamental issue of
trust. How can a client be sure that the cloud has performed inference correctly?
A lazy cloud provider might use a simpler but less accurate model to reduce its
own computational load, or worse, maliciously modify the inference results sent to
the client. We propose SafetyNets, a framework that enables an untrusted server
(the cloud) to provide a client with a short mathematical proof of the correctness of
inference tasks that they perform on behalf of the client. Specifically, SafetyNets
develops and implements a specialized interactive proof (IP) protocol for verifiable
execution of a class of deep neural networks, i.e., those that can be represented
as arithmetic circuits. Our empirical results on three- and four-layer deep neural
networks demonstrate the run-time costs of SafetyNets for both the client and server
are low. SafetyNets detects any incorrect computations of the neural network by
the untrusted server with high probability, while achieving state-of-the-art accuracy
on the MNIST digit recognition (99.4%) and TIMIT speech recognition tasks
(75.22%).

1

Introduction

Recent advances in deep learning have shown that multi-layer neural networks can achieve state-ofthe-art performance on a wide range of machine learning tasks. However, training and performing
inference (using a trained neural network for predictions) can be computationally expensive. For this
reason, several commercial vendors have begun offering “machine learning as a service" (MLaaS)
solutions that allow clients to outsource machine learning computations, both training and inference,
to the cloud.
While promising, the MLaaS model (and outsourced computing, in general) raises immediate security
concerns, specifically relating to the integrity (or correctness) of computations performed by the
cloud and the privacy of the client’s data [16]. This paper focuses on the former, i.e., the question
of integrity. Specifically, how can a client perform inference using a deep neural network on an
untrusted cloud, while obtaining strong assurance that the cloud has performed inference correctly?
Indeed, there are compelling reasons for a client to be wary of a third-party cloud’s computations. For
one, the cloud has a financial incentive to be “lazy." A lazy cloud might use a simpler but less accurate
model, for instance, a single-layer instead of a multi-layer neural network, to reduce its computational
costs. Further the cloud could be compromised by malware that modifies the results sent back to
the client with malicious intent. For instance, the cloud might always mis-classify a certain digit in
a digit recognition task, or allow unauthorized access to certain users in a face recognition based
authentication system.
The security risks posed by cloud computing have spurred theoretical advances in the area of verifiable
computing (VC) [21]. The idea is to enable a client to provably (and cheaply) verify that an untrusted
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

