Decoupling “when to update” from “how to update”
Eran Malach
School of Computer Science
The Hebrew University, Israel
eran.malach@mail.huji.ac.il

Shai Shalev-Shwartz
School of Computer Science
The Hebrew University, Israel
shais@cs.huji.ac.il

Abstract
Deep learning requires data. A useful approach to obtain data is to be creative and
mine data from various sources, that were created for different purposes. Unfortunately, this approach often leads to noisy labels. In this paper, we propose a meta
algorithm for tackling the noisy labels problem. The key idea is to decouple “when
to update” from “how to update”. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm by mining data for gender classification by combining the Labeled Faces
in the Wild (LFW) face recognition dataset with a textual genderizing service,
which leads to a noisy dataset. While our approach is very simple to implement,
it leads to state-of-the-art results. We analyze some convergence properties of the
proposed algorithm.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep learning achieves state-of-the-art results in various different tasks, however,
neural networks are mostly trained using supervised learning, where a massive amount of labeled
data is required. While collecting unlabeled data is relatively easy given the amount of data available
on the web, providing accurate labeling is usually an expensive task. In order to overcome this
problem, data science becomes an art of extracting labels out of thin air. Some popular approaches
to labeling are crowdsourcing, where the labeling is not done by experts, and mining available
meta-data, such as text that is linked to an image in a webpage. Unfortunately, this gives rise to a
problem of abundant noisy labels - labels may often be corrupted [19], which might deteriorate the
performance of neural-networks [12].
Let us start with an intuitive explanation as to why noisy labels are problematic. Common neural
network optimization algorithms start with a random guess of what the classifier should be, and
then iteratively update the classifier based on stochastically sampled examples from a given dataset,
optimizing a given loss function such as the hinge loss or the logistic loss. In this process, wrong
predictions lead to an update of the classifier that would hopefully result in better classification
performance. While at the beginning of the training process the predictions are likely to be wrong,
as the classifier improves it will fail on less and less examples, thus making fewer and fewer updates.
On the other hand, in the presence of noisy labels, as the classifier improves the effect of the noise
increases - the classifier may give correct predictions, but will still have to update due to wrong
labeling. Thus, in an advanced stage of the training process the majority of the updates may actually
be due to wrongly labeled examples, and therefore will not allow the classifier to further improve.
To tackle this problem, we propose to decouple the decision of “when to update” from the decision
of “how to update”. As mentioned before, in the presence of noisy labels, if we update only when
the classifier’s prediction differs from the available label, then at the end of the optimization process,
these few updates will probably be mainly due to noisy labels. We would therefore like a different
update criterion, that would let us decide whether it is worthy to update the classifier based on a
given example. We would like to preserve the behavior of performing many updates at the beginning of the training process but only a few updates when we approach convergence. To do so, we
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

