Scalable Lévy Process Priors for Spectral Kernel
Learning

Phillip A. Jang

Andrew E. Loeb Matthew B. Davidow
Cornell University

Andrew Gordon Wilson

Abstract
Gaussian processes are rich distributions over functions, with generalization properties determined by a kernel function. When used for long-range extrapolation,
predictions are particularly sensitive to the choice of kernel parameters. It is
therefore critical to account for kernel uncertainty in our predictive distributions.
We propose a distribution over kernels formed by modelling a spectral mixture
density with a Lévy process. The resulting distribution has support for all stationary covariances—including the popular RBF, periodic, and Matérn kernels—
combined with inductive biases which enable automatic and data efficient learning, long-range extrapolation, and state of the art predictive performance. The
proposed model also presents an approach to spectral regularization, as the Lévy
process introduces a sparsity-inducing prior over mixture components, allowing
automatic selection over model order and pruning of extraneous components. We
exploit the algebraic structure of the proposed process for O(n) training and O(1)
predictions. We perform extrapolations having reasonable uncertainty estimates
on several benchmarks, show that the proposed model can recover flexible ground
truth covariances and that it is robust to errors in initialization.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes (GPs) naturally give rise to a function space view of modelling, whereby we
place a prior distribution over functions, and reason about the properties of likely functions under
this prior (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006). Given data, we then infer a posterior distribution over
functions to make predictions. The generalisation behavior of the Gaussian process is determined
by its prior support (which functions are a priori possible) and its inductive biases (which functions
are a priori likely), which are in turn encoded by a kernel function. However, popular kernels,
and even multiple kernel learning procedures, typically cannot extract highly expressive hidden
representations, as was envisaged for neural networks (MacKay, 1998; Wilson, 2014).
To discover such representations, recent approaches have advocated building more expressive kernel functions. For instance, spectral mixture kernels (Wilson & Adams, 2013b) were introduced for
flexible kernel learning and extrapolation, by modelling a spectral density with a scale-location mixture of Gaussians, with promising results. However, Wilson & Adams (2013b) specify the number of
mixture components by hand, and do not characterize uncertainty over the mixture hyperparameters.
As kernel functions become increasingly expressive and parametrized, it becomes natural to also
adopt a function space view of kernel learning—to represent uncertainty over the values of the
kernel function, and to reflect the belief that the kernel does not have a simple form. Just as we
use Gaussian processes over functions to model data, we can apply the function space view a step
further in a hierarchical model—with a prior distribution over kernels.
In this paper, we introduce a scalable distribution over kernels by modelling a spectral density, the
Fourier transform of a kernel, with a Lévy process. We consider both scale-location mixtures of
Gaussians and Laplacians as basis functions for the Lévy process, to induce a prior over kernels that
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

