Adaptive Active Hypothesis Testing under Limited
Information
Fabio Cecchi
Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands
f.cecchi@tue.nl
Nidhi Hegde
Nokia Bell Labs, Paris-Saclay, France
nidhi.hegde@nokia-bell-labs.com

Abstract
We consider the problem of active sequential hypothesis testing where a Bayesian
decision maker must infer the true hypothesis from a set of hypotheses. The
decision maker may choose for a set of actions, where the outcome of an action is
corrupted by independent noise. In this paper we consider a special case where the
decision maker has limited knowledge about the distribution of observations for
each action, in that only a binary value is observed. Our objective is to infer the
true hypothesis with low error, while minimizing the number of action sampled.
Our main results include the derivation of a lower bound on sample size for our
system under limited knowledge and the design of an active learning policy that
matches this lower bound and outperforms similar known algorithms.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of active sequential hypothesis testing with incomplete information. The
original problem, first studied by Chernoff [1], is one where a Bayesian decision maker must infer
the correct hypothesis from a set of J hypotheses. At each step the decision maker may choose from
W actions where the outcome of an action is a random variable that depends on the action and the
true (hidden) hypothesis. In prior work, the probability distribution functions on the outcomes are
assumed to be known. In the present work we assume that these distributions are not known, and
only some rough information about the outcomes of the actions is known, to be made more precise
further on.
Active hypothesis testing is an increasingly important problem these days, with applications that
include the following. (a) Medical diagnostics ([2]) systems that include clinical trials for testing a
new treatment, or diagnostics of a new disease. (b) Crowdsourcing: online platforms for task-worker
matching such as Amazon’s Mechanical Turk or TaskRabbit, where, as new tasks arrive, they must
be matched to workers capable of working on them. (c) Customer hotline centres or Q&A forums:
online platforms such as StackExchange where questions are submitted, and users with varying
capabilities are available for providing an answer. This includes customer service centres where
customer tickets are submitted and the nature of the problem must be learned before its treatment (an
example where supervised learning techniques are used is [3]). (d) Content search problems where
an incoming image must be matched to known contents, as studied in [4].
We now informally describe our model. In the general instance of our problem, the true hypothesis,
θ∗ is one in a set of J hypotheses, J = {θ1 , . . . , θJ }, and a set of W actions is available, where
the outcomes of the actions depend on the true hypothesis. When the true hypothesis is θj and
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

