Statistical Cost Sharing
Eric Balkanski
Harvard University
ericbalkanski@g.harvard.edu

Umar Syed
Google NYC
usyed@google.com

Sergei Vassilvitskii
Google NYC
sergeiv@google.com

Abstract
We study the cost sharing problem for cooperative games in situations where the
cost function C is not available via oracle queries, but must instead be learned from
samples drawn from a distribution, represented as tuples (S, C(S)), for different
subsets S of players. We formalize this approach, which we call S TATISTICAL
C OST S HARING, and consider the computation of the core and the Shapley value.
Expanding on the work by Balcan et al. [2015], we give precise sample complexity
bounds for computing cost shares that satisfy the core property with high probability for any function with a non-empty core. For the Shapley value, which has
never been studied in this setting, we show that for submodular cost functions
with bounded curvature
 it can be approximated from samples from the uniform
p
distribution to a 1  factor, and that the bound is tight. We then define statistical analogues of the Shapley axioms, and derive a notion of statistical Shapley
value and that these can be approximated arbitrarily well from samples from any
distribution and for any function.

1

Introduction

The cost sharing problem asks for an equitable way to split the cost of a service among all of the
participants. Formally, there is a cost function C defined over all subsets S ✓ N of a ground set of
elements, or players, and the objective is to fairly divide the cost of the ground set C(N ) among the
players. Unlike traditional learning problems, the goal here is not to predict the cost of the service,
but rather learn which ways of dividing the cost among the players are equitable.
Cost sharing is central to cooperative game theory, and there is a rich literature developing the
key concepts and principles to reason about this topic. Two popular cost sharing concepts are
the core [Gillies, 1959], where no group of players has an incentive to deviate, and the Shapley
value [Shapley, 1953], which is the unique vector of cost shares satisfying four natural axioms.
While both the core and the Shapley value are easy to define, computing them poses additional
challenges. One obstacle is that the computation of the cost shares requires knowledge of costs in
myriad different scenarios. For example, computing the exact Shapley value requires one to look at
the marginal contribution of a player over all possible subsets of others. Recent work [Liben-Nowell
et al., 2012] shows that one can find approximate Shapley values for a restricted subset of cost
functions by looking at the costs for polynomially many specifically chosen subsets. In practice,
however, another roadblock emerges: one cannot simply query for the cost of an arbitrary subset.
Rather, the subsets are passively observed, and the costs of unobserved subsets are simply unknown.
We share the opinion of Balcan et al. [2016] that the main difficulty with using cost sharing methods
in concrete applications is the information needed to compute them.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

