Predicting Organic Reaction Outcomes with
Weisfeiler-Lehman Network
Wengong Jin† Connor W. Coley‡ Regina Barzilay† Tommi Jaakkola†
†
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab, MIT
‡
Department of Chemical Engineering, MIT
†
{wengong,regina,tommi}@csail.mit.edu, ‡ ccoley@mit.edu

Abstract
The prediction of organic reaction outcomes is a fundamental problem in computational chemistry. Since a reaction may involve hundreds of atoms, fully exploring
the space of possible transformations is intractable. The current solution utilizes
reaction templates to limit the space, but it suffers from coverage and efficiency
issues. In this paper, we propose a template-free approach to efficiently explore the
space of product molecules by first pinpointing the reaction center – the set of nodes
and edges where graph edits occur. Since only a small number of atoms contribute
to reaction center, we can directly enumerate candidate products. The generated
candidates are scored by a Weisfeiler-Lehman Difference Network that models
high-order interactions between changes occurring at nodes across the molecule.
Our framework outperforms the top-performing template-based approach with a
10% margin, while running orders of magnitude faster. Finally, we demonstrate
that the model accuracy rivals the performance of domain experts.

1

Introduction

One of the fundamental problems in organic chemistry is the prediction of which products form as
a result of a chemical reaction [16, 17]. While the products can be determined unambiguously for
simple reactions, it is a major challenge for many complex organic reactions. Indeed, experimentation
remains the primary manner in which reaction outcomes are analyzed. This is time consuming,
expensive, and requires the help of an experienced chemist. The empirical approach is particularly
limiting for the goal of automatically designing efficient reaction sequences that produce specific
target molecule(s), a problem known as chemical retrosynthesis [16, 17].
Viewing molecules as labeled graphs over atoms, we propose to formulate the reaction prediction
task as a graph transformation problem. A chemical reaction transforms input molecules (reactants)
into new molecules (products) by performing a set of graph edits over reactant molecules, adding
new edges and/or eliminating existing ones. Given that a typical reaction may involve more than 100
atoms, fully exploring all possible transformations is intractable. The computational challenge is
how to reduce the space of possible edits effectively, and how to select the product from among the
resulting candidates.
The state-of-the-art solution is based on reaction templates (Figure 1). A reaction template specifies a
molecular subgraph pattern to which it can be applied and the corresponding graph transformation.
Since multiple templates can match a set of reactants, another model is trained to filter candidate
products using standard supervised approaches. The key drawbacks of this approach are coverage
and scalability. A large number of templates is required to ensure that at least one can reconstitute the
correct product. The templates are currently either hand-crafted by experts [7, 1, 15] or generated
from reaction databases with heuristic algorithms [2, 11, 3]. For example, Coley et al. [3] extracts
140K unique reaction templates from a database of 1 million reactions. Beyond coverage, applying a
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

