Variational Memory Addressing
in Generative Models
Jörg Bornschein Andriy Mnih Daniel Zoran Danilo J. Rezende
{bornschein, amnih, danielzoran, danilor}@google.com
DeepMind, London, UK

Abstract
Aiming to augment generative models with external memory, we interpret the
output of a memory module with stochastic addressing as a conditional mixture
distribution, where a read operation corresponds to sampling a discrete memory
address and retrieving the corresponding content from memory. This perspective
allows us to apply variational inference to memory addressing, which enables
effective training of the memory module by using the target information to guide
memory lookups. Stochastic addressing is particularly well-suited for generative
models as it naturally encourages multimodality which is a prominent aspect of
most high-dimensional datasets. Treating the chosen address as a latent variable
also allows us to quantify the amount of information gained with a memory lookup
and measure the contribution of the memory module to the generative process.
To illustrate the advantages of this approach we incorporate it into a variational
autoencoder and apply the resulting model to the task of generative few-shot
learning. The intuition behind this architecture is that the memory module can
pick a relevant template from memory and the continuous part of the model can
concentrate on modeling remaining variations. We demonstrate empirically that
our model is able to identify and access the relevant memory contents even with
hundreds of unseen Omniglot characters in memory.

1

Introduction

Recent years have seen rapid developments in generative modelling. Much of the progress was driven
by the use of powerful neural networks to parameterize conditional distributions composed to define
the generative process (e.g., VAEs [1, 2], GANs [3]). In the Variational Autoencoder (VAE) framework
for example, we typically define a generative model p(z), p✓ (x|z) and an approximate inference
model q (z|x). All conditional distributions are parameterized by multilayered perceptrons (MLPs)
which, in the simplest case, output the mean and the diagonal variance of a Normal distribution
given the conditioning variables. We then optimize a variational lower bound to learn the generative
model for x. Considering recent progress, we now have the theory and the tools to train powerful,
potentially non-factorial parametric conditional distributions p(x|y) that generalize well with respect
to x (normalizing flows [4], inverse autoregressive flows [5], etc.).
Another line of work which has been gaining popularity recently is memory augmented neural
networks [6, 7, 8]. In this family of models the network is augmented with a memory buffer which
allows read and write operations and is persistent in time. Such models usually handle input and output
to the memory buffer using differentiable “soft” write/read operations to allow back-propagating
gradients during training.
Here we propose a memory-augmented generative model that uses a discrete latent variable a acting
as an address into the memory buffer M. This stochastic perspective allows us to introduce a
variational approximation over the addressing variable which takes advantage of target information
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

