Universal consistency and minimax rates for online
Mondrian Forests
Jaouad Mourtada
Centre de Mathématiques Appliquées
École Polytechnique, Palaiseau, France
jaouad.mourtada@polytechnique.edu

Stéphane Gaïffas
Centre de Mathématiques Appliquées
École Polytechnique,Palaiseau, France
stéphane.gaiffas@polytechnique.edu

Erwan Scornet
Centre de Mathématiques Appliquées
École Polytechnique,Palaiseau, France
erwan.scornet@polytechnique.edu

Abstract
We establish the consistency of an algorithm of Mondrian Forests [LRT14, LRT16],
a randomized classification algorithm that can be implemented online. First, we
amend the original Mondrian Forest algorithm proposed in [LRT14], that considers
a fixed lifetime parameter. Indeed, the fact that this parameter is fixed hinders
the statistical consistency of the original procedure. Our modified Mondrian
Forest algorithm grows trees with increasing lifetime parameters λn , and uses
an alternative updating rule, allowing to work also in an online fashion. Second,
we provide a theoretical analysis establishing simple conditions for consistency.
Our theoretical analysis also exhibits a surprising fact: our algorithm achieves the
minimax rate (optimal rate) for the estimation of a Lipschitz regression function,
which is a strong extension of previous results [AG14] to an arbitrary dimension.

1

Introduction

Random Forests (RF) are state-of-the-art classification and regression algorithms that proceed by
averaging the forecasts of a number of randomized decision trees grown in parallel (see [Bre01, Bre04,
GEW06, BDL08, Bia12, BS16, DMdF14, SBV15]). Despite their widespread use and remarkable
success in practical applications, the theoretical properties of such algorithms are still not fully
understood [Bia12, DMdF14]. Among these methods, purely random forests [Bre00, BDL08, Gen12,
AG14] that grow the individual trees independently of the sample, are particularly amenable to
theoretical analysis; the consistency of such classifiers was obtained in [BDL08].
An important limitation of the most commonly used random forests algorithms, such as Breiman’s
Random Forest [Bre01] and the Extra-Trees algorithm [GEW06], is that they are typically trained in
a batch manner, using the whole dataset to build the trees. In order to enable their use in situations
when large amounts of data have to be incorporated in a streaming fashion, several online adaptations
of the decision trees and RF algorithms have been proposed [DH00, TGP11, SLS+ 09, DMdF13].
Of particular interest in this article is the Mondrian Forest algorithm, an efficient and accurate online
random forest classifier [LRT14]. This algorithm is based on the Mondrian process [RT09, Roy11], a
natural probability distribution on the set of recursive partitions of the unit cube [0, 1]d . An appealing
property of Mondrian processes is that they can be updated in an online fashion: in [LRT14], the use
of the conditional Mondrian process enabled to design an online algorithm that matched its batch
counterpart. While Mondrian Forest offer several advantages, both computational and in terms of
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

