Dynamic Revenue Sharing∗

Santiago Balseiro
Columbia University
New York City, NY
srb2155@columbia.edu

Max Lin
Google
New York City, NY
whlin@google.com

Vahab Mirrokni
Google
New York City, NY
mirrokni@google.com

Song Zuo†
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
songzuo.z@gmail.com

Renato Paes Leme
Google
New York City, NY
renatoppl@google.com

Abstract
Many online platforms act as intermediaries between a seller and a set of buyers.
Examples of such settings include online retailers (such as Ebay) selling items
on behalf of sellers to buyers, or advertising exchanges (such as AdX) selling
pageviews on behalf of publishers to advertisers. In such settings, revenue sharing
is a central part of running such a marketplace for the intermediary, and fixedpercentage revenue sharing schemes are often used to split the revenue among the
platform and the sellers. In particular, such revenue sharing schemes require the
platform to (i) take at most a constant fraction α of the revenue from auctions and
(ii) pay the seller at least the seller declared opportunity cost c for each item sold.
A straightforward way to satisfy the constraints is to set a reserve price at c/(1 − α)
for each item, but it is not the optimal solution on maximizing the profit of the
intermediary.
While previous studies (by Mirrokni and Gomes, and by Niazadeh et al) focused on
revenue-sharing schemes in static double auctions, in this paper, we take advantage
of the repeated nature of the auctions. In particular, we introduce dynamic revenue
sharing schemes where we balance the two constraints over different auctions
to achieve higher profit and seller revenue. This is directly motivated by the
practice of advertising exchanges where the fixed-percentage revenue-share should
be met across all auctions and not in each auction. In this paper, we characterize
the optimal revenue sharing scheme that satisfies both constraints in expectation.
Finally, we empirically evaluate our revenue sharing scheme on real data.

1

Introduction

The space of internet advertising can be divided in two large areas: search ads and display ads. While
similar at first glance, they are different both in terms of business constraints in the market as well as
algorithmic challenges. A notable difference is that in search ads the auctioneer and the seller are the
same party, as the same platform owns the search page and operates the auction. Thus search ads are
a one-sided market: the only agents outside the control of the auctioneer are buyers. In display ads,
on the other hand, the platform operates the auction but, in most cases, it does not own the pages in
∗

We thank Jim Giles, Nitish Korula, Martin Pál, Rita Ren and Balu Sivan for the fruitful discussion and their
comments on early versions of this paper. We also thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments.
A full version of this paper can be found at https://ssrn.com/abstract=2956715.
†
The work was done when this author was an intern at Google. This author was supported by the National
Basic Research Program of China Grant 2011CBA00300, 2011CBA00301, the Natural Science Foundation of
China Grant 61033001, 61361136003, 61303077, 61561146398, a Tsinghua Initiative Scientific Research Grant
and a China Youth 1000-talent program.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

