PASS-GLM: polynomial approximate sufficient
statistics for scalable Bayesian GLM inference

Jonathan H. Huggins
CSAIL, MIT
jhuggins@mit.edu

Ryan P. Adams
Google Brain and Princeton
rpa@princeton.edu

Tamara Broderick
CSAIL, MIT
tbroderick@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Generalized linear models (GLMs)—such as logistic regression, Poisson regression, and robust regression—provide interpretable models for diverse data types.
Probabilistic approaches, particularly Bayesian ones, allow coherent estimates of
uncertainty, incorporation of prior information, and sharing of power across experiments via hierarchical models. In practice, however, the approximate Bayesian
methods necessary for inference have either failed to scale to large data sets or
failed to provide theoretical guarantees on the quality of inference. We propose a
new approach based on constructing polynomial approximate sufficient statistics
for GLMs (PASS-GLM). We demonstrate that our method admits a simple algorithm as well as trivial streaming and distributed extensions that do not compound
error across computations. We provide theoretical guarantees on the quality of
point (MAP) estimates, the approximate posterior, and posterior mean and uncertainty estimates. We validate our approach empirically in the case of logistic
regression using a quadratic approximation and show competitive performance
with stochastic gradient descent, MCMC, and the Laplace approximation in terms
of speed and multiple measures of accuracy—including on an advertising data set
with 40 million data points and 20,000 covariates.

1

Introduction

Scientists, engineers, and companies increasingly use large-scale data—often only available via
streaming—to obtain insights into their respective problems. For instance, scientists might be interested in understanding how varying experimental inputs leads to different experimental outputs;
or medical professionals might be interested in understanding which elements of patient histories
lead to certain health outcomes. Generalized linear models (GLMs) enable these practitioners to
explicitly and interpretably model the effect of covariates on outcomes while allowing flexible noise
distributions—including binary, count-based, and heavy-tailed observations. Bayesian approaches
further facilitate (1) understanding the importance of covariates via coherent estimates of parameter
uncertainty, (2) incorporating prior knowledge into the analysis, and (3) sharing of power across different experiments or domains via hierarchical modeling. In practice, however, an exact Bayesian
analysis is computationally infeasible for GLMs, so an approximation is necessary. While some
approximate methods provide asymptotic guarantees on quality, these methods often only run successfully in the small-scale data regime. In order to run on (at least) millions of data points and thousands of covariates, practitioners often turn to heuristics with no theoretical guarantees on quality.
In this work, we propose a novel and simple approximation framework for probabilistic inference in
GLMs. We demonstrate theoretical guarantees on the quality of point estimates in the finite-sample
setting and on the quality of Bayesian posterior approximations produced by our framework. We
show that our framework trivially extends to streaming data and to distributed architectures, with
no additional compounding of error in these settings. We empirically demonstrate the practicality
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

