Reducing Reparameterization Gradient Variance

Andrew C. Miller∗
Harvard University
acm@seas.harvard.edu

Nicholas J. Foti
University of Washington
nfoti@uw.edu

Alexander D’Amour
UC Berkeley
alexdamour@berkeley.edu

Ryan P. Adams
Google Brain and Princeton University
rpa@princeton.edu

Abstract
Optimization with noisy gradients has become ubiquitous in statistics and machine learning. Reparameterization gradients, or gradient estimates computed via
the “reparameterization trick,” represent a class of noisy gradients often used in
Monte Carlo variational inference (MCVI). However, when these gradient estimators are too noisy, the optimization procedure can be slow or fail to converge. One
way to reduce noise is to generate more samples for the gradient estimate, but this
can be computationally expensive. Instead, we view the noisy gradient as a random variable, and form an inexpensive approximation of the generating procedure
for the gradient sample. This approximation has high correlation with the noisy
gradient by construction, making it a useful control variate for variance reduction. We demonstrate our approach on a non-conjugate hierarchical model and a
Bayesian neural net where our method attained orders of magnitude (20-2,000×)
reduction in gradient variance resulting in faster and more stable optimization.

1

Introduction

Representing massive datasets with flexible probabilistic models has been central to the success of
many statistics and machine learning applications, but the computational burden of fitting these models is a major hurdle. For optimization-based fitting methods, a central approach to this problem has
been replacing expensive evaluations of the gradient of the objective function with cheap, unbiased,
stochastic estimates of the gradient. For example, stochastic gradient descent using small minibatches of (conditionally) i.i.d. data to estimate the gradient at each iteration is a popular approach
with massive data sets. Alternatively, some learning methods sample directly from a generative
model or approximating distribution to estimate the gradients of interest, for example, in learning
algorithms for implicit models [18, 30] and generative adversarial networks [2, 9].
Approximate Bayesian inference using variational techniques (variational inference, or VI) has also
motivated the development of new stochastic gradient estimators, as the variational approach reframes the integration problem of inference as an optimization problem [4]. VI approaches seek out
the distribution from a well-understood variational family of distributions that best approximates
an intractable posterior distribution. The VI objective function itself is often intractable, but recent
work has shown that it can be optimized with stochastic gradient methods that use Monte Carlo
estimates of the gradient [19, 14, 22, 25], which we call Monte Carlo variational inference (MCVI).
In MCVI, generating samples from an approximate posterior distribution is the source of gradient
stochasticity. Alternatively, stochastic variational inference (SVI) [11] and other stochastic opti∗

http://andymiller.github.io/

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

