Dilated Recurrent Neural Networks
Shiyu Chang1⇤, Yang Zhang1⇤, Wei Han2⇤, Mo Yu1 , Xiaoxiao Guo1 , Wei Tan1 ,
Xiaodong Cui1 , Michael Witbrock1 , Mark Hasegawa-Johnson2 , Thomas S. Huang2
1
IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown, NY 10598, USA
2
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA
{shiyu.chang, yang.zhang2, xiaoxiao.guo}@ibm.com,
{yum, wtan, cuix, witbrock}@us.ibm.com,
{weihan3, jhasegaw, t-huang1}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Learning with recurrent neural networks (RNNs) on long sequences is a notoriously difficult task. There are three major challenges: 1) complex dependencies, 2)
vanishing and exploding gradients, and 3) efficient parallelization. In this paper,
we introduce a simple yet effective RNN connection structure, the D ILATED RNN,
which simultaneously tackles all of these challenges. The proposed architecture is
characterized by multi-resolution dilated recurrent skip connections, and can be
combined flexibly with diverse RNN cells. Moreover, the D ILATED RNN reduces
the number of parameters needed and enhances training efficiency significantly,
while matching state-of-the-art performance (even with standard RNN cells) in
tasks involving very long-term dependencies. To provide a theory-based quantification of the architecture’s advantages, we introduce a memory capacity measure,
the mean recurrent length, which is more suitable for RNNs with long skip
connections than existing measures. We rigorously prove the advantages of the
D ILATED RNN over other recurrent neural architectures. The code for our method
is publicly available1 .

1

Introduction

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have been shown to have remarkable performance on many
sequential learning problems. However, long sequence learning with RNNs remains a challenging
problem for the following reasons: first, memorizing extremely long-term dependencies while
maintaining mid- and short-term memory is difficult; second, training RNNs using back-propagationthrough-time is impeded by vanishing and exploding gradients; And lastly, both forward- and
back-propagation are performed in a sequential manner, which makes the training time-consuming.
Many attempts have been made to overcome these difficulties using specialized neural structures, cells,
and optimization techniques. Long short-term memory (LSTM) [10] and gated recurrent units (GRU)
[6] powerfully model complex data dependencies. Recent attempts have focused on multi-timescale
designs, including clockwork RNNs [12], phased LSTM [17], hierarchical multi-scale RNNs [5], etc.
The problem of vanishing and exploding gradients is mitigated by LSTM and GRU memory gates;
other partial solutions include gradient clipping [18], orthogonal and unitary weight optimization
[2, 14, 24], and skip connections across multiple timestamps [8, 30]. For efficient sequential training,
WaveNet [22] abandoned RNN structures, proposing instead the dilated causal convolutional neural
network (CNN) architecture, which provides significant advantages in working directly with raw
audio waveforms. However, the length of dependencies captured by a dilated CNN is limited by its
kernel size, whereas an RNN’s autoregressive modeling can, in theory, capture potentially infinitely
⇤

1

Denotes equal contribution.
https://github.com/code-terminator/DilatedRNN

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

