Flexpoint: An Adaptive Numerical Format for
Efficient Training of Deep Neural Networks
Urs Köster∗,† Tristan J. Webb∗, Xin Wang∗, Marcel Nassar∗, Arjun K. Bansal, William H.
Constable, Oğuz H. Elibol, Scott Gray‡, Stewart Hall†, Luke Hornof, Amir Khosrowshahi,
Carey Kloss, Ruby J. Pai, Naveen Rao
Artificial Intelligence Products Group, Intel Corporation

Abstract
Deep neural networks are commonly developed and trained in 32-bit floating point
format. Significant gains in performance and energy efficiency could be realized
by training and inference in numerical formats optimized for deep learning. Despite advances in limited precision inference in recent years, training of neural
networks in low bit-width remains a challenging problem. Here we present the
Flexpoint data format, aiming at a complete replacement of 32-bit floating point
format training and inference, designed to support modern deep network topologies
without modifications. Flexpoint tensors have a shared exponent that is dynamically adjusted to minimize overflows and maximize available dynamic range. We
validate Flexpoint by training AlexNet [1], a deep residual network [2, 3] and a
generative adversarial network [4], using a simulator implemented with the neon
deep learning framework. We demonstrate that 16-bit Flexpoint closely matches
32-bit floating point in training all three models, without any need for tuning of
model hyperparameters. Our results suggest Flexpoint as a promising numerical
format for future hardware for training and inference.

1

Introduction

Deep learning is a rapidly growing field that achieves state-of-the-art performance in solving many
key data-driven problems in a wide range of industries. With major chip makers’ quest for novel
hardware architectures for deep learning, the next few years will see the advent of new computing
devices optimized for training and inference of deep neural networks with increasing performance at
decreasing cost.
Typically deep learning research is done on CPU and/or GPU architectures that offer native 64-bit,
32-bit or 16-bit floating point data format and operations. Substantial improvements in hardware
footprint, power consumption, speed, and memory requirements could be obtained with more efficient
data formats. This calls for innovations in numerical representations and operations specifically
tailored for deep learning needs.
Recently, inference with low bit-width fixed point data formats has made significant advancement,
whereas low bit-width training remains an open challenge [5, 6, 7]. Because training in low precision reduces memory footprint and increases the computational density of the deployed hardware
infrastructure, it is crucial to efficient and scalable deep learning applications.
∗

Equal contribution.
Currently with Cerebras Systems, work done while at Nervana Systems and Intel Corporation.
‡
Currently with OpenAI, work done while at Nervana Systems.
†

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

