ADMM without a Fixed Penalty Parameter:
Faster Convergence with New Adaptive Penalization

Yi Xu† , Mingrui Liu† , Qihang Lin‡ , Tianbao Yang†
Department of Computer Science, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA
‡
Department of Management Sciences, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA
{yi-xu, mingrui-liu, qihang-lin, tianbao-yang}@uiowa.edu
†

Abstract
Alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) has received tremendous
interest for solving numerous problems in machine learning, statistics and signal
processing. However, it is known that the performance of ADMM and many of its
variants is very sensitive to the penalty parameter of a quadratic penalty applied
to the equality constraints. Although several approaches have been proposed for
dynamically changing this parameter during the course of optimization, they do not
yield theoretical improvement in the convergence rate and are not directly applicable to stochastic ADMM. In this paper, we develop a new ADMM and its linearized
variant with a new adaptive scheme to update the penalty parameter. Our methods
can be applied under both deterministic and stochastic optimization settings for
structured non-smooth objective function. The novelty of the proposed scheme lies
at that it is adaptive to a local sharpness property of the objective function, which
marks the key difference from previous adaptive scheme that adjusts the penalty
parameter per-iteration based on certain conditions on iterates. On theoretical side,
given the local sharpness characterized by an exponent θ ∈ (0, 1], we show that the
1−θ 1
e
) in the
proposed ADMM enjoys an improved iteration complexity of O(1/
2(1−θ)
deterministic setting and an iteration complexity of e
O(1/
) in the stochastic
setting without smoothness and strong convexity assumptions. The complexity in
either setting improves that of the standard ADMM which only uses a fixed penalty
parameter. On the practical side, we demonstrate that the proposed algorithms
converge comparably to, if not much faster than, ADMM with a fine-tuned fixed
penalty parameter.

1

Introduction

Our problem of interest is the following convex optimization problem that commonly arises in
machine learning, statistics and signal processing:
min
x∈Ω

F (x) , f (x) + ψ(Ax)

(1)

where Ω ⊆ Rd is a closed convex set, f : Rd → R and ψ : Rm → R are proper lower-semicontinuous
convex functions, and A ∈ Rm×d is a matrix. In this paper, we consider solving (1) by alternating
direction method of multipliers (ADMM) in two paradigms, namely deterministic optimization and
stochastic optimization. In both paradigms, ADMM has been employed widely for solving the
regularized statistical learning problems like (1) due to its capability of tackling the sophisticated
structured regularization term ψ(Ax) in (1) (e.g., the generalized lasso kAxk1 ), which is often an
1e

O() suppresses a logarithmic factor.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

