Variational Inference for Gaussian Process Models
with Linear Complexity

Ching-An Cheng
Institute for Robotics and Intelligent Machines
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
cacheng@gatech.edu

Byron Boots
Institute for Robotics and Intelligent Machines
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
bboots@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
Large-scale Gaussian process inference has long faced practical challenges due
to time and space complexity that is superlinear in dataset size. While sparse
variational Gaussian process models are capable of learning from large-scale
data, standard strategies for sparsifying the model can prevent the approximation
of complex functions. In this work, we propose a novel variational Gaussian
process model that decouples the representation of mean and covariance functions
in reproducing kernel Hilbert space. We show that this new parametrization
generalizes previous models. Furthermore, it yields a variational inference problem
that can be solved by stochastic gradient ascent with time and space complexity that
is only linear in the number of mean function parameters, regardless of the choice of
kernels, likelihoods, and inducing points. This strategy makes the adoption of largescale expressive Gaussian process models possible. We run several experiments
on regression tasks and show that this decoupled approach greatly outperforms
previous sparse variational Gaussian process inference procedures.

1

Introduction

Gaussian process (GP) inference is a popular nonparametric framework for reasoning about functions
under uncertainty. However, the expressiveness of GPs comes at a price: solving (approximate)
inference for a GP with N data instances has time and space complexities in Θ(N 3 ) and Θ(N 2 ),
respectively. Therefore, GPs have traditionally been viewed as a tool for problems with small- or
medium-sized datasets
Recently, the concept of inducing points has been used to scale GPs to larger datasets. The idea is to
summarize a full GP model with statistics on a sparse set of M  N fictitious observations [18, 24].
By representing a GP with these inducing points, the time and the space complexities are reduced to
O(N M 2 + M 3 ) and O(N M + M 2 ), respectively. To further process datasets that are too large to fit
into memory, stochastic approximations have been proposed for regression [10] and classification [11].
These methods have similar complexity bounds, but with N replaced by the size of a mini-batch Nm .
Despite the success of sparse models, the scalability issues of GP inference are far from resolved.
The major obstruction is that the cubic complexity in M in the aforementioned upper-bound is also
a lower-bound, which results from the inversion of an M -by-M covariance matrix defined on the
inducing points. As a consequence, these models can only afford to use a small set of M basis
functions, limiting the expressiveness of GPs for prediction.
In this work, we show that superlinear complexity is not completely necessary. Inspired by the
reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) representation of GPs [2], we propose a generalized
variational GP model, called DGPs (Decoupled Gaussian Processes), which decouples the bases
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

