f -GANs in an Information Geometric Nutshell

Richard Nock†,‡,§
Zac Cranko‡,†
Aditya Krishna Menon†,‡
†,‡
Lizhen Qu
Robert C. Williamson‡,†
†
‡
Data61, the Australian National University and § the University of Sydney
{firstname.lastname, aditya.menon, bob.williamson}@data61.csiro.au

Abstract
Nowozin et al showed last year how to extend the GAN principle to all f divergences. The approach is elegant but falls short of a full description of the
supervised game, and says little about the key player, the generator: for example,
what does the generator actually converge to if solving the GAN game means
convergence in some space of parameters? How does that provide hints on the generator’s design and compare to the flourishing but almost exclusively experimental
literature on the subject? In this paper, we unveil a broad class of distributions for
which such convergence happens — namely, deformed exponential families, a wide
superset of exponential families —. We show that current deep architectures are
able to factorize a very large number of such densities using an especially compact
design, hence displaying the power of deep architectures and their concinnity in the
f -GAN game. This result holds given a sufficient condition on activation functions
— which turns out to be satisfied by popular choices. The key to our results is a
variational generalization of an old theorem that relates the KL divergence between
regular exponential families and divergences between their natural parameters. We
complete this picture with additional results and experimental insights on how
these results may be used to ground further improvements of GAN architectures,
via (i) a principled design of the activation functions in the generator and (ii) an
explicit integration of proper composite losses’ link function in the discriminator.

1

Introduction

In a recent paper, Nowozin et al. [30] showed that the GAN principle [15] can be extended to the
variational formulation of all f -divergences. In the GAN game, there is an unknown distribution P
which we want to approximate using a parameterised distribution Q. Q is learned by a generator
by finding a saddle point of a function which we summarize for now as f -GAN(P, Q), where f is
a convex function (see eq. (7) below for its formal expression). A part of the generator’s training
involves as a subroutine a supervised adversary — hence, the saddle point formulation – called
discriminator, which tries to guess whether randomly generated observations come from P or Q.
Ideally, at the end of this supervised game, we want Q to be close to P, and a good measure of this is
the f -divergence If (PkQ), also known as Ali-Silvey distance [1, 12]. Initially, one choice of f was
considered [15]. Nowozin et al. significantly grounded the game and expanded its scope by showing
that for any f convex and suitably defined, then [30, Eq. 4]:
f -GAN(P, Q) ≤ If (PkQ) .

(1)

The inequality is an equality if the discriminator is powerful enough. So, solving the f -GAN game
can give guarantees on how P and Q are distant to each other in terms of f -divergence. This elegant
characterization of the supervised game unfortunately falls short of justifying or elucidating all
parameters of the supervised game [30, Section 2.4], and the paper is also silent regarding a key
part of the game: the link between distributions in the variational formulation and the generator, the
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

