Clustering Billions of Reads for DNA Data Storage

Cyrus Rashtchiana,b Konstantin Makarycheva,c Miklós Rácza,d Siena Dumas Anga
Djordje Jevdjica Sergey Yekhanina Luis Cezea,b Karin Straussa
a
Microsoft Research, b CSE at University of Washington,
c
EECS at Northwestern University, d ORFE at Princeton University

Abstract
Storing data in synthetic DNA offers the possibility of improving information
density and durability by several orders of magnitude compared to current storage
technologies. However, DNA data storage requires a computationally intensive
process to retrieve the data. In particular, a crucial step in the data retrieval pipeline
involves clustering billions of strings with respect to edit distance. Datasets in
this domain have many notable properties, such as containing a very large number
of small clusters that are well-separated in the edit distance metric space. In this
regime, existing algorithms are unsuitable because of either their long running time
or low accuracy. To address this issue, we present a novel distributed algorithm
for approximately computing the underlying clusters. Our algorithm converges
efficiently on any dataset that satisfies certain separability properties, such as
those coming from DNA data storage systems. We also prove that, under these
assumptions, our algorithm is robust to outliers and high levels of noise. We
provide empirical justification of the accuracy, scalability, and convergence of our
algorithm on real and synthetic data. Compared to the state-of-the-art algorithm for
clustering DNA sequences, our algorithm simultaneously achieves higher accuracy
and a 1000x speedup on three real datasets.

1

Introduction

Existing storage technologies cannot keep up with the modern data explosion. Thus, researchers have
turned to fundamentally different physical media for alternatives. Synthetic DNA has emerged as a
promising option, with theoretical information density of multiple orders of magnitude more than
magnetic tapes [12, 24, 26, 52]. However, significant biochemical and computational improvements
are necessary to scale DNA storage systems to read/write exabytes of data within hours or even days.
Encoding a file in DNA requires several preprocessing steps, such as randomizing it
using a pseudo-random sequence, partitioning it into hundred-character substrings,
adding address and error correction information to these substrings, and finally
encoding everything to the {A, C, G, T} alphabet. The resulting collection of short
strings is synthesized into DNA and stored until needed.
To retrieve the data, the DNA is accessed using next-generation sequencing, which
results in several noisy copies, called reads, of each originally synthesized short
string, called a reference. With current technologies, these references and reads
contain hundreds of characters, and in the near future, they will likely contain
thousands [52]. After sequencing, the goal is to recover the unknown references
from the observed reads. The first step, which is the focus of this paper, is to cluster
the reads into groups, each of which is the set of noisy copies of a single reference.

Figure 1: DNA
storage datasets
have many small
clusters that are
well-separated
in edit distance.

The output of clustering is fed into a consensus-finding algorithm, which predicts
the most likely reference to have produced each cluster of reads. As Figure 1 shows,
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

