Structured Generative Adversarial Networks
Zhijie Deng∗ , 2,3 Hao Zhang∗ , 2 Xiaodan Liang, 2 Luona Yang,
1,2
Shizhen Xu, 1 Jun Zhu† , 3 Eric P. Xing
1
Tsinghua University, 2 Carnegie Mellon University, 3 Petuum Inc.
{dzj17,xsz12}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {hao,xiaodan1,luonay1}@cs.cmu.edu,
dcszj@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, epxing@cs.cmu.edu
1

Abstract
We study the problem of conditional generative modeling based on designated
semantics or structures. Existing models that build conditional generators either
require massive labeled instances as supervision or are unable to accurately control
the semantics of generated samples. We propose structured generative adversarial
networks (SGANs) for semi-supervised conditional generative modeling. SGAN
assumes the data x is generated conditioned on two independent latent variables:
y that encodes the designated semantics, and z that contains other factors of
variation. To ensure disentangled semantics in y and z, SGAN builds two collaborative games in the hidden space to minimize the reconstruction error of y
and z, respectively. Training SGAN also involves solving two adversarial games
that have their equilibrium concentrating at the true joint data distributions p(x, z)
and p(x, y), avoiding distributing the probability mass diffusely over data space
that MLE-based methods may suffer. We assess SGAN by evaluating its trained
networks, and its performance on downstream tasks. We show that SGAN delivers
a highly controllable generator, and disentangled representations; it also establishes
start-of-the-art results across multiple datasets when applied for semi-supervised
image classification (1.27%, 5.73%, 17.26% error rates on MNIST, SVHN and
CIFAR-10 using 50, 1000 and 4000 labels, respectively). Benefiting from the
separate modeling of y and z, SGAN can generate images with high visual quality
and strictly following the designated semantic, and can be extended to a wide
spectrum of applications, such as style transfer.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models (DGMs) [12, 8, 26] have gained considerable research interest recently
because of their high capacity of modeling complex data distributions and ease of training or inference.
Among various DGMs, variational autoencoders (VAEs) and generative adversarial networks (GANs)
can be trained unsupervisedly to map a random noise z ∼ N (0, 1) to the data distribution p(x), and
have reported remarkable successes in many domains including image/text generation [17, 9, 3, 27],
representation learning [27, 4], and posterior inference [12, 5]. They have also been extended to
model the conditional distribution p(x|y), which involves training a neural network generator G that
takes as inputs both the random noise z and a condition y, and generates samples that have desired
properties specified by y. Obtaining such a conditional generator would be quite helpful for a wide
spectrum of downstream applications, such as classification, where synthetic data from G can be used
to augment the training set. However, training conditional generator is inherently difficult, because it
requires not only a holistic characterization of the data distribution, but also fine-grained alignments
between different modes of the distribution and different conditions. Previous works have tackled this
problem by using a large amount of labeled data to guide the generator’s learning [32, 23, 25], which
compromises the generator’s usefulness because obtaining the label information might be expensive.
∗

indicates equal contributions. † indicates the corresponding author. 31st Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

