Counterfactual Fairness
Matt Kusner ∗
The Alan Turing Institute and
University of Warwick
mkusner@turing.ac.uk

Joshua Loftus ∗
New York University
loftus@nyu.edu

Chris Russell ∗
The Alan Turing Institute and
University of Surrey
crussell@turing.ac.uk

Ricardo Silva
The Alan Turing Institute and
University College London
ricardo@stats.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Machine learning can impact people with legal or ethical consequences when
it is used to automate decisions in areas such as insurance, lending, hiring, and
predictive policing. In many of these scenarios, previous decisions have been made
that are unfairly biased against certain subpopulations, for example those of a
particular race, gender, or sexual orientation. Since this past data may be biased,
machine learning predictors must account for this to avoid perpetuating or creating
discriminatory practices. In this paper, we develop a framework for modeling
fairness using tools from causal inference. Our definition of counterfactual fairness
captures the intuition that a decision is fair towards an individual if it the same in
(a) the actual world and (b) a counterfactual world where the individual belonged
to a different demographic group. We demonstrate our framework on a real-world
problem of fair prediction of success in law school.

1

Contribution

Machine learning has spread to fields as diverse as credit scoring [20], crime prediction [5], and loan
assessment [25]. Decisions in these areas may have ethical or legal implications, so it is necessary for
the modeler to think beyond the objective of maximizing prediction accuracy and consider the societal
impact of their work. For many of these applications, it is crucial to ask if the predictions of a model
are fair. Training data can contain unfairness for reasons having to do with historical prejudices or
other factors outside an individual’s control. In 2016, the Obama administration released a report2
which urged data scientists to analyze “how technologies can deliberately or inadvertently perpetuate,
exacerbate, or mask discrimination."
There has been much recent interest in designing algorithms that make fair predictions [4, 6, 10,
12, 14, 16–19, 22, 24, 36–39]. In large part, the literature has focused on formalizing fairness
into quantitative definitions and using them to solve a discrimination problem in a certain dataset.
Unfortunately, for a practitioner, law-maker, judge, or anyone else who is interested in implementing
algorithms that control for discrimination, it can be difficult to decide which definition of fairness to
choose for the task at hand. Indeed, we demonstrate that depending on the relationship between a
protected attribute and the data, certain definitions of fairness can actually increase discrimination.
∗

Equal contribution. This work was done while JL was a Research Fellow at the Alan Turing Institute.
https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/blog/2016/05/04/big-risks-big-opportunities-intersection-big-dataand-civil-rights
2

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

