What Uncertainties Do We Need in Bayesian Deep
Learning for Computer Vision?

Alex Kendall
University of Cambridge
agk34@cam.ac.uk

Yarin Gal
University of Cambridge
yg279@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
There are two major types of uncertainty one can model. Aleatoric uncertainty
captures noise inherent in the observations. On the other hand, epistemic uncertainty accounts for uncertainty in the model – uncertainty which can be explained
away given enough data. Traditionally it has been difficult to model epistemic
uncertainty in computer vision, but with new Bayesian deep learning tools this
is now possible. We study the benefits of modeling epistemic vs. aleatoric uncertainty in Bayesian deep learning models for vision tasks. For this we present
a Bayesian deep learning framework combining input-dependent aleatoric uncertainty together with epistemic uncertainty. We study models under the framework
with per-pixel semantic segmentation and depth regression tasks. Further, our
explicit uncertainty formulation leads to new loss functions for these tasks, which
can be interpreted as learned attenuation. This makes the loss more robust to noisy
data, also giving new state-of-the-art results on segmentation and depth regression
benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Understanding what a model does not know is a critical part of many machine learning systems.
Today, deep learning algorithms are able to learn powerful representations which can map high dimensional data to an array of outputs. However these mappings are often taken blindly and assumed
to be accurate, which is not always the case. In two recent examples this has had disastrous consequences. In May 2016 there was the first fatality from an assisted driving system, caused by the
perception system confusing the white side of a trailer for bright sky [1]. In a second recent example, an image classification system erroneously identified two African Americans as gorillas [2],
raising concerns of racial discrimination. If both these algorithms were able to assign a high level
of uncertainty to their erroneous predictions, then the system may have been able to make better
decisions and likely avoid disaster.
Quantifying uncertainty in computer vision applications can be largely divided into regression settings such as depth regression, and classification settings such as semantic segmentation. Existing
approaches to model uncertainty in such settings in computer vision include particle filtering and
conditional random fields [3, 4]. However many modern applications mandate the use of deep learning to achieve state-of-the-art performance [5], with most deep learning models not able to represent
uncertainty. Deep learning does not allow for uncertainty representation in regression settings for
example, and deep learning classification models often give normalised score vectors, which do not
necessarily capture model uncertainty. For both settings uncertainty can be captured with Bayesian
deep learning approaches – which offer a practical framework for understanding uncertainty with
deep learning models [6].
In Bayesian modeling, there are two main types of uncertainty one can model [7]. Aleatoric uncertainty captures noise inherent in the observations. This could be for example sensor noise or motion
noise, resulting in uncertainty which cannot be reduced even if more data were to be collected. On
the other hand, epistemic uncertainty accounts for uncertainty in the model parameters – uncertainty
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

