Self-Supervised Intrinsic Image Decomposition

Michael Janner
MIT

Jiajun Wu
MIT

Tejas D. Kulkarni
DeepMind

janner@mit.edu

jiajunwu@mit.edu

tejasdkulkarni@gmail.com

Ilker Yildirim
MIT

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT

ilkery@mit.edu

jbt@mit.edu

Abstract
Intrinsic decomposition from a single image is a highly challenging task, due to
its inherent ambiguity and the scarcity of training data. In contrast to traditional
fully supervised learning approaches, in this paper we propose learning intrinsic
image decomposition by explaining the input image. Our model, the Rendered
Intrinsics Network (RIN), joins together an image decomposition pipeline, which
predicts reflectance, shape, and lighting conditions given a single image, with a
recombination function, a learned shading model used to recompose the original
input based off of intrinsic image predictions. Our network can then use unsupervised reconstruction error as an additional signal to improve its intermediate
representations. This allows large-scale unlabeled data to be useful during training, and also enables transferring learned knowledge to images of unseen object
categories, lighting conditions, and shapes. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our method performs well on both intrinsic image decomposition and knowledge transfer.

1

Introduction

There has been remarkable progress in computer vision, particularly for answering questions such
as “what is where?” given raw images. This progress has been possible due to large labeled training
sets and representation learning techniques such as convolutional neural networks [LeCun et al.,
2015]. However, the general problem of visual scene understanding will require algorithms that
extract not only object identities and locations, but also their shape, reflectance, and interactions
with light. Intuitively disentangling the contributions from these three components, or intrinsic
images, is a major triumph of human vision and perception. Conferring this type of intuition to an
algorithm, though, has proven a difficult task, constituting a major open problem in computer vision.
This problem is challenging in particular because it is fundamentally underconstrained. Consider
the porcelain vase in Figure 1a. Most individuals would have no difficulty identifying the true colors
and shape of the vase, along with estimating the lighting conditions and the resultant shading on the
object, as those shown in 1b. However, the alternatives in 1c, which posits a flat shape, and 1d, with
unnatural red lighting, are entirely consistent in that they compose to form the correct observed vase
in 1a.
The task of finding appropriate intrinsic images for an object is then not a question of simply finding a valid answer, as there are countless factorizations that would be equivalent in terms of their
rendered combination, but rather of finding the most probable answer. Roughly speaking, there are
two methods of tackling such a problem: a model must either (1) employ handcrafted priors on the
reflectance, shape, and lighting conditions found in the natural world in order to assign probabilities
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

