From which world is your graph?

Cheng Li
College of William & Mary

Felix M. F. Wong
Independent Researcher∗

Zhenming Liu
College of William & Mary

Varun Kanade
University of Oxford

Abstract
Discovering statistical structure from links is a fundamental problem in the analysis of social networks. Choosing a misspecified model, or equivalently, an incorrect inference algorithm will result in an invalid analysis or even falsely uncover
patterns that are in fact artifacts of the model. This work focuses on unifying two
of the most widely used link-formation models: the stochastic blockmodel (SBM)
and the small world (or latent space) model (SWM). Integrating techniques from
kernel learning, spectral graph theory, and nonlinear dimensionality reduction, we
develop the first statistically sound polynomial-time algorithm to discover latent
patterns in sparse graphs for both models. When the network comes from an SBM,
the algorithm outputs a block structure. When it is from an SWM, the algorithm
outputs estimates of each node’s latent position.

1

Introduction

Discovering statistical structures from links is a fundamental problem in the analysis of social
networks. Connections between entities are typically formed based on underlying feature-based
similarities; however these features themselves are partially or entirely hidden. A question of great
interest is to what extent can these latent features be inferred from the observable links in the network. This work focuses on the so-called assortative setting, the principle that similar individuals
are more likely to interact with each other. Most stochastic models of social networks rely on this assumption, including the two most famous ones – the stochastic blockmodel [1] and the small-world
model [2, 3], described below.
Stochastic Blockmodel (SBM). In a stochastic blockmodel [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13], nodes
are grouped into disjoint “communities” and links are added randomly between nodes, with a higher
probability if nodes are in the same community. In its simplest incarnation, an edge is added between
nodes within the same community with probability p, and between nodes in different communities
with probability q, for p > q. Despite arguably naı̈ve modelling choices, such as the independence
of edges, algorithms designed with SBM work well in practice [14, 15].
Small-World Model (SWM). In a small-world model, each node is associated with a latent variable
xi , e.g., the geographic location of an individual. The probability that there is a link between two
nodes is proportional to an inverse polynomial of some notion of distance, dist(xi , xj ), between
them. The presence of a small number of “long-range” connections is essential to some of the most
intriguing properties of these networks, such as small diameter and fast decentralized routing algorithms [3]. In general, the latent position may reflect geographic location as well as more abstract
concepts, e.g., position on a political ideology spectrum.
The Inference Problem. Without observing the latent positions, or knowing which model generates
the underlying graph, the adjacency matrix of a social graph typically looks like the one shown in
∗

Currently at Google.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

