Hypothesis Transfer Learning via
Transformation Functions
Simon S. Du
Carnegie Mellon University
ssdu@cs.cmu.edu

Jayanth Koushik
Carnegie Mellon University
jayanthkoushik@cmu.edu

Aarti Singh
Carnegie Mellon University
aartisingh@cmu.edu

Barnabás Póczos
Carnegie Mellon University
bapoczos@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We consider the Hypothesis Transfer Learning (HTL) problem where one incorporates a hypothesis trained on the source domain into the learning procedure
of the target domain. Existing theoretical analysis either only studies speciﬁc
algorithms or only presents upper bounds on the generalization error but not on the
excess risk. In this paper, we propose a uniﬁed algorithm-dependent framework
for HTL through a novel notion of transformation function, which characterizes
the relation between the source and the target domains. We conduct a general risk
analysis of this framework and in particular, we show for the ﬁrst time, if two
domains are related, HTL enjoys faster convergence rates of excess risks for Kernel
Smoothing and Kernel Ridge Regression than those of the classical non-transfer
learning settings. Experiments on real world data demonstrate the effectiveness of
our framework.

1

Introduction

In a classical transfer learning setting, we have a large amount of data from a source domain and
a relatively small amount of data from a target domain. These two domains are related but not
necessarily identical, and the usual assumption is that the hypothesis learned from the source domain
is useful in the learning task of the target domain.
In this paper, we focus on the regression problem where the functions we want to estimate of the source
and the target domains are different but related. Figure 1a shows a 1D toy example of this setting,
where the source function is f so (x) = sin(4πx) and the target function is f ta (x) = sin(4πx) + 4πx.
Many real world problems can be formulated as transfer learning problems. For example, in the task
of predicting the reaction time of an individual from his/her fMRI images, we have about 30 subjects
but each subject has only about 100 data points. To learn the mapping from neural images to the
reaction time of a speciﬁc subject, we can treat all but this subject as the source domain, and this
subject as the target domain. In Section 6, we show how our proposed method helps us learn this
mapping more accurately.
This paradigm, hypothesis transfer learning (HTL) has been explored empirically with success in
many applications [Fei-Fei et al., 2006, Yang et al., 2007, Orabona et al., 2009, Tommasi et al.,
2010, Kuzborskij et al., 2013, Wang and Schneider, 2014]. Kuzborskij and Orabona [2013, 2016]
pioneered the theoretical analysis of HTL for linear regression and recently Wang and Schneider
[2015] analyzed Kernel Ridge Regression. However, most existing works only provide generalization
bounds, i.e. the difference between the true risk and the training error or the leave-one-out error.
These analyses are not complete because minimizing the generalization error does not necessarily
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

