Robust Estimation of Neural Signals in Calcium
Imaging

Hakan Inan 1
inanh@stanford.edu
1

Murat A. Erdogdu 2,3
erdogdu@cs.toronto.edu

Mark J. Schnitzer 1,4
mschnitz@stanford.edu

Stanford University 2 Microsoft Research 3 Vector Institute 4 Howard Hughes Medical Institute

Abstract
Calcium imaging is a prominent technology in neuroscience research which allows
for simultaneous recording of large numbers of neurons in awake animals. Automated extraction of neurons and their temporal activity from imaging datasets is an
important step in the path to producing neuroscience results. However, nearly all
imaging datasets contain gross contaminating sources which could originate from
the technology used, or the underlying biological tissue. Although past work has
considered the effects of contamination under limited circumstances, there has not
been a general framework treating contamination and its effects on the statistical
estimation of calcium signals. In this work, we proceed in a new direction and
propose to extract cells and their activity using robust statistical estimation. Using
the theory of M-estimation, we derive a minimax optimal robust loss, and also
find a simple and practical optimization routine for this loss with provably fast
convergence. We use our proposed robust loss in a matrix factorization framework
to extract the neurons and their temporal activity in calcium imaging datasets.
We demonstrate the superiority of our robust estimation approach over existing
methods on both simulated and real datasets.

1

Introduction

Calcium imaging has become an indispensable tool in systems neuroscience research. It allows
simultaneous imaging of the activity of very large ensembles of neurons in awake and even freely
behaving animals [3, 4, 6]. It relies on fluorescence imaging of intracellular calcium activity reported
by genetically encoded calcium indicators. A crucial task for a neuroscientist working with calcium
imaging is to extract signals (i.e. temporal traces and spatial footprints of regions of interest) from
the imaging dataset. This allows abstraction of useful information from a large dataset in a highly
compressive manner, losing little to no information. Automating this process is highly desirable, as
manual extraction of cells and their activities in large-scale datasets is prohibitively laborious, and
prone to flawed outcomes.
A variety of methods have been proposed for automated signal extraction in calcium imaging datasets,
including the ones based on matrix factorization [13, 14, 15, 16], and image segmentation [1, 10].
Some of these tools were tailored to two-photon calcium imaging, for which signal-to-noise ratio is
typically high, and the fluorescence background is fairly stable [3], whereas some targeted one-photon
and microendoscopic calcium imaging [4, 5], which are often characterized by low SNR and large
background fluctuations. Interestingly, least squares estimation has been a predominant paradigm
among previous methods; yet there is no previous work addressing statistically the generic nature
of calcium imaging datasets, which includes non-gaussian noise, non-cell background activity (e.g.
neuropil), and overlapping cells not captured by algorithms (out-of-focus or foreground). As a
consequence, the impact of such impurities inherent in calcium imaging on the accuracy of extracted
signals has not been thoroughly investigated previously. This lack of focus on signal accuracy is
worrisome as cell extraction is a fairly early step in the research pipeline, and flawed signals may
lead to incorrect scientific outcomes.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

