Net-Trim: Convex Pruning of Deep Neural Networks
with Performance Guarantee
Alireza Aghasi∗
Institute for Insight
Georgia State University
IBM TJ Watson
aaghasi@gsu.edu

Afshin Abdi
Department of ECE
Georgia Tech
abdi@gatech.edu

Nam Nguyen
IBM TJ Watson
nnguyen@us.ibm.com

Justin Romberg
Department of ECE
Georgia Tech
jrom@ece.gatech.edu

Abstract
We introduce and analyze a new technique for model reduction for deep neural
networks. While large networks are theoretically capable of learning arbitrarily
complex models, overfitting and model redundancy negatively affects the prediction
accuracy and model variance. Our Net-Trim algorithm prunes (sparsifies) a trained
network layer-wise, removing connections at each layer by solving a convex
optimization program. This program seeks a sparse set of weights at each layer
that keeps the layer inputs and outputs consistent with the originally trained model.
The algorithms and associated analysis are applicable to neural networks operating
with the rectified linear unit (ReLU) as the nonlinear activation. We present both
parallel and cascade versions of the algorithm. While the latter can achieve slightly
simpler models with the same generalization performance, the former can be
computed in a distributed manner. In both cases, Net-Trim significantly reduces the
number of connections in the network, while also providing enough regularization
to slightly reduce the generalization error. We also provide a mathematical analysis
of the consistency between the initial network and the retrained model. To analyze
the model sample complexity, we derive the general sufficient conditions for the
recovery of a sparse transform matrix. For a single layer taking independent
Gaussian random vectors of length N as inputs, we show that if the network
response can be described using a maximum number of s non-zero weights per
node, these weights can be learned from O(s log N ) samples.

1

Introduction

With enough layers, neurons in each layer, and a sufficiently large set of training data, neural networks
can learn structure of arbitrary complexity [1]. This model flexibility has made the deep neural
network a pioneer machine learning tool over the past decade (see [2] for a comprehensive overview).
In practice, multi-layer networks often have more parameters than can be reliably estimated from the
amount of data available. This gives the training procedure a certain ambiguity – many different sets
of parameter values can model the data equally well, and we risk instabilities due to overfitting. In
this paper, we introduce a framework for sparisfying networks that have already been trained using
standard techniques. This reduction in the number of parameters needed to specify the network makes
it more robust and more computationally efficient to implement without sacrificing performance.
∗

Corresponding Author

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

