A Scale Free Algorithm for Stochastic Bandits with
Bounded Kurtosis
Tor Lattimore∗
tor.lattimore@gmail.com

Abstract
Existing strategies for finite-armed stochastic bandits mostly depend on a parameter of scale that must be known in advance. Sometimes this is in the form of a
bound on the payoffs, or the knowledge of a variance or subgaussian parameter.
The notable exceptions are the analysis of Gaussian bandits with unknown mean
and variance by Cowan et al. [2015] and of uniform distributions with unknown
support [Cowan and Katehakis, 2015]. The results derived in these specialised
cases are generalised here to the non-parametric setup, where the learner knows
only a bound on the kurtosis of the noise, which is a scale free measure of the
extremity of outliers.

1

Introduction

SpaceBandits is a fictional company that specialises in optimising the power output of satellitemounted solar panels. The data science team wants to use a bandit algorithm to adjust the knobs
on a legacy satellite, but they don’t remember the units of the sensors, and have limited knowledge
about the noise distribution of the panel output or sensors. The SpaceBandits data science team
searches the literature for an algorithm that does not depend on the scale or location of the means of
the arms, and find this simple paper, in NIPS 2017.
It turns out that logarithmic regret is possible for finite-armed bandits with no assumptions on the
noise of the payoffs except for a known finite bound on the kurtosis, which corresponds to knowing
the likelihood/magnitude of outliers [DeCarlo, 1997]. Importantly, the kurtosis is independent of
the location of the mean and scale of the central tendency (the variance). This generalises the ideas
of Cowan et al. [2015] beyond the Gaussian case with unknown mean and variance to the nonparametric setting.
The setup is as follows. Let k ≥ 2 be the number of bandits (or arms). In each round 1 ≤ t ≤ n
the player should choose an action At ∈ {1, . . . , k} and subsequently receives a reward Xt ∼ νAt ,
where ν1 , . . . , νk are a set of distributions that are not known in advance. Let µi be the mean payoff
of the ith arm and µ∗ = maxi µi and ∆i = µ∗ − µi . The regret measures the expected deficit of the
player relative to the optimal choice of distribution:
" n
#
X
Rn = E
∆A t .
(1)
t=1

The table below summarises many of the known results on the optimal achievable asymptotic regret
under different assumptions on (νi )i . A reference for each of the upper bounds is given in Table 1,
while the lower bounds are mostly due to Lai and Robbins [1985] and Burnetas and Katehakis
[1996]. An omission from the table is when the distributions are known to lie in a single-parameter
exponential family (which does not fit well with the columns). Details are by Cappé et al. [2013].
∗

Now at DeepMind, London.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

