Self-Normalizing Neural Networks

Günter Klambauer

Thomas Unterthiner

Andreas Mayr

Sepp Hochreiter
LIT AI Lab & Institute of Bioinformatics,
Johannes Kepler University Linz
A-4040 Linz, Austria
{klambauer,unterthiner,mayr,hochreit}@bioinf.jku.at

Abstract
Deep Learning has revolutionized vision via convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
and natural language processing via recurrent neural networks (RNNs). However,
success stories of Deep Learning with standard feed-forward neural networks
(FNNs) are rare. FNNs that perform well are typically shallow and, therefore cannot
exploit many levels of abstract representations. We introduce self-normalizing
neural networks (SNNs) to enable high-level abstract representations. While
batch normalization requires explicit normalization, neuron activations of SNNs
automatically converge towards zero mean and unit variance. The activation
function of SNNs are “scaled exponential linear units” (SELUs), which induce
self-normalizing properties. Using the Banach fixed-point theorem, we prove that
activations close to zero mean and unit variance that are propagated through many
network layers will converge towards zero mean and unit variance — even under
the presence of noise and perturbations. This convergence property of SNNs allows
to (1) train deep networks with many layers, (2) employ strong regularization
schemes, and (3) to make learning highly robust. Furthermore, for activations
not close to unit variance, we prove an upper and lower bound on the variance,
thus, vanishing and exploding gradients are impossible. We compared SNNs on
(a) 121 tasks from the UCI machine learning repository, on (b) drug discovery
benchmarks, and on (c) astronomy tasks with standard FNNs, and other machine
learning methods such as random forests and support vector machines. For FNNs
we considered (i) ReLU networks without normalization, (ii) batch normalization,
(iii) layer normalization, (iv) weight normalization, (v) highway networks, and (vi)
residual networks. SNNs significantly outperformed all competing FNN methods
at 121 UCI tasks, outperformed all competing methods at the Tox21 dataset, and
set a new record at an astronomy data set. The winning SNN architectures are often
very deep.

1

Introduction

Deep Learning has set new records at different benchmarks and led to various commercial applications
[21, 26]. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [15] achieved new levels at speech and natural language
processing, for example at the TIMIT benchmark [10] or at language translation [29], and are already
employed in mobile devices [24]. RNNs have won handwriting recognition challenges (Chinese and
Arabic handwriting) [26, 11, 4] and Kaggle challenges, such as the “Grasp-and Lift EEG” competition.
Their counterparts, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [20] excel at vision and video tasks. CNNs
are on par with human dermatologists at the visual detection of skin cancer [8]. The visual processing
for self-driving cars is based on CNNs [16], as is the visual input to AlphaGo which has beaten one
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

