Gradients of Generative Models for Improved
Discriminative Analysis of Tandem Mass Spectra

John T. Halloran
Department of Public Health Sciences
University of California, Davis
jthalloran@ucdavis.edu

David M. Rocke
Department of Public Health Sciences
University of California, Davis
dmrocke@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) is a high-throughput technology used to
identify the proteins in a complex biological sample, such as a drop of blood. A
collection of spectra is generated at the output of the process, each spectrum of
which is representative of a peptide (protein subsequence) present in the original
complex sample. In this work, we leverage the log-likelihood gradients of generative models to improve the identification of such spectra. In particular, we show
that the gradient of a recently proposed dynamic Bayesian network (DBN) [7] may
be naturally employed by a kernel-based discriminative classifier. The resulting
Fisher kernel substantially improves upon recent attempts to combine generative
and discriminative models for post-processing analysis, outperforming all other
methods on the evaluated datasets. We extend the improved accuracy offered by
the Fisher kernel framework to other search algorithms by introducing Theseus,
a DBN representing a large number of widely used MS/MS scoring functions.
Furthermore, with gradient ascent and max-product inference at hand, we use
Theseus to learn model parameters without any supervision.

1

Introduction

In the past two decades, tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) has become an indispensable tool
for identifying the proteins present in a complex biological sample. At the output of a typical
MS/MS experiment, a collection of spectra is produced on the order of tens-to-hundreds of thousands,
each of which is representative of a protein subsequence, called a peptide, present in the original
complex sample. The main challenge in MS/MS is accurately identifying the peptides responsible for
generating each output spectrum.
The most accurate identification methods search a database of peptides to first score peptides, then
rank and return the top-ranking such peptide. The pair consisting of a scored candidate peptide and
observed spectrum is typically referred to as a peptide-spectrum match (PSM). However, PSM scores
returned by such database-search methods are often difficult to compare across different spectra (i.e.,
they are poorly calibrated), limiting the number of spectra identified per search [15]. To combat such
poor calibration, post-processors are typically used to recalibrate PSM scores [13, 19, 20].
Recent work has attempted to exploit generative scoring functions for use with discriminative
classifiers to better recalibrate PSM scores; by parsing a DBN’s Viterbi path (i.e., the most probable
sequence of random variables), heuristically derived features were shown to improve discriminative
recalibration using support vector machines (SVMs). Rather than relying on heuristics, we look
towards the more principled approach of a Fisher kernel [11]. Fisher kernels allow one to exploit the
sequential-modeling strengths of generative models such as DBNs, which offer vast design flexibility
for representing data sequences of varying length, for use with discriminative classifiers such as
SVMs, which offer superior accuracy but often require feature vectors of fixed length. Although
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

