Noise-Tolerant Interactive Learning Using
Pairwise Comparisons
Yichong Xu* , Hongyang Zhang* , Kyle Miller† , Aarti Singh* , and Artur Dubrawski†
*

Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
†
Auton Lab, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
{yichongx, hongyanz, aarti, awd}@cs.cmu.edu,
mille856@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of interactively learning a binary classifier using noisy
labeling and pairwise comparison oracles, where the comparison oracle answers
which one in the given two instances is more likely to be positive. Learning from
such oracles has multiple applications where obtaining direct labels is harder but
pairwise comparisons are easier, and the algorithm can leverage both types of
oracles. In this paper, we attempt to characterize how the access to an easier
comparison oracle helps in improving the label and total query complexity. We
show that the comparison oracle reduces the learning problem to that of learning a
threshold function. We then present an algorithm that interactively queries the label
and comparison oracles and we characterize its query complexity under Tsybakov
and adversarial noise conditions for the comparison and labeling oracles. Our lower
bounds show that our label and total query complexity is almost optimal.

1

Introduction

Given high costs of obtaining labels for big datasets, interactive learning is gaining popularity in
both practice and theory of machine learning. On the practical side, there has been an increasing
interest in designing algorithms capable of engaging domain experts in two-way queries to facilitate
more accurate and more effort-efficient learning systems (c.f. [26, 31]). On the theoretical side, study
of interactive learning has led to significant advances such as exponential improvement of query
complexity over passive learning under certain conditions (c.f. [5, 6, 7, 15, 19, 27]). While most of
these approaches to interactive learning fix the form of an oracle, e.g., the labeling oracle, and explore
the best way of querying, recent work allows for multiple diverse forms of oracles [12, 13, 16, 33].
The focus of this paper is on this latter setting, also known as active dual supervision [4]. We
investigate how to recover a hypothesis h that is a good approximator of the optimal classifier h∗ ,
in terms of expected 0/1 error PrX [h(X) 6= h∗ (X)], given limited access to labels on individual
instances X ∈ X and pairwise comparisons about which one of two given instances is more likely to
belong to the +1/-1 class.
Our study is motivated by important applications where comparisons are easier to obtain than labels,
and the algorithm can leverage both types of oracles to improve label and total query complexity.
For example, in material design, synthesizing materials for specific conditions requires expensive
experimentation, but with an appropriate algorithm we can leverage expertize of material scientists,
for whom it may be hard to accurately assess the resulting material properties, but who can quickly
compare different input conditions and suggest which ones are more promising. Similarly, in clinical
settings, precise assessment of each individual patient’s health status can be difficult, expensive and/or
risky (e.g. it may require application of invasive sensors or diagnostic surgeries), but comparing
relative statuses of two patients at a time may be relatively easy and accurate. In both these scenarios
we may have access to a modest amount of individually labeled data, but the bulk of more accessible
training information is available via pairwise comparisons. There are many other examples where
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

