Large-Scale Quadratically Constrained Quadratic
Program via Low-Discrepancy Sequences

Kinjal Basu, Ankan Saha, Shaunak Chatterjee
LinkedIn Corporation
Mountain View, CA 94043
{kbasu, asaha, shchatte}@linkedin.com

Abstract
We consider the problem of solving a large-scale Quadratically Constrained
Quadratic Program. Such problems occur naturally in many scientific and web
applications. Although there are efficient methods which tackle this problem, they
are mostly not scalable. In this paper, we develop a method that transforms the
quadratic constraint into a linear form by sampling a set of low-discrepancy points
[16]. The transformed problem can then be solved by applying any state-of-the-art
large-scale quadratic programming solvers. We show the convergence of our approximate solution to the true solution as well as some finite sample error bounds.
Experimental results are also shown to prove scalability as well as improved quality
of approximation in practice.

1

Introduction

In this paper we consider the class of problems called quadratically constrained quadratic programming (QCQP) which take the following form:
Minimize
x

subject to

1 T
x P0 x + qT0 x + r0
2
1 T
x Pi x + qTi x + ri ≤ 0,
2
Ax = b,

i = 1, . . . , m

(1)

where P0 , . . . , Pm are n × n matrices. If each of these matrices are positive definite, then the
optimization problem is convex. In general, however, solving QCQP is NP-hard, which can be
verified by easily reducing a 0 − 1 integer programming problem (known to be NP-hard) to a QCQP
[4]. In spite of that challenge, they form an important class of optimization problems, since they
arise naturally in many engineering, scientific and web applications. Two famous examples of QCQP
include the max-cut and boolean optimization [11]. Other examples include alignment of kernels
in semi-supervised learning [29], learning the kernel matrix in discriminant analysis [28] as well as
more general learning of kernel matrices [21], steering direction estimation for radar detection [15],
several applications in signal processing [20], the triangulation in computer vision [3] among others.
Internet applications handling large scale of data, often model trade-offs between key utilities using
constrained optimization formulations [1, 2]. When there is independence among the expected utilities
(e.g., click, time spent, revenue obtained) of items, the objective or the constraints corresponding to
those utilities are linear. However, in most real life scenarios, there is dependence among expected
utilities of items presented together on a web page or mobile app. Examples of such dependence are
abundant in newsfeeds, search result pages and most lists of recommendations on the internet. If
this dependence is expressed through a linear model, it makes the corresponding objective and/or
constraint quadratic. This makes the constrained optimization problem a very large scale QCQP, if
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

