Unsupervised Learning of Disentangled
Representations from Video

Emily Denton
Department of Computer Science
New York University
denton@cs.nyu.edu

Vighnesh Birodkar
Department of Computer Science
New York University
vighneshbirodkar@nyu.edu

Abstract
We present a new model D R N ET that learns disentangled image representations
from video. Our approach leverages the temporal coherence of video and a novel
adversarial loss to learn a representation that factorizes each frame into a stationary
part and a temporally varying component. The disentangled representation can be
used for a range of tasks. For example, applying a standard LSTM to the time-vary
components enables prediction of future frames. We evaluate our approach on a
range of synthetic and real videos, demonstrating the ability to coherently generate
hundreds of steps into the future.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised learning from video is a long-standing problem in computer vision and machine
learning. The goal is to learn, without explicit labels, a representation that generalizes effectively to a
previously unseen range of tasks, such as semantic classification of the objects present, predicting
future frames of the video or classifying the dynamic activity taking place. There are several prevailing
paradigms: the first, known as self-supervision, uses domain knowledge to implicitly provide labels
(e.g. predicting the relative position of patches on an object [4] or using feature tracks [36]). This
allows the problem to be posed as a classification task with self-generated labels. The second general
approach relies on auxiliary action labels, available in real or simulated robotic environments. These
can either be used to train action-conditional predictive models of future frames [2, 20] or inversekinematics models [1] which attempt to predict actions from current and future frame pairs. The
third and most general approaches are predictive auto-encoders (e.g.[11, 12, 18, 31]) which attempt
to predict future frames from current ones. To learn effective representations, some kind of constraint
on the latent representation is required.
In this paper, we introduce a form of predictive auto-encoder which uses a novel adversarial loss
to factor the latent representation for each video frame into two components, one that is roughly
time-independent (i.e. approximately constant throughout the clip) and another that captures the
dynamic aspects of the sequence, thus varying over time. We refer to these as content and pose
components, respectively. The adversarial loss relies on the intuition that while the content features
should be distinctive of a given clip, individual pose features should not. Thus the loss encourages
pose features to carry no information about clip identity. Empirically, we find that training with this
loss to be crucial to inducing the desired factorization.
We explore the disentangled representation produced by our model, which we call DisentangledRepresentation Net (D R N ET ), on a variety of tasks. The first of these is predicting future video
frames, something that is straightforward to do using our representation. We apply a standard LSTM
model to the pose features, conditioning on the content features from the last observed frame. Despite
the simplicity of our model relative to other video generation techniques, we are able to generate
convincing long-range frame predictions, out to hundreds of time steps in some instances. This is
significantly further than existing approaches that use real video data. We also show that D R N ET can
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

