Learning Hierarchical Information Flow
with Recurrent Neural Modules
Danijar Hafner ∗
Google Brain
mail@danijar.com

Alex Irpan
Google Brain
alexirpan@google.com

James Davidson
Google Brain
jcdavidson@google.com

Nicolas Heess
Google DeepMind
heess@google.com

Abstract
We propose ThalNet, a deep learning model inspired by neocortical communication
via the thalamus. Our model consists of recurrent neural modules that send features
through a routing center, endowing the modules with the flexibility to share features
over multiple time steps. We show that our model learns to route information
hierarchically, processing input data by a chain of modules. We observe common
architectures, such as feed forward neural networks and skip connections, emerging
as special cases of our architecture, while novel connectivity patterns are learned
for the text8 compression task. Our model outperforms standard recurrent neural
networks on several sequential benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models make use of modular building blocks such as fully connected layers, convolutional layers, and recurrent layers. Researchers often combine them in strictly layered or task-specific
ways. Instead of prescribing this connectivity a priori, our method learns how to route information as
part of learning to solve the task. We achieve this using recurrent modules that communicate via a
routing center that is inspired by the thalamus.
Warren McCulloch and Walter Pitts invented the perceptron in 1943 as the first mathematical model
of neural information processing [22], laying the groundwork for modern research on artificial neural
networks. Since then, researchers have continued looking for inspiration from neuroscience to identify
new deep learning architectures [11, 13, 16, 31].
While some of these efforts have been directed at learning biologically plausible mechanisms in an
attempt to explain brain behavior, our interest is to achieve a flexible learning model. In the neocortex,
communication between areas can be broadly classified into two pathways: Direct communication
and communication via the thalamus [28]. In our model, we borrow this latter notion of a centralized
routing system to connect specializing neural modules.
In our experiments, the presented model learns to form connection patterns that process input
hierarchically, including skip connections as known from ResNet [12], Highway networks [29], and
DenseNet [14] and feedback connections, which are known to both play an important role in the
neocortex and improve deep learning [7, 20]. The learned connectivity structure is adapted to the
task, allowing the model to trade-off computational width and depth. In this paper, we study these
properties with the goal of building an understanding of the interactions between recurrent neural
modules.
∗

Work done during an internship with Google Brain.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

