Predictive-State Decoders:
Encoding the Future into Recurrent Networks

Arun Venkatraman1∗ , Nicholas Rhinehart1∗, Wen Sun1 ,
Lerrel Pinto , Martial Hebert1 , Byron Boots2 , Kris M. Kitani1 , J. Andrew Bagnell1
1
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie-Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA
2
School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA
1

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are a vital modeling technique that rely on
internal states learned indirectly by optimization of a supervised, unsupervised, or
reinforcement training loss. RNNs are used to model dynamic processes that are
characterized by underlying latent states whose form is often unknown, precluding
its analytic representation inside an RNN. In the Predictive-State Representation
(PSR) literature, latent state processes are modeled by an internal state representation that directly models the distribution of future observations, and most recent
work in this area has relied on explicitly representing and targeting sufficient statistics of this probability distribution. We seek to combine the advantages of RNNs
and PSRs by augmenting existing state-of-the-art recurrent neural networks with
P REDICTIVE -S TATE D ECODERS (P SDs), which add supervision to the network’s
internal state representation to target predicting future observations. P SDs are
simple to implement and easily incorporated into existing training pipelines via
additional loss regularization. We demonstrate the effectiveness of P SDs with
experimental results in three different domains: probabilistic filtering, Imitation
Learning, and Reinforcement Learning. In each, our method improves statistical
performance of state-of-the-art recurrent baselines and does so with fewer iterations
and less data.

1

Introduction

Despite their wide success in a variety of domains, recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are often
inhibited by the difficulty of learning an internal state representation. Internal state is a unifying
characteristic of RNNs, as it serves as an RNN’s memory. Learning these internal states is challenging
because optimization is guided by the indirect signal of the RNN’s target task, such as maximizing
the cost-to-go for reinforcement learning or maximizing the likelihood of a sequence of words. These
target tasks have a latent state sequence that characterizes the underlying sequential data-generating
process. Unfortunately, most settings do not afford a parametric model of latent state that is available
to the learner.
However, recent work has shown that in certain settings, latent states can be characterized by
observations alone [8, 24, 26] – which are almost always available to recurrent models. In such
partially-observable problems (e.g. Fig. 1a), a single observation is not guaranteed to contain enough
information to fully represent the system’s latent state. For example, a single image of a robot is
insufficient to characterize its latent velocity and acceleration. While a latent state parametrization
may be known in some domains – e.g. a simple pendulum can be sufficiently modeled by its angle
and angular velocity (θ, θ̇) – data from most domains cannot be explicitly parametrized.
∗

Contributed equally to this work. Direct correspondence to: {arunvenk,nrhineha}@cs.cmu.edu

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

