Bayesian GAN

Yunus Saatchi
Uber AI Labs

Andrew Gordon Wilson
Cornell University

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) can implicitly learn rich distributions over
images, audio, and data which are hard to model with an explicit likelihood. We
present a practical Bayesian formulation for unsupervised and semi-supervised
learning with GANs. Within this framework, we use stochastic gradient Hamiltonian Monte Carlo to marginalize the weights of the generator and discriminator
networks. The resulting approach is straightforward and obtains good performance
without any standard interventions such as label smoothing or mini-batch discrimination. By exploring an expressive posterior over the parameters of the generator,
the Bayesian GAN avoids mode-collapse, produces interpretable and diverse candidate samples, and provides state-of-the-art quantitative results for semi-supervised
learning on benchmarks including SVHN, CelebA, and CIFAR-10, outperforming
DCGAN, Wasserstein GANs, and DCGAN ensembles.

1

Introduction

Learning a good generative model for high-dimensional natural signals, such as images, video
and audio has long been one of the key milestones of machine learning. Powered by the learning
capabilities of deep neural networks, generative adversarial networks (GANs) [4] and variational
autoencoders [6] have brought the field closer to attaining this goal.
GANs transform white noise through a deep neural network to generate candidate samples from
a data distribution. A discriminator learns, in a supervised manner, how to tune its parameters
so as to correctly classify whether a given sample has come from the generator or the true data
distribution. Meanwhile, the generator updates its parameters so as to fool the discriminator. As
long as the generator has sufficient capacity, it can approximate the CDF inverse-CDF composition
required to sample from a data distribution of interest. Since convolutional neural networks by design
provide reasonable metrics over images (unlike, for instance, Gaussian likelihoods), GANs using
convolutional neural networks can in turn provide a compelling implicit distribution over images.
Although GANs have been highly impactful, their learning objective can lead to mode collapse, where
the generator simply memorizes a few training examples to fool the discriminator. This pathology
is reminiscent of maximum likelihood density estimation with Gaussian mixtures: by collapsing
the variance of each component we achieve infinite likelihood and memorize the dataset, which is
not useful for a generalizable density estimate. Moreover, a large degree of intervention is required
to stabilize GAN training, including label smoothing and mini-batch discrimination [9, 10]. To
help alleviate these practical difficulties, recent work has focused on replacing the Jensen-Shannon
divergence implicit in standard GAN training with alternative metrics, such as f-divergences [8] or
Wasserstein divergences [1]. Much of this work is analogous to introducing various regularizers for
maximum likelihood density estimation. But just as it can be difficult to choose the right regularizer,
it can also be difficult to decide which divergence we wish to use for GAN training.
It is our contention that GANs can be improved by fully probabilistic inference. Indeed, a posterior
distribution over the parameters of the generator could be broad and highly multimodal. GAN
training, which is based on mini-max optimization, always estimates this whole posterior distribution
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

