Linear regression without correspondence
Daniel Hsu
Columbia University
New York, NY
djhsu@cs.columbia.edu

Kevin Shi
Columbia University
New York, NY
kshi@cs.columbia.edu

Xiaorui Sun
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA
xiaoruisun@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
This article considers algorithmic and statistical aspects of linear regression when
the correspondence between the covariates and the responses is unknown. First, a
fully polynomial-time approximation scheme is given for the natural least squares
optimization problem in any constant dimension. Next, in an average-case and
noise-free setting where the responses exactly correspond to a linear function of
i.i.d. draws from a standard multivariate normal distribution, an efficient algorithm
based on lattice basis reduction is shown to exactly recover the unknown linear
function in arbitrary dimension. Finally, lower bounds on the signal-to-noise ratio
are established for approximate recovery of the unknown linear function by any
estimator.

1

Introduction

Consider the problem of recovering an unknown vector w̄ 2 Rd from noisy linear measurements
when the correspondence between the measurement vectors and the measurements themselves is
unknown. The measurement vectors (i.e., covariates) from Rd are denoted by x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ; for
each i 2 [n] := {1, 2, . . . , n}, the i-th measurement (i.e., response) yi is obtained using x⇡¯ (i) :
yi = w̄> x⇡¯ (i) + "i ,

i 2 [n] .

(1)

Above, ⇡
¯ is an unknown permutation on [n], and the "1 , "2 , . . . , "n are unknown measurement errors.
This problem, which has been called unlabeled sensing [22], linear regression with an unknown
permutation [18], and linear regression with shuffled labels [1], arises in many settings; see the
aforementioned references for more details. In short, sensing limitations may create ambiguity in
or even completely lose the ordering of measurements. The problem is also interesting because the
missing correspondence makes an otherwise well-understood problem into one with very different
computational and statistical properties.
Prior works. Unnikrishnan et al. [22] study conditions on the measurement vectors that permit
recovery of any target vector w̄ under noiseless measurements. They show that when the entries of
the xi are drawn i.i.d. from a continuous distribution, and n 2d, then almost surely, every vector
w̄ 2 Rd is uniquely determined by noiseless correspondence-free measurements as in (1). (Under
noisy measurements, it is shown that w̄ can be recovered when an appropriate signal-to-noise ratio
tends to infinity.) It is also shown that n 2d is necessary for such a guarantee that holds for all
vectors w̄ 2 Rd .
Pananjady et al. [18] study statistical and computational limits on recovering the unknown permutation
⇡
¯ . On the statistical front, they consider necessary and sufficient conditions on the signal-to-noise ratio
2
SNR := kw̄k2 / 2 when the measurement errors ("i )ni=1 are i.i.d. draws from the normal distribution
N(0, 2 ) and the measurement vectors (xi )ni=1 are i.i.d. draws from the standard multivariate normal
distribution N(0, I d ). Roughly speaking, exact recovery of ⇡
¯ is possible via maximum likelihood
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

