Efficient Use of Limited-Memory Accelerators
for Linear Learning on Heterogeneous Systems

Celestine Dünner
IBM Research - Zurich
Switzerland
cdu@zurich.ibm.com

Thomas Parnell
IBM Research - Zurich
Switzerland
tpa@zurich.ibm.com

Martin Jaggi
EPFL
Switzerland
martin.jaggi@epfl.ch

Abstract
We propose a generic algorithmic building block to accelerate training of machine
learning models on heterogeneous compute systems. Our scheme allows to efficiently employ compute accelerators such as GPUs and FPGAs for the training
of large-scale machine learning models, when the training data exceeds their memory capacity. Also, it provides adaptivity to any system’s memory hierarchy in
terms of size and processing speed. Our technique is built upon novel theoretical
insights regarding primal-dual coordinate methods, and uses duality gap information to dynamically decide which part of the data should be made available for
fast processing. To illustrate the power of our approach we demonstrate its performance for training of generalized linear models on a large-scale dataset exceeding
the memory size of a modern GPU, showing an order-of-magnitude speedup over
existing approaches.

1

Introduction

As modern compute systems rapidly increase in size, complexity and computational power, they
become less homogeneous. Today’s systems exhibit strong heterogeneity at many levels: in terms
of compute parallelism, memory size and access bandwidth, as well as communication bandwidth
between compute nodes (e.g., computers, mobile phones, server racks, GPUs, FPGAs, storage nodes
etc.). This increasing heterogeneity of compute environments is posing new challenges for the
development of efficient distributed algorithms. That is to optimally exploit individual compute
resources with very diverse characteristics without suffering from the I/O cost of exchanging data
between them.
In this paper, we focus on the task of training large scale
machine learning models in such heterogeneous compute enUnit B
Unit A
vironments and propose a new generic algorithmic building
⚙⚙⚙⚙
⚙
block to efficiently distribute the workload between heterogeneous compute units. Assume two compute units, denoted A
and B, which differ in compute power as well as memory capacity as illustrated in Figure 1. The computational power of
unit A is smaller and its memory capacity is larger relative to
its peer unit B (i.e., we assume that the training data fits into
the memory of A, but not into B’s). Hence, on the compu- Figure 1: Compute units A, B with
tationally more powerful unit B, only part of the data can be different memory size, bandwidth
processed at any given time. The two units, A and B, are able and compute power.
to communicate with each other over some interface, however
there is cost associated with doing so.
This generic setup covers many essential elements of modern machine learning systems. A typical
example is that of accelerator units, such as a GPUs or FPGAs, augmenting traditional computers
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

