Interpolated Policy Gradient: Merging On-Policy and
Off-Policy Gradient Estimation for Deep
Reinforcement Learning

Shixiang Gu
University of Cambridge
Max Planck Institute
sg717@cam.ac.uk
Richard E. Turner
University of Cambridge
ret26@cam.ac.uk

Timothy Lillicrap
DeepMind
countzero@google.com

Bernhard Schölkopf
Max Planck Institute
bs@tuebingen.mpg.de

Zoubin Ghahramani
University of Cambridge
Uber AI Labs
zoubin@eng.cam.ac.uk

Sergey Levine
UC Berkeley
svlevine@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Off-policy model-free deep reinforcement learning methods using previously collected data can improve sample efficiency over on-policy policy gradient techniques.
On the other hand, on-policy algorithms are often more stable and easier to use.
This paper examines, both theoretically and empirically, approaches to merging
on- and off-policy updates for deep reinforcement learning. Theoretical results
show that off-policy updates with a value function estimator can be interpolated
with on-policy policy gradient updates whilst still satisfying performance bounds.
Our analysis uses control variate methods to produce a family of policy gradient
algorithms, with several recently proposed algorithms being special cases of this
family. We then provide an empirical comparison of these techniques with the
remaining algorithmic details fixed, and show how different mixing of off-policy
gradient estimates with on-policy samples contribute to improvements in empirical
performance. The final algorithm provides a generalization and unification of
existing deep policy gradient techniques, has theoretical guarantees on the bias
introduced by off-policy updates, and improves on the state-of-the-art model-free
deep RL methods on a number of OpenAI Gym continuous control benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) studies how an agent that interacts sequentially with an environment
can learn from rewards to improve its behavior and optimize long-term returns. Recent research has
demonstrated that deep networks can be successfully combined with RL techniques to solve difficult
control problems. Some of these include robotic control (Schulman et al., 2016; Lillicrap et al., 2016;
Levine et al., 2016), computer games (Mnih et al., 2015), and board games (Silver et al., 2016).
One of the simplest ways to learn a neural network policy is to collect a batch of behavior wherein
the policy is used to act in the world, and then compute and apply a policy gradient update from
this data. This is referred to as on-policy learning because all of the updates are made using data
that was collected from the trajectory distribution induced by the current policy of the agent. It is
straightforward to compute unbiased on-policy gradients, and practical on-policy gradient algorithms
tend to be stable and relatively easy to use. A major drawback of such methods is that they tend to
be data inefficient, because they only look at each data point once. Off-policy algorithms based on
Q-learning and actor-critic learning (Sutton et al., 1999) have also proven to be an effective approach
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

