Hindsight Experience Replay
Marcin Andrychowicz⇤ , Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong,
Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Josh Tobin, Pieter Abbeel† , Wojciech Zaremba†
OpenAI

Abstract
Dealing with sparse rewards is one of the biggest challenges in Reinforcement
Learning (RL). We present a novel technique called Hindsight Experience Replay
which allows sample-efficient learning from rewards which are sparse and binary
and therefore avoid the need for complicated reward engineering. It can be combined with an arbitrary off-policy RL algorithm and may be seen as a form of
implicit curriculum.
We demonstrate our approach on the task of manipulating objects with a robotic
arm. In particular, we run experiments on three different tasks: pushing, sliding,
and pick-and-place, in each case using only binary rewards indicating whether or
not the task is completed. Our ablation studies show that Hindsight Experience
Replay is a crucial ingredient which makes training possible in these challenging
environments. We show that our policies trained on a physics simulation can
be deployed on a physical robot and successfully complete the task. The video
presenting our experiments is available at https://goo.gl/SMrQnI.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) combined with neural networks has recently led to a wide range of
successes in learning policies for sequential decision-making problems. This includes simulated
environments, such as playing Atari games (Mnih et al., 2015), and defeating the best human player
at the game of Go (Silver et al., 2016), as well as robotic tasks such as helicopter control (Ng et al.,
2006), hitting a baseball (Peters and Schaal, 2008), screwing a cap onto a bottle (Levine et al., 2015),
or door opening (Chebotar et al., 2016).
However, a common challenge, especially for robotics, is the need to engineer a reward function
that not only reflects the task at hand but is also carefully shaped (Ng et al., 1999) to guide the
policy optimization. For example, Popov et al. (2017) use a cost function consisting of five relatively
complicated terms which need to be carefully weighted in order to train a policy for stacking a
brick on top of another one. The necessity of cost engineering limits the applicability of RL in the
real world because it requires both RL expertise and domain-specific knowledge. Moreover, it is
not applicable in situations where we do not know what admissible behaviour may look like. It is
therefore of great practical relevance to develop algorithms which can learn from unshaped reward
signals, e.g. a binary signal indicating successful task completion.
One ability humans have, unlike the current generation of model-free RL algorithms, is to learn
almost as much from achieving an undesired outcome as from the desired one. Imagine that you are
learning how to play hockey and are trying to shoot a puck into a net. You hit the puck but it misses
the net on the right side. The conclusion drawn by a standard RL algorithm in such a situation would
be that the performed sequence of actions does not lead to a successful shot, and little (if anything)
⇤
†

marcin@openai.com
Equal advising.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

