A Meta-Learning Perspective on Cold-Start
Recommendations for Items
Manasi Vartak∗
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
mvartak@csail.mit.edu
Jeshua Bratman
Twitter Inc.
jbratman@twitter.com

Arvind Thiagarajan
Twitter Inc.
arvindt@twitter.com

Conrado Miranda
Twitter Inc.
cmiranda@twitter.com

Hugo Larochelle†
Google Brain
hugolarochelle@google.com

Abstract
Matrix factorization (MF) is one of the most popular techniques for product recommendation, but is known to suffer from serious cold-start problems. Item cold-start
problems are particularly acute in settings such as Tweet recommendation where
new items arrive continuously. In this paper, we present a meta-learning strategy
to address item cold-start when new items arrive continuously. We propose two
deep neural network architectures that implement our meta-learning strategy. The
first architecture learns a linear classifier whose weights are determined by the item
history while the second architecture learns a neural network whose biases are
instead adjusted. We evaluate our techniques on the real-world problem of Tweet
recommendation. On production data at Twitter, we demonstrate that our proposed
techniques significantly beat the MF baseline and also outperform production
models for Tweet recommendation.

1

Introduction

The problem of recommending items to users — whether in the form of products, Tweets, or ads —
is a ubiquitous one. Recommendation algorithms in each of these settings seek to identify patterns
of individual user interest and use these patterns to recommend items. Matrix factorization (MF)
techniques [19], have been shown to work extremely well in settings where many users rate the same
items. MF works by learning separate vector embeddings (in the form of lookup tables) for each
user and each item. However, these techniques are well known for facing serious challenges when
making cold-start recommendations, i.e. when having to deal with a new user or item for which a
vector embedding hasn’t been learned. Cold-start problems related to items (as opposed to users) are
particularly acute in settings where new items arrive continuously. A prime example of this scenario
is Tweet recommendation in the Twitter Home Timeline [1]. Hundreds of millions of Tweets are sent
on Twitter everyday. To ensure freshness of content, the Twitter timeline must continually rank the
latest Tweets and recommend relevant Tweets to each user. In the absence of user-item rating data
for the millions of new Tweets, traditional matrix factorization approaches that depend on ratings
cannot be used. Similar challenges related to item cold-start arise when making recommendations for
news [20], other types of social media, and streaming data applications.
In this paper, we consider the problem of item cold-start (ICS) recommendation, focusing specifically
on providing recommendations when new items arrive continuously. Various techniques [3, 14, 27, 17]
∗
†

Work done as an intern at Twitter
Work done while at Twitter

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

