When Worlds Collide: Integrating Different
Counterfactual Assumptions in Fairness

Chris Russell∗
The Alan Turing Institute and
University of Surrey
crussell@turing.ac.uk

Matt J. Kusner∗
The Alan Turing Institute and
University of Warwick
mkusner@turing.ac.uk

Joshua R. Loftus†
New York University
loftus@nyu.edu

Ricardo Silva
The Alan Turing Institute and
University College London
ricardo@stats.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Machine learning is now being used to make crucial decisions about people’s lives.
For nearly all of these decisions there is a risk that individuals of a certain race,
gender, sexual orientation, or any other subpopulation are unfairly discriminated
against. Our recent method has demonstrated how to use techniques from counterfactual inference to make predictions fair across different subpopulations. This
method requires that one provides the causal model that generated the data at hand.
In general, validating all causal implications of the model is not possible without
further assumptions. Hence, it is desirable to integrate competing causal models to
provide counterfactually fair decisions, regardless of which causal “world” is the
correct one. In this paper, we show how it is possible to make predictions that are
approximately fair with respect to multiple possible causal models at once, thus
mitigating the problem of exact causal specification. We frame the goal of learning
a fair classifier as an optimization problem with fairness constraints entailed by
competing causal explanations. We show how this optimization problem can be
efficiently solved using gradient-based methods. We demonstrate the flexibility of
our model on two real-world fair classification problems. We show that our model
can seamlessly balance fairness in multiple worlds with prediction accuracy.

1

Introduction

Machine learning algorithms can do extraordinary things with data. From generating realistic images
from noise [7], to predicting what you will look like when you become older [18]. Today, governments
and other organizations make use of it in criminal sentencing [4], predicting where to allocate police
officers [3, 16], and to estimate an individual’s risk of failing to pay back a loan [8]. However, in
many of these settings, the data used to train machine learning algorithms contains biases against
certain races, sexes, or other subgroups in the population [3, 6]. Unwittingly, this discrimination is
then reflected in the predictions of such algorithms. Simply being born male or female can change an
individual’s opportunities that follow from automated decision making trained to reflect historical
biases. The implication is that, without taking this into account, classifiers that maximize accuracy
risk perpetuating biases present in society.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
This work was done while JL was a Research Fellow at the Alan Turing Institute.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

