Dynamic Importance Sampling for Anytime Bounds
of the Partition Function
Qi Lou
Computer Science
Univ. of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697, USA
qlou@ics.uci.edu

Rina Dechter
Computer Science
Univ. of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697, USA
dechter@ics.uci.edu

Alexander Ihler
Computer Science
Univ. of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697, USA
ihler@ics.uci.edu

Abstract
Computing the partition function is a key inference task in many graphical models.
In this paper, we propose a dynamic importance sampling scheme that provides
anytime finite-sample bounds for the partition function. Our algorithm balances
the advantages of the three major inference strategies, heuristic search, variational
bounds, and Monte Carlo methods, blending sampling with search to refine a
variationally defined proposal. Our algorithm combines and generalizes recent
work on anytime search [16] and probabilistic bounds [15] of the partition function.
By using an intelligently chosen weighted average over the samples, we construct
an unbiased estimator of the partition function with strong finite-sample confidence
intervals that inherit both the rapid early improvement rate of sampling and the
long-term benefits of an improved proposal from search. This gives significantly
improved anytime behavior, and more flexible trade-offs between memory, time,
and solution quality. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach empirically
on real-world problem instances taken from recent UAI competitions.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic graphical models, including Bayesian networks and Markov random fields, provide a
framework for representing and reasoning with probabilistic and deterministic information [5, 6, 8].
Reasoning in a graphical model often requires computing the partition function, or normalizing
constant of the underlying distribution. Exact computation of the partition function is known to be
#P-hard [19] in general, leading to the development of many approximate schemes. Two important
properties for a good approximation are that (1) it provides bounds or confidence guarantees on the
result, so that the degree of approximation can be measured; and that (2) it can be improved in an
anytime manner, so that the approximation becomes better as more computation is available.
In general, there are three major paradigms for approximate inference: variational bounds, heuristic
search, and Monte Carlo sampling. Each method has advantages and disadvantages. Variational
bounds [21], and closely related approximate elimination methods [7, 14] provide deterministic
guarantees on the partition function. However, these bounds are not anytime; their quality often
depends on the amount of memory available, and do not improve without additional memory. Search
algorithms [12, 20, 16] explicitly enumerate over the space of configurations and eventually provide
an exact answer; however, while some problems are well-suited to search, others only improve their
quality very slowly with more computation. Importance sampling [e.g., 4, 15] gives probabilistic
bounds that improve with more samples at a predictable rate; in practice this means bounds that
improve rapidly at first, but are slow to become very tight. Several algorithms combine two strategies:
approximate hash-based counting combines sampling (of hash functions) with CSP-based search [e.g.,
3, 2] or other MAP queries [e.g., 9, 10], although these are not typically formulated to provide anytime
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

