Smooth Primal-Dual Coordinate Descent Algorithms
for Nonsmooth Convex Optimization

Ahmet Alacaoglu1
1

Quoc Tran-Dinh2

Olivier Fercoq3

Volkan Cevher1

Laboratory for Information and Inference Systems (LIONS), EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
{ahmet.alacaoglu, volkan.cevher}@epfl.ch
2
Department of Statistics and Operations Research, UNC-Chapel Hill, NC, USA
quoctd@email.unc.edu
3
LTCI, Télécom ParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay, Paris, France
olivier.fercoq@telecom-paristech.fr

Abstract
We propose a new randomized coordinate descent method for a convex optimization
template with broad applications. Our analysis relies on a novel combination
of four ideas applied to the primal-dual gap function: smoothing, acceleration,
homotopy, and coordinate descent with non-uniform sampling. As a result, our
method features the first convergence rate guarantees among the coordinate descent
methods, that are the best-known under a variety of common structure assumptions
on the template. We provide numerical evidence to support the theoretical results
with a comparison to state-of-the-art algorithms.

1

Introduction

We develop randomized coordinate descent methods to solve the following composite convex problem:
F ? = minp {F (x) = f (x) + g(x) + h(Ax)} ,
x∈R

(1)

where f : Rp → R, g : Rp → R ∪ {+∞}, and h : Rm → R ∪ {+∞} are proper, closed and
convex functions, A ∈ Rm×p is a given matrix. The optimization template (1) covers many important
applications including support vector machines, sparse model selection, logistic regression, etc. It is
also convenient to formulate generic constrained convex problems by choosing an appropriate h.
Within convex optimization, coordinate descent methods have recently become increasingly popular
in the literature [1–6]. These methods are particularly well-suited to solve huge-scale problems
arising from machine learning applications where matrix-vector operations are prohibitive [1].
To our knowledge, there is no coordinate descent method for the general three-composite form (1)
within our structure assumptions studied here that has rigorous convergence guarantees. Our paper
specifically fills this gap. For such a theoretical development, coordinate descent algorithms require
specific assumptions on the convex optimization problems [1, 4, 6]. As a result, to rigorously handle
the three-composite case, we assume that (i) f is smooth, (ii) g is non-smooth but decomposable
(each component has an “efficiently computable” proximal operator), and (iii) h is non-smooth.
Our approach: In a nutshell, we generalize [4, 7] to the three composite case (1). For this purpose,
we combine several classical and contemporary ideas: We exploit the smoothing technique in [8],
the efficient implementation technique in [4, 14], the homotopy strategy in [9], and the nonuniform
coordinate selection rule in [7] in our algorithm, to achieve the best known complexity estimate for
the template.
Surprisingly, the combination of these ideas is achieved in a very natural and elementary primal-dual
gap-based framework. However, the extension is indeed not trivial since it requires to deal with the
composition of a non-smooth function h and a linear operator A.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

