Dykstra’s Algorithm, ADMM, and Coordinate
Descent: Connections, Insights, and Extensions

Ryan J. Tibshirani
Department of Statistics and Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
ryantibs@stat.cmu.edu

Abstract
We study connections between Dykstra’s algorithm for projecting onto an intersection of convex sets, the augmented Lagrangian method of multipliers or ADMM,
and block coordinate descent. We prove that coordinate descent for a regularized
regression problem, in which the penalty is a separable sum of support functions,
is exactly equivalent to Dykstra’s algorithm applied to the dual problem. ADMM
on the dual problem is also seen to be equivalent, in the special case of two sets,
with one being a linear subspace. These connections, aside from being interesting
in their own right, suggest new ways of analyzing and extending coordinate descent. For example, from existing convergence theory on Dykstra’s algorithm over
polyhedra, we discern that coordinate descent for the lasso problem converges at
an (asymptotically) linear rate. We also develop two parallel versions of coordinate
descent, based on the Dykstra and ADMM connections.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we study two seemingly unrelated but closely connected convex optimization problems,
and associated algorithms. The first is the best approximation problem: given closed, convex sets
C1 , . . . , Cd ⊆ Rn and y ∈ Rn , we seek the point in C1 ∩ · · · ∩ Cd (assumed nonempty) closest to y,
and solve
minn ky − uk22 subject to u ∈ C1 ∩ · · · ∩ Cd .
(1)
u∈R

The second problem is the regularized regression problem: given a response y ∈ Rn and predictors
X ∈ Rn×p , and a block decomposition Xi ∈ Rn×pi , i = 1, . . . , d of the columns of X (i.e., these
could be columns, or groups of columns), we build a working linear model by applying blockwise
regularization over the coefficients, and solve
minp

w∈R

d
X
1
ky − Xwk22 +
hi (wi ),
2
i=1

(2)

where hi : Rpi → R, i = 1, . . . , d are convex functions, and we write wi ∈ Rpi , iP= 1, . . . , d for the
d
appropriate block decomposition of a coefficient vector w ∈ Rp (so that Xw = i=1 Xi wi ).
Two well-studied algorithms for problems (1), (2) are Dykstra’s algorithm (Dykstra, 1983; Boyle and
Dykstra, 1986) and (block) coordinate descent (Warga, 1963; Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis, 1989; Tseng,
1990), respectively. The jumping-off point for our work in this paper is the following fact: these two
algorithms are equivalent for solving (1) and (2). That is, for a particular relationship between the
sets C1 , . . . , Cd and penalty functions h1 , . . . , hd , the problems (1) and (2) are duals of each other,
and Dykstra’s algorithm on the primal problem (1) is exactly the same as coordinate descent on the
dual problem (2). We provide details in Section 2.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

