Wasserstein Learning of Deep Generative Point
Process Models
Shuai Xiao∗ † , Mehrdad Farajtabar∗ Xiaojing Ye‡ , Junchi Yan§ , Le Song¶, Hongyuan Zha
†
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
‡
School of Mathematics, Georgia State University
§
IBM Research – China
¶
Ant Financial
benjaminforever@sjtu.edu.cn, mehrdad@gatech.edu
xye@gsu.edu, yanjc@cn.ibm.com
{lsong,zha}@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
Point processes are becoming very popular in modeling asynchronous sequential
data due to their sound mathematical foundation and strength in modeling a variety
of real-world phenomena. Currently, they are often characterized via intensity
function which limits model’s expressiveness due to unrealistic assumptions on
its parametric form used in practice. Furthermore, they are learned via maximum
likelihood approach which is prone to failure in multi-modal distributions of
sequences. In this paper, we propose an intensity-free approach for point processes
modeling that transforms nuisance processes to a target one. Furthermore, we train
the model using a likelihood-free leveraging Wasserstein distance between point
processes. Experiments on various synthetic and real-world data substantiate the
superiority of the proposed point process model over conventional ones.

1

Introduction

Event sequences are ubiquitous in areas such as e-commerce, social networks, and health informatics.
For example, events in e-commerce are the times a customer purchases a product from an online
vendor such as Amazon. In social networks, event sequences are the times a user signs on or
generates posts, clicks, and likes. In health informatics, events can be the times when a patient
exhibits symptoms or receives treatments. Bidding and asking orders also comprise events in the
stock market. In all of these applications, understanding and predicting user behaviors exhibited by
the event dynamics are of great practical, economic, and societal interest.
Temporal point processes [1] is an effective mathematical tool for modeling events data. It has
been applied to sequences arising from social networks [2, 3, 4], electronic health records [5], ecommerce [6], and finance [7]. A temporal point process is a random process whose realization
consists of a list of discrete events localized in (continuous) time. The point process representation of
sequence data is fundamentally different from the discrete time representation typically used in time
series analysis. It directly models the time period between events as random variables, and allows
temporal events to be modeled accurately, without requiring the choice of a time window to aggregate
events, which may cause discretization errors. Moreover, it has a remarkably extensive theoretical
foundation [8].
∗

Authors contributed equally. Work completed at Georgia Tech.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

