Unsupervised Transformation Learning
via Convex Relaxations
Tatsunori B. Hashimoto John C. Duchi Percy Liang
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
{thashim,jduchi,pliang}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Our goal is to extract meaningful transformations from raw images, such as varying
the thickness of lines in handwriting or the lighting in a portrait. We propose an
unsupervised approach to learn such transformations by attempting to reconstruct
an image from a linear combination of transformations of its nearest neighbors. On
handwritten digits and celebrity portraits, we show that even with linear transformations, our method generates visually high-quality modified images. Moreover,
since our method is semiparametric and does not model the data distribution, the
learned transformations extrapolate off the training data and can be applied to new
types of images.

1

Introduction

Transformations (e.g, rotating or varying the thickness of a handwritten digit) capture important
invariances in data, which can be useful for dimensionality reduction [7], improving generative models
through data augmentation [2], and removing nuisance variables in discriminative tasks [3]. However,
current methods for learning transformations have two limitations. First, they rely on explicit
transformation pairs—for example, given pairs of image patches undergoing rotation [12]. Second,
improvements in transformation learning have focused on problems with known transformation
classes, such as orthogonal or rotational groups [3, 4], while algorithms for general transformations
require solving a difficult, nonconvex objective [12].
To tackle the above challenges, we propose a semiparametric approach for unsupervised transformation learning. Specifically, given data points x1 , . . . , xn , we find K linear transformations A1 . . . AK
such that the vector from each xi to its nearest neighbor lies near the span of A1 xi . . . AK xi . The idea
of using nearest neighbors for unsupervised learning has been explored in manifold learning [1, 7],
but unlike these approaches and more recent work on representation learning [2, 13], we do not seek
to model the full data distribution. Thus, even with relatively few parameters, the transformations we
learn naturally extrapolate off the training distribution and can be applied to novel types of points
(e.g., new types of images).
Our contribution is to express transformation matrices as a sum of rank-one matrices based on
samples of the data. This new objective is convex, thus avoiding local minima (which we show to be
a problem in practice), scales to real-world problems beyond the 10 × 10 image patches considered
in past work, and allows us to derive disentangled transformations through a trace norm penalty.
Empirically, we show our method is fast and effective at recovering known disentangled transformations, improving on past baseline methods based on gradient descent and expectation maximization [11]. On the handwritten digits (MNIST) and celebrity faces (CelebA) datasets, our method finds
interpretable and disentangled transformations—for handwritten digits, the thickness of lines and the
size of loops in digits such as 0 and 9; and for celebrity faces, the degree of a smile.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

