Training recurrent networks to generate hypotheses
about how the brain solves hard navigation problems

Ingmar Kanitscheider & Ila Fiete
Department of Neuroscience
The University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712
ikanitscheider, ilafiete @mail.clm.utexas.edu

Abstract
Self-localization during navigation with noisy sensors in an ambiguous world is
computationally challenging, yet animals and humans excel at it. In robotics, Simultaneous Location and Mapping (SLAM) algorithms solve this problem through
joint sequential probabilistic inference of their own coordinates and those of external spatial landmarks. We generate the first neural solution to the SLAM problem
by training recurrent LSTM networks to perform a set of hard 2D navigation tasks
that require generalization to completely novel trajectories and environments. Our
goal is to make sense of how the diverse phenomenology in the brain’s spatial
navigation circuits is related to their function. We show that the hidden unit representations exhibit several key properties of hippocampal place cells, including
stable tuning curves that remap between environments. Our result is also a proof
of concept for end-to-end-learning of a SLAM algorithm using recurrent networks,
and a demonstration of why this approach may have some advantages for robotic
SLAM.

1

Introduction

Sensory noise and ambiguous spatial cues make self-localization during navigation computationally
challenging. Errors in self-motion estimation cause rapid deterioration in localization performance, if
localization is based simply on path integration (PI), the integration of self-motion signals. Spatial
features in the world are often spatially extended (e.g. walls) or similar landmarks are found at
multiple locations, and thus provide only partial position information. Worse, localizing in novel
environments requires solving a chicken-or-egg problem: Since landmarks are not yet associated
with coordinates, agents must learn landmark positions from PI (known as mapping), but PI location
estimates drift rapidly and require correction from landmark coordinates.
Despite the computational difficulties, animals exhibit stable neural tuning in familiar and novel
environments over several 10s of minutes [1, 2], even though the PI estimates in the same animals is
estimated to deteriorate within a few minutes [3]. These experimental and computational findings
suggest that the brain is solving some version of the simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM)
problem.
In robotics, the SLAM problem is solved by algorithms that approximate Bayes-optimal sequential
probabilistic inference: at each step, a probability distribution over possible current locations and
over the locations of all the landmarks is updated based on noisy motion and noisy, ambiguous
landmark inputs [4]. These algorithms simultaneously update location and map estimates, effectively
bootstrapping their way to better estimates of both. Quantitative studies of neural responses in rodents
suggest that their brains might also perform high-quality sequential probabilistic fusion of motion
and landmark cues during navigation [3]. The required probabilistic computations are difficult to
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

