Estimation of the covariance structure of heavy-tailed
distributions
Stanislav Minsker
Department of Mathematics
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90007
minsker@usc.edu

Xiaohan Wei
Department of Electrical Engineering
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90007
xiaohanw@usc.edu

Abstract
We propose and analyze a new estimator of the covariance matrix that admits strong
theoretical guarantees under weak assumptions on the underlying distribution,
such as existence of moments of only low order. While estimation of covariance
matrices corresponding to sub-Gaussian distributions is well-understood, much
less in known in the case of heavy-tailed data. As K. Balasubramanian and M.
Yuan write 1 , “data from real-world experiments oftentimes tend to be corrupted
with outliers and/or exhibit heavy tails. In such cases, it is not clear that those
covariance matrix estimators .. remain optimal” and “..what are the other possible
strategies to deal with heavy tailed distributions warrant further studies.” We make
a step towards answering this question and prove tight deviation inequalities for the
proposed estimator that depend only on the parameters controlling the “intrinsic
dimension” associated to the covariance matrix (as opposed to the dimension of
the ambient space); in particular, our results are applicable in the case of highdimensional observations.

1

Introduction

Estimation of the covariance matrix is one of the fundamental problems in data analysis: many
important statistical tools, such as Principal Component Analysis (PCA, Hotelling, 1933) and
regression analysis, involve covariance estimation as a crucial step. For instance, PCA has immediate
applications to nonlinear dimension reduction and manifold learning techniques (Allard et al., 2012),
genetics (Novembre et al., 2008), computational biology (Alter et al., 2000), among many others.
However, assumptions underlying the theoretical analysis of most existing estimators, such as various
modifications of the sample covariance matrix, are often restrictive and do not hold for real-world
scenarios. Usually, such estimators rely on heuristic (and often bias-producing) data preprocessing,
such as outlier removal. To eliminate such preprocessing step from the equation, one has to develop a
class of new statistical estimators that admit strong performance guarantees, such as exponentially
tight concentration around the unknown parameter of interest, under weak assumptions on the
underlying distribution, such as existence of moments of only low order. In particular, such heavytailed distributions serve as a viable model for data corrupted with outliers – an almost inevitable
scenario for applications.
We make a step towards solving this problem: using tools from the random matrix theory, we will
develop a class of robust estimators that are numerically tractable and are supported by strong
theoretical evidence under much weaker conditions than currently available analogues. The term
“robustness” refers to the fact that our estimators admit provably good performance even when the
underlying distribution is heavy-tailed.
1

Balasubramanian and Yuan (2016)

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

