Identifying Outlier Arms in Multi-Armed Bandit ∗
Honglei Zhuang1†
Chi Wang2
Yifan Wang3
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
2
Microsoft Research, Redmond
3
Tsinghua University
hzhuang3@illinois.edu
wang.chi@microsoft.com
yifan-wa16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We study a novel problem lying at the intersection of two areas: multi-armed bandit
and outlier detection. Multi-armed bandit is a useful tool to model the process
of incrementally collecting data for multiple objects in a decision space. Outlier
detection is a powerful method to narrow down the attention to a few objects after
the data for them are collected. However, no one has studied how to detect outlier
objects while incrementally collecting data for them, which is necessary when data
collection is expensive. We formalize this problem as identifying outlier arms in a
multi-armed bandit. We propose two sampling strategies with theoretical guarantee,
and analyze their sampling efficiency. Our experimental results on both synthetic
and real data show that our solution saves 70-99% of data collection cost from
baseline while having nearly perfect accuracy.

1

Introduction

A multi-armed bandit models a set of items (arms), each associated with an unknown probability
distribution of rewards. An observer can iteratively select an item and request a sample reward from
its distribution. This model has been predominant in modeling a broad range of applications, such
as cold-start recommendation [24], crowdsourcing [13] etc. In some applications, the objective is to
maximize the collected rewards while playing the bandit (exploration-exploitation setting [7, 5, 23]);
in others, the goal is to identify an optimal object among multiple candidates (pure exploration
setting [6]).
In the pure exploration setting, rich literature is devoted to the problem of identifying the top-K arms
with largest reward expectations [8, 15, 20]. We consider a different scenario, in which one is more
concerned about “outlier arms” with extremely high/low expectation of rewards that substantially
deviate from others. Such arms are valuable as they usually provide novel insight or imply potential
errors.
For example, suppose medical researchers are testing the effectiveness of a biomarker X (e.g.,
the existence of a certain gene sequence) in distinguishing several different diseases with similar
∗

The authors would like to thank anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments.
Part of this work was done while the first author was an intern at Microsoft Research. The first author
was sponsored in part by the U.S. Army Research Lab. under Cooperative Agreement No. W911NF-092-0053 (NSCTA), National Science Foundation IIS 16-18481, IIS 17-04532, and IIS-17-41317, and grant
1U54GM114838 awarded by NIGMS through funds provided by the trans-NIH Big Data to Knowledge (BD2K)
initiative (www.bd2k.nih.gov). The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the author(s)
and should not be interpreted as representing the official policies of the U.S. Army Research Laboratory or the
U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Government
purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation hereon.
†

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

