Fast Rates for Bandit Optimization with
Upper-Confidence Frank-Wolfe

Quentin Berthet ∗
University of Cambridge
q.berthet@statslab.cam.ac.uk

Vianney Perchet †
ENS Paris-Saclay & Criteo Research, Paris
vianney.perchet@normalesup.org

Abstract
We consider the problem of bandit optimization, inspired by stochastic optimization and online learning problems with bandit feedback. In this problem, the objective is to minimize a global loss function of all the actions, not necessarily a
cumulative loss. This framework allows us to study a very general class of problems, with applications in statistics, machine learning, and other fields. To solve
this problem, we analyze the Upper-Confidence Frank-Wolfe algorithm, inspired
by techniques for bandits and convex optimization. We give theoretical guarantees for the performance of this algorithm over various classes of functions, and
discuss the optimality of these results.

Introduction
In online optimization problems, a decision maker choses at each round t ≥ 1 an action πt from
some given action space, observes some information through a feedback mechanism in order to
minimize a loss, function of the set
Pof actions {π1 , . . . , πT }. Traditionally, this objective is computed
as a cumulative loss of the form t `t (πt ) [20, 34], or as a function thereof [2, 3, 16, 32].
Examples include classical multi-armed bandit problems where the action space is finite with K
elements, in stochastic or adversarial settings [9]. In these problems, the loss at round t can be
written as `t (eπt ) for a linear form `t on RK , and basis vectors ei . More generally, this includes
also bandit problems over a convex body C, where the action at each round consists in picking xt ∈ C
and where the loss `t (xt ) is for some convex function `t [see, e.g. 9, 12, 19, 10].
In this work, we consider the online learning problem of bandit optimization. Similarly to other
problems of this type, a decision maker chooses at each round an action πt from a set of size K, and
observes information about an unknown convex loss
 function L. The difference is that the objective
PT
is to minimize a global convex loss L T1 t=1 eπt , not a cumulative one. At each round, choosing
the i-th action increases the information about the local dependency of L on its i-th coefficient. This
problem can be contrasted with the objective of minimizing the average pseudo-regret in a stochastic
PT
bandit problem, i.e. of minimizing T1 t=1 L(eπt ) with observation `t (eπt ), a noisy estimate of
L(eπt ). At the intersection of these frameworks, when L is a linear form, is the stochastic multiarmed bandit problem. Our problem is also related to maximization of known convex objectives
[2, 3]. We compare our framework to these settings in Section 1.4.
Bandit optimization shares some similarities with stochastic optimization problems, where the objective is to minimize f (xT ) for an unknown function f , while choosing at each round a variable xt
∗

Supported by an Isaac Newton Trust Early Career Support Scheme and by The Alan Turing Institute under
the EPSRC grant EP/N510129/1.
†
Supported by the ANR (grant ANR- 13-JS01-0004-01), and the FMJH Program Gaspard Monge in Optimization and operations research (supported in part by EDF) and from the Labex LMH.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

