Learning Deep Structured Multi-Scale Features using
Attention-Gated CRFs for Contour Prediction
Dan Xu1

Wanli Ouyang2 Xavier Alameda-Pineda3 Elisa Ricci4
Xiaogang Wang5 Nicu Sebe1
1
The University of Trento, 2 The University of Sydney, 3 Perception Group, INRIA
4
University of Perugia, 5 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
dan.xu@unitn.it, wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au, xavier.alameda-pineda@inria.fr
elisa.ricci@unipg.it, xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, niculae.sebe@unitn.it

Abstract
Recent works have shown that exploiting multi-scale representations deeply learned
via convolutional neural networks (CNN) is of tremendous importance for accurate
contour detection. This paper presents a novel approach for predicting contours
which advances the state of the art in two fundamental aspects, i.e. multi-scale
feature generation and fusion. Different from previous works directly considering multi-scale feature maps obtained from the inner layers of a primary CNN
architecture, we introduce a hierarchical deep model which produces more rich
and complementary representations. Furthermore, to refine and robustly fuse the
representations learned at different scales, the novel Attention-Gated Conditional
Random Fields (AG-CRFs) are proposed. The experiments ran on two publicly
available datasets (BSDS500 and NYUDv2) demonstrate the effectiveness of the
latent AG-CRF model and of the overall hierarchical framework.

1

Introduction

Considered as one of the fundamental tasks in low-level vision, contour detection has been deeply
studied in the past decades. While early works mostly focused on low-level cues (e.g. colors, gradients,
textures) and hand-crafted features [3, 25, 22], more recent methods benefit from the representational
power of deep learning models [31, 2, 38, 19, 24]. The ability to effectively exploit multi-scale
feature representations is considered a crucial factor for achieving accurate predictions of contours
in both traditional [29] and CNN-based [38, 19, 24] approaches. Restricting the attention on deep
learning-based solutions, existing methods [38, 24] typically derive multi-scale representations by
adopting standard CNN architectures and considering directly the feature maps associated to different
inner layers. These maps are highly complementary: while the features from the first layers are
responsible for predicting fine details, the ones from the higher layers are devoted to encode the
basic structure of the objects. Traditionally, concatenation and weighted averaging are very popular
strategies to combine multi-scale representations (see Fig. 1.a). While these strategies typically lead
to an increased detection accuracy with respect to single-scale models, they severly simplify the
complex relationship between multi-scale feature maps.
The motivational cornerstone of this study is the following research question: is it worth modeling
and exploiting complex relationships between multiple scales of a deep representation for contour
detection? In order to provide an answer and inspired by recent works exploiting graphical models
within deep learning architectures [5, 39], we introduce Attention-Gated Conditional Random Fields
(AG-CRFs), which allow to learn robust feature map representations at each scale by exploiting the information available from other scales. This is achieved by incorporating an attention mechanism [27]
seamlessly integrated into the multi-scale learning process under the form of gates [26]. Intuitively,
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

