Testing and Learning on Distributions with
Symmetric Noise Invariance

Ho Chung Leon Law
Department of Statistics
University Of Oxford
hlaw@stats.ox.ac.uk

Christopher Yau
Centre for Computational Biology
University of Birmingham
c.yau@bham.ac.uk

Dino Sejdinovic
Department of Statistics
University Of Oxford
dino.sejdinovic@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Kernel embeddings of distributions and the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD),
the resulting distance between distributions, are useful tools for fully nonparametric
two-sample testing and learning on distributions. However, it is rare that all possible
differences between samples are of interest – discovered differences can be due to
different types of measurement noise, data collection artefacts or other irrelevant
sources of variability. We propose distances between distributions which encode
invariance to additive symmetric noise, aimed at testing whether the assumed
true underlying processes differ. Moreover, we construct invariant features of
distributions, leading to learning algorithms robust to the impairment of the input
distributions with symmetric additive noise.

1

Introduction

There are many sources of variability in data, and not all of them are pertinent to the questions that
a data analyst may be interested in. Consider, for example, a nonparametric two-sample testing
problem, which has recently been attracting significant research interest, especially in the context
N2
1
of kernel embeddings of distributions [2, 5, 7]. We observe samples {X1j }N
j=1 and {X2j }j=1 from
two data generating processes P1 and P2 , respectively, and would like to test the null hypothesis that
P1 = P2 without making any parametric assumptions on these distributions. With a large sample-size,
the minutiae of the two data generating processes are uncovered (e.g. slightly different calibration
of the data collecting equipment, different numerical precision), and we ultimately reject the null
hypothesis, even if the sources of variation across the two samples may be irrelevant for the analysis.
Similarly, we may be interested in learning on distributions [14, 23, 24], where the appropriate
level of granularity in the data is distributional. For example, each label yi in supervised learning
i
is associated to a whole bag of observations Bi = {Xij }N
j=1 – assumed to come from a probability
distribution Pi , or we may be interested in clustering such bags of observations. Again, nonparametric
distances used in such contexts to facilitate a learning algorithm on distributions, such as Maximum
Mean Discrepancy (MMD) [5], can be sensitive to irrelevant sources of variation and may lead to
suboptimal or even misleading results, in which case building predictors which are invariant to noise
is of interest.
While it may be tempting to revert back to a parametric setup and work with simple, easy to interpret
models, we argue that a different approach is possible: we stay within a nonparametric framework,
exploit the irregular and complicated nature of real life distributions and encode invariances to sources

