Towards Generalization and Simplicity
in Continuous Control
Aravind Rajeswaran∗

Kendall Lowrey∗

Emanuel Todorov

Sham Kakade

University of Washington Seattle
{ aravraj, klowrey, todorov, sham } @ cs.washington.edu

Abstract
This work shows that policies with simple linear and RBF parameterizations can
be trained to solve a variety of widely studied continuous control tasks, including
the gym-v1 benchmarks. The performance of these trained policies are competitive
with state of the art results, obtained with more elaborate parameterizations such as
fully connected neural networks. Furthermore, the standard training and testing
scenarios for these tasks are shown to be very limited and prone to over-fitting, thus
giving rise to only trajectory-centric policies. Training with a diverse initial state
distribution induces more global policies with better generalization. This allows
for interactive control scenarios where the system recovers from large on-line
perturbations; as shown in the supplementary video.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (deepRL) has recently achieved impressive results on a number of
hard problems, including sequential decision making in game domains [1, 2]. This success has
motivated efforts to adapt deepRL methods for control of physical systems, and has resulted in rich
motor behaviors [3, 4]. The complexity of systems solvable with deepRL methods is not yet at the
level of what can be achieved with trajectory optimization (planning) in simulation [5, 6, 7], or with
hand-crafted controllers on physical robots (e.g. Boston Dynamics). However, RL approaches are
exciting because they are generic, model-free, and highly automated.
Recent success of RL [2, 8, 9, 10, 11] has been enabled largely due to engineering efforts such
as large scale data collection [1, 2, 11] or careful systems design [8, 9] with well behaved robots.
When advances in a field are largely empirical in nature, it is important to understand the relative
contributions of representations, optimization methods, and task design or modeling: both as a
sanity check and to scale up to harder tasks. Furthermore, in line with Occam’s razor, the simplest
reasonable approaches should be tried and understood first. A thorough understanding of these factors
is unfortunately lacking in the community.
In this backdrop, we ask the pertinent question: "What are the simplest set of ingredients needed
to succeed in some of the popular benchmarks?" To attempt this question, we use the Gym-v1 [12]
continuous control benchmarks, which have accelerated research and enabled objective comparisons.
Since the tasks involve under-actuation, contact dynamics, and are high dimensional (continuous
space), they have been accepted as benchmarks in the deepRL community. Recent works test their
algorithms either exclusively or primarily on these tasks [13, 4, 14], and success on these tasks have
been regarded as demonstrating a “proof of concept”.
Our contributions: Our results and their implications are highlighted below with more elaborate
discussions in Section 5:
∗

Equal contributions. Project page: https://sites.google.com/view/simple-pol

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

