Masked Autoregressive Flow for Density Estimation

George Papamakarios
University of Edinburgh
g.papamakarios@ed.ac.uk

Theo Pavlakou
University of Edinburgh
theo.pavlakou@ed.ac.uk

Iain Murray
University of Edinburgh
i.murray@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Autoregressive models are among the best performing neural density estimators.
We describe an approach for increasing the flexibility of an autoregressive model,
based on modelling the random numbers that the model uses internally when generating data. By constructing a stack of autoregressive models, each modelling the
random numbers of the next model in the stack, we obtain a type of normalizing
flow suitable for density estimation, which we call Masked Autoregressive Flow.
This type of flow is closely related to Inverse Autoregressive Flow and is a generalization of Real NVP. Masked Autoregressive Flow achieves state-of-the-art
performance in a range of general-purpose density estimation tasks.

1

Introduction

The joint density p(x) of a set of variables x is a central object of interest in machine learning. Being
able to access and manipulate p(x) enables a wide range of tasks to be performed, such as inference,
prediction, data completion and data generation. As such, the problem of estimating p(x) from a set
of examples {xn } is at the core of probabilistic unsupervised learning and generative modelling.
In recent years, using neural networks for density estimation has been particularly successful. Combining the flexibility and learning capacity of neural networks with prior knowledge about the structure
of data to be modelled has led to impressive results in modelling natural images [4, 30, 37, 38] and
audio data [34, 36]. State-of-the-art neural density estimators have also been used for likelihood-free
inference from simulated data [21, 23], variational inference [13, 24], and as surrogates for maximum
entropy models [19].
Neural density estimators differ from other approaches to generative modelling—such as variational
autoencoders [12, 25] and generative adversarial networks [7]—in that they readily provide exact
density evaluations. As such, they are more suitable in applications where the focus is on explicitly
evaluating densities, rather than generating synthetic data. For instance, density estimators can learn
suitable priors for data from large unlabelled datasets, for use in standard Bayesian inference [39].
In simulation-based likelihood-free inference, conditional density estimators can learn models for
the likelihood [5] or the posterior [23] from simulated data. Density estimators can learn effective
proposals for importance sampling [22] or sequential Monte Carlo [8, 21]; such proposals can be
used in probabilistic programming environments to speed up inference [15, 16]. Finally, conditional
density estimators can be used as flexible inference networks for amortized variational inference and
as part of variational autoencoders [12, 25].
A challenge in neural density estimation is to construct models that are flexible enough to represent
complex densities, but have tractable density functions and learning algorithms. There are mainly
two families of neural density estimators that are both flexible and tractable: autoregressive models
[35] and normalizing flows [24]. Autoregressive models decompose the joint density as a product of
conditionals, and model each conditional in turn. Normalizing flows transform a base density (e.g. a
standard Gaussian) into the target density by an invertible transformation with tractable Jacobian.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

