On the Optimization Landscape of Tensor
Decompositions

Rong Ge
Duke University
rongge@cs.duke.edu

Tengyu Ma
Facebook AI Research
tengyuma@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Non-convex optimization with local search heuristics has been widely used in
machine learning, achieving many state-of-art results. It becomes increasingly
important to understand why they can work for these NP-hard problems on typical
data. The landscape of many objective functions in learning has been conjectured
to have the geometric property that “all local optima are (approximately) global optima”, and thus they can be solved efficiently by local search algorithms. However,
establishing such property can be very difficult.
In this paper, we analyze the optimization landscape of the random over-complete
tensor decomposition problem, which has many applications in unsupervised leaning, especially in learning latent variable models. In practice, it can be efficiently
solved by gradient ascent on a non-convex objective. We show that for any small
constant ε > 0, among the set of points with function values (1 + ε)-factor larger
than the expectation of the function, all the local maxima are approximate global
maxima. Previously, the best-known result only characterizes the geometry in
small neighborhoods around the true components. Our result implies that even
with an initialization that is barely better than the random guess, the gradient ascent
algorithm is guaranteed to solve this problem.
Our main technique uses Kac-Rice formula and random matrix theory. To our best
knowledge, this is the first time when Kac-Rice formula is successfully applied to
counting the number of local optima of a highly-structured random polynomial
with dependent coefficients.

1

Introduction

Non-convex optimization is the dominating algorithmic technique behind many state-of-art results in
machine learning, computer vision, natural language processing and reinforcement learning. Local
search algorithms through stochastic gradient methods are simple, scalable and easy to implement.
Surprisingly, they also return high-quality solutions for practical problems like training deep neural
networks, which are NP-hard in the worst case. It has been conjectured [DPG+ 14, CHM+ 15] that
on typical data, the landscape of the training objectives has the nice geometric property that all
local minima are (approximate) global minima. Such property assures the local search algorithms to
converge to global minima [GHJY15, LSJR16, NP06, SQW15]. However, establishing it for concrete
problems can be challenging.
Despite recent progress on understanding the optimization landscape of various machine learning
problems (see [GHJY15, BBV16, BNS16, Kaw16, GLM16, HM16, HMR16] and references therein),
a comprehensive answer remains elusive. Moreover, all previous techniques fundamentally rely on
the spectral structure of the problems. For example, in [GLM16] allows us to pin down the set of the
critical points (points with vanishing gradients) as approximate eigenvectors of some matrix. Among
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

