Learning to See Physics via Visual De-animation

Jiajun Wu
MIT CSAIL

Erika Lu
University of Oxford

William T. Freeman
MIT CSAIL, Google Research

Pushmeet Kohli
DeepMind
Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT CSAIL

Abstract
We introduce a paradigm for understanding physical scenes without human annotations. At the core of our system is a physical world representation that is
first recovered by a perception module and then utilized by physics and graphics
engines. During training, the perception module and the generative models learn
by visual de-animation — interpreting and reconstructing the visual information
stream. During testing, the system first recovers the physical world state, and then
uses the generative models for reasoning and future prediction.
Even more so than forward simulation, inverting a physics or graphics engine is
a computationally hard problem; we overcome this challenge by using a convolutional inversion network. Our system quickly recognizes the physical world
state from appearance and motion cues, and has the flexibility to incorporate both
differentiable and non-differentiable physics and graphics engines. We evaluate our
system on both synthetic and real datasets involving multiple physical scenes, and
demonstrate that our system performs well on both physical state estimation and
reasoning problems. We further show that the knowledge learned on the synthetic
dataset generalizes to constrained real images.

1

Introduction

Inspired by human abilities, we wish to develop machine systems that understand scenes. Scene
understanding has multiple defining characteristics which break down broadly into two features. First,
human scene understanding is rich. Scene understanding is physical, predictive, and causal: rather
than simply knowing what is where, one can also predict what may happen next, or what actions
one can take, based on the physics afforded by the objects, their properties, and relations. These
predictions, hypotheticals, and counterfactuals are probabilistic, integrating uncertainty as to what is
more or less likely to occur. Second, human scene understanding is fast. Most of the computation has
to happen in a single, feedforward, bottom-up pass.
There have been many systems proposed recently to tackle these challenges, but existing systems
have architectural features that allow them to address one of these features but not the other. Typical
approaches based on inverting graphics engines and physics simulators [Kulkarni et al., 2015b]
achieve richness at the expense of speed. Conversely, neural networks such as PhysNet [Lerer et al.,
2016] are fast, but their ability to generalize to rich physical predictions is limited.
We propose a new approach to combine the best of both. Our overall framework for representation is
based on graphics and physics engines, where graphics is run in reverse to build the initial physical
scene representation, and physics is then run forward to imagine what will happen next or what can
be done. Graphics can also be run in the forward direction to visualize the outputs of the physics
simulation as images of what we expect to see in the future, or under different viewing conditions.
Rather than use traditional, often slow inverse graphics methods [Kulkarni et al., 2015b], we learn to
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

