Adaptive Accelerated Gradient Converging Method
under Hölderian Error Bound Condition
Mingrui Liu, Tianbao Yang
Department of Computer Science
The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242
mingrui-liu, tianbao-yang@uiowa.edu

Abstract
Recent studies have shown that proximal gradient (PG) method and accelerated
gradient method (APG) with restarting can enjoy a linear convergence under a
weaker condition than strong convexity, namely a quadratic growth condition
(QGC). However, the faster convergence of restarting APG method relies on
the potentially unknown constant in QGC to appropriately restart APG, which
restricts its applicability. We address this issue by developing a novel adaptive
gradient converging methods, i.e., leveraging the magnitude of proximal gradient
as a criterion for restart and termination. Our analysis extends to a much more
general condition beyond the QGC, namely the Hölderian error bound (HEB)
condition. The key technique for our development is a novel synthesis of adaptive
regularization and a conditional restarting scheme, which extends previous work
focusing on strongly convex problems to a much broader family of problems.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that our results have important implication and
applications in machine learning: (i) if the objective function is coercive and semialgebraic, PG’s convergence speed is essentially o( 1t ), where t is the total number
of iterations; (ii) if the objective function consists of an `1 , `∞ , `1,∞ , or huber
norm regularization and a convex smooth piecewise quadratic loss (e.g., square
loss, squared hinge loss and huber loss), the proposed algorithm is parameter-free
and enjoys a faster linear convergence than PG without any other assumptions
(e.g., restricted eigen-value condition). It is notable that our linear convergence
results for the aforementioned problems are global instead of local. To the best of
our knowledge, these improved results are first shown in this work.

1

Introduction

We consider the following smooth composite optimization:
min F (x) , f (x) + g(x),

x∈Rd

(1)

where g(x) is a proper lower semi-continuous convex function and f (x) is a continuously differentiable convex function, whose gradient is L-Lipschitz continuous. The above problem has
been studied extensively in literature and many algorithms have been developed with convergence
guarantee. In particular, by employing the proximal mapping associated with g(x), i.e.,
1
(2)
Pηg (u) = arg min kx − uk22 + ηg(x),
x∈Rd 2
proximal gradient (PG) and accelerated
√ proximal gradient (APG) methods have been developed
for solving (1) with O(1/) and O(1/ ) 1 iteration complexities for finding an -optimal solution.
1

For the moment, we neglect the constant factor.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

