Variable Importance using Decision Trees

S. Jalil Kazemitabar
UCLA
sjalilk@ucla.edu

Arash A. Amini
UCLA
aaamini@ucla.edu

Adam Bloniarz
UC Berkeley∗
adam@stat.berkeley.edu

Ameet Talwalkar
CMU
talwalkar@cmu.edu

Abstract
Decision trees and random forests are well established models that not only offer
good predictive performance, but also provide rich feature importance information.
While practitioners often employ variable importance methods that rely on this
impurity-based information, these methods remain poorly characterized from a
theoretical perspective. We provide novel insights into the performance of these
methods by deriving finite sample performance guarantees in a high-dimensional
setting under various modeling assumptions. We further demonstrate the effectiveness of these impurity-based methods via an extensive set of simulations.

1

Introduction

Known for their accuracy and robustness, decision trees and random forests have long been a
workhorse in machine learning [1]. In addition to their strong predictive accuracy, they are equipped
with measures of variable importance that are widely used in applications where model interpretability
is paramount. Importance scores are used for model selection: predictors with high-ranking scores
may be chosen for further investigation, or for building a more parsimonious model.
One common approach naturally couples the model training process with feature selection [2, 5].
This approach, which we call T REE W EIGHT, calculates the feature importance score for a variable
by summing the impurity reductions over all nodes in the tree where a split was made on that
variable, with impurity reductions weighted to account for the size of the node. For ensembles, these
quantities are averaged over constituent trees. T REE W EIGHT is particularly attractive because it can
be calculated without any additional computational expense above the standard training procedure.
However, as the training procedure in random forests combines several complex ingredients—bagging,
random selection of predictor subsets at nodes, line search for optimal impurity reduction, recursive
partitioning—theoretical investigation into T REE W EIGHT is extremely challenging. We propose a
new method called DS TUMP that is inspired by T REE W EIGHT but is more amenable to analysis.
DS TUMP assigns variable importance as the impurity reduction at the root node of a single tree.
In this work we characterize the finite sample performance of DS TUMP under an additive regression
model, which also yields novel results for variable selection under a linear model, both with correlated
and uncorrelated design. We corroborate our theoretical analyses with extensive simulations in which
we evaluate DS TUMP and T REE W EIGHT on the task of feature selection under various modeling
assumptions. We also compare the performance of these techniques against established methods
whose behaviors have been theoretically characterized, including Lasso, SIS, and SpAM [12, 3, 9].
∗

Now at Google

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

