Filtering Variational Objectives

Chris J. Maddison1,3,* , Dieterich Lawson,2,* George Tucker2,*
Nicolas Heess1 , Mohammad Norouzi2 , Andriy Mnih1 , Arnaud Doucet3 , Yee Whye Teh1
1

DeepMind, 2 Google Brain, 3 University of Oxford
{cmaddis, dieterichl, gjt}@google.com

Abstract
When used as a surrogate objective for maximum likelihood estimation in latent
variable models, the evidence lower bound (ELBO) produces state-of-the-art results.
Inspired by this, we consider the extension of the ELBO to a family of lower bounds
defined by a particle filter’s estimator of the marginal likelihood, the filtering
variational objectives (FIVOs). FIVOs take the same arguments as the ELBO,
but can exploit a model’s sequential structure to form tighter bounds. We present
results that relate the tightness of FIVO’s bound to the variance of the particle filter’s
estimator by considering the generic case of bounds defined as log-transformed
likelihood estimators. Experimentally, we show that training with FIVO results
in substantial improvements over training the same model architecture with the
ELBO on sequential data.

1

Introduction

Learning in statistical models via gradient descent is straightforward when the objective function
and its gradients are tractable. In the presence of latent variables, however, many objectives become
intractable. For neural generative models with latent variables, there are currently a few dominant
approaches: optimizing lower bounds on the marginal log-likelihood [1, 2], restricting to a class of
invertible models [3], or using likelihood-free methods [4, 5, 6, 7]. In this work, we focus on the
first approach and introduce filtering variational objectives (FIVOs), a tractable family of objectives
for maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) in latent variable models with sequential structure.
Specifically, let x denote an observation of an X -valued random variable. We assume that the
process generating x involves an unobserved Z-valued random variable z with joint density p(x, z)
in some family P.R The goal ofMLE is to recover p ∈ P that maximizes the marginal log-likelihood,
log p(x) = log p(x, z) dz 1 . The difficulty in carrying out this optimization is that the loglikelihood function is defined via a generally intractable integral. To circumvent marginalization,
a common approach [1, 2] is to optimize a variational lower bound on the marginal log-likelihood
[8, 9]. The evidence lower bound L(x, p, q) (ELBO) is the most common such bound and is defined
by a variational posterior distribution q(z|x) whose support includes p’s,


p(x, z)
L(x, p, q) = E log
= log p(x) − KL(q(z|x) k p(z|x)) ≤ log p(x) .
(1)
q(z|x)
q(z|x)
L(x, p, q) lower-bounds the marginal log-likelihood for any choice of q, and the bound is tight when
q is the true posterior p(z|x). Thus, the joint optimum of L(x, p, q) in p and q is the MLE. In practice,
it is common to restrict q to a tractable family of distributions (e.g., a factored distribution) and to
*

Equal contribution.
We reuse p to denote the conditionals and marginals of the joint density.

1

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

