Data-Efficient Reinforcement Learning in
Continuous State-Action Gaussian-POMDPs
Rowan Thomas McAllister
Department of Engineering
Cambridge University
Cambridge, CB2 1PZ
rtm26@cam.ac.uk

Carl Edward Rasmussen
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, CB2 1PZ
cer54@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
We present a data-efficient reinforcement learning method for continuous stateaction systems under significant observation noise. Data-efficient solutions under
small noise exist, such as PILCO which learns the cartpole swing-up task in
30s. PILCO evaluates policies by planning state-trajectories using a dynamics
model. However, PILCO applies policies to the observed state, therefore planning
in observation space. We extend PILCO with filtering to instead plan in belief
space, consistent with partially observable Markov decisions process (POMDP)
planning. This enables data-efficient learning under significant observation noise,
outperforming more naive methods such as post-hoc application of a filter to
policies optimised by the original (unfiltered) PILCO algorithm. We test our
method on the cartpole swing-up task, which involves nonlinear dynamics and
requires nonlinear control.

1

Introduction

The Probabilistic Inference and Learning for COntrol (PILCO) [5] framework is a reinforcement
learning algorithm, which uses Gaussian Processes (GPs) to learn the dynamics in continuous state
spaces. The method has shown to be highly efficient in the sense that it can learn with only very
few interactions with the real system. However, a serious limitation of PILCO is that it assumes
that the observation noise level is small. There are two main reasons which make this assumption
necessary. Firstly, the dynamics are learnt from the noisy observations, but learning the transition
model in this way doesn’t correctly account for the noise in the observations. If the noise is assumed
small, then this will be a good approximation to the real transition function. Secondly, PILCO uses
the noisy observation directly to calculate the action, which is problematic if the observation noise is
substantial. Consider a policy controlling an unstable system, where high gain feed-back is necessary
for good performance. Observation noise is amplified when the noisy input is fed directly to the high
gain controller, which in turn injects noise back into the state, creating cycles of increasing variance
and instability.
In this paper we extend PILCO to address these two shortcomings, enabling PILCO to be used in
situations with substantial observation noise. The first issue is addressed using the so-called Direct
method for training the transition model, see section 3.3. The second problem can be tackled by
filtering the observations. One way to look at this is that PILCO does planning in observation space,
rather than in belief space. In this paper we extend PILCO to allow filtering of the state, by combining
the previous state distribution with the dynamics model and the observation using Bayes rule. Note,
that this is easily done when the controller is being applied, but to gain the full benefit, we have to
also take the filter into account when optimising the policy.
PILCO trains its policy through minimising the expected predicted loss when simulating the system
and controller actions. Since the dynamics are not known exactly, the simulation in PILCO had to
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

