VAIN: Attentional Multi-agent Predictive Modeling

Yedid Hoshen
Facebook AI Research, NYC
yedidh@fb.com

Abstract
Multi-agent predictive modeling is an essential step for understanding physical,
social and team-play systems. Recently, Interaction Networks (INs) were proposed
for the task of modeling multi-agent physical systems. One of the drawbacks of
INs is scaling with the number of interactions in the system (typically quadratic
or higher order in the number of agents). In this paper we introduce VAIN,
a novel attentional architecture for multi-agent predictive modeling that scales
linearly with the number of agents. We show that VAIN is effective for multiagent predictive modeling. Our method is evaluated on tasks from challenging
multi-agent prediction domains: chess and soccer, and outperforms competing
multi-agent approaches.

1

Introduction

Modeling multi-agent interactions is essential for understanding the world. The physical world
is governed by (relatively) well-understood multi-agent interactions including fundamental forces
(e.g. gravitational attraction, electrostatic interactions) as well as more macroscopic phenomena
(electrical conductors and insulators, astrophysics). The social world is also governed by multi-agent
interactions (e.g. psychology and economics) which are often imperfectly understood. Games such
as Chess or Go have simple and well defined rules but move dynamics are governed by very complex
policies. Modeling and inference of multi-agent interaction from observational data is therefore an
important step towards machine intelligence.
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have had much success in machine perception e.g. Computer Vision
[1, 2, 3], Natural Language Processing [4] and Speech Recognition [5, 6]. These problems usually
have temporal and/or spatial structure, which makes them amenable to particular neural architectures
- Convolutional and Recurrent Neural Networks (CNN [7] and RNN [8]). Multi-agent interactions
are different from machine perception in several ways:
• The data is no longer sampled on a spatial or temporal grid.
• The number of agents changes frequently.
• Systems are quite heterogeneous, there is not a canonical large network that can be used for
finetuning.
• Multi-agent systems have an obvious factorization (into point agents), whereas signals such
as images and speech do not.
To model simple interactions in a physics simulation context, Interaction Networks (INs) were
proposed by Battaglia et al. [9]. Interaction networks model each interaction in the physical
interaction graph (e.g. force between every two gravitating bodies) by a neural network. By the
additive sum of the vector outputs of all the interactions, a global interaction vector is obtained.
The global interaction alongside object features are then used to predict the future velocity of the
object. It was shown that Interaction Networks can be trained for different numbers of physical agents
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

