Generalization Properties of Learning with Random
Features
Alessandro Rudi ∗

Lorenzo Rosasco

INRIA - Sierra Project-team,
École Normale Supérieure, Paris,
75012 Paris, France
alessandro.rudi@inria.fr

University of Genova,
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
lrosasco@mit.edu

Abstract
We study the generalization properties of ridge regression with random features
√
in the statistical learning framework. We show√for the first time that O(1/ n)
learning bounds can be achieved with only O( n log n) random features rather
than O(n) as suggested by previous results. Further, we prove faster learning
rates and show that they might require more random features, unless they are
sampled according to a possibly problem dependent distribution. Our results
shed light on the statistical computational trade-offs in large scale kernelized
learning, showing the potential effectiveness of random features in reducing the
computational complexity while keeping optimal generalization properties.

1

Introduction

Supervised learning is a basic machine learning problem where the goal is estimating a function
from random noisy samples [1, 2]. The function to be learned is fixed, but unknown, and flexible
non-parametric models are needed for good results. A general class of models is based on functions
of the form,
f (x) =

M
X

αi q(x, ωi ),

(1)

i=1

where q is a non-linear function, ω1 , . . . , ωM ∈ Rd are often called centers, α1 , . . . , αM ∈ R are
coefficients, and M = Mn could/should grow with the number of data points n. Algorithmically, the
problem reduces to computing from data the parameters ω1 , . . . , ωM , α1 , . . . , αM and M . Among
others, one-hidden layer networks [3], or RBF networks [4], are examples of classical approaches
considering these models. Here, parameters are computed by considering a non-convex optimization
problem, typically hard to solve and analyze [5]. Kernel methods are another notable example of
an approach [6] using functions of the form (1). In this case, q is assumed to be a positive definite
function [7] and it is shown that choosing the centers to be the input points, hence M = n, suffices
for optimal statistical results [8, 9, 10]. As a by product, kernel methods require only finding the
coefficients (αi )i , typically by convex optimization. While theoretically sound and remarkably
effective in small and medium size problems, memory requirements make kernel methods unfeasible
for large scale problems.
Most popular approaches to tackle these limitations are randomized and include sampling the centers
at random, either in a data-dependent or in a data-independent way. Notable examples include
Nyström [11, 12] and random features [13] approaches. Given random centers, computations still
∗
This work was done when A.R. was working at Laboratory of Computational and Statistical Learning
(Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia).

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

