Improved Dynamic Regret for Non-degenerate
Functions
Lijun Zhang∗ , Tianbao Yang† , Jinfeng Yi‡ , Rong Jin§ , Zhi-Hua Zhou∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
†
Department of Computer Science, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, USA
‡
AI Foundations Lab, IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
§
Alibaba Group, Seattle, USA
zhanglj@lamda.nju.edu.cn, tianbao-yang@uiowa.edu, jinfengyi@tencent.com
jinrong.jr@alibaba-inc.com, zhouzh@lamda.nju.edu.cn

∗

Abstract
Recently, there has been a growing research interest in the analysis of dynamic
regret, which measures the performance of an online learner against a sequence
of local minimizers. By exploiting the strong convexity, previous studies have
shown that the dynamic regret can be upper bounded by the path-length of the
comparator sequence. In this paper, we illustrate that the dynamic regret can be
further improved by allowing the learner to query the gradient of the function
multiple times, and meanwhile the strong convexity can be weakened to other
non-degenerate conditions. Specifically, we introduce the squared path-length,
which could be much smaller than the path-length, as a new regularity of the
comparator sequence. When multiple gradients are accessible to the learner, we
first demonstrate that the dynamic regret of strongly convex functions can be upper
bounded by the minimum of the path-length and the squared path-length. We then
extend our theoretical guarantee to functions that are semi-strongly convex or selfconcordant. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that semi-strong
convexity and self-concordance are utilized to tighten the dynamic regret.

1

Introduction

Online convex optimization is a fundamental tool for solving a wide variety of machine learning
problems [Shalev-Shwartz, 2011]. It can be formulated as a repeated game between a learner and
an adversary. On the t-th round of the game, the learner selects a point xt from a convex set X
and the adversary chooses a convex function ft : X 7→ R. Then, the function is revealed to the
learner, who incurs loss ft (xt ). The standard performance measure is the regret, defined as the
difference between the learner’s cumulative loss and the cumulative loss of the optimal fixed vector
in hindsight:
T
T
X
X
ft (x).
(1)
ft (xt ) − min
t=1

x∈X

t=1

Over the past decades, various online algorithms, such as the online gradient descent [Zinkevich,
2003], have been proposed to yield sub-linear regret under different scenarios [Hazan et al., 2007,
Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2007].
Though equipped with rich theories, the notion of regret fails to illustrate the performance of online algorithms in dynamic setting, as a static comparator is used in (1). To overcome this limitation, there has been a recent surge of interest in analyzing a more stringent metric—dynamic regret
[Hall and Willett, 2013, Besbes et al., 2015, Jadbabaie et al., 2015, Mokhtari et al., 2016, Yang et al.,
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

