Mapping distinct timescales of functional interactions
among brain networks

Mali Sundaresan1
s.malisundar@gmail.com
2

Arshed Nabeel2
arshed@iisc.ac.in

Devarajan Sridharan1,2∗
sridhar@iisc.ac.in

1
Center for Neuroscience, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
Department of Computer Science and Automation, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore

Abstract
Brain processes occur at various timescales, ranging from milliseconds (neurons)
to minutes and hours (behavior). Characterizing functional coupling among brain
regions at these diverse timescales is key to understanding how the brain produces
behavior. Here, we apply instantaneous and lag-based measures of conditional
linear dependence, based on Granger-Geweke causality (GC), to infer network
connections at distinct timescales from functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) data. Due to the slow sampling rate of fMRI, it is widely held that GC
produces spurious and unreliable estimates of functional connectivity when applied
to fMRI data. We challenge this claim with simulations and a novel machine
learning approach. First, we show, with simulated fMRI data, that instantaneous
and lag-based GC identify distinct timescales and complementary patterns of functional connectivity. Next, we analyze fMRI scans from 500 subjects and show
that a linear classifier trained on either instantaneous or lag-based GC connectivity
reliably distinguishes task versus rest brain states, with ∼80-85% cross-validation
accuracy. Importantly, instantaneous and lag-based GC exploit markedly different spatial and temporal patterns of connectivity to achieve robust classification.
Our approach enables identifying functionally connected networks that operate at
distinct timescales in the brain.

1

Introduction

Processes in the brain occur at various timescales. These range from the timescales of milliseconds for
extremely rapid processes (e.g. neuron spikes), to timescales of tens to hundreds of milliseconds for
processes coordinated across local populations of neurons (e.g. synchronized neural oscillations), to
timescales of seconds for processes that are coordinated across diverse brain networks (e.g. language)
and even up to minutes, hours or days for processes that involve large-scale neuroplastic changes
(e.g. learning a new skill). Coordinated activity among brain regions that mediate each of these
cognitive processes would manifest in the form of functional connections among these regions at
the corresponding timescales. Characterizing patterns of functional connectivity that occur at these
different timescales is, hence, essential for understanding how the brain produces behavior.
Measures of linear dependence and feedback, based on Granger-Geweke causality (GC) [10][11]),
have been used to estimate instantaneous and lagged functional connectivity in recordings of brain
activity made with electroencephalography (EEG, [6]), and electrocorticography (ECoG, [3]). However, the application of GC measures to brain recordings made with functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) remains controversial [22][20][2]. Because the hemodynamic response is produced
and sampled at a timescale (seconds) several orders of magnitude slower than the underlying neural
processes (milliseconds), previous studies have argued that GC measures, particularly lag-based GC,
produce spurious and unreliable estimates of functional connectivity from fMRI data [22][20].
∗

Corresponding author

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

