Gauging Variational Inference

Sungsoo Ahn∗
Michael Chertkov†
Jinwoo Shin∗
∗
School of Electrical Engineering,
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, Korea
†1
Theoretical Division, T-4 & Center for Nonlinear Studies,
Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA,
†2
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, 143026 Moscow, Russia
∗
†
{sungsoo.ahn, jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr
chertkov@lanl.gov

Abstract
Computing partition function is the most important statistical inference task arising
in applications of Graphical Models (GM). Since it is computationally intractable,
approximate methods have been used in practice, where mean-field (MF) and belief
propagation (BP) are arguably the most popular and successful approaches of a
variational type. In this paper, we propose two new variational schemes, coined
Gauged-MF (G-MF) and Gauged-BP (G-BP), improving MF and BP, respectively.
Both provide lower bounds for the partition function by utilizing the so-called
gauge transformation which modifies factors of GM while keeping the partition
function invariant. Moreover, we prove that both G-MF and G-BP are exact for
GMs with a single loop of a special structure, even though the bare MF and BP
perform badly in this case. Our extensive experiments indeed confirm that the
proposed algorithms outperform and generalize MF and BP.

1

Introduction

Graphical Models (GM) express factorization of the joint multivariate probability distributions in
statistics via a graph of relations between variables. The concept of GM has been developed and/or
used successfully in information theory [1, 2], physics [3, 4, 5, 6, 7], artificial intelligence [8], and
machine learning [9, 10]. Of many inference problems one can formulate using a GM, computing the
partition function (normalization), or equivalently computing marginal probability distributions, is
the most important and universal inference task of interest. However, this paradigmatic problem is
known to be computationally intractable in general, i.e., it is #P-hard even to approximate [11].
The Markov chain monte carlo (MCMC) [12] is a classical approach addressing the inference task,
but it typically suffers from exponentially slow mixing or large variance. Variational inference is
an approach stating the inference task as an optimization. Hence, it does not have such issues of
MCMC and is often more favorable. The mean-field (MF) [6] and belief propagation (BP) [13] are
arguably the most popular algorithms of the variational type. They are distributed, fast and overall
very successful in practical applications even though they are heuristics lacking systematic error
control. This has motivated researchers to seek for methods with some guarantees, e.g., providing
lower bounds [14, 15] and upper bounds [16, 17, 15] for the partition function of GM.
In another line of research, which this paper extends and contributes, the so-called re-parametrizations
[18], gauge transformations (GT) [19, 20] and holographic transformations [21, 22] were explored.
This class of distinct, but related, transformations consist in modifying a GM by changing factors, associated with elements of the graph, continuously such that the partition function stays the
same/invariant.1 In this paper, we choose to work with GT as the most general one among the three
1

See [23, 24, 25] for discussions of relations between the aforementioned techniques.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

