Shape and Material from Sound

Zhoutong Zhang
MIT

Qiujia Li
University of Cambridge

Zhengjia Huang
ShanghaiTech University

Jiajun Wu
MIT

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT

William T. Freeman
MIT, Google Research

Abstract
Hearing an object falling onto the ground, humans can recover rich information
including its rough shape, material, and falling height. In this paper, we build
machines to approximate such competency. We first mimic human knowledge of
the physical world by building an efficient, physics-based simulation engine. Then,
we present an analysis-by-synthesis approach to infer properties of the falling
object. We further accelerate the process by learning a mapping from a sound wave
to object properties, and using the predicted values to initialize the inference. This
mapping can be viewed as an approximation of human commonsense learned from
past experience. Our model performs well on both synthetic audio clips and real
recordings without requiring any annotated data. We conduct behavior studies
to compare human responses with ours on estimating object shape, material, and
falling height from sound. Our model achieves near-human performance.

1

Introduction

From a short audio clip of interacting objects, humans can recover the number of objects involved, as
well as their materials and surface smoothness [Zwicker and Fastl, 2013, Kunkler-Peck and Turvey,
2000, Siegel et al., 2014]. How does our cognitive system recover so much content from so little?
What is the role of past experience in understanding auditory data?
For physical scene understanding from visual input, recent behavioral and computational studies
suggest that human judgments can be well explained as approximate, probabilistic simulations of a
mental physics engine [Battaglia et al., 2013, Sanborn et al., 2013]. These studies suggest that the
brain encodes rich, but noisy, knowledge of physical properties of objects and basic laws of physical
interactions between objects. To understand, reason, and predict about a physical scene, humans
seem to rely on simulations from this mental physics engine.
In this paper, we develop a computational system to interpret audio clips of falling objects, inspired
by the idea that humans may use a physics engine as part of a generative model to understand the
physical world. Our generative model has three components. The first is a object representation that
includes its 3D shape, position in space, and physical properties such as mass, Young’s modulus,
Rayleigh damping coefficients, and restitution. We aim to infer all these attributes from auditory
inputs.
The second component is an efficient, physics-based audio synthesis engine. Given an initial scene
setup and object properties, the engine simulates the object’s motion and generates its trajectory
using rigid body physics. It also produces the corresponding collision profile — when, where, and
how collisions happen. The object’s trajectory and collision profile are then combined with its
pre-computed sound statistics to generate the sound it makes during the physical event. With this
efficient forward model, we can then infer object properties using analysis-by-synthesis; for each
audio clip, we want to find a set of latent variables that best reproduce it.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

