A Bayesian Data Augmentation Approach for
Learning Deep Models

Toan Tran1 , Trung Pham1 , Gustavo Carneiro1 , Lyle Palmer2 and Ian Reid1
1
School of Computer Science, 2 School of Public Health
The University of Adelaide, Australia
{toan.m.tran, trung.pham, gustavo.carneiro,
lyle.palmer, ian.reid} @adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Data augmentation is an essential part of the training process applied to deep
learning models. The motivation is that a robust training process for deep learning
models depends on large annotated datasets, which are expensive to be acquired,
stored and processed. Therefore a reasonable alternative is to be able to automatically generate new annotated training samples using a process known as data
augmentation. The dominant data augmentation approach in the field assumes
that new training samples can be obtained via random geometric or appearance
transformations applied to annotated training samples, but this is a strong assumption because it is unclear if this is a reliable generative model for producing new
training samples. In this paper, we provide a novel Bayesian formulation to data
augmentation, where new annotated training points are treated as missing variables
and generated based on the distribution learned from the training set. For learning,
we introduce a theoretically sound algorithm — generalised Monte Carlo expectation maximisation, and demonstrate one possible implementation via an extension
of the Generative Adversarial Network (GAN). Classification results on MNIST,
CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 show the better performance of our proposed method
compared to the current dominant data augmentation approach mentioned above —
the results also show that our approach produces better classification results than
similar GAN models.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has become the “backbone” of several state-of-the-art visual object classification
[19, 14, 25, 27], speech recognition [17, 12, 6], and natural language processing [4, 5, 31] systems.
One of the many reasons that explains the success of deep learning models is that their large capacity
allows for the modeling of complex, high dimensional data patterns. The large capacity allowed by
deep learning is enabled by millions of parameters estimated within annotated training sets, where
generalization tends to improve with the size of these training sets. One way of acquiring large
annotated training sets is via the manual (or “hand”) labeling of training samples by human experts —
a difficult and sometimes subjective task that is expensive and prone to mistakes. Another way of
producing such large training sets is to artificially enlarge existing training datasets — a process that
is commonly known in computer science as data augmentation (DA).
In computer vision applications, DA has been predominantly developed with the application of simple
geometric and appearance transformations on existing annotated training samples in order to generate
new training samples, where the transformation parameters are sampled with additive Gaussian or
uniform noise. For instance, for ImageNet classification [8], new training images can be generated by
applying random rotations, translations or color perturbations to the annotated images [19]. Such a
DA process based on “label-preserving” transformations assumes that the noise model over these
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

