Convergence of Gradient EM on Multi-component
Mixture of Gaussians
Bowei Yan
University of Texas at Austin
boweiy@utexas.edu

Mingzhang Yin
University of Texas at Austin
mzyin@utexas.edu

Purnamrita Sarkar
University of Texas at Austin
purna.sarkar@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study convergence properties of the gradient variant of
Expectation-Maximization algorithm [11] for Gaussian Mixture Models for arbitrary number of clusters and mixing coefficients. We derive the convergence
rate depending on the mixing coefficients, minimum and maximum pairwise distances between the true centers, dimensionality and number of components; and
obtain a near-optimal local contraction radius. While there have been some recent
notable works that derive local convergence rates for EM in the two symmetric
mixture of Gaussians, in the more general case, the derivations need structurally
different and non-trivial arguments. We use recent tools from learning theory and
empirical processes to achieve our theoretical results.

1

Introduction

Proposed by [7] in 1977, the Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm is a powerful tool for statistical inference in latent variable models. A famous example is the parameter estimation problem
under parametric mixture models. In such models, data is generated from a mixture of a known family of parametric distributions. The mixture component from which a datapoint is generated from
can be thought of as a latent variable.
Typically the marginal data log-likelihood (which integrates the latent variables out) is hard to optimize, and hence EM iteratively optimizes a lower bound of it and obtains a sequence of estimators. This consists of two steps. In the expectation step (E-step) one computes the expectation of
the complete data likelihood with respect to the posterior distribution of the unobserved mixture
memberships evaluated at the current parameter estimates. In the maximization step (M-step) one
this expectation is maximized to obtain new estimators. EM always improves the objective function. While it is established in [4] that the true parameter vector is the global maximizer of the
log-likelihood function, there has been much effort to understand the behavior of the local optima
obtained via EM.
When the exact M-step is burdensome, a popular variant of EM, named Gradient EM is widely
used. The idea here is to take a gradient step towards the maxima of the expectation computed in
the E-step. [11] introduces a gradient algorithm using one iteration of Newton’s method and shows
the local properties of the gradient EM are almost identical with those of the EM.
Early literature [22, 24] mostly focuses on the convergence to the stationary points or local optima.
In [22] it is proven that the sequence of estimators in EM converges to stationary point when the
lower bound function from E-step is continuous. In addition, some conditions are derived under
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

