Streaming Weak Submodularity:
Interpreting Neural Networks on the Fly
Ethan R. Elenberg
Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering
The University of Texas at Austin
elenberg@utexas.edu
Moran Feldman
Department of Mathematics
and Computer Science
Open University of Israel
moranfe@openu.ac.il

Alexandros G. Dimakis
Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering
The University of Texas at Austin
dimakis@austin.utexas.edu
Amin Karbasi
Department of Electrical Engineering
Department of Computer Science
Yale University
amin.karbasi@yale.edu

Abstract
In many machine learning applications, it is important to explain the predictions
of a black-box classifier. For example, why does a deep neural network assign
an image to a particular class? We cast interpretability of black-box classifiers
as a combinatorial maximization problem and propose an efficient streaming
algorithm to solve it subject to cardinality constraints. By extending ideas from
Badanidiyuru et al. [2014], we provide a constant factor approximation guarantee
for our algorithm in the case of random stream order and a weakly submodular
objective function. This is the first such theoretical guarantee for this general class
of functions, and we also show that no such algorithm exists for a worst case stream
order. Our algorithm obtains similar explanations of Inception V3 predictions 10
times faster than the state-of-the-art LIME framework of Ribeiro et al. [2016].

1

Introduction

Consider the following combinatorial optimization problem. Given a ground set N of N elements
and a set function f : 2N 7! R 0 , find the set S of size k which maximizes f (S). This formulation
is at the heart of many machine learning applications such as sparse regression, data summarization,
facility location, and graphical model inference. Although the problem is intractable in general, if
f is assumed to be submodular then many approximation algorithms have been shown to perform
provably within a constant factor from the best solution.
Some disadvantages of the standard greedy algorithm of Nemhauser et al. [1978] for this problem are
that it requires repeated access to each data element and a large total number of function evaluations.
This is undesirable in many large-scale machine learning tasks where the entire dataset cannot fit in
main memory, or when a single function evaluation is time consuming. In our main application, each
function evaluation corresponds to inference on a large neural network and can take a few seconds.
In contrast, streaming algorithms make a small number of passes (often only one) over the data and
have sublinear space complexity, and thus, are ideal for tasks of the above kind.
Recent ideas, algorithms, and techniques from submodular set function theory have been used to
derive similar results in much more general settings. For example, Elenberg et al. [2016a] used
the concept of weak submodularity to derive approximation and parameter recovery guarantees for
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

