Variational Laws of
Visual Attention for Dynamic Scenes

Dario Zanca
DINFO, University of Florence
DIISM, University of Siena
dario.zanca@unifi.it

Marco Gori
DIISM, University of Siena
marco@diism.unisi.it

Abstract
Computational models of visual attention are at the crossroad of disciplines like
cognitive science, computational neuroscience, and computer vision. This paper
proposes a model of attentional scanpath that is based on the principle that there
are foundational laws that drive the emergence of visual attention. We devise variational laws of the eye-movement that rely on a generalized view of the Least Action
Principle in physics. The potential energy captures details as well as peripheral
visual features, while the kinetic energy corresponds with the classic interpretation
in analytic mechanics. In addition, the Lagrangian contains a brightness invariance
term, which characterizes significantly the scanpath trajectories. We obtain differential equations of visual attention as the stationary point of the generalized action,
and we propose an algorithm to estimate the model parameters. Finally, we report
experimental results to validate the model in tasks of saliency detection.

1

Introduction

Eye movements in humans constitute an essential mechanism to disentangle the tremendous amount
of information that reaches the retina every second. This mechanism in adults is very sophisticated.
In fact, it involves both bottom-up processes, which depend on raw input features, and top-down
processes, which include task dependent strategies [2; 3; 4]. It turns out that visual attention is
interwound with high level cognitive processes, so as its deep understanding seems to be trapped
into a sort of eggs-chicken dilemma. Does visual scene interpretation drive visual attention or the
other way around? Which one “was born” first? Interestingly, this dilemma seems to disappears
in newborns: despite their lack of knowledge of the world, they exhibit mechanisms of attention to
extract relevant information from what they see [5]. Moreover, there are evidences that the very first
fixations are highly correlated among adult subjects who are presented with a new input [25]. This
shows that they still share a common mechanism that drive early fixations, while scanpaths diverge
later under top-down influences.
Many attempts have been made in the direction of modeling visual attention. Based on the feature
integration theory of attention [14], Koch and Ullman in [9] assume that human attention operates
in the early representation, which is basically a set of feature maps. They assume that these maps
are then combined in a central representation, namely the saliency map, which drives the attention
mechanisms. The first complete implementation of this scheme was proposed by Itti et al. in [10].
In that paper, feature maps for color, intensity and orientation are extracted at different scales.
Then center-surround differences and normalization are computed for each pixel. Finally, all this
information is combined linearly in a centralized saliency map. Several other models have been
proposed by the computer vision community, in particular to address the problem of refining saliency
maps estimation. They usually differ in the definition of saliency, while they postulate a centralized
control of the attention mechanism through the saliency map. For instance, it has been claimed that
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

