Stochastic Submodular Maximization:
The Case of Coverage Functions
Mohammad Reza Karimi
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
mkarimi@ethz.ch

Mario Lucic
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
lucic@inf.ethz.ch

Hamed Hassani
Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering
University of Pennsylvania
hassani@seas.upenn.edu

Andreas Krause
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract
Stochastic optimization of continuous objectives is at the heart of modern machine learning. However, many important problems are of discrete nature and
often involve submodular objectives. We seek to unleash the power of stochastic
continuous optimization, namely stochastic gradient descent and its variants, to
such discrete problems. We first introduce the problem of stochastic submodular
optimization, where one needs to optimize a submodular objective which is given
as an expectation. Our model captures situations where the discrete objective
arises as an empirical risk (e.g., in the case of exemplar-based clustering), or is
given as an explicit stochastic model (e.g., in the case of influence maximization
in social networks). By exploiting that common extensions act linearly on the
class of submodular functions, we employ projected stochastic gradient ascent
and its variants in the continuous domain, and perform rounding to obtain discrete
solutions. We focus on the rich and widely used family of weighted coverage
functions. We show that our approach yields solutions that are guaranteed to match
the optimal approximation guarantees, while reducing the computational cost by
several orders of magnitude, as we demonstrate empirically.

1

Introduction

Submodular functions are discrete analogs of convex functions. They arise naturally in many
areas, such as the study of graphs, matroids, covering problems, and facility location problems.
These functions are extensively studied in operations research and combinatorial optimization [22].
Recently, submodular functions have proven to be key concepts in other areas such as machine
learning, algorithmic game theory, and social sciences. As such, they have been applied to a host
of important problems such as modeling valuation functions in combinatorial auctions, feature and
variable selection [23], data summarization [27], and influence maximization [20].
Classical results in submodular optimization consider the oracle model whereby the access to the
optimization objective is provided through a black box — an oracle. However, in many applications,
the objective has to be estimated from data and is subject to stochastic fluctuations. In other cases
the value of the objective may only be obtained through simulation. As such, the exact computation
might not be feasible due to statistical or computational constraints. As a concrete example, consider
the problem of influence maximization in social networks [20]. The objective function is defined
as the expectation of a stochastic process, quantifying the size of the (random) subset of nodes
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

