Multiscale Quantization for Fast Similarity Search
Xiang Wu Ruiqi Guo Ananda Theertha Suresh Sanjiv Kumar
Dan Holtmann-Rice David Simcha Felix X. Yu
Google Research, New York
{wuxiang, guorq, theertha, sanjivk, dhr, dsimcha, felixyu}@google.com

Abstract
We propose a multiscale quantization approach for fast similarity search on large,
high-dimensional datasets. The key insight of the approach is that quantization
methods, in particular product quantization, perform poorly when there is large
variance in the norms of the data points. This is a common scenario for realworld datasets, especially when doing product quantization of residuals obtained
from coarse vector quantization. To address this issue, we propose a multiscale
formulation where we learn a separate scalar quantizer of the residual norm scales.
All parameters are learned jointly in a stochastic gradient descent framework to
minimize the overall quantization error. We provide theoretical motivation for the
proposed technique and conduct comprehensive experiments on two large-scale
public datasets, demonstrating substantial improvements in recall over existing
state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Large-scale similarity search is central to information retrieval and recommendation systems for
images, audio, video, and textual information. For high-dimensional data, several hashing based
methods have been proposed, including randomized [19, 1, 32] and learning-based techniques
[34, 35, 15]. Another set of techniques, based on quantization, have become popular recently due to
their strong performance on real-world data. In particular, product quantization (PQ) [12, 20] and its
variants have regularly claimed top spots on public benchmarks such as GIST1M, SIFT1B [20] and
DEEP10M [3].
In product quantization, the original vector space is decomposed into a Cartesian product of lower
dimensional subspaces, and vector quantization is performed in each subspace independently. Vector
quantization (VQ) approximates a vector x 2 Rdim(x) by finding the closest quantizer in a codebook
C:
ck2
V Q (x; C) = argmin kx
c2{Cj }

dim(x)⇥m

where C 2 R
is a vector quantization codebook with m codewords, and the j-th column Cj
represents the j-th quantizer. Similarly, product quantization (PQ) with K subspaces can be defined
as following concatenation:
P Q (x; S = {S

(k)

}) = [ V Q (x(1) ; S(1) ); · · · ;

V Q (x

(K)

; S(K) )]

where x(k) denotes the subvector of x in the k-th subspace, and S(k) 2 Rdim(x
K product quantization codebooks, each with l sub-quantizers.

(k)

)⇥l

(1)
is a collection of

Product quantization works well in large part due to the fact that it permits asymmetric distance
computation [20], in which only dataset vectors are quantized while the query remains unquantized.
This is more precise than techniques based on Hamming distances (which generally require hashing
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

