Inhomogeneous Hypergraph Clustering with
Applications

Pan Li
Department ECE
UIUC
panli2@illinois.edu

Olgica Milenkovic
Department ECE
UIUC
milenkov@illinois.edu

Abstract
Hypergraph partitioning is an important problem in machine learning, computer
vision and network analytics. A widely used method for hypergraph partitioning
relies on minimizing a normalized sum of the costs of partitioning hyperedges
across clusters. Algorithmic solutions based on this approach assume that different
partitions of a hyperedge incur the same cost. However, this assumption fails
to leverage the fact that different subsets of vertices within the same hyperedge
may have different structural importance. We hence propose a new hypergraph
clustering technique, termed inhomogeneous hypergraph partitioning, which assigns different costs to different hyperedge cuts. We prove that inhomogeneous
partitioning produces a quadratic approximation to the optimal solution if the
inhomogeneous costs satisfy submodularity constraints. Moreover, we demonstrate
that inhomogenous partitioning offers significant performance improvements in
applications such as structure learning of rankings, subspace segmentation and
motif clustering.

1

Introduction

Graph partitioning or clustering is a ubiquitous learning task that has found many applications in
statistics, data mining, social science and signal processing [1, 2]. In most settings, clustering is
formally cast as an optimization problem that involves entities with different pairwise similarities
and aims to maximize the total “similarity” of elements within clusters [3, 4, 5], or simultaneously
maximize the total similarity within cluster and dissimilarity between clusters [6, 7, 8]. Graph
partitioning may be performed in an agnostic setting, where part of the optimization problem is to
automatically learn the number of clusters [6, 7].
Although similarity among entities in a class may be captured via pairwise relations, in many realworld problems it is necessary to capture joint, higher-order relations between subsets of objects. From
a graph-theoretic point of view, these higher-order relations may be described via hypergraphs, where
objects correspond to vertices and higher-order relations among objects correspond to hyperedges.
The vertex clustering problem aims to minimize the similarity across clusters and is referred to as
hypergraph partitioning. Hypergraph clustering has found a wide range of applications in network
motif clustering, semi-supervised learning, subspace clustering and image segmentation. [8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14, 15].
Classical hypergraph partitioning approaches share the same setup: A nonnegative weight is assigned
to every hyperedge and if the vertices in the hyperedge are placed across clusters, a cost proportional
to the weight is charged to the objective function [9, 11]. We refer to this clustering procedure
as homogenous hyperedge clustering and refer to the corresponding partition as a homogeneous
partition (H-partition). Clearly, this type of approach prohibits the use of information regarding
how different vertices or subsets of vertices belonging to a hyperedge contribute to the higher-order
relation. A more appropriate formulation entails charging different costs to different cuts of the
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

