Multi-Armed Bandits with Metric Movement Costs
Tomer Koren
Google Brain
tkoren@google.com

Roi Livni
Princeton University
rlivni@cs.princeton.edu

Yishay Mansour
Tel Aviv University and Google
mansour@cs.tau.ac.il

Abstract
We consider the non-stochastic Multi-Armed Bandit problem in a setting where
there is a fixed and known metric on the action space that determines a cost for
switching between any pair of actions. The loss of the online learner has two
components: the first is the usual loss of the selected actions, and the second is an
additional loss due to switching between actions. Our main contribution gives a
tight characterization of the expected minimax regret in this setting, in terms of
a complexity measure C of the underlying metric which depends on its covering
numbers. In finite metric spaces with k actions, we
√ give an efficient algorithm
that achieves regret of the form e
O(max{C 1/3T 2/3, kT }), and show that this is
the best possible. Our regret bound generalizes previous known regret bounds
√
1/3T 2/3, kT })
e
for some special cases: (i) the unit-switching cost regret Θ(max{k
√
2/3, kT }) where
e
where C = Θ(k), and (ii) the interval metric with regret Θ(max{T
C = Θ(1). For infinite metrics
spaces
with
Lipschitz
loss
functions,
we derive a
e d+1
d+2 ) where d ≥ 1 is the Minkowski dimension of the
tight regret bound of Θ(T
space, which is known to be tight even when there are no switching costs.

1

Introduction

Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) is perhaps one of the most well studied model for learning that allows to
incorporate settings with limited feedback. In its simplest form, MAB can be thought of as a game
between a learner and an adversary: At first, the adversary chooses an arbitrary sequence of losses
`1, . . . , `T (possibly adversarially). Then, at each round the learner chooses an action it from a finite
set of actions K. At the end of each round, the learner gets to observe her loss `t (it ), and only the loss
of her chosen action. The objective of the
PTlearner is to minimize her (external) regret, defined as
the expected
difference
between
her
loss,
t=1 `t (it ), and the loss of the best action in hindsight, i.e.,
P
mini ∈K Tt=1 `t (i).
One simplification of the MAB is that it assumes that the learner can switch between actions without
any cost, this is in contrast to online algorithms that maintain a state and have a cost of switching
between states. One simple intermediate solution is to add further costs to the learner that penalize
movements between actions. (Since we compare the learner to the single best action, the adversary
has no movement and hence no movement cost.) This approach has been studied in the MAB with
unit switching costs [2, 12], where the learner is not only penalized for her loss but also pays a
unit cost for any time she switches between actions. This simple penalty implicitly advocates the
construction of algorithms that avoid frequent fluctuation in their decisions. Regulating switching has
been successfully applied to many interesting instances such as buffering problems [16], limited-delay
lossy coding [19] and dynamic pricing with patient buyers [15].
The unit switching cost assumes that any pair of actions have the same cost, which in many scenarios
is far from true. For example, consider an ice-cream vendor on a beach, where his actions are to select
a location and price. Clearly, changing location comes at a cost, while changing prices might come
with no cost. In this case we can define a interval metric (the coast line) and the movement cost is the
distance. A more involved case is a hot-dog vendor in Manhattan, which needs to select a location
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

