Parameter-Free Online Learning via Model Selection
Dylan J. Foster
Cornell University

Satyen Kale
Google Research

Mehryar Mohri
NYU and Google Research

Karthik Sridharan
Cornell University

Abstract
We introduce an efficient algorithmic framework for model selection in online
learning, also known as parameter-free online learning. Departing from previous
work, which has focused on highly structured function classes such as nested balls
in Hilbert space, we propose a generic meta-algorithm framework that achieves
online model selection oracle inequalities under minimal structural assumptions.
We give the first computationally efficient parameter-free algorithms that work
in arbitrary Banach spaces under mild smoothness assumptions; previous results
applied only to Hilbert spaces. We further derive new oracle inequalities for matrix
classes, non-nested convex sets, and Rd with generic regularizers. Finally, we
generalize these results by providing oracle inequalities for arbitrary non-linear
classes in the online supervised learning model. These results are all derived
through a unified meta-algorithm scheme using a novel “multi-scale” algorithm
for prediction with expert advice based on random playout, which may be of
independent interest.

1

Introduction

A key problem in the design of learning algorithms is the choice of the hypothesis set F. This is
known as the model selection problem. The choice of F is driven by inherent trade-offs. In the
statistical learning setting, this can be analyzed in terms of the estimation and approximation errors.
A richer or more complex F helps better approximate the Bayes predictor (smaller approximation
error). On the other hand, a hypothesis set that is too complex may have too large a VC-dimension or
have unfavorable Rademacher complexity, thereby resulting in looser guarantees on the difference
between the loss of a hypothesis and that of the best-in class (large estimation error).
In the batch setting, this problem has been extensively studied with the main ideas originating in
the seminal work of [40] and [39] and the principle of Structural Risk Minimization (SRM). This is
typically formulated as follows: let (Fi )i∈N be an infinite sequence of hypothesis sets (or models);
the problem consists of using the training sample to select a hypothesis set Fi with a favorable
estimation-approximation trade-off and choosing the best hypothesis f in Fi .

If we had access to a hypothetical oracle informing us of the best choice of i for a given instance, the
problem would reduce to the standard one of learning with a fixed hypothesis set. Remarkably though,
techniques such as SRM or similar penalty-based model selection methods return a hypothesis f ∗
that enjoys finite-sample learning guarantees that are almost as favorable as those that would be
obtained had an oracle informed us of the index i∗ of the best-in-class classifier’s hypothesis set
[39; 13; 36; 21; 4; 24]. Such guarantees are sometimes referred to as oracle inequalities. They can
be derived even for data-dependent penalties [21; 4; 3].
Such results naturally raise the following questions in the online setting: can we develop an analogous
theory of model selection in online learning? Can we design online algorithms for model selection
with solutions benefiting from strong guarantees, analogous to the batch ones? Unlike the statistical
setting, in online learning one cannot split samples to first learn the optimal predictor within each
subclass and then later learn the optimal subclass choice.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

