Online Dynamic Programming
Holakou Rahmanian
Department of Computer Science
University of California Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95060
holakou@ucsc.edu

Manfred K. Warmuth
Department of Computer Science
University of California Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95060
manfred@ucsc.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of repeatedly solving a variant of the same dynamic
programming problem in successive trials. An instance of the type of problems
we consider is to find a good binary search tree in a changing environment. At the
beginning of each trial, the learner probabilistically chooses a tree with the n keys
at the internal nodes and the n + 1 gaps between keys at the leaves. The learner
is then told the frequencies of the keys and gaps and is charged by the average
search cost for the chosen tree. The problem is online because the frequencies can
change between trials. The goal is to develop algorithms with the property that
their total average search cost (loss) in all trials is close to the total loss of the best
tree chosen in hindsight for all trials. The challenge, of course, is that the algorithm
has to deal with exponential number of trees. We develop a general methodology
for tackling such problems for a wide class of dynamic programming algorithms.
Our framework allows us to extend online learning algorithms like Hedge [16] and
Component Hedge [25] to a significantly wider class of combinatorial objects than
was possible before.

1

Introduction

Consider the following online learning problem. In each trial, the algorithm plays with a Binary
Search Tree (BST) for a given set of n keys. Then the adversary reveals a set of probabilities for the
n keys and their n + 1 gaps, and the algorithm incurs a linear loss of average search cost. The goal is
to predict with a sequence of BSTs minimizing regret which is the difference between the total loss
of the algorithm and the total loss of the single best BST chosen in hindsight.
A natural approach to solve this problem is to keep track of a distribution on all possible BSTs during
the trials (e.g. by running the Hedge algorithm [16] with one weight per BST). However, this seems
impractical since it requires maintaining a weight vector of exponential size. Here we focus on
combinatorial objects that are comprised of n components where the number of objects is typically
exponential in n. For a BST the components are the depth values of the keys and the gaps in the tree.
This line of work requires that the loss of an object is linear in the components (see e.g. [35]). In our
BST examples the loss is simply the dot product between the components and the frequencies.
There has been much work on developing efficient algorithms for learning objects that are composed
of components when the loss is linear in the components. These algorithms get away with keeping
one weight per component instead of one weight per object. Previous work includes learning k-sets
[36], permutations [19, 37, 2] and paths in a DAG [35, 26, 18, 11, 5]. There are also general tools for
learning such combinatorial objects with linear losses. The Follow the Perturbed Leader (FPL) [22]
is a simple algorithm that adds random perturbations to the cumulative loss of each component, and
then predicts with the combinatorial object that has the minimum perturbed loss. The Component
Hedge (CH) algorithm [25] (and its extensions [34, 33, 17]) constitutes another generic approach.
Each object is typically represented as a bit vector over the set of components where the 1-bits
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

