Stochastic Mirror Descent in
Variationally Coherent Optimization Problems

Zhengyuan Zhou
Stanford University
zyzhou@stanford.edu
Nicholas Bambos
Stanford University
bambos@stanford.edu

Panayotis Mertikopoulos
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, LIG
panayotis.mertikopoulos@imag.fr
Stephen Boyd
Stanford University
boyd@stanford.edu

Peter Glynn
Stanford University
glynn@stanford.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we examine a class of non-convex stochastic optimization problems
which we call variationally coherent, and which properly includes pseudo-/quasiconvex and star-convex optimization problems. To solve such problems, we focus
on the widely used stochastic mirror descent (SMD) family of algorithms (which
contains stochastic gradient descent as a special case), and we show that the
last iterate of SMD converges to the problem’s solution set with probability 1.
This result contributes to the landscape of non-convex stochastic optimization by
clarifying that neither pseudo-/quasi-convexity nor star-convexity is essential for
(almost sure) global convergence; rather, variational coherence, a much weaker
requirement, suffices. Characterization of convergence rates for the subclass of
strongly variationally coherent optimization problems as well as simulation results
are also presented.

1

Introduction

The stochastic mirror descent (SMD) method and its variants[1, 7, 8] is arguably one of the most
widely used family of algorithms in stochastic optimization – convex and non-convex alike. Starting
with the orginal work of [16], the convergence of SMD has been studied extensively in the context of
convex programming (both stochastic and deterministic), saddle-point problems, and monotone variational inequalities. Some of the most important contributions in this domain are due to Nemirovski et
al. [15], Nesterov [18] and Xiao [23], who provided tight convergence bounds for the ergodic average
of SMD in stochastic/online convex programs, variational inequalities, and saddle-point problems.
These results were further boosted by recent work on extra-gradient variants of the algorithm [11, 17],
and the ergodic relaxation of [8] where the independence assumption on the gradient samples is
relaxed and is replaced by a mixing distribution that converges in probability to a well-defined limit.
However, all these works focus exclusively on the algorithm’s ergodic average (also known as timeaverage), a mode of convergence which is strictly weaker than the convergence of the algorithm’s last
iterate. In addition, most of the analysis focuses on establishing convergence "in expectation" and
then leveraging sophisticated martingale concentration inequalities to derive "large deviations" results
that hold true with high probability. Last (but certainly not least), the convexity of the objective plays
a crucial role: thanks to the monotonicity of the gradient, it is possible to exploit regret-like bounds
and transform them to explicit convergence rates.1
1

For the role of variational monotonicity in the context of convex programming, see also [22].

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

