Question Asking as Program Generation

Anselm Rothe1
anselm@nyu.edu
1

Brenden M. Lake1,2
brenden@nyu.edu

Todd M. Gureckis1
todd.gureckis@nyu.edu

2
Department of Psychology
Center for Data Science
New York University

Abstract
A hallmark of human intelligence is the ability to ask rich, creative, and revealing
questions. Here we introduce a cognitive model capable of constructing humanlike questions. Our approach treats questions as formal programs that, when executed on the state of the world, output an answer. The model specifies a probability
distribution over a complex, compositional space of programs, favoring concise
programs that help the agent learn in the current context. We evaluate our approach by modeling the types of open-ended questions generated by humans who
were attempting to learn about an ambiguous situation in a game. We find that our
model predicts what questions people will ask, and can creatively produce novel
questions that were not present in the training set. In addition, we compare a number of model variants, finding that both question informativeness and complexity
are important for producing human-like questions.

1

Introduction

In active machine learning, a learner is able to query an oracle in order to obtain information that is
expected to improve performance. Theoretical and empirical results show that active learning can
speed acquisition for a variety of learning tasks [see 21, for a review]. Although impressive, most
work on active machine learning has focused on relatively simple types of information requests
(most often a request for a supervised label). In contrast, humans often learn by asking far richer
questions which more directly target the critical parameters in a learning task. A human child might
ask “Do all dogs have long tails?” or “What is the difference between cats and dogs?” [2]. A long
term goal of artificial intelligence (AI) is to develop algorithms with a similar capacity to learn
by asking rich questions. Our premise is that we can make progress toward this goal by better
understanding human question asking abilities in computational terms [cf. 8].
To that end, in this paper, we propose a new computational framework that explains how people construct rich and interesting queries within in a particular domain. A key insight is to model questions
as programs that, when executed on the state of a possible world, output an answer. For example,
a program corresponding to “Does John prefer coffee to tea?” would return True for all possible
world states where this is the correct answer and False for all others. Other questions may return
different types of answers. For example “How many sugars does John take in his coffee?” would
return a number 0, 1, 2, etc. depending on the world state. Thinking of questions as syntactically
well-formed programs recasts the problem of question asking as one of program synthesis. We show
that this powerful formalism offers a new approach to modeling question asking in humans and may
eventually enable more human-like question asking in machines.
We evaluate our model using a data set containing natural language questions asked by human
participants in an information-search game [19]. Given an ambiguous situation or context, our
model can predict what questions human learners will ask by capturing constraints in how humans
construct semantically meaningful questions. The method successfully predicts the frequencies of
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

