Sparse Approximate Conic Hulls

Gregory Van Buskirk, Benjamin Raichel, and Nicholas Ruozzi
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson, TX 75080
{greg.vanbuskirk, benjamin.raichel, nicholas.ruozzi}@utdallas.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of computing a restricted nonnegative matrix factorization
(NMF) of an m × n matrix X. Specifically, we seek a factorization X ≈ BC,
where the k columns of B are a subset of those from X and C ∈ Rk×n
≥0 . Equivalently, given the matrix X, consider the problem of finding a small subset, S,
of the columns of X such that the conic hull of S ε-approximates the conic
hull of the columns of X, i.e., the distance of every column of X to the conic
hull of the columns of S should be at most an ε-fraction of the angular diameter of X. If k is the size of the smallest ε-approximation, then we produce an
O(k/ε2/3 ) sized O(ε1/3 )-approximation, yielding the first provable, polynomial
time ε-approximation for this class of NMF problems, where also desirably the
approximation is independent of n and m. Furthermore, we prove an approximate
conic Carathéodory theorem, a general sparsity result, that shows that any column
of X can be ε-approximated with an O(1/ε2 ) sparse combination from S. Our
results are facilitated by a reduction to the problem of approximating convex hulls,
and we prove that both the convex and conic hull variants are d-SUM-hard, resolving an open problem. Finally, we provide experimental results for the convex and
conic algorithms on a variety of feature selection tasks.

1

Introduction

Matrix factorizations of all sorts (SVD, NMF, CU, etc.) are ubiquitous in machine learning and
computer science. In general, given an m × n matrix X, the goal is to find a decomposition into a
product of two matrices B ∈ Rm×k and C ∈ Rk×n such that the Frobenius norm between X and
BC is minimized. If no further restrictions are placed on the matrices B and C, this problem can be
solved optimally by computing the singular value decomposition. However, imposing restrictions on
B and C can lead to factorizations which are more desirable for reasons such as interpretability and
sparsity. One of the most common restrictions is non-negative matrix factorization (NMF), requiring
B and C to consist only of non-negative entries (see [Berry et al., 2007] for a survey). Practically,
NMF has seen widespread usage as it often produces nice factorizations that are frequently sparse.
Typically NMF is accomplished by applying local search heuristics, and while NMF can be solved
exactly in certain cases (see [Arora et al., 2016]), in general NMF is not only NP-hard [Vavasis, 2009]
but also d-SUM-hard [Arora et al., 2016].
One drawback of factorizations such as SVD or NMF is that they can represent the data using a basis
that may have no clear relation to the data. CU decompositions [Mahoney and Drineas, 2009] address
this by requiring the basis to consist of input points. While it appears that the hardness of this problem
has not been resolved, approximate solutions are known. Most notable is the additive approximation
of Frieze et al. [2004], though more recently there have been advances on the multiplicative front
[Drineas et al., 2008, Çivril and Magdon-Ismail, 2012, Guruswami and Sinop, 2012]. Similar
restrictions have also been considered for NMF. Donoho and Stodden [2003] introduced a separability
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

