Mean teachers are better role models:
Weight-averaged consistency targets improve
semi-supervised deep learning results
Antti Tarvainen
The Curious AI Company
tarvaina@cai.fi

Harri Valpola
The Curious AI Company
harri@cai.fi

Abstract
The recently proposed Temporal Ensembling has achieved state-of-the-art results in
several semi-supervised learning benchmarks. It maintains an exponential moving
average of label predictions on each training example, and penalizes predictions
that are inconsistent with this target. However, because the targets change only once
per epoch, Temporal Ensembling becomes unwieldy when learning large datasets.
To overcome this problem, we propose Mean Teacher, a method that averages
model weights instead of label predictions. As an additional benefit, Mean Teacher
improves test accuracy and enables training with fewer labels than Temporal
Ensembling. Without changing the network architecture, Mean Teacher achieves an
error rate of 4.35% on SVHN with 250 labels, outperforming Temporal Ensembling
trained with 1000 labels. We also show that a good network architecture is crucial
to performance. Combining Mean Teacher and Residual Networks, we improve
the state of the art on CIFAR-10 with 4000 labels from 10.55% to 6.28%, and on
ImageNet 2012 with 10% of the labels from 35.24% to 9.11%.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has seen tremendous success in areas such as image and speech recognition. In order
to learn useful abstractions, deep learning models require a large number of parameters, thus making
them prone to over-fitting (Figure 1a). Moreover, adding high-quality labels to training data manually
is often expensive. Therefore, it is desirable to use regularization methods that exploit unlabeled data
effectively to reduce over-fitting in semi-supervised learning.
When a percept is changed slightly, a human typically still considers it to be the same object. Correspondingly, a classification model should favor functions that give consistent output for similar data
points. One approach for achieving this is to add noise to the input of the model. To enable the model
to learn more abstract invariances, the noise may be added to intermediate representations, an insight
that has motivated many regularization techniques, such as Dropout [27]. Rather than minimizing
the classification cost at the zero-dimensional data points of the input space, the regularized model
minimizes the cost on a manifold around each data point, thus pushing decision boundaries away
from the labeled data points (Figure 1b).
Since the classification cost is undefined for unlabeled examples, the noise regularization by itself
does not aid in semi-supervised learning. To overcome this, the model [20] evaluates each data
point with and without noise, and then applies a consistency cost between the two predictions. In this
case, the model assumes a dual role as a teacher and a student. As a student, it learns as before; as a
teacher, it generates targets, which are then used by itself as a student for learning. Since the model
itself generates targets, they may very well be incorrect. If too much weight is given to the generated
targets, the cost of inconsistency outweighs that of misclassification, preventing the learning of new
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

