Learning Linear Dynamical Systems
via Spectral Filtering

Elad Hazan, Karan Singh, Cyril Zhang
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
{ehazan,karans,cyril.zhang}@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
We present an efficient and practical algorithm for the online prediction of
discrete-time linear dynamical systems with a symmetric transition matrix. We
circumvent the non-convex optimization problem using improper learning: carefully overparameterize the class of LDSs by a polylogarithmic factor, in exchange
for convexity of the loss functions. From this arises a polynomial-time algorithm
with a near-optimal regret guarantee, with an analogous sample complexity bound
for agnostic learning. Our algorithm is based on a novel filtering technique, which
may be of independent interest: we convolve the time series with the eigenvectors
of a certain Hankel matrix.

1

Introduction

Linear dynamical systems (LDSs) are a class of state space models which accurately model many
phenomena in nature and engineering, and are applied ubiquitously in time-series analysis, robotics,
econometrics, medicine, and meteorology. In this model, the time evolution of a system is explained
by a linear map on a finite-dimensional hidden state, subject to disturbances from input and noise.
Recent interest has focused on the effectiveness of recurrent neural networks (RNNs), a nonlinear
variant of this idea, for modeling sequences such as audio signals and natural language.
Central to this field of study is the problem of system identification: given some sample trajectories,
output the parameters for an LDS which generalize to predict unseen future data. Viewed directly,
this is a non-convex optimization problem, for which efficient algorithms with theoretical guarantees
are very difficult to obtain. A standard heuristic for this problem is expectation-maximization (EM),
which can find poor local optima in theory and practice.
We consider a different approach: we formulate system identification as an online learning problem,
in which neither the data nor predictions are assumed to arise from an LDS. Furthermore, we slightly
overparameterize the class of predictors, yielding an online convex program amenable to efficient
regret minimization. This carefully chosen relaxation, which is our main theoretical contribution,
expands the dimension of the hypothesis class by only a polylogarithmic factor. This construction
relies upon recent work on the spectral theory of Hankel matrices.
The result is a simple and practical algorithm for time-series prediction, which deviates significantly
from existing methods. We coin the term wave-filtering for our method, in reference to our relaxation’s use of convolution by wave-shaped eigenvectors. We present experimental evidence on both
toy data and a physical simulation, showing our method to be competitive in terms of predictive
performance, more stable, and significantly faster than existing algorithms.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

