Learned D-AMP: Principled Neural Network Based
Compressive Image Recovery

Christopher A. Metzler
Rice University
chris.metzler@rice.edu

Ali Mousavi
Rice University
ali.mousavi@rice.edu

Richard G. Baraniuk
Rice University
richb@rice.edu

Abstract
Compressive image recovery is a challenging problem that requires fast and accurate algorithms. Recently, neural networks have been applied to this problem with
promising results. By exploiting massively parallel GPU processing architectures
and oodles of training data, they can run orders of magnitude faster than existing
techniques. However, these methods are largely unprincipled black boxes that are
difficult to train and often-times specific to a single measurement matrix.
It was recently demonstrated that iterative sparse-signal-recovery algorithms can
be “unrolled” to form interpretable deep networks. Taking inspiration from this
work, we develop a novel neural network architecture that mimics the behavior of
the denoising-based approximate message passing (D-AMP) algorithm. We call
this new network Learned D-AMP (LDAMP).
The LDAMP network is easy to train, can be applied to a variety of different
measurement matrices, and comes with a state-evolution heuristic that accurately
predicts its performance. Most importantly, it outperforms the state-of-the-art
BM3D-AMP and NLR-CS algorithms in terms of both accuracy and run time. At
high resolutions, and when used with sensing matrices that have fast implementations, LDAMP runs over 50× faster than BM3D-AMP and hundreds of times
faster than NLR-CS.

1

Introduction

Over the last few decades computational imaging systems have proliferated in a host of different
imaging domains, from synthetic aperture radar to functional MRI and CT scanners. The majority of
these systems capture linear measurements y ∈ Rm of the signal of interest x ∈ Rn via y = Ax + ,
where A ∈ Rm×n is a measurement matrix and  ∈ Rm is noise.
Given the measurements y and the measurement matrix A, a computational imaging system seeks to
recover x. When m < n this problem is underdetermined, and prior knowledge about x must be used
to recovery the signal. This problem is broadly referred to as compressive sampling (CS) [1; 2].
There are myriad ways to use priors to recover an image x from compressive measurements. In the
following, we briefly describe some of these methods. Note that the ways in which these algorithms
use priors span a spectrum; from simple hand-designed models to completely data-driven methods
(see Figure 1).

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

