Diving into the shallows: a computational perspective
on large-scale shallow learning

Siyuan Ma
Mikhail Belkin
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Ohio State University
{masi, mbelkin}@cse.ohio-state.edu

Abstract
Remarkable recent success of deep neural networks has not been easy to analyze
theoretically. It has been particularly hard to disentangle relative significance of
architecture and optimization in achieving accurate classification on large datasets.
On the flip side, shallow methods (such as kernel methods) have encountered
obstacles in scaling to large data, despite excellent performance on smaller datasets,
and extensive theoretical analysis. Practical methods, such as variants of gradient
descent used so successfully in deep learning, seem to perform below par when
applied to kernel methods. This difficulty has sometimes been attributed to the
limitations of shallow architecture.
In this paper we identify a basic limitation in gradient descent-based optimization
methods when used in conjunctions with smooth kernels. Our analysis demonstrates that only a vanishingly small fraction of the function space is reachable
after a polynomial number of gradient descent iterations. That drastically limits
the approximating power of gradient descent leading to over-regularization. The
issue is purely algorithmic, persisting even in the limit of infinite data.
To address this shortcoming in practice, we introduce EigenPro iteration, a simple
and direct preconditioning scheme using a small number of approximately computed eigenvectors. It can also be viewed as learning a kernel optimized for gradient
descent. Injecting this small, computationally inexpensive and SGD-compatible,
amount of approximate second-order information leads to major improvements in
convergence. For large data, this leads to a significant performance boost over the
state-of-the-art kernel methods. In particular, we are able to match or improve the
results reported in the literature at a small fraction of their computational budget.
For complete version of this paper see https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.10622.

1

Introduction

In recent years we have witnessed remarkable advances in many areas of artificial intelligence. Much
of this progress has been due to machine learning methods, notably deep neural networks, applied
to very large datasets. These networks are typically trained using variants of stochastic gradient
descent (SGD), allowing training on large data with modern GPU hardware. Despite intense recent
research and significant progress on SGD and deep architectures, it has not been easy to understand
the underlying causes of that success. Broadly speaking, it can be attributed to (a) the structure of the
function space represented by the network or (b) the properties of the optimization algorithms used.
While these two aspects of learning are intertwined, they are distinct and may be disentangled.
As learning in deep neural networks is still largely resistant to theoretical analysis, progress can
be made by exploring the limits of shallow methods on large datasets. Shallow methods, such as
kernel methods, are a subject of an extensive and diverse literature, both theoretical and practical.
In particular, kernel machines are universal learners, capable of learning nearly arbitrary functions
given a sufficient number of examples [STC04, SC08]. Still, while kernel methods are easily
implementable and show state-of-the-art performance on smaller datasets (see [CK11, HAS+ 14,
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

