Accelerated Stochastic Greedy Coordinate Descent by
Soft Thresholding Projection onto Simplex

Chaobing Song, Shaobo Cui, Yong Jiang, Shu-Tao Xia
Tsinghua University
{songcb16,cuishaobo16}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{jiangy, xiast}@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn ∗

Abstract
In this paper we study the well-known greedy coordinate descent (GCD) algorithm
to solve `1 -regularized problems and improve GCD by the two popular strategies:
Nesterov’s acceleration and stochastic optimization. Firstly, based on an `1 -norm
square approximation, we propose a new rule for greedy selection which is nontrivial to solve but convex; then an efficient algorithm called “SOft ThreshOlding
PrOjection (SOTOPO)” is proposed to exactly solve an `1 -regularized `1 -norm
square approximation problem, which is induced by the new rule. Based on the
new rule and the SOTOPO algorithm, the Nesterov’s acceleration and stochastic
optimization strategies are then successfully applied to the GCD algorithm. The resulted algorithm called accelerated stochastic
greedy coordinate descent (ASGCD)
p
has the optimal convergence rate O( 1/); meanwhile, it reduces the iteration
complexity of greedy selection up to a factor of sample size. Both theoretically and
empirically, we show that ASGCD has better performance for high-dimensional
and dense problems with sparse solutions.

1

Introduction

In large-scale convex optimization, first-order methods are widely used due to their cheap iteration
cost. In order to improve the convergence rate and reduce the iteration cost further, two important
strategies are used in first-order methods: Nesterov’s acceleration and stochastic optimization.
Nesterov’s acceleration is referred to the technique that uses some algebra trick to accelerate firstorder algorithms; while stochastic optimization is referred to the method that samples one training
example or one dual coordinate at random from the training data in each iteration. Assume the
objective function F (x) is convex and smooth. Let F ∗ = minx∈Rd F (x) be the optimal value. In
order to find an approximate solution x that satisfies F (x) − F ∗ ≤ , the vanilla gradient descent
method needs O(1/) iterations. While after applying the Nesterov’s p
acceleration scheme [16],
the resulted accelerated full gradient method (AFG) [16] only needs O( 1/) iterations, which is
optimal for first-order algorithms [16]. Meanwhile, assume F (x) is also a finite sum of n sample
convex functions. By sampling one training example, the resulted stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
and its variants [13, 23, 1] can reduce the iteration complexity by a factor of the sample size. As an
alternative of SGD, randomized coordinate descent (RCD) can also reduce thep
iteration complexity
by a factor of the sample size [15] and obtain the optimal convergence rate O( 1/) by Nesterov’s
acceleration [14, 12]. The development of gradient descent and RCD raises an interesting problem:
can the Nesterov’s acceleration and stochastic optimization strategies be used to improve other
existing first-order algorithms?
∗

This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under grant Nos. 61771273,
61371078.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

