PointNet++: Deep Hierarchical Feature Learning on
Point Sets in a Metric Space
Charles R. Qi

Li Yi Hao Su Leonidas J. Guibas
Stanford University

Abstract
Few prior works study deep learning on point sets. PointNet [20] is a pioneer in this
direction. However, by design PointNet does not capture local structures induced by
the metric space points live in, limiting its ability to recognize fine-grained patterns
and generalizability to complex scenes. In this work, we introduce a hierarchical
neural network that applies PointNet recursively on a nested partitioning of the
input point set. By exploiting metric space distances, our network is able to learn
local features with increasing contextual scales. With further observation that point
sets are usually sampled with varying densities, which results in greatly decreased
performance for networks trained on uniform densities, we propose novel set
learning layers to adaptively combine features from multiple scales. Experiments
show that our network called PointNet++ is able to learn deep point set features
efficiently and robustly. In particular, results significantly better than state-of-the-art
have been obtained on challenging benchmarks of 3D point clouds.

1

Introduction

We are interested in analyzing geometric point sets which are collections of points in a Euclidean
space. A particularly important type of geometric point set is point cloud captured by 3D scanners,
e.g., from appropriately equipped autonomous vehicles. As a set, such data has to be invariant to
permutations of its members. In addition, the distance metric defines local neighborhoods that may
exhibit different properties. For example, the density and other attributes of points may not be uniform
across different locations — in 3D scanning the density variability can come from perspective effects,
radial density variations, motion, etc.
Few prior works study deep learning on point sets. PointNet [20] is a pioneering effort that directly
processes point sets. The basic idea of PointNet is to learn a spatial encoding of each point and then
aggregate all individual point features to a global point cloud signature. By its design, PointNet does
not capture local structure induced by the metric. However, exploiting local structure has proven to
be important for the success of convolutional architectures. A CNN takes data defined on regular
grids as the input and is able to progressively capture features at increasingly larger scales along a
multi-resolution hierarchy. At lower levels neurons have smaller receptive fields whereas at higher
levels they have larger receptive fields. The ability to abstract local patterns along the hierarchy
allows better generalizability to unseen cases.
We introduce a hierarchical neural network, named as PointNet++, to process a set of points sampled
in a metric space in a hierarchical fashion. The general idea of PointNet++ is simple. We first
partition the set of points into overlapping local regions by the distance metric of the underlying
space. Similar to CNNs, we extract local features capturing fine geometric structures from small
neighborhoods; such local features are further grouped into larger units and processed to produce
higher level features. This process is repeated until we obtain the features of the whole point set.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

