Union of Intersections (UoI) for Interpretable Data
Driven Discovery and Prediction

Kristofer E. Bouchard∗

Alejandro F. Bujan†

Shashanka Ubaru§

Prabhat¶

Edward F. Chang∗∗

Michael W. Mahoney‡

Farbod Roosta-Khorasani‡

Antoine M. Snijdersk

Jian-Hua Maok

Sharmodeep Bhattacharyya††

Abstract
The increasing size and complexity of scientific data could dramatically enhance
discovery and prediction for basic scientific applications. Realizing this potential,
however, requires novel statistical analysis methods that are both interpretable
and predictive. We introduce Union of Intersections (UoI), a flexible, modular,
and scalable framework for enhanced model selection and estimation. Methods
based on UoI perform model selection and model estimation through intersection
and union operations, respectively. We show that UoI-based methods achieve
low-variance and nearly unbiased estimation of a small number of interpretable
features, while maintaining high-quality prediction accuracy. We perform extensive
numerical investigation to evaluate a UoI algorithm (U oILasso ) on synthetic and
real data. In doing so, we demonstrate the extraction of interpretable functional
networks from human electrophysiology recordings as well as accurate prediction
of phenotypes from genotype-phenotype data with reduced features. We also show
(with the U oIL1Logistic and U oICU R variants of the basic framework) improved
prediction parsimony for classification and matrix factorization on several benchmark biomedical data sets. These results suggest that methods based on the UoI
framework could improve interpretation and prediction in data-driven discovery
across scientific fields.

1

Introduction

A central goal of data-driven science is to identify a small number of features (i.e., predictor variables;
X in Fig. 1(a)) that generate a response variable of interest (y in Fig. 1(a)) and then to estimate
the relative contributions of these features as the parameters in the generative process relating the
predictor variables to the response variable (Fig. 1(a)). A common characteristic of many modern
massive data sets is that they have a large number of features (i.e., high-dimensional data), while
∗

Biological Systems and Engineering Division, LBNL. kebouchard@lbl.gov
Redwood Center, UC Berkeley. afbujan@gmail.com
‡
ICSI and Department of Statistics, UC Berkeley. {farbod,mmahoney}@icsi.berkeley.edu
§
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota. ubaru001@umn.edu
¶
NERSC, LBNL. prabhat@lbl.gov
k
Biological Systems and Engineering Division, LBNL. {AMSnijders,jhmao}@lbl.gov
∗∗
Department of Neurological Surgery, UC San Francisco. Edward.Chang@ucsf.edu
††
Department of Statistics, Oregon State University. bhattash@science.oregonstate.edu
†

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

