Minimizing a Submodular Function from Samples
Eric Balkanski
Harvard University
ericbalkanski@g.harvard.edu

Yaron Singer
Harvard University
yaron@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
In this paper we consider the problem of minimizing a submodular function from
training data. Submodular functions can be efficiently minimized and are consequently heavily applied in machine learning. There are many cases, however, in
which we do not know the function we aim to optimize, but rather have access
to training data that is used to learn it. In this paper we consider the question of
whether submodular functions can be minimized when given access to its training
data. We show that even learnable submodular functions cannot be minimized
within any non-trivial approximation when given access to polynomially-many samples. Specifically, we show that there is a class of submodular functions with range
in [0, 1] such that, despite being PAC-learnable and minimizable in polynomial-time,
no algorithm can obtain an approximation strictly better than 1/2 o(1) using
polynomially-many samples drawn from any distribution. Furthermore, we show
that this bound is tight via a trivial algorithm that obtains an approximation of 1/2.

1

Introduction

For well over a decade now, submodular minimization has been heavily studied in machine learning
(e.g. [SK10, JB11, JLB11, NB12, EN15, DTK16]). This focus can be largely attributed to the fact
that if a set function f : 2N ! R is submodular, meaning it has the following property of diminishing
returns: f (S [ {a}) f (S)
f (T [ {a}) f (T ) for all S ✓ T ✓ N and a 62 T , then it can
be optimized efficiently: its minimizer can be found in time that is polynomial in the size of the
ground set N [GLS81, IFF01]. In many cases, however, we do not know the submodular function,
and instead learn it from data (e.g. [BH11, IJB13, FKV13, FK14, Bal15, BVW16]). The question
we address in this paper is whether submodular functions can be (approximately) minimized when
the function is not known but can be learned from training data.
An intuitive approach for optimization from training data is to learn a surrogate function from training
data that predicts the behavior of the submodular function well, and then find the minimizer of the
surrogate learned and use that as a proxy for the true minimizer we seek. The problem however, is that
this approach does not generally guarantee that the resulting solution is close to the true minimum of
the function. One pitfall is that the surrogate may be non-submodular, and despite approximating the
true submodular function arbitrarily well, the surrogate can be intractable to minimize. Alternatively,
it may be that the surrogate is submodular, but its minimum is arbitrarily far from the minimum of
the true function we aim to optimize (see examples in Appendix A).
Since optimizing a surrogate function learned from data may generally result in poor approximations,
one may seek learning algorithms that are guaranteed to produce surrogates whose optima wellapproximate the true optima and are tractable to compute. More generally, however, it is possible that
there is some other approach for optimizing the function from the training samples, without learning
a model. Therefore, at a high level, the question is whether a reasonable number of training samples
suffices to minimize a submodular function. We can formalize this as optimization from samples.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

