Toward Multimodal Image-to-Image Translation

Jun-Yan Zhu
UC Berkeley
Trevor Darrell
UC Berkeley

Richard Zhang
UC Berkeley
Alexei A. Efros
UC Berkeley

Oliver Wang
Adobe Research

Deepak Pathak
UC Berkeley
Eli Shechtman
Adobe Research

Abstract
Many image-to-image translation problems are ambiguous, as a single input image
may correspond to multiple possible outputs. In this work, we aim to model
a distribution of possible outputs in a conditional generative modeling setting.
The ambiguity of the mapping is distilled in a low-dimensional latent vector,
which can be randomly sampled at test time. A generator learns to map the given
input, combined with this latent code, to the output. We explicitly encourage the
connection between output and the latent code to be invertible. This helps prevent
a many-to-one mapping from the latent code to the output during training, also
known as the problem of mode collapse, and produces more diverse results. We
explore several variants of this approach by employing different training objectives,
network architectures, and methods of injecting the latent code. Our proposed
method encourages bijective consistency between the latent encoding and output
modes. We present a systematic comparison of our method and other variants on
both perceptual realism and diversity.

1

Introduction

Deep learning techniques have made rapid progress in conditional image generation. For example,
networks have been used to inpaint missing image regions [20, 34, 47], add color to grayscale
images [19, 20, 27, 50], and generate photorealistic images from sketches [20, 40]. However, most
techniques in this space have focused on generating a single result. In this work, we model a
distribution of potential results, as many of these problems may be multimodal in nature. For
example, as seen in Figure 1, an image captured at night may look very different in the day, depending
on cloud patterns and lighting conditions. We pursue two main goals: producing results which are (1)
perceptually realistic and (2) diverse, all while remaining faithful to the input.
Mapping from a high-dimensional input to a high-dimensional output distribution is challenging. A
common approach to representing multimodality is learning a low-dimensional latent code, which
should represent aspects of the possible outputs not contained in the input image. At inference time,
a deterministic generator uses the input image, along with stochastically sampled latent codes, to
produce randomly sampled outputs. A common problem in existing methods is mode collapse [14],
where only a small number of real samples get represented in the output. We systematically study a
family of solutions to this problem.
We start with the pix2pix framework [20], which has previously been shown to produce highquality results for various image-to-image translation tasks. The method trains a generator network,
conditioned on the input image, with two losses: (1) a regression loss to produce similar output
to the known paired ground truth image and (2) a learned discriminator loss to encourage realism.
The authors note that trivially appending a randomly drawn latent code did not produce diverse
results. Instead, we propose encouraging a bijection between the output and latent space. We not
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

