Robust Conditional Probabilities
Yoav Wald
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Hebrew University
yoav.wald@mail.huji.ac.il

Amir Globerson
The Balvatnik School of Computer Science
Tel-Aviv University
gamir@mail.tau.ac.il

Abstract
Conditional probabilities are a core concept in machine learning. For example,
optimal prediction of a label Y given an input X corresponds to maximizing the
conditional probability of Y given X. A common approach to inference tasks is
learning a model of conditional probabilities. However, these models are often
based on strong assumptions (e.g., log-linear models), and hence their estimate of
conditional probabilities is not robust and is highly dependent on the validity of
their assumptions.
Here we propose a framework for reasoning about conditional probabilities without
assuming anything about the underlying distributions, except knowledge of their
second order marginals, which can be estimated from data. We show how this
setting leads to guaranteed bounds on conditional probabilities, which can be calculated efficiently in a variety of settings, including structured-prediction. Finally, we
apply them to semi-supervised deep learning, obtaining results competitive with
variational autoencoders.

1

Introduction

In classification tasks the goal is to predict a label Y for an object X. Assuming that the joint
distribution of these two variables is p∗ (x, y) then optimal prediction1 corresponds to returning
the label y that maximizes the conditional probability p∗ (y|x). Thus, being able to reason about
conditional probabilities is fundamental to machine learning and probabilistic inference.
In the fully supervised setting, one can sidestep the task of estimating conditional probabilities by
directly learning a classifier in a discriminative fashion. However, in unsupervised or semi-supervised
settings, a reliable estimate of the conditional distributions becomes important. For example, consider
a self-training [17, 31] or active learning setting. In both scenarios, the learner has a set of unlabeled
samples and it needs to choose which ones to tag. Given an unlabeled sample x, if we could reliably
conclude that p∗ (y|x) is close to 1 for some label y, we could easily decide whether to tag x or not.
Intuitively, an active learner would prefer not to tag x while a self training algorithm would tag it.
There are of course many approaches to “modelling” conditional distributions, from logistic regression
to conditional random fields. However, these do not come with any guarantees of approximations
to the true underlying conditional distributions of p∗ and thus cannot be used to reliably reason
about these. This is due to the fact that such models make assumptions about the conditionals (e.g.,
conditional independence or parametric), which are unlikely to be satisfied in practice.
As an illustrative example for our motivation and setup, consider a set of n binary variables
X1 , ..., Xn whose distribution we are interested in. Suppose we have enough data to obtain
the joint marginals, P [Xi = xi , Xj = xj ], of pairs i, j in a set E. If (1, 2) ∈ E and we concluded that P [X1 = 1|X2 = 1] = 1, this lets us reason about many other probabilities. For example, we know that P [X1 = 1|X2 = 1, . . . , Xn = xn ] = 1 for any setting of the x3 , . . . , xn
1

In the sense of minimizing prediction error.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

