Bayesian Inference of Individualized Treatment
Effects using Multi-task Gaussian Processes

Ahmed M. Alaa
Electrical Engineering Department
University of California, Los Angeles

ahmedmalaa@ucla.edu

Mihaela van der Schaar
Department of Engineering Science
University of Oxford

mihaela.vanderschaar@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Predicated on the increasing abundance of electronic health records, we investigate the problem of inferring individualized treatment effects using observational
data. Stemming from the potential outcomes model, we propose a novel multitask learning framework in which factual and counterfactual outcomes are modeled as the outputs of a function in a vector-valued reproducing kernel Hilbert
space (vvRKHS). We develop a nonparametric Bayesian method for learning the
treatment effects using a multi-task Gaussian process (GP) with a linear coregionalization kernel as a prior over the vvRKHS. The Bayesian approach allows us
to compute individualized measures of confidence in our estimates via pointwise
credible intervals, which are crucial for realizing the full potential of precision
medicine. The impact of selection bias is alleviated via a risk-based empirical
Bayes method for adapting the multi-task GP prior, which jointly minimizes the
empirical error in factual outcomes and the uncertainty in (unobserved) counterfactual outcomes. We conduct experiments on observational datasets for an interventional social program applied to premature infants, and a left ventricular assist
device applied to cardiac patients wait-listed for a heart transplant. In both experiments, we show that our method significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Clinical trials entail enormous costs: the average costs of multi-phase trials in vital therapeutic areas such as the respiratory system, anesthesia and oncology are $115.3 million, $105.4 million, and
$78.6 million, respectively [1]. Moreover, due to the difficulty of patient recruitment, randomized
controlled trials often exhibit small sample sizes, which hinders the discovery of heterogeneous therapeutic effects across different patient subgroups [2]. Observational studies are cheaper and quicker
alternatives to clinical trials [3, 4]. With the advent of electronic health records (EHRs), currently
deployed in more than 75% of hospitals in the U.S. according to the latest ONC data brief1 , there is
a growing interest in using machine learning to infer heterogeneous treatment effects from readily
available observational data in EHRs. This interest glints in recent initiatives such as STRATOS
[3], which focuses on guiding observational medical research, in addition to various recent works
on causal inference from observational data developed by the machine learning community [4-11].
Motivated by the plethora of EHR data and the potentiality of precision medicine, we address the
problem of estimating individualized treatment effects (i.e. causal inference) using observational
data. The problem differs from standard supervised learning in that for every subject in an observational cohort, we only observe the "factual" outcome for a specific treatment assignment, but never
observe the corresponding "counterfactual" outcome2 , without which we can never know the true
1
2

https://www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/briefs/
Some works refer to this setting as the "logged bandits with feedback" [12, 13].

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

