One-Sided Unsupervised Domain Mapping
Sagie Benaim1 and Lior Wolf1,2
1

The Blavatnik School of Computer Science , Tel Aviv University, Israel
2
Facebook AI Research

Abstract
In unsupervised domain mapping, the learner is given two unmatched datasets
A and B. The goal is to learn a mapping GAB that translates a sample in A
to the analog sample in B. Recent approaches have shown that when learning
simultaneously both GAB and the inverse mapping GBA , convincing mappings
are obtained. In this work, we present a method of learning GAB without learning
GBA . This is done by learning a mapping that maintains the distance between
a pair of samples. Moreover, good mappings are obtained, even by maintaining
the distance between different parts of the same sample before and after mapping.
We present experimental results that the new method not only allows for one
sided mapping learning, but also leads to preferable numerical results over the
existing circularity-based constraint. Our entire code is made publicly available
at https://github.com/sagiebenaim/DistanceGAN.

1

Introduction

The advent of the Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [6] technology has allowed for the
generation of realistic images that mimic a given training set by accurately capturing what is inside
the given class and what is “fake”. Out of the many tasks made possible by GANs, the task of
mapping an image in a source domain to the analog image in a target domain is of a particular interest.
The solutions proposed for this problem can be generally separated by the amount of required
supervision. On the one extreme, fully supervised methods employ pairs of matched samples, one
in each domain, in order to learn the mapping [9]. Less direct supervision was demonstrated by
employing a mapping into a semantic space and requiring that the original sample and the analog
sample in the target domain share the same semantic representation [22].
If the two domains are highly related, it was demonstrated that just by sharing weights between the
networks working on the two domains, and without any further supervision, one can map samples
between the two domains [21, 13]. For more distant domains, it was demonstrated recently that by
symmetrically leaning mappings in both directions, meaningful analogs are obtained [28, 11, 27].
This is done by requiring circularity, i.e., that mapping a sample from one domain to the other and
then back, produces the original sample.
In this work, we go a step further and show that it is possible to learn the mapping between the
source domain and the target domain in a one-sided unsupervised way, by enforcing high crossdomain correlation between the matching pairwise distances computed in each domain. The new
constraint allows one-sided mapping and also provides, in our experiments, better numerical results
than circularity. Combining both of these constraints together often leads to further improvements.
Learning the new constraint requires comparing pairs of samples. While there is no real practical
reason not to do so, since training batches contain multiple samples, we demonstrate that similar
constraints can even be applied per image by computing the distance between, e.g., the top part of the
image and the bottom part.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

