On clustering network-valued data

Soumendu Sundar Mukherjee
Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, California 94720, USA
soumendu@berkeley.edu

Purnamrita Sarkar
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences
University of Texas, Austin
Austin, Texas 78712, USA
purna.sarkar@austin.utexas.edu

Lizhen Lin
Department of Applied and Computational Mathematics and Statistics
Univeristy of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, Indiana 46556, USA
lizhen.lin@nd.edu

Abstract
Community detection, which focuses on clustering nodes or detecting communities in (mostly) a single network, is a problem of considerable practical
interest and has received a great deal of attention in the research community. While being able to cluster within a network is important, there
are emerging needs to be able to cluster multiple networks. This is largely
motivated by the routine collection of network data that are generated from
potentially different populations. These networks may or may not have node
correspondence. When node correspondence is present, we cluster networks
by summarizing a network by its graphon estimate, whereas when node
correspondence is not present, we propose a novel solution for clustering
such networks by associating a computationally feasible feature vector to
each network based on trace of powers of the adjacency matrix. We illustrate our methods using both simulated and real data sets, and theoretical
justifications are provided in terms of consistency.

1

Introduction

A network, which is used to model interactions or communications among a set of agents
or nodes, is arguably among one of the most common and important representations for
modern complex data. Networks are ubiquitous in many scientific fields, ranging from
computer networks, brain networks and biological networks, to social networks, co-authorship
networks and many more. Over the past few decades, great advancement has been made
in developing models and methodologies for inference of networks. There are a range of
probabilistic models for networks, starting from the relatively simple Erdös-Rényi model
[12], stochastic blockmodels and their extensions [15, 17, 6], to infinite dimensional graphons
[28, 13]. These models are often used for community detection, i.e. clustering the nodes in a
network. Various community detection algorithms or methods have been proposed, including
modularity-based methods [21], spectral methods [25], likelihood-based methods [8, 11, 7, 4],
and optimization-based approaches like those based on semidefinite programming [5], etc.
The majority of the work in the community detection literature including the above mentioned
ones focus on finding communities among the nodes in a single network. While this is still
a very important problem with many open questions, there is an emerging need to be
able to detect clusters among multiple network-valued objects, where a network itself is a
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

