SVCCA: Singular Vector Canonical Correlation
Analysis for Deep Learning Dynamics and
Interpretability

Maithra Raghu,1,2 Justin Gilmer,1 Jason Yosinski,3 & Jascha Sohl-Dickstein1
1
Google Brain 2 Cornell University 3 Uber AI Labs
maithrar@gmail•com, gilmer@google•com, yosinski@uber•com, jaschasd@google•com

Abstract
We propose a new technique, Singular Vector Canonical Correlation Analysis
(SVCCA), a tool for quickly comparing two representations in a way that is both
invariant to affine transform (allowing comparison between different layers and
networks) and fast to compute (allowing more comparisons to be calculated than
with previous methods). We deploy this tool to measure the intrinsic dimensionality of layers, showing in some cases needless over-parameterization; to probe
learning dynamics throughout training, finding that networks converge to final
representations from the bottom up; to show where class-specific information in
networks is formed; and to suggest new training regimes that simultaneously save
computation and overfit less.

1

Introduction

As the empirical success of deep neural networks ([7, 9, 18]) become an indisputable fact, the goal
of better understanding these models escalates in importance. Central to this aim is a core issue
of deciphering learned representations. Facets of this key question have been explored empirically,
particularly for image models, in [1, 2, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 19, 20]. Most of these approaches are
motivated by interpretability of learned representations. More recently, [11] studied the similarities
of representations learned by multiple networks by finding permutations of neurons with maximal
correlation.
In this work we introduce a new approach to the study of network representations, based on an
analysis of each neuron’s activation vector – the scalar outputs it emits on input datapoints. With
this interpretation of neurons as vectors (and layers as subspaces, spanned by neurons), we introduce SVCCA, Singular Vector Canonical Correlation Analysis, an amalgamation of Singular Value
Decomposition and Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) [5], as a powerful method for analyzing
deep representations. Although CCA has not previously been used to compare deep representations,
it has been used for related tasks such as computing the similarity between modeled and measured
brain activity [16], and training multi-lingual word embeddings in language models [3].
The main contributions resulting from the introduction of SVCCA are the following:
1. We ask: is the dimensionality of a layer’s learned representation the same as the number
of neurons in the layer? Answer: No. We show that trained networks perform equally well
with a number of directions just a fraction of the number of neurons with no additional
training, provided they are carefully chosen with SVCCA (Section 2.1). We explore the
consequences for model compression (Section 4.4).
2. We ask: what do deep representation learning dynamics look like? Answer: Networks
broadly converge bottom up. Using SVCCA, we compare layers across time and find they
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

