Adaptive Classification for Prediction Under a Budget

Venkatesh Saligrama
Electrical Engineering
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
srv@bu.edu

Feng Nan
Systems Engineering
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
fnan@bu.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel adaptive approximation approach for test-time resourceconstrained prediction motivated by Mobile, IoT, health, security and other applications, where constraints in the form of computation, communication, latency
and feature acquisition costs arise. We learn an adaptive low-cost system by training a gating and prediction model that limits utilization of a high-cost model to
hard input instances and gates easy-to-handle input instances to a low-cost model.
Our method is based on adaptively approximating the high-cost model in regions
where low-cost models suffice for making highly accurate predictions. We pose an
empirical loss minimization problem with cost constraints to jointly train gating
and prediction models. On a number of benchmark datasets our method outperforms state-of-the-art achieving higher accuracy for the same cost.

1

Introduction

Resource costs arise during test-time prediction in a number of machine learning applications. Feature costs in Internet, Healthcare, and Surveillance applications arise due to to feature extraction
time [23], and feature/sensor acquisition [19]. In addition to feature acquisition costs, communication and latency costs pose a key challenge in the design of mobile computing, or the Internet-ofThings(IoT) applications, where a large number of sensors/camera/watches/phones (known as edge
devices) are connected to a cloud.
Adaptive System: Rather than having the edge devices constantly transmit measurements/images
to the cloud where a centralized model makes prediction, a more efficient approach is to allow
the edge devices make predictions locally [12], whenever possible, saving the high communication
cost and reducing latency. Due to the memory, computing and battery constraints, the prediction
models on the edge devices are limited to low complexity. Consequently, to maintain high-accuracy,
adaptive systems are desirable. Such systems identify easy-to-handle input instances where local
edge models suffice, thus limiting the utilization cloud services for only hard instances. We propose
to learn an adaptive system by training on fully annotated training data. Our objective is to maintain
high accuracy while meeting average resource constraints during prediction-time.
There have been a number of promising approaches that focus on methods for reducing costs while
improving overall accuracy [9, 24, 19, 20, 13, 15]. These methods are adaptive in that, at testtime, resources (features, computation etc) are allocated adaptively depending on the difficulty of
the input. Many of these methods train models in a top-down manner, namely, attempt to build out
the model by selectively adding the most cost-effective features to improve accuracy.
In contrast we propose a novel bottom-up approach. We train adaptive models on annotated training
data by selectively identifying parts of the input space for which high accuracy can be maintained at
a lower cost. The principle advantage of our method is twofold. First, our approach can be readily
applied to cases where it is desirable to reduce costs of an existing high-cost legacy system. Second,
training top-down models in case of feature costs leads to fundamental combinatorial issues in multi-

