Fixed-Rank Approximation of a
Positive-Semidefinite Matrix from Streaming Data
Joel A. Tropp
Caltech

Alp Yurtsever
EPFL

Madeleine Udell
Cornell

Volkan Cevher
EPFL

jtropp@caltech.edu alp.yurtsever@epfl.ch mru8@cornell.edu volkan.cevher@epfl.ch

Abstract
Several important applications, such as streaming PCA and semidefinite programming, involve a large-scale positive-semidefinite (psd) matrix that is presented as a
sequence of linear updates. Because of storage limitations, it may only be possible
to retain a sketch of the psd matrix. This paper develops a new algorithm for
fixed-rank psd approximation from a sketch. The approach combines the Nyström
approximation with a novel mechanism for rank truncation. Theoretical analysis
establishes that the proposed method can achieve any prescribed relative error in
the Schatten 1-norm and that it exploits the spectral decay of the input matrix. Computer experiments show that the proposed method dominates alternative techniques
for fixed-rank psd matrix approximation across a wide range of examples.

1

Motivation

In recent years, researchers have studied many applications where a large positive-semidefinite (psd)
matrix is presented as a series of linear updates. A recurring theme is that we only have space to store
a small summary of the psd matrix, and we must use this information to construct an accurate psd
approximation with specified rank. Here are two important cases where this problem arises.
Streaming Covariance Estimation. Suppose that we receive a stream h1 , h2 , h3 , · · · ∈ Rn of
high-dimensional vectors. The psd sample covariance matrix of these vectors has the linear dynamics
A(0) ← 0 and

A(i) ← (1 − i−1 )A(i−1) + i−1 hi h∗i .

When the dimension n and the number of vectors are both large, it is not possible to store the vectors
or the sample covariance matrix. Instead, we wish to maintain a small summary that allows us to
compute the rank-r psd approximation of the sample covariance matrix A(i) at a specified instant i.
This problem and its variants are often called streaming PCA [3, 12, 14, 15, 25, 32].
Convex Low-Rank Matrix Optimization with Optimal Storage. A primary application of
semidefinite programming (SDP) is to search for a rank-r psd matrix that satisfies additional constraints. Because of storage costs, SDPs are difficult to solve when the matrix variable is large.
Recently, Yurtsever et al. [44] exhibited the first provable algorithm, called SketchyCGM, that
produces a rank-r approximate solution to an SDP using optimal storage.
Implicitly, SketchyCGM forms a sequence of approximate psd solutions to the SDP via the iteration
A(0) ← 0

and A(i) ← (1 − ηi )A(i−1) + ηi hi h∗i .

The step size ηi = 2/(i + 2), and the vectors hi do not depend on the matrices A(i) . In fact,
SketchyCGM only maintains a small summary of the evolving solution A(i) . When the iteration
terminates, SketchyCGM computes a rank-r psd approximation of the final iterate using the method
described by Tropp et al. [37, Alg. 9].
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

