Collecting Telemetry Data Privately

Bolin Ding, Janardhan Kulkarni, Sergey Yekhanin
Microsoft Research
{bolind, jakul, yekhanin}@microsoft.com

Abstract
The collection and analysis of telemetry data from user’s devices is routinely
performed by many software companies. Telemetry collection leads to improved
user experience but poses significant risks to users’ privacy. Locally differentially
private (LDP) algorithms have recently emerged as the main tool that allows data
collectors to estimate various population statistics, while preserving privacy. The
guarantees provided by such algorithms are typically very strong for a single round
of telemetry collection, but degrade rapidly when telemetry is collected regularly.
In particular, existing LDP algorithms are not suitable for repeated collection of
counter data such as daily app usage statistics. In this paper, we develop new
LDP mechanisms geared towards repeated collection of counter data, with formal
privacy guarantees even after being executed for an arbitrarily long period of time.
For two basic analytical tasks, mean estimation and histogram estimation, our LDP
mechanisms for repeated data collection provide estimates with comparable or
even the same accuracy as existing single-round LDP collection mechanisms. We
conduct empirical evaluation on real-world counter datasets to verify our theoretical
results. Our mechanisms have been deployed by Microsoft to collect telemetry
across millions of devices.

1

Introduction

Collecting telemetry data to make more informed decisions is a commonplace. In order to meet
users’ privacy expectations and in view of tightening privacy regulations (e.g., European GDPR law)
the ability to collect telemetry data privately is paramount. Counter data, e.g., daily app or system
usage statistics reported in seconds, is a common form of telemetry. In this paper we are interested
in algorithms that preserve users’ privacy in the face of continuous collection of counter data, are
accurate, and scale to populations of millions of users.
Recently, differential privacy [10] (DP) has emerged as defacto standard for the privacy guarantees. In
the context of telemetry collection one typically considers algorithms that exhibit differential privacy
in the local model [12, 14, 7, 5, 3, 18], also called randomized response model [19], γ-amplification
[13], or FRAPP [1]. These are randomized algorithms that are invoked on each user’s device to turn
user’s private value into a response that is communicated to a data collector and have the property
that the likelihood of any specific algorithm’s output varies little with the input, thus providing users
with plausible deniability. Guarantees offered by locally differentially private algorithms, although
very strong in a single round of telemetry collection, quickly degrade when data is collected over
time. This is a very challenging problem that limits the applicability of DP in many contexts.
In telemetry applications, privacy guarantees need to hold in the face of continuous data collection.
An influential paper [12] proposed a framework based on memoization to tackle this issue. Their
techniques allow one to extend single round DP algorithms to continual data collection and protect
users whose values stay constant or change very rarely. The key limitation of the work of [12] is that
their approach cannot protect users’ private numeric values with very small but frequent changes,
making it inappropriate for collecting telemetry counters. In this paper, we address this limitation.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

