From Parity to Preference-based Notions
of Fairness in Classification
Muhammad Bilal Zafar
MPI-SWS
mzafar@mpi-sws.org
Krishna P. Gummadi
MPI-SWS
gummadi@mpi-sws.org

Isabel Valera
MPI-IS
isabel.valera@tue.mpg.de

Manuel Gomez Rodriguez
MPI-SWS
manuelgr@mpi-sws.org

Adrian Weller
University of Cambridge & Alan Turing Institute
aw665@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
The adoption of automated, data-driven decision making in an ever expanding
range of applications has raised concerns about its potential unfairness towards
certain social groups. In this context, a number of recent studies have focused on
defining, detecting, and removing unfairness from data-driven decision systems.
However, the existing notions of fairness, based on parity (equality) in treatment
or outcomes for different social groups, tend to be quite stringent, limiting the
overall decision making accuracy. In this paper, we draw inspiration from the fairdivision and envy-freeness literature in economics and game theory and propose
preference-based notions of fairness—given the choice between various sets of
decision treatments or outcomes, any group of users would collectively prefer its
treatment or outcomes, regardless of the (dis)parity as compared to the other groups.
Then, we introduce tractable proxies to design margin-based classifiers that satisfy
these preference-based notions of fairness. Finally, we experiment with a variety
of synthetic and real-world datasets and show that preference-based fairness allows
for greater decision accuracy than parity-based fairness.

1

Introduction

As machine learning is increasingly being used to automate decision making in domains that affect
human lives (e.g., credit ratings, housing allocation, recidivism risk prediction), there are growing
concerns about the potential for unfairness in such algorithmic decisions [23, 25]. A flurry of recent
research on fair learning has focused on defining appropriate notions of fairness and then designing
mechanisms to ensure fairness in automated decision making [12, 14, 18, 19, 20, 21, 28, 32, 33, 34].
Existing notions of fairness in the machine learning literature are largely inspired by the concept of
discrimination in social sciences and law. These notions call for parity (i.e., equality) in treatment,
in impact, or both. To ensure parity in treatment (or treatment parity), decision making systems need
to avoid using users’ sensitive attribute information, i.e., avoid using the membership information in
socially salient groups (e.g., gender, race), which are protected by anti-discrimination laws [4, 10]. As
a result, the use of group-conditional decision making systems is often prohibited. To ensure parity in
impact (or impact parity), decision making systems need to avoid disparity in the fraction of users
belonging to different sensitive attribute groups (e.g., men, women) that receive beneficial decision
outcomes. A number of learning mechanisms have been proposed to achieve parity in treatment [24],
An open-source code implementation of our scheme is available at: http://fate-computing.mpi-sws.org/
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

