Eigen-Distortions of Hierarchical Representations

Alexander Berardino
Center for Neural Science
New York University
agb313@nyu.edu

Johannes Ballé
Center for Neural Science
New York University∗
johannes.balle@nyu.edu

Valero Laparra
Image Processing Laboratory
Universitat de València
valero.laparra@uv.es

Eero Simoncelli
Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Center for Neural Science and
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
eero.simoncelli@nyu.edu

Abstract
We develop a method for comparing hierarchical image representations in terms
of their ability to explain perceptual sensitivity in humans. Specifically, we utilize
Fisher information to establish a model-derived prediction of sensitivity to local
perturbations of an image. For a given image, we compute the eigenvectors of the
Fisher information matrix with largest and smallest eigenvalues, corresponding
to the model-predicted most- and least-noticeable image distortions, respectively.
For human subjects, we then measure the amount of each distortion that can be
reliably detected when added to the image. We use this method to test the ability
of a variety of representations to mimic human perceptual sensitivity. We find that
the early layers of VGG16, a deep neural network optimized for object recognition,
provide a better match to human perception than later layers, and a better match
than a 4-stage convolutional neural network (CNN) trained on a database of human
ratings of distorted image quality. On the other hand, we find that simple models
of early visual processing, incorporating one or more stages of local gain control,
trained on the same database of distortion ratings, provide substantially better
predictions of human sensitivity than either the CNN, or any combination of layers
of VGG16.
Human capabilities for recognizing complex visual patterns are believed to arise through a cascade
of transformations, implemented by neurons in successive stages in the visual system. Several
recent studies have suggested that representations of deep convolutional neural networks trained
for object recognition can predict activity in areas of the primate ventral visual stream better than
models constructed explicitly for that purpose (Yamins et al. [2014], Khaligh-Razavi and Kriegeskorte
[2014]). These results have inspired exploration of deep networks trained on object recognition
as models of human perception, explicitly employing their representations as perceptual distortion
metrics or loss functions (Hénaff and Simoncelli [2016], Johnson et al. [2016], Dosovitskiy and Brox
[2016]).
On the other hand, several other studies have used synthesis techniques to generate images that
indicate a profound mismatch between the sensitivity of these networks and that of human observers.
Specifically, Szegedy et al. [2013] constructed image distortions, imperceptible to humans, that
cause their networks to grossly misclassify objects. Similarly, Nguyen and Clune [2015] optimized
randomly initialized images to achieve reliable recognition by a network, but found that the resulting
∗

Currently at Google, Inc.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

