Hiding Images in Plain Sight:
Deep Steganography

Shumeet Baluja
Google Research
Google, Inc.
shumeet@google.com

Abstract
Steganography is the practice of concealing a secret message within another,
ordinary, message. Commonly, steganography is used to unobtrusively hide a small
message within the noisy regions of a larger image. In this study, we attempt
to place a full size color image within another image of the same size. Deep
neural networks are simultaneously trained to create the hiding and revealing
processes and are designed to specifically work as a pair. The system is trained on
images drawn randomly from the ImageNet database, and works well on natural
images from a wide variety of sources. Beyond demonstrating the successful
application of deep learning to hiding images, we carefully examine how the result
is achieved and explore extensions. Unlike many popular steganographic methods
that encode the secret message within the least significant bits of the carrier image,
our approach compresses and distributes the secret image’s representation across
all of the available bits.

1

Introduction to Steganography

Steganography is the art of covered or hidden writing; the term itself dates back to the 15th century,
when messages were physically hidden. In modern steganography, the goal is to covertly communicate
a digital message. The steganographic process places a hidden message in a transport medium, called
the carrier. The carrier may be publicly visible. For added security, the hidden message can also be
encrypted, thereby increasing the perceived randomness and decreasing the likelihood of content
discovery even if the existence of the message detected. Good introductions to steganography and
steganalysis (the process of discovering hidden messages) can be found in [1–5].
There are many well publicized nefarious applications of steganographic information hiding, such as
planning and coordinating criminal activities through hidden messages in images posted on public
sites – making the communication and the recipient difficult to discover [6]. Beyond the multitude of
misuses, however, a common use case for steganographic methods is to embed authorship information,
through digital watermarks, without compromising the integrity of the content or image.
The challenge of good steganography arises because embedding a message can alter the appearance
and underlying statistics of the carrier. The amount of alteration depends on two factors: first, the
amount of information that is to be hidden. A common use has been to hide textual messages in
images. The amount of information that is hidden is measured in bits-per-pixel (bpp). Often, the
amount of information is set to 0.4bpp or lower. The longer the message, the larger the bpp, and
therefore the more the carrier is altered [6, 7]. Second, the amount of alteration depends on the carrier
image itself. Hiding information in the noisy, high-frequency filled, regions of an image yields less
humanly detectable perturbations than hiding in the flat regions. Work on estimating how much
information a carrier image can hide can be found in [8].
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

