Bayesian Optimization with Gradients

Jian Wu 1

Matthias Poloczek 2 Andrew Gordon Wilson 1
1
Cornell University, 2 University of Arizona

Peter I. Frazier 1

Abstract
Bayesian optimization has been successful at global optimization of expensiveto-evaluate multimodal objective functions. However, unlike most optimization
methods, Bayesian optimization typically does not use derivative information. In
this paper we show how Bayesian optimization can exploit derivative information to
find good solutions with fewer objective function evaluations. In particular, we develop a novel Bayesian optimization algorithm, the derivative-enabled knowledgegradient (d-KG), which is one-step Bayes-optimal, asymptotically consistent, and
provides greater one-step value of information than in the derivative-free setting.
d-KG accommodates noisy and incomplete derivative information, comes in both
sequential and batch forms, and can optionally reduce the computational cost of
inference through automatically selected retention of a single directional derivative.
We also compute the d-KG acquisition function and its gradient using a novel fast
discretization-free technique. We show d-KG provides state-of-the-art performance
compared to a wide range of optimization procedures with and without gradients,
on benchmarks including logistic regression, deep learning, kernel learning, and
k-nearest neighbors.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimization [3, 17] is able to find global optima with a remarkably small number of
potentially noisy objective function evaluations. Bayesian optimization has thus been particularly
successful for automatic hyperparameter tuning of machine learning algorithms [10, 11, 35, 38],
where objectives can be extremely expensive to evaluate, noisy, and multimodal.
Bayesian optimization supposes that the objective function (e.g., the predictive performance with
respect to some hyperparameters) is drawn from a prior distribution over functions, typically a
Gaussian process (GP), maintaining a posterior as we observe the objective in new places. Acquisition
functions, such as expected improvement [15, 17, 28], upper confidence bound [37], predictive entropy
search [14] or the knowledge gradient [32], determine a balance between exploration and exploitation,
to decide where to query the objective next. By choosing points with the largest acquisition function
values, one seeks to identify a global optimum using as few objective function evaluations as possible.
Bayesian optimization procedures do not generally leverage derivative information, beyond a few
exceptions described in Sect. 2. By contrast, other types of continuous optimization methods [36] use
gradient information extensively. The broader use of gradients for optimization suggests that gradients
should also be quite useful in Bayesian optimization: (1) Gradients inform us about the objective’s
relative value as a function of location, which is well-aligned with optimization. (2) In d-dimensional
problems, gradients provide d distinct pieces of information about the objective’s relative value in each
direction, constituting d + 1 values per query together with the objective value itself. This advantage
is particularly significant for high-dimensional problems. (3) Derivative information is available
in many applications at little additional cost. Recent work [e.g., 23] makes gradient information
available for hyperparameter tuning. Moreover, in the optimization of engineering systems modeled
by partial differential equations, which pre-dates most hyperparameter tuning applications [8], adjoint
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

