From Bayesian Sparsity to Gated Recurrent Nets
Hao He
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
haohe@mit.edu
Satoshi Ikehata
National Institute of Informatics
satoshi.ikehata@gmail.com

Bo Xin
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
jimxinbo@gmail.com
David Wipf
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
davidwipf@gmail.com

Abstract
The iterations of many first-order algorithms, when applied to minimizing common
regularized regression functions, often resemble neural network layers with prespecified weights. This observation has prompted the development of learningbased approaches that purport to replace these iterations with enhanced surrogates
forged as DNN models from available training data. For example, important NPhard sparse estimation problems have recently benefitted from this genre of upgrade,
with simple feedforward or recurrent networks ousting proximal gradient-based
iterations. Analogously, this paper demonstrates that more powerful Bayesian
algorithms for promoting sparsity, which rely on complex multi-loop majorizationminimization techniques, mirror the structure of more sophisticated long short-term
memory (LSTM) networks, or alternative gated feedback networks previously
designed for sequence prediction. As part of this development, we examine the
parallels between latent variable trajectories operating across multiple time-scales
during optimization, and the activations within deep network structures designed
to adaptively model such characteristic sequences. The resulting insights lead to
a novel sparse estimation system that, when granted training data, can estimate
optimal solutions efficiently in regimes where other algorithms fail, including
practical direction-of-arrival (DOA) and 3D geometry recovery problems. The
underlying principles we expose are also suggestive of a learning process for a
richer class of multi-loop algorithms in other domains.

1

Introduction

Many practical iterative algorithms for minimizing an energy function Ly (x), parameterized by some
vector y, adopt the updating prescription
x(t+1) = f (Ax(t) + By),

(1)

where t is the iteration count, A and B are fixed matrices/filters, and f is a point-wise nonlinear
operator. When we treat By as a bias or exogenous input, then the progression of these iterations
through time resembles activations passing through the layers (indexed by t) of a deep neural network
(DNN) [20, 30, 34, 38]. It then naturally begs the question: If we have access to an ensemble of pairs
{y, x∗ }, where x∗ = arg minx Ly (x), can we train an appropriately structured DNN to produce a
minimum of Ly (x) when presented with an arbitrary new y as input? If A and B are fixed for all t,
this process can be interpreted as training a recurrent neural network (RNN), while if they vary, a
deep feedforward network with independent weights on each layer is a more apt description.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

