Welfare Guarantees from Data
Darrell Hoy
University of Maryland
darrell.hoy@gmail.com

Denis Nekipelov
University of Virginia
denis@virginia.edu

Vasilis Syrgkanis
Microsoft Research
vasy@microsoft.com

Abstract
Analysis of efficiency of outcomes in game theoretic settings has been a main item
of study at the intersection of economics and computer science. The notion of
the price of anarchy takes a worst-case stance to efficiency analysis, considering
instance independent guarantees of efficiency. We propose a data-dependent analog
of the price of anarchy that refines this worst-case assuming access to samples of
strategic behavior. We focus on auction settings, where the latter is non-trivial
due to the private information held by participants. Our approach to bounding the
efficiency from data is robust to statistical errors and mis-specification. Unlike
traditional econometrics, which seek to learn the private information of players
from observed behavior and then analyze properties of the outcome, we directly
quantify the inefficiency without going through the private information. We apply
our approach to datasets from a sponsored search auction system and find empirical
results that are a significant improvement over bounds from worst-case analysis.

1

Introduction

A major field at the intersection of economics and computer science is the analysis of the efficiency of
systems under strategic behavior. The seminal work of [6, 11] triggered a line of work on quantifying
the inefficiency of computer systems, ranging from network routing, resource allocation and more
recently auction marketplaces [10]. However, the notion of the price of anarchy suffers from the
pessimism of worst-case analysis. Many systems can be inefficient in the worst-case over parameters
of the model, but might perform very well for the parameters that arise in practice.
Due to the large availability of datasets in modern economic systems, we propose a data-dependent
analog of the price of anarchy, which assumes access to a sample of strategic behavior from the
system. We focus our analysis on auction systems where the latter approach is more interesting due
to the private information held by the participants of the system, i.e. their private value for the item at
sale. Since efficiency is a function of these private parameters, quantifying the inefficiency of the
system from samples of strategic behavior is non-trivial. The problem of estimation of the inefficiency
becomes an econometric problem where we want to estimate a function of hidden variables from
observed strategic behavior. The latter is feasible under the assumption that the observed behavior
is the outcome of an equilibrium of the strategic setting, which connects observed behavior to
unobserved private information.
Traditional econometric approaches to auctions [3, 8], address such questions by attempting to
exactly pin-point the private parameters from the observed behavior and subsequently measuring the
quantities of interest, such as the efficiency of the allocation. The latter approach is problematic in
complex auction systems for two main reasons: (i) it leads to statistical inefficiency, (ii) it requires
strong conditions on the connection between observed behavior and private information. Even for a
single-item first-price auction, uniform estimation of the private value of a player from T samples
of observed bids, can only be achieved at O(T 1/3 )-rates [3]. Moreover, uniquely identifying the
private information from the observed behavior, requires a one-to-one mapping between the two
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

