Fitting Low-Rank Tensors in Constant Time

Kohei Hayashi∗
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology
RIKEN AIP
hayashi.kohei@gmail.com
Yuichi Yoshida†
National Institute of Informatics
yyoshida@nii.ac.jp

Abstract
In this paper, we develop an algorithm that approximates the residual error of
Tucker decomposition, one of the most popular tensor decomposition methods,
with a provable guarantee. Given an order-K tensor X ∈ RN1 ×···×NK , our
algorithm randomly samples a constant number s of indices for each mode and
creates a “mini” tensor X̃ ∈ Rs×···×s , whose elements are given by the intersection
of the sampled indices on X. Then, we show that the residual error of the Tucker
decomposition of X̃ is sufficiently close to that of X with high probability. This
result implies that we can figure out how much we can fit a low-rank tensor to X in
constant time, regardless of the size of X. This is useful for guessing the favorable
rank of Tucker decomposition. Finally, we demonstrate how the sampling method
works quickly and accurately using multiple real datasets.

1

Introduction

Tensor decomposition is a fundamental tool for dealing with array-structured data. Using tensor
decomposition, a tensor (or a multidimensional array) is approximated with multiple tensors in
lower-dimensional space using a multilinear operation. This drastically reduces disk and memory
usage. We say that a tensor is of order K if it is a K-dimensional array; each dimension is called a
mode in tensor terminology.
Among the many existing tensor decomposition methods, Tucker decomposition [18] is a popular
choice. To some extent, Tucker decomposition is analogous to singular-value decomposition (SVD):
as SVD decomposes a matrix into left and right singular vectors that interact via singular values,
Tucker decomposition of an order-K tensor consists of K factor matrices that interact via the socalled core tensor. The key difference between SVD and Tucker decomposition is that, with the latter,
the core tensor need not be diagonal and its “rank” can differ for each mode k = 1, . . . , K. In this
paper, we refer to the size of the core tensor, which is a K-tuple, as the Tucker rank of a Tucker
decomposition.
We are usually interested in obtaining factor matrices and a core tensor to minimize the residual error—
the error between the input and low-rank approximated tensors. Sometimes, however, knowing the
residual error itself is an important task. The residual error tells us how the low-rank approximation
is suitable to the input tensor, and is particularly useful to predetermine the Tucker rank. In real
∗

Supported by ONR N62909-17-1-2138.
Supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP17H04676 and JST ERATO Grant Number JPMJER1305,
Japan.
†

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

