Scalable Demand-Aware Recommendation
Jinfeng Yi1∗, Cho-Jui Hsieh2 , Kush R. Varshney1 , Lijun Zhang3 , Yao Li2
1

IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
2
University of California, Davis, CA, USA
3
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
jinfengyi.ustc@gmail.com, chohsieh@ucdavis.edu, krvarshn@us.ibm.com,
zhanglj@lamda.nju.edu.cn, yaoli@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
Recommendation for e-commerce with a mix of durable and nondurable goods
has characteristics that distinguish it from the well-studied media recommendation
problem. The demand for items is a combined effect of form utility and time utility,
i.e., a product must both be intrinsically appealing to a consumer and the time must
be right for purchase. In particular for durable goods, time utility is a function of
inter-purchase duration within product category because consumers are unlikely to
purchase two items in the same category in close temporal succession. Moreover,
purchase data, in contrast to rating data, is implicit with non-purchases not necessarily indicating dislike. Together, these issues give rise to the positive-unlabeled
demand-aware recommendation problem that we pose via joint low-rank tensor
completion and product category inter-purchase duration vector estimation. We
further relax this problem and propose a highly scalable alternating minimization
approach with which we can solve problems with millions of users and millions of
items in a single thread. We also show superior prediction accuracies on multiple
real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

E-commerce recommender systems aim to present items with high utility to the consumers [18].
Utility may be decomposed into form utility: the item is desired as it is manifested, and time utility:
the item is desired at the given point in time [28]; recommender systems should take both types of
utility into account. Economists define items to be either durable goods or nondurable goods based
on how long they are intended to last before being replaced [27]. A key characteristic of durable
goods is the long duration of time between successive purchases within item categories whereas this
duration for nondurable goods is much shorter, or even negligible. Thus, durable and nondurable
goods have differing time utility characteristics which lead to differing demand characteristics.
Although we have witnessed great success of collaborative filtering in media recommendation, we
should be careful when expanding its application to general e-commerce recommendation involving
both durable and nondurable goods due to the following reasons:
1. Since media such as movies and music are nondurable goods, most users are quite receptive
to buying or renting them in rapid succession. However, users only purchase durable goods
when the time is right. For instance, most users will not buy televisions the day after they have
already bought one. Therefore, recommending an item for which a user has no immediate
demand can hurt user experience and waste an opportunity to drive sales.
∗

Now at Tencent AI Lab, Bellevue, WA, USA

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

