Information Theoretic Properties of Markov Random
Fields, and their Algorithmic Applications

Linus Hamilton∗

Frederic Koehler †

Ankur Moitra ‡

Abstract
Markov random fields are a popular model for high-dimensional probability distributions. Over the years, many mathematical, statistical and algorithmic problems
on them have been studied. Until recently, the only known algorithms for provably
learning them relied on exhaustive search, correlation decay or various incoherence assumptions. Bresler [4] gave an algorithm for learning general Ising models
on bounded degree graphs. His approach was based on a structural result about
mutual information in Ising models.
Here we take a more conceptual approach to proving lower bounds on the mutual
information. Our proof generalizes well beyond Ising models, to arbitrary Markov
random fields with higher order interactions. As an application, we obtain algorithms for learning Markov random fields on bounded degree graphs on n nodes
with r-order interactions in nr time and log n sample complexity. Our algorithms
also extend to various partial observation models.

1

Introduction

1.1

Background

Markov random fields are a popular model for defining high-dimensional distributions by using a
graph to encode conditional dependencies among a collection of random variables. More precisely,
the distribution is described by an undirected graph G = (V, E) where to each of the n nodes u ∈ V
we associate a random variable Xu which takes on one of ku different states. The crucial property
is that the conditional distribution of Xu should only depend on the states of u’s neighbors. It turns
out that as long as every configuration has positive probability, the distribution can be written as
!
r
X
X
i1 ···i`
Pr(a1 , · · · an ) = exp
θ
(a1 , · · · an ) − C
(1)
`=1 i1 <i2 <···<i`

Here θi1 ···i` : [ki1 ] × . . . × [ki` ] → R is a function that takes as input the configuration of states on
the nodes i1 , i2 , · · · i` and is assumed to be zero on non-cliques. These functions are referred to as
clique potentials. In the equation above, C is a constant that ensures the distribution is normalized
and is called the log-partition function. Such distributions are also called Gibbs measures and arise
frequently in statistical physics and have numerous applications in computer vision, computational
biology, social networks and signal processing. The Ising model corresponds to the special case
∗
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Department of Mathematics. Email: luh@mit.edu. This work
was supported in part by Hertz Fellowship.
†
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Department of Mathematics. Email: fkoehler@mit.edu.
‡
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Department of Mathematics and the Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab. Email: moitra@mit.edu. This work was supported in part by NSF CAREER Award
CCF-1453261, NSF Large CCF-1565235, a David and Lucile Packard Fellowship and an Alfred P. Sloan Fellowship.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

