Few-Shot Adversarial Domain Adaptation

Saeid Motiian, Quinn Jones, Seyed Mehdi Iranmanesh, Gianfranco Doretto
Lane Department of Computer Science and Electrical Engineering
West Virginia University
{samotiian, qjones1, seiranmanesh, gidoretto}@mix.wvu.edu

Abstract
This work provides a framework for addressing the problem of supervised domain
adaptation with deep models. The main idea is to exploit adversarial learning to
learn an embedded subspace that simultaneously maximizes the confusion between
two domains while semantically aligning their embedding. The supervised setting
becomes attractive especially when there are only a few target data samples that
need to be labeled. In this few-shot learning scenario, alignment and separation of
semantic probability distributions is difficult because of the lack of data. We found
that by carefully designing a training scheme whereby the typical binary adversarial
discriminator is augmented to distinguish between four different classes, it is
possible to effectively address the supervised adaptation problem. In addition, the
approach has a high “speed” of adaptation, i.e. it requires an extremely low number
of labeled target training samples, even one per category can be effective. We then
extensively compare this approach to the state of the art in domain adaptation in
two experiments: one using datasets for handwritten digit recognition, and one
using datasets for visual object recognition.

1

Introduction

As deep learning approaches have gained prominence in computer vision we have seen tasks that
have large amounts of available labeled data flourish with improved results. There are still many
problems worth solving where labeled data on an equally large scale is too expensive to collect,
annotate, or both, and by extension a straightforward deep learning approach would not be feasible.
Typically, in such a scenario, practitioners will train or reuse a model from a closely related dataset
with a large amount of samples, here called the source domain, and then train with the much smaller
dataset of interest, referred to as the target domain. This process is well-known under the name
finetuning. Finetuning, while simple to implement, has been found to be sub-optimal when compared
to later techniques such as domain adaptation [5]. Domain Adaptation can be supervised [58, 27],
unsupervised [15, 34], or semi-supervised [16, 21, 63], depending on what data is available in a
labeled format and how much can be collected.
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) algorithms do not need any target data labels, but they
require large amounts of target training samples, which may not always be available. Conversely,
supervised domain adaptation (SDA) algorithms do require labeled target data, and because labeling
information is available, for the same quantity of target data, SDA outperforms UDA [38]. Therefore,
if the available target data is scarce, SDA becomes attractive, even if the labeling process is expensive,
because only few samples need to be processed.
Most domain adaptation approaches try to find a feature space such that the confusion between
source and target distributions in that space is maximum (domain confusion). Because of that, it
is hard to say whether a sample in the feature space has come from the source distribution or the
target distribution. Recently, generative adversarial networks [18] have been introduced for image
generation which can also be used for domain adaptation. In [18], the goal is to learn a discriminator
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

