Joint distribution optimal transportation for domain
adaptation

Nicolas Courty∗
Université de Bretagne Sud,
IRISA, UMR 6074, CNRS,
courty@univ-ubs.fr

Rémi Flamary∗
Université Côte d’Azur,
Lagrange, UMR 7293 , CNRS, OCA
remi.flamary@unice.fr

Amaury Habrard
Univ Lyon, UJM-Saint-Etienne, CNRS,
Lab. Hubert Curien UMR 5516, F-42023
amaury.habrard@univ-st-etienne.fr

Alain Rakotomamonjy
Normandie Universite
Université de Rouen, LITIS EA 4108
alain.rakoto@insa-rouen.fr

Abstract
This paper deals with the unsupervised domain adaptation problem, where one
wants to estimate a prediction function f in a given target domain without any
labeled sample by exploiting the knowledge available from a source domain where
labels are known. Our work makes the following assumption: there exists a nonlinear transformation between the joint feature/label space distributions of the two
domain Ps and Pt that can be estimated with optimal transport. We propose a
solution of this problem that allows to recover an estimated target Ptf = (X, f (X))
by optimizing simultaneously the optimal coupling and f . We show that our method
corresponds to the minimization of a bound on the target error, and provide an
efficient algorithmic solution, for which convergence is proved. The versatility of
our approach, both in terms of class of hypothesis or loss functions is demonstrated
with real world classification and regression problems, for which we reach or
surpass state-of-the-art results.

1

Introduction

In the context of supervised learning, one generally assumes that the test data is a realization of the
same process that generated the learning set. Yet, in many practical applications it is often not the
case, since several factors can slightly alter this process. The particular case of visual adaptation [1]
in computer vision is a good example: given a new dataset of images without any label, one may want
to exploit a different annotated dataset, provided that they share sufficient common information and
labels. However, the generating process can be different in several aspects, such as the conditions and
devices used for acquisition, different pre-processing, different compressions, etc. Domain adaptation
techniques aim at alleviating this issue by transferring knowledge between domains [2]. We propose
in this paper a principled and theoretically founded way of tackling this problem.
The domain adaptation (DA) problem is not new and has received a lot of attention during the past ten
years. State-of-the-art methods are mainly differing by the assumptions made over the change in data
distributions. In the covariate shift assumption, the differences between the domains are characterized
by a change in the feature distributions P(X), while the conditional distributions P(Y |X) remain
unchanged (X and Y being respectively the instance and label spaces). Importance re-weighting can
be used to learn a new classifier (e.g. [3]), provided that the overlapping of the distributions is large
∗

Both authors contributed equally.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

