Reliable Decision Support using
Counterfactual Models
Suchi Saria
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21211
ssaria@cs.jhu.edu

Peter Schulam
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21211
pschulam@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract
Decision-makers are faced with the challenge of estimating what is likely to happen
when they take an action. For instance, if I choose not to treat this patient, are they
likely to die? Practitioners commonly use supervised learning algorithms to fit
predictive models that help decision-makers reason about likely future outcomes,
but we show that this approach is unreliable, and sometimes even dangerous. The
key issue is that supervised learning algorithms are highly sensitive to the policy
used to choose actions in the training data, which causes the model to capture
relationships that do not generalize. We propose using a different learning objective
that predicts counterfactuals instead of predicting outcomes under an existing
action policy as in supervised learning. To support decision-making in temporal
settings, we introduce the Counterfactual Gaussian Process (CGP) to predict the
counterfactual future progression of continuous-time trajectories under sequences
of future actions. We demonstrate the benefits of the CGP on two important
decision-support tasks: risk prediction and “what if?” reasoning for individualized
treatment planning.

1

Introduction

Decision-makers are faced with the challenge of estimating what is likely to happen when they take
an action. One use of such an estimate is to evaluate risk; e.g. is this patient likely to die if I do not
intervene? Another use is to perform “what if?” reasoning by comparing outcomes under alternative
actions; e.g. would changing the color or text of an ad lead to more click-throughs? Practitioners
commonly use supervised learning algorithms to help decision-makers answer such questions, but
these decision-support tools are unreliable, and can even be dangerous.
Consider, for instance, the finding discussed by Caruana et al. [2015] regarding risk of death among
those who develop pneumonia. Their goal was to build a model that predicts risk of death for a
hospitalized individual with pneumonia so that those at high-risk could be treated and those at low-risk
could be safely sent home. Their model counterintuitively learned that asthmatics are less likely to
die from pneumonia. They traced the result back to an existing policy that asthmatics with pneumonia
should be directly admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU), therefore receiving more aggressive
treatment. Had this model been deployed to assess risk, then asthmatics might have received less
care, putting them at greater risk. Caruana et al. [2015] show how these counterintuitive relationships
can be problematic and ought to be addressed by “repairing” the model. We note, however, that these
issues stem from a deeper limitation: when training data is affected by actions, supervised learning
algorithms capture relationships caused by action policies, and these relationships do not generalize
when the policy changes.
To build reliable models for decision support, we propose using learning objectives that predict
counterfactuals, which are collections of random variables {Y [a] : a ∈ C} used in the potential
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

