Influence Maximization with ε-Almost
Submodular Threshold Functions
Qiang Li∗†, Wei Chen‡, Xiaoming Sun∗†, Jialin Zhang∗†
∗
CAS Key Lab of Network Data Science and Technology,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
†
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
‡
Microsoft Research
{liqiang01,sunxiaoming,zhangjialin}@ict.ac.cn
weic@microsoft.com

Abstract
Influence maximization is the problem of selecting k nodes in a social network to
maximize their influence spread. The problem has been extensively studied but
most works focus on the submodular influence diffusion models. In this paper,
motivated by empirical evidences, we explore influence maximization in the nonsubmodular regime. In particular, we study the general threshold model in which
a fraction of nodes have non-submodular threshold functions, but their threshold
functions are closely upper- and lower-bounded by some submodular functions
(we call them ε-almost submodular). We first show a strong hardness result: there
is no 1/nγ/c approximation for influence maximization (unless P = NP) for all
networks with up to nγ ε-almost submodular nodes, where γ is in (0,1) and c is a
parameter depending on ε. This indicates that influence maximization is still hard
to approximate even though threshold functions are close to submodular. We then
provide (1 − ε)` (1 − 1/e) approximation algorithms when the number of ε-almost
submodular nodes is `. Finally, we conduct experiments on a number of real-world
datasets, and the results demonstrate that our approximation algorithms outperform
other baseline algorithms.

1

Introduction

Influence maximization, proposed by Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos [1], considers the problem
of selecting k seed nodes in a social network that maximizes the spread of influence under predefined diffusion model. This problem has many applications including viral marketing [2, 3], media
advertising [4] and rumors spreading [5] etc., and many aspects of the problem has been extensively
studied.
Most existing algorithms for influence maximization, typically under the independent cascade (IC)
model and the linear threshold (LT) model [1], utilize the submodularity of the influence spread as a
set function on the set of seed nodes, because it permits a (1 − 1/e)-approximation solution by the
greedy scheme [1, 6, 7], following the foundational work on submodular function maximization [8].
One important result concerning submodularity in the influence model is by Mossel and Roch [9],
who prove that in the general threshold model, the global influence spread function is submodular
when all local threshold functions at all nodes are submodular. This result implies that “local"
submodularity ensures the submodularity of “global" influence spread.
Although influence maximization under submodular diffusion models is dominant in the research
literature, in real networks, non-submodularity of influence spread function has been observed.
Backstrom et al. [10] study the communities of two networks LiveJournal and DBLP and draw
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

