Diverse and Accurate Image Description Using a
Variational Auto-Encoder with an Additive Gaussian
Encoding Space

Liwei Wang
Alexander G. Schwing
Svetlana Lazebnik
{lwang97, aschwing, slazebni}@illinois.edu
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Abstract
This paper explores image caption generation using conditional variational autoencoders (CVAEs). Standard CVAEs with a fixed Gaussian prior yield descriptions
with too little variability. Instead, we propose two models that explicitly structure
the latent space around K components corresponding to different types of image
content, and combine components to create priors for images that contain multiple
types of content simultaneously (e.g., several kinds of objects). Our first model
uses a Gaussian Mixture model (GMM) prior, while the second one defines a novel
Additive Gaussian (AG) prior that linearly combines component means. We show
that both models produce captions that are more diverse and more accurate than
a strong LSTM baseline or a “vanilla” CVAE with a fixed Gaussian prior, with
AG-CVAE showing particular promise.

1

Introduction

Automatic image captioning [9, 11, 18–20, 24] is a challenging open-ended conditional generation
task. State-of-the-art captioning techniques [23, 32, 36, 1] are based on recurrent neural nets with
long-short term memory (LSTM) units [13], which take as input a feature representation of a provided
image, and are trained to maximize the likelihood of reference human descriptions. Such methods are
good at producing relatively short, generic captions that roughly fit the image content, but they are
unsuited for sampling multiple diverse candidate captions given the image. The ability to generate
such candidates is valuable because captioning is profoundly ambiguous: not only can the same image
be described in many different ways, but also, images can be hard to interpret even for humans, let
alone machines relying on imperfect visual features. In short, we would like the posterior distribution
of captions given the image, as estimated by our model, to accurately capture both the open-ended
nature of language and any uncertainty about what is depicted in the image.
Achieving more diverse image description is a major theme in several recent works [6, 14, 27, 31, 35].
Deep generative models are a natural fit for this goal, and to date, Generative Adversarial Models
(GANs) have attracted the most attention. Dai et al. [6] proposed jointly learning a generator to
produce descriptions and an evaluator to assess how well a description fits the image. Shetty et
al. [27] changed the training objective of the generator from reproducing ground-truth captions to
generating captions that are indistinguishable from those produced by humans.
In this paper, we also explore a generative model for image description, but unlike the GAN-style
training of [6, 27], we adopt the conditional variational auto-encoder (CVAE) formalism [17, 29].
Our starting point is the work of Jain et al. [14], who trained a “vanilla” CVAE to generate questions
given images. At training time, given an image and a sentence, the CVAE encoder samples a latent z
vector from a Gaussian distribution in the encoding space whose parameters (mean and variance)
come from a Gaussian prior with zero mean and unit variance. This z vector is then fed into a decoder
that uses it, together with the features of the input image, to generate a question. The encoder and the
decoder are jointly trained to maximize (an upper bound on) the likelihood of the reference questions
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

