Optimistic posterior sampling for reinforcement
learning: worst-case regret bounds

Shipra Agrawal
Columbia University
sa3305@columbia.edu

Randy Jia
Columbia University
rqj2000@columbia.edu

Abstract
We present an algorithm based on posterior sampling (aka Thompson sampling)
that achieves near-optimal worst-case regret bounds when the underlying Markov
Decision Process (MDP) is communicating with a finite, though unknown,
diameter.
√
Our main result is a high probability regret upper bound of Õ(D SAT ) for any
communicating MDP with S states, A actions and diameter D, when T ≥ S 5 A.
Here, regret compares the total reward achieved by the algorithm to the total
expected reward of an optimal infinite-horizon undiscounted average reward policy,
in time horizon √
T . This result improves over the best previously known upper
bound of Õ(DS AT ) achieved by any algorithm in this
√ setting, and matches the
dependence on S in the established lower bound of Ω( DSAT ) for this problem.
Our techniques involve proving some novel results about the anti-concentration of
Dirichlet distribution, which may be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) refers to the problem of learning and planning in sequential decision
making systems when the underlying system dynamics are unknown, and may need to be learned by
trying out different options and observing their outcomes. A typical model for the sequential decision
making problem is a Markov Decision Process (MDP), which proceeds in discrete time steps. At each
time step, the system is in some state s, and the decision maker may take any available action a to
obtain a (possibly stochastic) reward. The system then transitions to the next state according to a fixed
state transition distribution. The reward and the next state depend on the current state s and the action
a, but are independent of all the previous states and actions. In the reinforcement learning problem,
the underlying state transition distributions and/or reward distributions are unknown, and need to be
learned using the observed rewards and state transitions, while aiming to maximize the cumulative
reward. This requires the algorithm to manage the tradeoff between exploration vs. exploitation, i.e.,
exploring different actions in different states in order to learn the model more accurately vs. taking
actions that currently seem to be reward maximizing.
Exploration-exploitation tradeoff has been studied extensively in the context of stochastic multiarmed bandit (MAB) problems, which are essentially MDPs with a single state. The performance of
MAB algorithms is typically measured through regret, which compares the total reward obtained by
the algorithm to the total expected reward of an optimal action. Optimal regret bounds have been
established for many variations of MAB (see Bubeck et al. [2012] for a survey), with a large majority
of results obtained using the Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) algorithm, or more generally, the
optimism in the face of uncertainty principle. Under this principle, the learning algorithm maintains
tight over-estimates (or optimistic estimates) of the expected rewards for individual actions, and
at any given step, picks the action with the highest optimistic estimate. More recently, posterior
sampling, aka Thompson Sampling [Thompson, 1933], has emerged as another popular algorithm
design principle in MAB, owing its popularity to a simple and extendible algorithmic structure, an
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

