When Cyclic Coordinate Descent Outperforms
Randomized Coordinate Descent
Mert Gürbüzbalaban⇤, Asuman Ozdaglar†, Pablo A. Parrilo†, N. Denizcan Vanli†
⇤
Rutgers University, mg1366@rutgers.edu
†
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, {asuman,parrilo,denizcan}@mit.edu

Abstract
The coordinate descent (CD) method is a classical optimization algorithm that
has seen a revival of interest because of its competitive performance in machine
learning applications. A number of recent papers provided convergence rate
estimates for their deterministic (cyclic) and randomized variants that differ in the
selection of update coordinates. These estimates suggest randomized coordinate
descent (RCD) performs better than cyclic coordinate descent (CCD), although
numerical experiments do not provide clear justification for this comparison. In this
paper, we provide examples and more generally problem classes for which CCD
(or CD with any deterministic order) is faster than RCD in terms of asymptotic
worst-case convergence. Furthermore, we provide lower and upper bounds on
the amount of improvement on the rate of CCD relative to RCD, which depends
on the deterministic order used. We also provide a characterization of the best
deterministic order (that leads to the maximum improvement in convergence rate)
in terms of the combinatorial properties of the Hessian matrix of the objective
function.

1

Introduction

We consider solving smooth convex optimization problems using the coordinate descent (CD) method.
The CD method is an iterative algorithm that performs (approximate) global minimizations with
respect to a single coordinate (or several coordinates in the case of block CD) in a sequential manner.
More specifically, at each iteration k, an index ik 2 {1, 2, . . . , n} is selected and the decision vector
is updated to approximately minimize the objective function in the ik -th coordinate [3, 4]. The CD
method can be deterministic or randomized depending on the choice of the update coordinates. If
the coordinate indices ik are chosen in a cyclic manner from the set {1, 2, . . . , n}, then the method
is called the cyclic coordinate descent (CCD) method. When ik is sampled uniformly from the set
{1, 2, . . . , n}, the resulting method is called the randomized coordinate descent (RCD) method.1
The CD method has a long history in optimization and its convergence has been studied extensively
in 80s and 90s (cf. [5, 12, 13, 18]). It has seen a resurgence of recent interest because of its
applicability and superior empirical performance in machine learning and large-scale data analysis
[7, 8]. Several recent influential papers established non-asymptotic convergence rate estimates under
various assumptions. Among these are Nesterov [15], which provided the first global non-asymptotic
convergence rates of RCD for convex and smooth problems (see also [11, 21, 22] for problems with
non-smooth terms), and Beck and Tetruashvili [1], which provided rate estimates for block coordinate
gradient descent method that yields rate results for CCD with exact minimization for quadratic
problems. Tighter rate estimates (with respect to [1]) for CCD are then presented in [23]. These rate
estimates suggest that CCD can be slower than RCD (precisely O(n2 ) times slower for quadratic

1
Note that there are other coordinate selection rules as well (such as the Gauss-Southwell rule [17]). However,
in this paper, we focus on cyclic and randomized rules.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

