Doubly Accelerated
Stochastic Variance Reduced Dual Averaging Method
for Regularized Empirical Risk Minimization

Tomoya Murata
NTT DATA Mathematical Systems Inc. , Tokyo, Japan
murata@msi.co.jp
Taiji Suzuki
Department of Mathematical Informatics
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Japan
Center for Advanced Integrated Intelligence Research, RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan
taiji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
We develop a new accelerated stochastic gradient method for efficiently solving
the convex regularized empirical risk minimization problem in mini-batch settings.
The use of mini-batches has become a golden standard in the machine learning
community, because the mini-batch techniques stabilize the gradient estimate and
can easily make good use of parallel computing. The core of our proposed method
is the incorporation of our new “double acceleration” technique and variance reduction technique. We theoretically analyze our proposed method and show that
our method much improves the mini-batch efficiencies
of previous accelerated
√
stochastic methods, and essentially only needs size n mini-batches for achieving
the optimal iteration complexities for both non-strongly and strongly convex objectives, where n is the training set size. Further, we show that even in non-mini-batch
settings, our method achieves the best known convergence rate for non-strongly
convex and strongly convex objectives.

1

Introduction

We consider a composite convex optimization problem associated with regularized empirical risk
minimization, which often arises in machine learning. In particular, our goal is to minimize the
sum of finite smooth convex functions and a relatively simple (possibly) non-differentiable convex
function by using first order methods in mini-batch settings. The use of mini-batches is now a
golden standard in the machine learning community, because it is generally more efficient to execute
matrix-vector multiplications over a mini-batch than an equivalent amount of vector-vector ones each
over a single instance; and more importantly, mini-batch techniques can easily make good use of
parallel computing.
Traditional and effective methods for solving the abovementioned problem are the “proximal gradient”
(PG) method and “accelerated proximal gradient” (APG) method [10, 3, 20]. These methods are
well known to achieve linear convergence for strongly convex objectives. Particularly, APG achieves
optimal iteration complexities for both non-strongly and strongly convex objectives. However, these
methods need a per iteration cost of O(nd), where n denotes the number of components of the
finite sum, and d is the dimension of the solution space. In typical machine learning tasks, n and d
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

