Targeting EEG/LFP Synchrony with Neural Nets
Yitong Li1 , Michael Murias2 , Samantha Major2 , Geraldine Dawson2 , Kafui Dzirasa2 ,
Lawrence Carin1 and David E. Carlson3,4
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University
Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Duke University
3
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Duke University
4
Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Duke University
{yitong.li,michael.murias,samantha.major,geraldine.dawson,
kafui.dzirasa,lcarin,david.carlson}@duke.edu
2

Abstract
We consider the analysis of Electroencephalography (EEG) and Local Field Potential (LFP) datasets, which are “big” in terms of the size of recorded data but
rarely have sufficient labels required to train complex models (e.g., conventional
deep learning methods). Furthermore, in many scientific applications, the goal is
to be able to understand the underlying features related to the classification, which
prohibits the blind application of deep networks. This motivates the development
of a new model based on parameterized convolutional filters guided by previous
neuroscience research; the filters learn relevant frequency bands while targeting
synchrony, which are frequency-specific power and phase correlations between
electrodes. This results in a highly expressive convolutional neural network with
only a few hundred parameters, applicable to smaller datasets. The proposed
approach is demonstrated to yield competitive (often state-of-the-art) predictive
performance during our empirical tests while yielding interpretable features. Furthermore, a Gaussian process adapter is developed to combine analysis over distinct
electrode layouts, allowing the joint processing of multiple datasets to address
overfitting and improve generalizability. Finally, it is demonstrated that the proposed framework effectively tracks neural dynamics on children in a clinical trial
on Autism Spectrum Disorder.

1

Introduction

There is significant current research on methods for Electroencephalography (EEG) and Local Field
Potential (LFP) data in a variety of applications, such as Brain-Machine Interfaces (BCIs) [21], seizure
detection [24, 26], and fundamental research in fields such as psychiatry [11]. The wide variety of
applications has resulted in many analysis approaches and packages, such as Independent Component
Analysis in EEGLAB [8], and a variety of standard machine learning approaches in FieldTrip [22].
While in many applications prediction is key, such as for BCIs [18, 19], in applications such as
emotion processing and psychiatric disorders, clinicians are ultimately interested in the dynamics
of underlying neural signals to help elucidate understanding and design future experiments. This
goal necessitates development of interpretable models, such that a practitioner may understand the
features and their relationships to outcomes. Thus, the focus here is on developing an interpretable
and predictive approach to understanding spontaneous neural activity.
A popular feature in these analyses is based on spectral coherence, where a specific frequency band is
compared between pairwise channels, to analyze both amplitude and phase coherence. When two
regions have a high power (amplitude) coherence in a spectral band, it implies that these areas are
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

