Self-supervised Learning of Motion Capture

Hsiao-Yu Fish Tung 1 , Hsiao-Wei Tung 2 , Ersin Yumer 3 , Katerina Fragkiadaki 1
1
Carnegie Mellon University, Machine Learning Department
2
University of Pittsburgh, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
3
Adobe Research
{htung, katef}@cs.cmu.edu, hst11@pitt.edu,yumer@adobe.com

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art solutions for motion capture from a single camera are
optimization driven: they optimize the parameters of a 3D human model so that
its re-projection matches measurements in the video (e.g. person segmentation,
optical flow, keypoint detections etc.). Optimization models are susceptible to
local minima. This has been the bottleneck that forced using clean green-screen
like backgrounds at capture time, manual initialization, or switching to multiple
cameras as input resource. In this work, we propose a learning based motion capture
model for single camera input. Instead of optimizing mesh and skeleton parameters
directly, our model optimizes neural network weights that predict 3D shape and
skeleton configurations given a monocular RGB video. Our model is trained using
a combination of strong supervision from synthetic data, and self-supervision from
differentiable rendering of (a) skeletal keypoints, (b) dense 3D mesh motion, and
(c) human-background segmentation, in an end-to-end framework. Empirically
we show our model combines the best of both worlds of supervised learning
and test-time optimization: supervised learning initializes the model parameters
in the right regime, ensuring good pose and surface initialization at test time,
without manual effort. Self-supervision by back-propagating through differentiable
rendering allows (unsupervised) adaptation of the model to the test data, and offers
much tighter fit than a pretrained fixed model. We show that the proposed model
improves with experience and converges to low-error solutions where previous
optimization methods fail.

1

Introduction

Detailed understanding of the human body and its motion from “in the wild" monocular setups
would open the path to applications of automated gym and dancing teachers, rehabilitation guidance,
patient monitoring and safer human-robot interactions. It would also impact the movie industry
where character motion capture (MOCAP) and retargeting still requires tedious labor effort of artists
to achieve the desired accuracy, or the use of expensive multi-camera setups and green-screen
backgrounds.
Most current motion capture systems are optimization driven and cannot benefit from experience.
Monocular motion capture systems optimize the parameters of a 3D human model to match measurements in the video (e.g., person segmentation, optical flow). Background clutter and optimization
difficulties significantly impact tracking performance, leading prior work to use green screen-like
backdrops [5] and careful initializations. Additionally, these methods cannot leverage the data generated by laborious manual processes involved in motion capture, to improve over time. This means
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

