Cost efficient gradient boosting

Sven Peter

Ferran Diego

Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing
Interdisciplinary Center for Scientific Computing
University of Heidelberg
69115 Heidelberg, Germany

Robert Bosch GmbH
Robert-Bosch-Straße 200
31139 Hildesheim, Germany

ferran.diegoandilla@de.bosch.com

sven.peter@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de
Fred A. Hamprecht

Boaz Nadler

Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing
Interdisciplinary Center for Scientific Computing
University of Heidelberg
69115 Heidelberg, Germany

Department of Computer Science
Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot 76100, Israel

boaz.nadler@weizmann.ac.il

fred.hamprecht@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
Many applications require learning classifiers or regressors that are both accurate
and cheap to evaluate. Prediction cost can be drastically reduced if the learned
predictor is constructed such that on the majority of the inputs, it uses cheap features
and fast evaluations. The main challenge is to do so with little loss in accuracy. In
this work we propose a budget-aware strategy based on deep boosted regression
trees. In contrast to previous approaches to learning with cost penalties, our method
can grow very deep trees that on average are nonetheless cheap to compute. We
evaluate our method on a number of datasets and find that it outperforms the
current state of the art by a large margin. Our algorithm is easy to implement and
its learning time is comparable to that of the original gradient boosting. Source
code is made available at http://github.com/svenpeter42/LightGBM-CEGB.

1

Introduction

Many applications need classifiers or regressors that are not only accurate, but also cheap to evaluate
[33, 30]. Prediction cost usually consists of two different components: The acquisition or computation
of the features used to predict the output, and the evaluation of the predictor itself. A common
approach to construct an accurate predictor with low evaluation cost is to modify the classical
empirical risk minimization objective, such that it includes a prediction cost penalty, and optimize
this modified functional [33, 30, 23, 24].
In this work we also follow this general approach, and develop a budget-aware strategy based on
deep boosted regression trees. Despite the recent re-emergence and popularity of neural networks,
our choice of boosted regression trees is motivated by three observations:
(i) Given ample training data and computational resources, deep neural networks often give the most
accurate results. However, standard feed-forward architectures route a single input component (for
example, a single coefficient in the case of vectorial input) through most network units. While the
computational cost can be mitigated by network compression or quantization [14], in the extreme
case to binary activations only [16], the computational graph is fundamentally dense. In a standard
decision tree, on the other hand, each sample is routed along a single path from the root to a leaf, thus
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

