Interactive Submodular Bandit

1

Lin Chen1,2 , Andreas Krause3 , Amin Karbasi1,2
Department of Electrical Engineering, 2 Yale Institute for Network Science, Yale University
3
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
{lin.chen, amin.karbasi}@yale.edu, krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract
In many machine learning applications, submodular functions have been used
as a model for evaluating the utility or payoff of a set such as news items to
recommend, sensors to deploy in a terrain, nodes to influence in a social network,
to name a few. At the heart of all these applications is the assumption that the
underlying utility/payoff function is known a priori, hence maximizing it is in
principle possible. In many real life situations, however, the utility function is not
fully known in advance and can only be estimated via interactions. For instance,
whether a user likes a movie or not can be reliably evaluated only after it was
shown to her. Or, the range of influence of a user in a social network can be
estimated only after she is selected to advertise the product. We model such
problems as an interactive submodular bandit optimization, where in each round
we receive a context (e.g., previously selected movies) and have to choose an action
(e.g., propose a new movie). We then receive a noisy feedback about the utility
of the action (e.g., ratings) which we model as a submodular function over the
context-action space. We develop SM-UCB that efficiently trades off exploration
(collecting more data) and
√ exploration (proposing a good action given gathered
data) and achieves a O( T ) regret bound after T rounds of interaction. More
specifically, given a bounded-RKHS norm kernel over the context-action-payoff
space that governs the smoothness of the utility function, SM-UCB keeps an upperconfidence bound on the payoff function that allows it to asymptotically achieve
no-regret. Finally, we evaluate our results on four concrete applications, including
movie recommendation (on the MovieLense data set), news recommendation (on
Yahoo! Webscope dataset), interactive influence maximization (on a subset of the
Facebook network), and personalized data summarization (on Reuters Corpus). In
all these applications, we observe that SM-UCB consistently outperforms the prior
art.

1

Introduction

Interactive learning is a modern machine learning paradigm that has recently received significant
interest in both theory and practice [15, 14, 7, 6]. In this setting, the learning algorithm engages in a
two-way dialog with the environment (e.g., users) by performing actions and receiving a response (e.g.,
like or dislike) for each action. Interactive learning has led to substantial performance improvement
in a variety of machine learning applications [43, 13], including clustering [4, 25, 1], classification
[46, 10], language learning [48], decision making [26], and recommender systems [28], to name a
few.
At a high level, interactive learning can be cast as a dynamic optimization problem with a known
utility/payoff function where the goal is to achieve an objective whose value depends on the selected
actions, their responses, and the state of the environment. In many practical settings, the utility
functions are submodular, stating (informally) that the payoff of performing an action earlier is more
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

