Sparse convolutional coding for neuronal assembly
detection
Sven Peter1,∗
Elke Kirschbaum1,∗
{sven.peter,elke.kirschbaum}@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de
Martin Both2
mboth@physiologie.uni-heidelberg.de
Brandon K. Harvey3
bharvey@mail.nih.gov

Lee A. Campbell3
lee.campbell@nih.gov
Conor Heins3,4,†
conor.heins@ds.mpg.de

Daniel Durstewitz5
daniel.durstewitz@zi-mannheim.de

Ferran Diego Andilla6,‡
ferran.diegoandilla@de.bosch.com

Fred A. Hamprecht1
fred.hamprecht@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

1

Interdisciplinary Center for Scientific Computing (IWR), Heidelberg, Germany
2
Institute of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Heidelberg, Germany
3
National Institute on Drug Abuse, Baltimore, USA
4
Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self-Organization, Göttingen, Germany
5
Dept. Theoretical Neuroscience, Central Institute of Mental Health, Mannheim, Germany
6
Robert Bosch GmbH, Hildesheim, Germany

Abstract
Cell assemblies, originally proposed by Donald Hebb (1949), are subsets of neurons
firing in a temporally coordinated way that gives rise to repeated motifs supposed
to underly neural representations and information processing. Although Hebb’s
original proposal dates back many decades, the detection of assemblies and their
role in coding is still an open and current research topic, partly because simultaneous recordings from large populations of neurons became feasible only relatively
recently. Most current and easy-to-apply computational techniques focus on the
identification of strictly synchronously spiking neurons. In this paper we propose
a new algorithm, based on sparse convolutional coding, for detecting recurrent
motifs of arbitrary structure up to a given length. Testing of our algorithm on
synthetically generated datasets shows that it outperforms established methods and
accurately identifies the temporal structure of embedded assemblies, even when
these contain overlapping neurons or when strong background noise is present.
Moreover, exploratory analysis of experimental datasets from hippocampal slices
and cortical neuron cultures have provided promising results.
∗

Both authors contributed equally.
Majority of this work was done while co-author was at 3 .
‡
Majority of this work was done while co-author was at 1 .

†

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

