Learning Unknown Markov Decision Processes:
A Thompson Sampling Approach

Yi Ouyang
University of California, Berkeley
ouyangyi@berkeley.edu

Mukul Gagrani
University of Southern California
mgagrani@usc.edu

Ashutosh Nayyar
University of Southern California
ashutosn@usc.edu

Rahul Jain
University of Southern California
rahul.jain@usc.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning an unknown Markov Decision Process (MDP)
that is weakly communicating in the infinite horizon setting. We propose a Thompson Sampling-based reinforcement learning algorithm with dynamic episodes
(TSDE). At the beginning of each episode, the algorithm generates a sample from
the posterior distribution over the unknown model parameters. It then follows the
optimal stationary policy for the sampled model for the rest of the episode. The
duration of each episode is dynamically determined by two stopping criteria. The
first stopping criterion controls the growth rate of episode length. The second
stopping criterion happens when
√ the number of visits to any state-action pair is
doubled. We establish Õ(HS AT ) bounds on expected regret under a Bayesian
setting, where S and A are the sizes of the state and action spaces, T is time, and
H is the bound of the span. This regret bound matches the best available bound for
weakly communicating MDPs. Numerical results show it to perform better than
existing algorithms for infinite horizon MDPs.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of reinforcement learning by an agent interacting with an environment while
trying to minimize the total cost accumulated over time. The environment is modeled by an infinite
horizon Markov Decision Process (MDP) with finite state and action spaces. When the environment
is perfectly known, the agent can determine optimal actions by solving a dynamic program for the
MDP [1]. In reinforcement learning, however, the agent is uncertain about the true dynamics of the
MDP. A naive approach to an unknown model is the certainty equivalence principle. The idea is to
estimate the unknown MDP parameters from available information and then choose actions as if the
estimates are the true parameters. But it is well-known in adaptive control theory that the certainty
equivalence principle may lead to suboptimal performance due to the lack of exploration [2]. This
issue actually comes from the fundamental exploitation-exploration trade-off: the agent wants to
exploit available information to minimize cost, but it also needs to explore the environment to learn
system dynamics.
One common way to handle the exploitation-exploration trade-off is to use the optimism in the
face of uncertainty (OFU) principle [3]. Under this principle, the agent constructs confidence sets
for the system parameters at each time, find the optimistic parameters that are associated with the
minimum cost, and then selects an action based on the optimistic parameters. The optimism procedure
encourages exploration for rarely visited states and actions. Several optimistic algorithms are proved
to possess strong theoretical performance guarantees [4–10].
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

