EEG-GRAPH: A Factor-Graph-Based Model for
Capturing Spatial, Temporal, and Observational
Relationships in Electroencephalograms

Yogatheesan Varatharajah ∗
Benjamin Brinkmann†

Min Jin Chong∗

Krishnakant Saboo∗

Gregory Worrell†

Brent Berry†

Ravishankar Iyer∗

Abstract
This paper presents a probabilistic-graphical model that can be used to infer characteristics of instantaneous brain activity by jointly analyzing spatial and temporal dependencies observed in electroencephalograms (EEG). Specifically, we describe a factor-graph-based model with customized factor-functions defined based
on domain knowledge, to infer pathologic brain activity with the goal of identifying seizure-generating brain regions in epilepsy patients. We utilize an inference
technique based on the graph-cut algorithm to exactly solve graph inference in
polynomial time. We validate the model by using clinically collected intracranial EEG data from 29 epilepsy patients to show that the model correctly identifies seizure-generating brain regions. Our results indicate that our model outperforms two conventional approaches used for seizure-onset localization (5–7%
better AUC: 0.72, 0.67, 0.65) and that the proposed inference technique provides
3–10% gain in AUC (0.72, 0.62, 0.69) compared to sampling-based alternatives.

1

Introduction

Studying the neurophysiological processes within the brain is an important step toward understanding the human brain. Techniques such as electroencephalography are exceptional tools for studying
the neurophysiological processes, because of their high temporal and spatial resolution. An electroencephalogram (EEG) typically contains several types of rhythms and discrete neurophysiological events that describe instantaneous brain activity. On the other hand, the neural activity taking
place in a brain region is very likely dependent on activities that took place in the same region at previous time instances. Furthermore, some EEG channels show inter-channel correlation due to their
spatial arrangement [1]. Those three characteristics are related, respectively, to the observational,
temporal, and spatial dependencies observed in time-series EEG signals.
The majority of the literature focuses on identifying and developing detectors for features relating to
the different rhythms and discrete neurophysiological events in the EEG signal [2]. Some effort has
been made to understand the inter-channel correlations [3] and temporal dependencies [4] observed
in EEG. Despite these separate efforts, very little effort has been made to combine those dependencies into a single model. Since those dependencies possess complementary information, using
only one of them generally results in poor understanding of the underlying neurophysiological phenomena. Hence, a unified framework that jointly captures all three dependencies in EEG, addresses
an important research problem in electrophysiology. In this paper, we describe a graphical-modelbased approach to capture all three dependencies, and we analyze its efficacy by applying it to a
critical problem in clinical neurology.
∗
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana,
Illinois 61801. Email: {varatha2, mchong6, ksaboo2, rkiyer}@illinois.edu
†
Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55904. Email: {Berry.Brent,
Brinkmann.Benjamin, Worrell.Gregory}@mayo.edu
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

