Learning multiple visual domains with residual
adapters

Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi1

Hakan Bilen1,2

1

Visual Geometry Group
University of Oxford
{srebuffi,hbilen,vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Andrea Vedaldi1

2

School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh

Abstract
There is a growing interest in learning data representations that work well for many
different types of problems and data. In this paper, we look in particular at the
task of learning a single visual representation that can be successfully utilized in
the analysis of very different types of images, from dog breeds to stop signs and
digits. Inspired by recent work on learning networks that predict the parameters of
another, we develop a tunable deep network architecture that, by means of adapter
residual modules, can be steered on the fly to diverse visual domains. Our method
achieves a high degree of parameter sharing while maintaining or even improving
the accuracy of domain-specific representations. We also introduce the Visual
Decathlon Challenge, a benchmark that evaluates the ability of representations to
capture simultaneously ten very different visual domains and measures their ability
to perform well uniformly.

1

Introduction

While research in machine learning is often directed at improving the performance of algorithms on
specific tasks, there is a growing interest in developing methods that can tackle a large variety of
different problems within a single model. In the case of perception, there are two distinct aspects of
this challenge. The first one is to extract from a given image diverse information, such as image-level
labels, semantic segments, object bounding boxes, object contours, occluding boundaries, vanishing
points, etc. The second aspect is to model simultaneously many different visual domains, such as
Internet images, characters, glyph, animal breeds, sketches, galaxies, planktons, etc (fig. 1).
In this work we explore the second challenge and look at how deep learning techniques can be used
to learn universal representations [5], i.e. feature extractors that can work well in several different
image domains. We refer to this problem as multiple-domain learning to distinguish it from the more
generic multiple-task learning.
Multiple-domain learning contains in turn two sub-challenges. The first one is to develop algorithms
that can learn well from many domains. If domains are learned sequentially, but this is not a
requirement, this is reminiscent of domain adaptation. However, there are two important differences.
First, in standard domain adaptation (e.g. [9]) the content of the images (e.g. “telephone”) remains
the same, and it is only the style of the images that changes (e.g. real life vs gallery image). Instead
in our case a domain shift changes both style and content. Secondly, the difficulty is not just to adapt
the model from one domain to another, but to do so while making sure that it still performs well on
the original domain, i.e. to learn without forgetting [21].
The second challenge of multiple-domain learning, and our main concern in this paper, is to construct
models that can represent compactly all the domains. Intuitively, even though images in different
domains may look quite different (e.g. glyph vs. cats), low and mid-level visual primitives may still
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

