Analyzing Hidden Representations in End-to-End
Automatic Speech Recognition Systems
Yonatan Belinkov and James Glass
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
{belinkov, glass}@mit.edu

Abstract
Neural networks have become ubiquitous in automatic speech recognition systems.
While neural networks are typically used as acoustic models in more complex
systems, recent studies have explored end-to-end speech recognition systems
based on neural networks, which can be trained to directly predict text from input
acoustic features. Although such systems are conceptually elegant and simpler
than traditional systems, it is less obvious how to interpret the trained models.
In this work, we analyze the speech representations learned by a deep end-to-end
model that is based on convolutional and recurrent layers, and trained with a
connectionist temporal classification (CTC) loss. We use a pre-trained model to
generate frame-level features which are given to a classifier that is trained on frame
classification into phones. We evaluate representations from different layers of the
deep model and compare their quality for predicting phone labels. Our experiments
shed light on important aspects of the end-to-end model such as layer depth, model
complexity, and other design choices.

1

Introduction

Traditional automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems are composed of multiple components,
including an acoustic model, a language model, a lexicon, and possibly other components. Each of
these is trained independently and combined during decoding. As such, the system is not directly
trained on the speech recognition task from start to end. In contrast, end-to-end ASR systems aim
to map acoustic features directly to text (words or characters). Such models have recently become
popular in the ASR community thanks to their simple and elegant architecture [1, 2, 3, 4]. Given
sufficient training data, they also perform fairly well. Importantly, such models do not receive explicit
phonetic supervision, in contrast to traditional systems that typically rely on an acoustic model trained
to predict phonetic units (e.g. HMM phone states). Intuitively, though, end-to-end models have
to generate some internal representation that allows them to abstract over phonological units. For
instance, a model that needs to generate the word “bought” should learn that in this case “g” is not
pronounced as the phoneme /g/.
In this work, we investigate if and to what extent end-to-end models implicitly learn phonetic
representations. The hypothesis is that such models need to create and exploit internal representations
that correspond to phonetic units in order to perform well on the speech recognition task. Given a
pre-trained end-to-end ASR system, we use it to extract frame-level features from an acoustic signal.
For example, these may be the hidden representations of a recurrent neural network (RNN) in the
end-to-end system. We then feed these features to a classifier that is trained to predict a phonetic
property of interest such as phone recognition. Finally, we evaluate the performance of the classifier
as a measure of the quality of the input features, and by proxy the quality of the original ASR system.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

