Unbounded cache model for online language
modeling with open vocabulary

Edouard Grave
Facebook AI Research
egrave@fb.com

Moustapha Cisse
Facebook AI Research
moustaphacisse@fb.com

Armand Joulin
Facebook AI Research
ajoulin@fb.com

Abstract
Recently, continuous cache models were proposed as extensions to recurrent neural
network language models, to adapt their predictions to local changes in the data
distribution. These models only capture the local context, of up to a few thousands
tokens. In this paper, we propose an extension of continuous cache models, which
can scale to larger contexts. In particular, we use a large scale non-parametric
memory component that stores all the hidden activations seen in the past. We
leverage recent advances in approximate nearest neighbor search and quantization
algorithms to store millions of representations while searching them efficiently. We
conduct extensive experiments showing that our approach significantly improves
the perplexity of pre-trained language models on new distributions, and can scale
efficiently to much larger contexts than previously proposed local cache models.

1

Introduction

Language models are a core component of many natural language processing applications such
as machine translation [3], speech recognition [2] or dialogue agents [50]. In recent years, deep
learning has led to remarkable progress in this domain, reaching state of the art performance on many
challenging benchmarks [31]. These models are known to be over-parametrized, and large quantities
of data are needed for them to reach their full potential [12]. Consequently, the training time can be
very long (up to weeks) even when vast computational resources are available [31]. Unfortunately, in
many real-world scenarios, either such quantity of data is not available, or the distribution of the data
changes too rapidly to permit very long training. A common strategy to circumvent these problems is
to use a pre-trained model and slowly finetune it on the new source of data. Such adaptive strategy is
also time-consuming for parametric models since the specificities of the new dataset must be slowly
encoded in the parameters of the model. Additionally, such strategy is also prone to overfitting and
dramatic forgetting of crucial information from the original dataset. These difficulties directly result
from the nature of parametric models.
In contrast, non-parametric approaches do not require retraining and can efficiently incorporate
new information without damaging the original model. This makes them particularly suitable for
settings requiring rapid adaptation to a changing distribution or to novel examples. However, nonparametric models perform significantly worse than fully trained deep models [12]. In this work,
we are interested in building a language model that combines the best of both non-parametric and
parametric approaches: a deep language model to model most of the distribution and a non-parametric
one to adapt it to the change of distribution.
This solution has been used in speech recognition under the name of cache models [36, 37]. Cache
models exploit the unigram distribution of a recent context to improve the predictive ability of the
model. Recently, Grave et al. [22] and Merity et al. [43] showed that this solution could be applied to
neural networks. However, cache models depend on the local context. Hence, they can only adapt a
parametric model to a local change in the distribution. These specificities limit their usefulness when
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

