Deep Supervised Discrete Hashing

Qi Li
Zhenan Sun
Ran He
Tieniu Tan
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{qli,znsun,rhe,tnt}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
With the rapid growth of image and video data on the web, hashing has been
extensively studied for image or video search in recent years. Benefiting from
recent advances in deep learning, deep hashing methods have achieved promising
results for image retrieval. However, there are some limitations of previous deep
hashing methods (e.g., the semantic information is not fully exploited). In this
paper, we develop a deep supervised discrete hashing algorithm based on the
assumption that the learned binary codes should be ideal for classification. Both the
pairwise label information and the classification information are used to learn the
hash codes within one stream framework. We constrain the outputs of the last layer
to be binary codes directly, which is rarely investigated in deep hashing algorithm.
Because of the discrete nature of hash codes, an alternating minimization method
is used to optimize the objective function. Experimental results have shown that
our method outperforms current state-of-the-art methods on benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Hashing has attracted much attention in recent years because of the rapid growth of image and
video data on the web. It is one of the most popular techniques for image or video search due to
its low computational cost and storage efficiency. Generally speaking, hashing is used to encode
high dimensional data into a set of binary codes while preserving the similarity of images or videos.
Existing hashing methods can be roughly grouped into two categories: data independent methods and
data dependent methods.
Data independent methods rely on random projections to construct hash functions. Locality Sensitive
Hashing (LSH) [3] is one of the representative methods, which uses random linear projections to
map nearby data into similar binary codes. LSH is widely used for large scale image retrieval. In
order to generalize LSH to accommodate arbitrary kernel functions, the Kenelized Locality Sensitive
Hashing (KLSH) [7] is proposed to deal with high-dimensional kernelized data. Other variants of
LSH are also proposed in recent years, such as super-bit LSH [5], non-metric LSH [14]. However,
there are some limitations of data independent hashing methods, e.g., it makes no use of training data.
The learning efficiency is low, and it requires longer hash codes to attain high accuracy. Due to the
limitations of the data independent hashing methods, recent hashing methods try to exploit various
machine learning techniques to learn more effective hash function based on a given dataset.
Data dependent methods refer to using training data to learn the hash functions. They can be further
categorized into supervised and unsupervised methods. Unsupervised methods retrieve the neighbors
under some kinds of distance metrics. Iterative Quantization (ITQ) [4] is one of the representative
unsupervised hashing methods, in which the projection matrix is optimized by iterative projection and
thresholding according to the given training samples. In order to utilize the semantic labels of data
samples, supervised hashing methods are proposed. Supervised Hashing with Kernels (KSH) [13]
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

