Style Transfer from Non-Parallel Text by
Cross-Alignment

Tianxiao Shen1

Tao Lei2 Regina Barzilay1 Tommi Jaakkola1
2
MIT CSAIL
ASAPP Inc.
1
{tianxiao, regina, tommi}@csail.mit.edu 2 tao@asapp.com
1

Abstract
This paper focuses on style transfer on the basis of non-parallel text. This is an
instance of a broad family of problems including machine translation, decipherment,
and sentiment modification. The key challenge is to separate the content from
other aspects such as style. We assume a shared latent content distribution across
different text corpora, and propose a method that leverages refined alignment of
latent representations to perform style transfer. The transferred sentences from
one style should match example sentences from the other style as a population.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of this cross-alignment method on three tasks:
sentiment modification, decipherment of word substitution ciphers, and recovery
of word order.1

1

Introduction

Using massive amounts of parallel data has been essential for recent advances in text generation tasks,
such as machine translation and summarization. However, in many text generation problems, we can
only assume access to non-parallel or mono-lingual data. Problems such as decipherment or style
transfer are all instances of this family of tasks. In all of these problems, we must preserve the content
of the source sentence but render the sentence consistent with desired presentation constraints (e.g.,
style, plaintext/ciphertext).
The goal of controlling one aspect of a sentence such as style independently of its content requires
that we can disentangle the two. However, these aspects interact in subtle ways in natural language
sentences, and we can succeed in this task only approximately even in the case of parallel data.
Our task is more challenging here. We merely assume access to two corpora of sentences with the
same distribution of content albeit rendered in different styles. Our goal is to demonstrate that this
distributional equivalence of content, if exploited carefully, suffices for us to learn to map a sentence
in one style to a style-independent content vector and then decode it to a sentence with the same
content but a different style.
In this paper, we introduce a refined alignment of sentence representations across text corpora.
We learn an encoder that takes a sentence and its original style indicator as input, and maps it to
a style-independent content representation. This is then passed to a style-dependent decoder for
rendering. We do not use typical VAEs for this mapping since it is imperative to keep the latent content
representation rich and unperturbed. Indeed, richer latent content representations are much harder to
align across the corpora and therefore they offer more informative content constraints. Moreover, we
reap additional information from cross-generated (style-transferred) sentences, thereby getting two
distributional alignment constraints. For example, positive sentences that are style-transferred into
negative sentences should match, as a population, the given set of negative sentences. We illustrate
this cross-alignment in Figure 1.
1

Our code and data are available at https://github.com/shentianxiao/language-style-transfer.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

