Matching on Balanced Nonlinear Representations for
Treatment Effects Estimation
Yun Fu
Northeastern University
Boston, MA
yunfu@ece.neu.edu

Sheng Li
Adobe Research
San Jose, CA
sheli@adobe.com

Abstract
Estimating treatment effects from observational data is challenging due to the
missing counterfactuals. Matching is an effective strategy to tackle this problem.
The widely used matching estimators such as nearest neighbor matching (NNM)
pair the treated units with the most similar control units in terms of covariates,
and then estimate treatment effects accordingly. However, the existing matching
estimators have poor performance when the distributions of control and treatment
groups are unbalanced. Moreover, theoretical analysis suggests that the bias of
causal effect estimation would increase with the dimension of covariates. In this
paper, we aim to address these problems by learning low-dimensional balanced and
nonlinear representations (BNR) for observational data. In particular, we convert
counterfactual prediction as a classification problem, develop a kernel learning
model with domain adaptation constraint, and design a novel matching estimator.
The dimension of covariates will be significantly reduced after projecting data
to a low-dimensional subspace. Experiments on several synthetic and real-world
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

1

Introduction

Causal questions exist in many areas, such as health care [24, 12], economics [14], political science [17], education [36], digital marketing [6, 43, 5, 15, 44], etc. In the field of health care, it is
critical to understand if a new medicine could cure a certain illness and perform better than the old
ones. In political science, it is of great importance to evaluate whether the government should fund a
job training program, by assessing if the program is the true factor that leads to the success of job
hunting. All of these causal questions can be addressed by the causal inference technique. Formally,
causal inference estimates the treatment effect on some units after interventions [33, 20]. In the
above example of heath care, the units could be patients, and the intervention would be taking new
medicines. Due to the wide applications of causal questions, effective causal inference techniques are
highly desired to address these problems.
Generally, the causal inference problems can be tackled by either experimental study or observational
study. Experimental study is popular in traditional causal inference problems, but it is time-consuming
and sometimes impractical. As an alternative strategy, observational study has attracted increasing
attention in the past decades, which extracts causal knowledge only from the observed data. Two
major paradigms for observational study have been developed in computer science and statistics,
including the causal graphical model [29] and the potential outcome framework [27, 33]. The former
builds directed acyclic graphs (DAG) from covariates, treatment and outcome, and uses probabilistic
inference to determine causal relationships; while the latter estimates counterfactuals for each treated
unit, and gives a precise definition of causal effect. The equivalence of two paradigms has been
discussed in [11]. In this paper, we mainly focus on the potential outcome framework.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

