A framework for Multi-A(rmed)/B(andit) Testing
with Online FDR Control
Fanny Yang
Dept. of EECS, U.C. Berkeley
fanny-yang@berkeley.edu

Aaditya Ramdas
Dept. of EECS and Statistics, U.C. Berkeley
ramdas@berkeley.edu

Kevin Jamieson
Allen School of CSE, U. of Washington
jamieson@cs.washington.edu

Martin Wainwright
Dept. of EECS and Statistics, U.C. Berkeley
wainwrig@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We propose an alternative framework to existing setups for controlling false alarms
when multiple A/B tests are run over time. This setup arises in many practical
applications, e.g. when pharmaceutical companies test new treatment options
against control pills for different diseases, or when internet companies test their
default webpages versus various alternatives over time. Our framework proposes to
replace a sequence of A/B tests by a sequence of best-arm MAB instances, which
can be continuously monitored by the data scientist. When interleaving the MAB
tests with an online false discovery rate (FDR) algorithm, we can obtain the best of
both worlds: low sample complexity and any time online FDR control. Our main
contributions are: (i) to propose reasonable definitions of a null hypothesis for
MAB instances; (ii) to demonstrate how one can derive an always-valid sequential
p-value that allows continuous monitoring of each MAB test; and (iii) to show that
using rejection thresholds of online-FDR algorithms as the confidence levels for
the MAB algorithms results in both sample-optimality, high power and low FDR
at any point in time. We run extensive simulations to verify our claims, and also
report results on real data collected from the New Yorker Cartoon Caption contest.

1

Introduction

Randomized trials are the default option to determine whether potential improvements of an alternative
method (e.g. website design for a tech company, or medication in clinical trials for pharmaceutical
companies) are significant compared to a well-established default. In the applied domain, this is often
colloquially referred to as A/B testing or A/B/n testing for several alternatives. The standard practice
is to divert a small amount of the traffic or patients to the alternative and control. If an alternative
appears to be significantly better, it is implemented; otherwise, the default setting is maintained.
At first glance, this procedure seems intuitive and simple. However, in cases where the aim is to
optimize over one particular metric, one can do better. In particular, this common tool suffers from
several downsides. (1) First, one may wish to allocate more traffic to a better treatment if it is clearly
better. Yet typical A/B/n testing frameworks split the traffic uniformly over alternatives. Adaptive
techniques should help to detect better alternatives faster. (2) Second, companies often desire to
continuously monitor an ongoing A/B test as they may adjust their termination criteria as time goes
by and possibly stop earlier or later than originally intended. However, this practice may result in
many more false alarms if not properly accounted for. This is one of the reasons for the lack of
reproducibility of scientific results, an issue recently receiving increased attention from the public
media. (3) Third, the lack of sufficient evidence or an insignificant improvement of the metric may
make it undesirable from a practical or financial perspective to replace the default. Therefore, when a
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

