Multitask Spectral Learning of Weighted Automata

Guillaume Rabusseau ∗
McGill University

Borja Balle †
Amazon Research Cambridge

Joelle Pineau‡
McGill University

Abstract
We consider the problem of estimating multiple related functions computed by
weighted automata (WFA). We first present a natural notion of relatedness between
WFAs by considering to which extent several WFAs can share a common underlying representation. We then introduce the novel model of vector-valued WFA which
conveniently helps us formalize this notion of relatedness. Finally, we propose a
spectral learning algorithm for vector-valued WFAs to tackle the multitask learning
problem. By jointly learning multiple tasks in the form of a vector-valued WFA,
our algorithm enforces the discovery of a representation space shared between
tasks. The benefits of the proposed multitask approach are theoretically motivated
and showcased through experiments on both synthetic and real world datasets.

1

Introduction

One common task in machine learning consists in estimating an unknown function f : X → Y from
a training sample of input-output data {(xi , yi )}N
i=1 where each yi ≃ f (xi ) is a (possibly noisy)
estimate of f (xi ). In multitask learning, the learner is given several such learning tasks f1 , · · · , fm .
It has been shown, both experimentally and theoretically, that learning related tasks simultaneously
can lead to better performances relative to learning each task independently (see e.g. [1, 7], and
references therein). Multitask learning has proven particularly useful when few data points are
available for each task, or when it is difficult or costly to collect data for a target task while much data
is available for related tasks (see e.g. [28] for an example in healthcare). In this paper, we propose a
multitask learning algorithm for the case where the input space X consists of sequence data.
Many tasks in natural language processing, computational biology, or reinforcement learning, rely on
estimating functions mapping sequences of observations to real numbers: e.g. inferring probability
distributions over sentences in language modeling or learning the dynamics of a model of the
environment in reinforcement learning. In this case, the function f to infer from training data is
defined over the set Σ∗ of strings built on a finite alphabet Σ. Weighted finite automata (WFA) are
finite state machines that allow one to succinctly represent such functions. In particular, WFAs
can compute any probability distribution defined by a hidden Markov model (HMM) [13] and can
model the transition and observation behavior of partially observable Markov decision processes [26].
A recent line of work has led to the development of spectral methods for learning HMMs [17],
WFAs [2, 4] and related models, offering an alternative to EM based algorithms with the benefits of
being computationally efficient and providing consistent estimators. Spectral learning algorithms
have led to competitive results in the fields of natural language processing [12, 3] and robotics [8].
We consider the problem of multitask learning for WFAs. As a motivational example, consider
a natural language modeling task where one needs to make predictions in different contexts (e.g.
online chat vs. newspaper articles) and has access to datasets in each of them; it is natural to expect
that basic grammar is shared across the datasets and that one could benefit from simultaneously
∗

guillaume.rabusseau@mail.mcgill.ca
pigem@amazon.co.uk
‡
jpineau@cs.mcgill.ca
†

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

