Safe Model-based Reinforcement Learning with
Stability Guarantees
Felix Berkenkamp
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
befelix@inf.ethz.ch

Matteo Turchetta
Department of Computer Science,
ETH Zurich
matteotu@inf.ethz.ch

Angela P. Schoellig
Institute for Aerospace Studies
University of Toronto
schoellig@utias.utoronto.ca

Andreas Krause
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract
Reinforcement learning is a powerful paradigm for learning optimal policies from
experimental data. However, to find optimal policies, most reinforcement learning
algorithms explore all possible actions, which may be harmful for real-world systems. As a consequence, learning algorithms are rarely applied on safety-critical
systems in the real world. In this paper, we present a learning algorithm that
explicitly considers safety, defined in terms of stability guarantees. Specifically,
we extend control-theoretic results on Lyapunov stability verification and show
how to use statistical models of the dynamics to obtain high-performance control
policies with provable stability certificates. Moreover, under additional regularity
assumptions in terms of a Gaussian process prior, we prove that one can effectively
and safely collect data in order to learn about the dynamics and thus both improve
control performance and expand the safe region of the state space. In our experiments, we show how the resulting algorithm can safely optimize a neural network
policy on a simulated inverted pendulum, without the pendulum ever falling down.

1

Introduction

While reinforcement learning (RL, [1]) algorithms have achieved impressive results in games, for
example on the Atari platform [2], they are rarely applied to real-world physical systems (e.g., robots)
outside of academia. The main reason is that RL algorithms provide optimal policies only in the
long-term, so that intermediate policies may be unsafe, break the system, or harm their environment.
This is especially true in safety-critical systems that can affect human lives. Despite this, safety in RL
has remained largely an open problem [3].
Consider, for example, a self-driving car. While it is desirable for the algorithm that drives the
car to improve over time (e.g., by adapting to driver preferences and changing environments), any
policy applied to the system has to guarantee safe driving. Thus, it is not possible to learn about the
system through random exploratory actions, which almost certainly lead to a crash. In order to avoid
this problem, the learning algorithm needs to consider its ability to safely recover from exploratory
actions. In particular, we want the car to be able to recover to a safe state, for example, driving at a
reasonable speed in the middle of the lane. This ability to recover is known as asymptotic stability
in control theory [4]. Specifically, we care about the region of attraction of the closed-loop system
under a policy. This is a subset of the state space that is forward invariant so that any state trajectory
that starts within this set stays within it for all times and converges to a goal state eventually.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

