An Empirical Study on The Properties of
Random Bases for Kernel Methods
Maximilian Alber, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Kristof T. Schütt
Technische Universität Berlin
maximilian.alber@tu-berlin.de
Klaus-Robert Müller
Technische Universität Berlin
Korea University
Max Planck Institut für Informatik

Fei Sha
University of Southern California
feisha@usc.edu

Abstract
Kernel machines as well as neural networks possess universal function approximation properties. Nevertheless in practice their ways of choosing the appropriate
function class differ. Specifically neural networks learn a representation by adapting their basis functions to the data and the task at hand, while kernel methods
typically use a basis that is not adapted during training. In this work, we contrast
random features of approximated kernel machines with learned features of neural
networks. Our analysis reveals how these random and adaptive basis functions
affect the quality of learning. Furthermore, we present basis adaptation schemes
that allow for a more compact representation, while retaining the generalization
properties of kernel machines.

1

Introduction

Recent work on scaling kernel methods using random basis functions has shown that their performance
on challenging tasks such as speech recognition can match closely those by deep neural networks [22,
6, 35]. However, research also highlighted two disadvantages of random basis functions. First, a large
number of basis functions, i.e., features, are needed to obtain useful representations of the data. In a
recent empirical study [22], a kernel machine matching the performance of a deep neural network
required a much larger number of parameters. Second, a finite number of random basis functions
lead to an inferior kernel approximation error that is data-specific [30, 32, 36].
Deep neural networks learn representations that are adapted to the data using end-to-end training.
Kernel methods on the other hand can only achieve this by selecting the optimal kernels to represent
the data – a challenge that persistently remains. Furthermore, there are interesting cases in which
learning with deep architectures is advantageous, as they require exponentially fewer examples [25].
Yet arguably both paradigms have the same modeling power as the number of training examples goes
to infinity. Moreover, empirical studies suggest that for real-world applications the advantage of one
method over the other is somewhat limited [22, 6, 35, 37].
Understanding the differences between approximated kernel methods and neural networks is crucial
to use them optimally in practice. In particular, there are two aspects that require investigation: (1)
How much performance is lost due to the kernel approximation error of the random basis? (2) What
is the possible gain of adapting the features to the task at hand? Since these effects are expected to be
data-dependent, we argue that an empirical study is needed to complement the existing theoretical
contributions [30, 36, 20, 32, 8].
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

