Value Prediction Network
Junhyuk Oh†

Satinder Singh†
Honglak Lee∗,†
University of Michigan
∗
Google Brain
{junhyuk,baveja,honglak}@umich.edu, honglak@google.com
†

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel deep reinforcement learning (RL) architecture, called
Value Prediction Network (VPN), which integrates model-free and model-based
RL methods into a single neural network. In contrast to typical model-based
RL methods, VPN learns a dynamics model whose abstract states are trained
to make option-conditional predictions of future values (discounted sum of rewards) rather than of future observations. Our experimental results show that
VPN has several advantages over both model-free and model-based baselines in a
stochastic environment where careful planning is required but building an accurate
observation-prediction model is difficult. Furthermore, VPN outperforms Deep
Q-Network (DQN) on several Atari games even with short-lookahead planning,
demonstrating its potential as a new way of learning a good state representation.

1

Introduction

Model-based reinforcement learning (RL) approaches attempt to learn a model that predicts future
observations conditioned on actions and can thus be used to simulate the real environment and do
multi-step lookaheads for planning. We will call such models an observation-prediction model to
distinguish it from another form of model introduced in this paper. Building an accurate observationprediction model is often very challenging when the observation space is large [23, 5, 13, 4] (e.g., highdimensional pixel-level image frames), and even more difficult when the environment is stochastic.
Therefore, a natural question is whether it is possible to plan without predicting future observations.
In fact, raw observations may contain information unnecessary for planning, such as dynamically
changing backgrounds in visual observations that are irrelevant to their value/utility. The starting point
of this work is the premise that what planning truly requires is the ability to predict the rewards and
values of future states. An observation-prediction model relies on its predictions of observations to
predict future rewards and values. What if we could predict future rewards and values directly without
predicting future observations? Such a model could be more easily learnable for complex domains or
more flexible for dealing with stochasticity. In this paper, we address the problem of learning and
planning from a value-prediction model that can directly generate/predict the value/reward of future
states without generating future observations.
Our main contribution is a novel neural network architecture we call the Value Prediction Network
(VPN). The VPN combines model-based RL (i.e., learning the dynamics of an abstract state space
sufficient for computing future rewards and values) and model-free RL (i.e., mapping the learned
abstract states to rewards and values) in a unified framework. In order to train a VPN, we propose
a combination of temporal-difference search [28] (TD search) and n-step Q-learning [20]. In brief,
VPNs learn to predict values via Q-learning and rewards via supervised learning. At the same time,
VPNs perform lookahead planning to choose actions and compute bootstrapped target Q-values.
Our empirical results on a 2D navigation task demonstrate the advantage of VPN over model-free
baselines (e.g., Deep Q-Network [21]). We also show that VPN is more robust to stochasticity in the
environment than an observation-prediction model approach. Furthermore, we show that our VPN
outperforms DQN on several Atari games [2] even with short-lookahead planning, which suggests
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

