A Dirichlet Mixture Model of Hawkes Processes for
Event Sequence Clustering

Hongteng Xu∗
School of ECE
Georgia Institute of Technology
hongtengxu313@gmail.com

Hongyuan Zha
College of Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
zha@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
How to cluster event sequences generated via different point processes is an interesting and important problem in statistical machine learning. To solve this problem,
we propose and discuss an effective model-based clustering method based on a
novel Dirichlet mixture model of a special but significant type of point processes —
Hawkes process. The proposed model generates the event sequences with different
clusters from the Hawkes processes with different parameters, and uses a Dirichlet
distribution as the prior distribution of the clusters. We prove the identifiability
of our mixture model and propose an effective variational Bayesian inference
algorithm to learn our model. An adaptive inner iteration allocation strategy is
designed to accelerate the convergence of our algorithm. Moreover, we investigate
the sample complexity and the computational complexity of our learning algorithm
in depth. Experiments on both synthetic and real-world data show that the clustering method based on our model can learn structural triggering patterns hidden
in asynchronous event sequences robustly and achieve superior performance on
clustering purity and consistency compared to existing methods.

1

Introduction

In many practical situations, we need to deal with a huge amount of irregular and asynchronous
sequential data. Typical examples include the viewing records of users in an IPTV system, the
electronic health records of patients in hospitals, among many others. All of these data are so-called
event sequences, each of which contains a series of events with different types in the continuous time
domain, e.g., when and which TV program a user watched, when and which care unit a patient is
transferred to. Given a set of event sequences, an important task is learning their clustering structure
robustly. Event sequence clustering is meaningful for many practical applications. Take the previous
two examples: clustering IPTV users according to their viewing records is beneficial to the program
recommendation system and the ads serving system; clustering patients according to their health
records helps hospitals to optimize their medication resources.
Event sequence clustering is very challenging. Existing work mainly focuses on clustering synchronous (or aggregated) time series with discrete time-lagged observations [19, 23, 39]. Event
sequences, on the contrary, are in the continuous time domain, so it is difficult to find a universal and
tractable representation for them. A potential solution is constructing features of event sequences via
parametric [22] or nonparametric [18] methods. However, these feature-based methods have a high
risk of overfitting because of the large number of parameters. What is worse, these methods actually
decompose the clustering problem into two phases: extracting features and learning clusters. As a
result, their clustering results are very sensitive to the quality of learned (or predefined) features.
∗

Corresponding author.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

