Discriminative State-Space Models
Vitaly Kuznetsov
Google Research
New York, NY 10011, USA
vitaly@cims.nyu.edu

Mehryar Mohri
Courant Institute and Google Research
New York, NY 10011, USA
mohri@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
We introduce and analyze Discriminative State-Space Models for forecasting nonstationary time series. We provide data-dependent generalization guarantees for
learning these models based on the recently introduced notion of discrepancy. We
provide an in-depth analysis of the complexity of such models. We also study the
generalization guarantees for several structural risk minimization approaches to
this problem and provide an efficient implementation for one of them which is
based on a convex objective.

1

Introduction

Time series data is ubiquitous in many domains including such diverse areas as finance, economics,
climate science, healthcare, transportation and online advertisement. The field of time series analysis
consists of many different problems, ranging from analysis to classification, anomaly detection, and
forecasting. In this work, we focus on the problem of forecasting, which is probably one of the most
challenging and important problems in the field.
Traditionally, time series analysis and time series prediction, in particular, have been approached
from the perspective of generative modeling: particular generative parametric model is postulated that
is assumed to generate the observations and these observations are then used to estimate unknown
parameters of the model. Autoregressive models are among the most commonly used types of
generative models for time series [Engle, 1982, Bollerslev, 1986, Brockwell and Davis, 1986, Box
and Jenkins, 1990, Hamilton, 1994]. These models typically assume that the stochastic process that
generates the data is stationary up to some known transformation, such as differencing or composition
with natural logarithms.
In many modern real world applications, the stationarity assumption does not hold, which has led
to the development of more flexible generative models that can account for non-stationarity in the
underlying stochastic process. State-Space Models [Durbin and Koopman, 2012, Commandeur and
Koopman, 2007, Kalman, 1960] provide a flexible framework that captures many of such generative
models as special cases, including autoregressive models, hidden Markov models, Gaussian linear
dynamical systems and many other models. This framework typically assumes that the time series Y
is a noisy observation of some dynamical system S that is hidden from the practitioner:
Yt = h(St ) + ✏t ,

St = g(St 1 ) + ⌘t

for all t.

(1)

In (1), h, g are some unknown functions estimated from data, {✏t }, {⌘t } are sequences of random
variables and {St } is an unobserved sequence of states of a hidden dynamical system.1 While this
class of models provides a powerful and flexible framework for time series analysis, the theoretical
learning properties of these models is not sufficiently well understood. The statistical guarantees
available in the literature rely on strong assumptions about the noise terms (e.g. {✏t } and {⌘t } are
Gaussian white noise). Furthermore, these results are typically asymptotic and require the model
1

A more general formulation is given in terms of distribution of Yt : ph (Yt |St )pg (St |St 1 ).

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

