On Tensor Train Rank Minimization: Statistical
Efficiency and Scalable Algorithm
Masaaki Imaizumi
Institute of Statistical Mathematics
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
imaizumi@ism.ac.jp
Takanori Maehara
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
takanori.maehara@riken.jp
Kohei Hayashi
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
hayashi.kohei@gmail.com

Abstract
Tensor train (TT) decomposition provides a space-efficient representation for
higher-order tensors. Despite its advantage, we face two crucial limitations when
we apply the TT decomposition to machine learning problems: the lack of statistical
theory and of scalable algorithms. In this paper, we address the limitations. First,
we introduce a convex relaxation of the TT decomposition problem and derive
its error bound for the tensor completion task. Next, we develop a randomized
optimization method, in which the time complexity is as efficient as the space
complexity is. In experiments, we numerically confirm the derived bounds and
empirically demonstrate the performance of our method with a real higher-order
tensor.

1

Introduction

Tensor decomposition is an essential tool for dealing with data represented as multidimensional arrays,
or simply, tensors. Through tensor decomposition, we can determine latent factors of an input tensor
in a low-dimensional multilinear space, which saves the storage cost and enables predicting missing
elements. Note that, a different multilinear interaction among latent factors defines a different tensor
decomposition model, which yields several variations of tensor decomposition. For general purposes,
however, either Tucker decomposition [29] or CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) decomposition [8]
model is commonly used.
In the past three years, an alternative tensor decomposition model, called tensor train (TT) decomposition [21] has actively been studied in machine learning communities for such as approximating the
inference on a Markov random field [18], modeling supervised learning [19, 24], analyzing restricted
Boltzmann machine [4], and compressing deep neural networks [17]. A key property is that, for
higher-order tensors, TT decomposition provides more space-saving representation called TT format
while preserving the representation power. Given an order-K tensor (i.e., a K-dimensional tensor),
the space complexity of Tucker decomposition is exponential in K, whereas that of TT decomposition
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

