Unsupervised Learning of Disentangled and
Interpretable Representations from Sequential Data

Wei-Ning Hsu, Yu Zhang, and James Glass
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
{wnhsu,yzhang87,glass}@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
We present a factorized hierarchical variational autoencoder, which learns disentangled and interpretable representations from sequential data without supervision.
Specifically, we exploit the multi-scale nature of information in sequential data by
formulating it explicitly within a factorized hierarchical graphical model that imposes sequence-dependent priors and sequence-independent priors to different sets
of latent variables. The model is evaluated on two speech corpora to demonstrate,
qualitatively, its ability to transform speakers or linguistic content by manipulating
different sets of latent variables; and quantitatively, its ability to outperform an
i-vector baseline for speaker verification and reduce the word error rate by as much
as 35% in mismatched train/test scenarios for automatic speech recognition tasks.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised learning is a powerful methodology that can leverage vast quantities of unannotated
data in order to learn useful representations that can be incorporated into subsequent applications in
either supervised or unsupervised fashions. One of the principle approaches to unsupervised learning
is probabilistic generative modeling. Recently, there has been significant interest in three classes of
deep probabilistic generative models: 1) Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [23, 34, 22], 2) Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) [11], and 3) auto-regressive models [30, 39]; more recently, there are
also studies combining multiple classes of models [6, 27, 26]. While GANs bypass any inference of
latent variables, and auto-regressive models abstain from using latent variables, VAEs jointly learn an
inference model and a generative model, allowing them to infer latent variables from observed data.
Despite successes with VAEs, understanding the underlying factors that latent variables associate
with is a major challenge. Some research focuses on the supervised or semi-supervised setting using
VAEs [21, 17]. There is also research attempting to develop weakly supervised or unsupervised
methods to learn disentangled representations, such as DC-IGN [25], InfoGAN [1], and β-VAE [13].
There is yet another line of research analyzing the latent variables with labeled data after the model
is trained [33, 15]. While there has been much research investigating static data, such as the
aforementioned ones, there is relatively little research on learning from sequential data [8, 3, 2, 9, 7,
18, 36]. Moreover, to the best of our knowledge, there has not been any attempt to learn disentangled
and interpretable representations without supervision from sequential data. The information encoded
in sequential data, such as speech, video, and text, is naturally multi-scaled; in speech for example,
information about the channel, speaker, and linguistic content is encoded in the statistics at the
session, utterance, and segment levels, respectively. By leveraging this source of constraint, we can
learn disentangled and interpretable factors in an unsupervised manner.
In this paper, we propose a novel factorized hierarchical variational autoencoder, which learns
disentangled and interpretable latent representations from sequential data without supervision by
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

