Inductive Representation Learning on Large Graphs

William L. Hamilton∗
wleif@stanford.edu

Rex Ying∗
rexying@stanford.edu

Jure Leskovec
jure@cs.stanford.edu

Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA, 94305

Abstract
Low-dimensional embeddings of nodes in large graphs have proved extremely
useful in a variety of prediction tasks, from content recommendation to identifying
protein functions. However, most existing approaches require that all nodes in the
graph are present during training of the embeddings; these previous approaches are
inherently transductive and do not naturally generalize to unseen nodes. Here we
present GraphSAGE, a general inductive framework that leverages node feature
information (e.g., text attributes) to efficiently generate node embeddings for
previously unseen data. Instead of training individual embeddings for each node,
we learn a function that generates embeddings by sampling and aggregating features
from a node’s local neighborhood. Our algorithm outperforms strong baselines
on three inductive node-classification benchmarks: we classify the category of
unseen nodes in evolving information graphs based on citation and Reddit post
data, and we show that our algorithm generalizes to completely unseen graphs
using a multi-graph dataset of protein-protein interactions.

1

Introduction

Low-dimensional vector embeddings of nodes in large graphs1 have proved extremely useful as
feature inputs for a wide variety of prediction and graph analysis tasks [5, 11, 28, 35, 36]. The basic
idea behind node embedding approaches is to use dimensionality reduction techniques to distill the
high-dimensional information about a node’s neighborhood into a dense vector embedding. These
node embeddings can then be fed to downstream machine learning systems and aid in tasks such as
node classification, clustering, and link prediction [11, 28, 35].
However, previous works have focused on embedding nodes from a single fixed graph, and many
real-world applications require embeddings to be quickly generated for unseen nodes, or entirely new
(sub)graphs. This inductive capability is essential for high-throughput, production machine learning
systems, which operate on evolving graphs and constantly encounter unseen nodes (e.g., posts on
Reddit, users and videos on Youtube). An inductive approach to generating node embeddings also
facilitates generalization across graphs with the same form of features: for example, one could train
an embedding generator on protein-protein interaction graphs derived from a model organism, and
then easily produce node embeddings for data collected on new organisms using the trained model.
The inductive node embedding problem is especially difficult, compared to the transductive setting,
because generalizing to unseen nodes requires “aligning” newly observed subgraphs to the node
embeddings that the algorithm has already optimized on. An inductive framework must learn to
∗

The two first authors made equal contributions.
While it is common to refer to these data structures as social or biological networks, we use the term graph
to avoid ambiguity with neural network terminology.
1

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

