Neural Expectation Maximization
Klaus Greff∗
IDSIA
klaus@idsia.ch

Sjoerd van Steenkiste∗
IDSIA
sjoerd@idsia.ch

Jürgen Schmidhuber
IDSIA
juergen@idsia.ch

Abstract
Many real world tasks such as reasoning and physical interaction require identiﬁcation and manipulation of conceptual entities. A ﬁrst step towards solving these
tasks is the automated discovery of distributed symbol-like representations. In
this paper, we explicitly formalize this problem as inference in a spatial mixture
model where each component is parametrized by a neural network. Based on the
Expectation Maximization framework we then derive a differentiable clustering
method that simultaneously learns how to group and represent individual entities.
We evaluate our method on the (sequential) perceptual grouping task and ﬁnd that
it is able to accurately recover the constituent objects. We demonstrate that the
learned representations are useful for next-step prediction.

1

Introduction

Learning useful representations is an important aspect of unsupervised learning, and one of the
main open problems in machine learning. It has been argued that such representations should be
distributed [13, 37] and disentangled [1, 31, 3]. The latter has recently received an increasing amount
of attention, producing representations that can disentangle features like rotation and lighting [4, 12].
So far, these methods have mostly focused on the single object case whereas, for real world tasks
such as reasoning and physical interaction, it is often necessary to identify and manipulate multiple
entities and their relationships. In current systems this is difﬁcult, since superimposing multiple
distributed and disentangled representations can lead to ambiguities. This is known as the Binding
Problem [21, 37, 13] and has been extensively discussed in neuroscience [33]. One solution to
this problem involves learning a separate representation for each object. In order to allow these
representations to be processed identically they must be described in terms of the same (disentangled)
features. This would then avoid the binding problem, and facilitate a wide range of tasks that require
knowledge about individual objects. This solution requires a process known as perceptual grouping:
dynamically splitting (segmenting) each input into its constituent conceptual entities.
In this work, we tackle this problem of learning how to group and efﬁciently represent individual
entities, in an unsupervised manner, based solely on the statistical structure of the data. Our work
follows a similar approach as the recently proposed Tagger [7] and aims to further develop the
understanding, as well as build a theoretical framework, for the problem of symbol-like representation
learning. We formalize this problem as inference in a spatial mixture model where each component
is parametrized by a neural network. Based on the Expectation Maximization framework we then
derive a differentiable clustering method, which we call Neural Expectation Maximization (N-EM). It
can be trained in an unsupervised manner to perform perceptual grouping in order to learn an efﬁcient
representation for each group, and naturally extends to sequential data.
∗

Both authors contributed equally to this work.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

