Practical Data-Dependent Metric Compression with
Provable Guarantees
Piotr Indyk∗
MIT

Ilya Razenshteyn∗
MIT

Tal Wagner∗
MIT

Abstract
We introduce a new distance-preserving compact representation of multidimensional point-sets. Given n points in a d-dimensional space where each
coordinate is represented using B bits (i.e., dB bits per point), it produces a representation of size O(d log(dB/) + log n) bits per point from which one can
approximate the distances up to a factor of 1 ± . Our algorithm almost matches
the recent bound of [6] while being much simpler. We compare our algorithm
to Product Quantization (PQ) [7], a state of the art heuristic metric compression
method. We evaluate both algorithms on several data sets: SIFT (used in [7]),
MNIST [11], New York City taxi time series [4] and a synthetic one-dimensional
data set embedded in a high-dimensional space. With appropriately tuned parameters, our algorithm produces representations that are comparable to or better than
those produced by PQ, while having provable guarantees on its performance.

1

Introduction

Compact distance-preserving representations of high-dimensional objects are very useful tools in
data analysis and machine learning. They compress each data point in a data set using a small number
of bits while preserving the distances between the points up to a controllable accuracy. This makes it
possible to run data analysis algorithms, such as similarity search, machine learning classifiers, etc, on
data sets of reduced size. The benefits of this approach include: (a) reduced running time (b) reduced
storage and (c) reduced communication cost (between machines, between CPU and RAM, between
CPU and GPU, etc). These three factors make the computation more efficient overall, especially on
modern architectures where the communication cost is often the dominant factor in the running time,
so fitting the data in a single processing unit is highly beneficial. Because of these benefits, various
compact representations have been extensively studied over the last decade, for applications such
as: speeding up similarity search [3, 5, 10, 19, 22, 7, 15, 18], scalable learning algorithms [21, 12],
streaming algorithms [13] and other tasks. For example, a recent paper [8] describes a similarity
search software package based on one such method (Product Quantization (PQ)) that has been used
to solve very large similarity search problems over billions of point on GPUs at Facebook.
The methods for designing such representations can be classified into data-dependent and dataoblivious. The former analyze the whole data set in order to construct the point-set representation,
while the latter apply a fixed procedure individually to each data point. A classic example of the
data-oblivious approach is based on randomized dimensionality reduction [9], which states that
any set of n points in the Euclidean space of arbitrary dimension D can be mapped into a space of
dimension d = O(−2 log n), such that the distances between all pairs of points are preserved up to a
factor of 1 ± . This allows representing each point using d(B + log D) bits, where B is the number
∗

Authors ordered alphabetically.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

