Practical Hash Functions for Similarity Estimation
and Dimensionality Reduction

Søren Dahlgaard
University of Copenhagen / SupWiz
s.dahlgaard@supwiz.com

Mathias Bæk Tejs Knudsen
University of Copenhagen / SupWiz
m.knudsen@supwiz.com

Mikkel Thorup
University of Copenhagen
mthorup@di.ku.dk

Abstract
Hashing is a basic tool for dimensionality reduction employed in several aspects of
machine learning. However, the perfomance analysis is often carried out under the
abstract assumption that a truly random unit cost hash function is used, without
concern for which concrete hash function is employed. The concrete hash function
may work fine on sufficiently random input. The question is if they can be trusted
in the real world where they may be faced with more structured input.
In this paper we focus on two prominent applications of hashing, namely similarity
estimation with the one permutation hashing (OPH) scheme of Li et al. [NIPS’12]
and feature hashing (FH) of Weinberger et al. [ICML’09], both of which have
found numerous applications, i.e. in approximate near-neighbour search with LSH
and large-scale classification with SVM.
We consider the recent mixed tabulation hash function of Dahlgaard et al.
[FOCS’15] which was proved theoretically to perform like a truly random hash
function in many applications, including the above OPH. Here we first show improved concentration bounds for FH with truly random hashing and then argue that
mixed tabulation performs similar when the input vectors are not too dense. Our
main contribution, however, is an experimental comparison of different hashing
schemes when used inside FH, OPH, and LSH.
We find that mixed tabulation hashing is almost as fast as the classic multiply-modprime scheme (ax + b) mod p. Mutiply-mod-prime is guaranteed to work well on
sufficiently random data, but here we demonstrate that in the above applications, it
can lead to bias and poor concentration on both real-world and synthetic data. We
also compare with the very popular MurmurHash3, which has no proven guarantees.
Mixed tabulation and MurmurHash3 both perform similar to truly random hashing
in our experiments. However, mixed tabulation was 40% faster than MurmurHash3,
and it has the proven guarantee of good performance (like fully random) on all
possible input making it more reliable.

1

Introduction

Hashing is a standard technique for dimensionality reduction and is employed as an underlying tool in
several aspects of machine learning including search [22, 31, 32, 3], classification [24, 22], duplicate
detection [25], computer vision and information retrieval [30]. The need for dimensionality reduction
techniques such as hashing is becoming further important due to the huge growth in data sizes. As
an example, already in 2010, Tong [36] discussed data sets with 1011 data points and 109 features.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

