Coded Distributed Computing for Inverse Problems

Yaoqing Yang, Pulkit Grover and Soummya Kar
Carnegie Mellon University
{yyaoqing, pgrover, soummyak}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Computationally intensive distributed and parallel computing is often bottlenecked
by a small set of slow workers known as stragglers. In this paper, we utilize the
emerging idea of “coded computation” to design a novel error-correcting-code
inspired technique for solving linear inverse problems under specific iterative
methods in a parallelized implementation affected by stragglers. Example machinelearning applications include inverse problems such as personalized PageRank and
sampling on graphs. We provably show that our coded-computation technique can
reduce the mean-squared error under a computational deadline constraint. In fact,
the ratio of mean-squared error of replication-based and coded techniques diverges
to infinity as the deadline increases. Our experiments for personalized PageRank
performed on real systems and real social networks show that this ratio can be
as large as 104 . Further, unlike coded-computation techniques proposed thus far,
our strategy combines outputs of all workers, including the stragglers, to produce
more accurate estimates at the computational deadline. This also ensures that the
accuracy degrades “gracefully” in the event that the number of stragglers is large.

1

Introduction

The speed of distributed computing is often affected by a few slow workers known as the “stragglers”
[1–4]. This issue is often addressed by replicating tasks across workers and using this redundancy to
ignore some of the stragglers. Recently, methods from error-correcting codes (ECC) have been used
for speeding up distributed computing [5–15], which build on classical works on algorithm-based
fault-tolerance [16]. The key idea is to treat stragglers as “erasures” and use ECC to retrieve the result
after a subset of fast workers have finished. In some cases, (e.g. [6, 8] for matrix multiplications),
techniques that utilize ECC achieve scaling-sense speedups in average computation time compared to
replication. In this work, we propose a novel coding-inspired technique to deal with stragglers in
distributed computing of linear inverse problems using iterative solvers [17].
Existing techniques that use coding to deal with stragglers treat straggling workers as “erasures”, that
is, they ignore computation results of the stragglers. In contrast, when using iterative methods for
linear inverse problems, even if the computation result at a straggler has not converged, the proposed
algorithm does not ignore the result, but instead combines it (with appropriate weights) with results
from other workers. This is in part because the results of iterative methods often converge gradually
to the true solutions. We use a small example shown in Fig. 1 to illustrate this idea. Suppose we
want to solve two linear inverse problems with solutions x∗1 and x∗2 . We “encode the computation” by
adding an extra linear inverse problem with solution x∗1 + x∗2 (see Section 3), and distribute these
three problems to three workers. Using this method, the solutions x∗1 and x∗2 can be obtained from
the results of any combination of two fast workers that first return their solutions.
But what if we have a computational deadline, Tdl , by which only one worker converges? The natural
extension of existing strategies (e.g., [6]) will declare a failure because it needs at least two workers
to respond. However, our strategy does not require convergence: even intermediate results can be
utilized to estimate solutions. In other words, our strategy degrades gracefully as the number of
stragglers increases, or as the deadline is pulled earlier. Indeed, we show that it is suboptimal to
ignore stragglers as erasures, and design strategies that treat the difference from the optimal solution
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

