A Disentangled Recognition and Nonlinear Dynamics
Model for Unsupervised Learning

Marco Fraccaro†∗

Simon Kamronn †∗
Ulrich Paquet‡
†
Technical University of Denmark
‡
DeepMind

Ole Winther†

Abstract
This paper takes a step towards temporal reasoning in a dynamically changing video,
not in the pixel space that constitutes its frames, but in a latent space that describes
the non-linear dynamics of the objects in its world. We introduce the Kalman
variational auto-encoder, a framework for unsupervised learning of sequential data
that disentangles two latent representations: an object’s representation, coming
from a recognition model, and a latent state describing its dynamics. As a result, the
evolution of the world can be imagined and missing data imputed, both without the
need to generate high dimensional frames at each time step. The model is trained
end-to-end on videos of a variety of simulated physical systems, and outperforms
competing methods in generative and missing data imputation tasks.

1

Introduction

From the earliest stages of childhood, humans learn to represent high-dimensional sensory input
to make temporal predictions. From the visual image of a moving tennis ball, we can imagine
its trajectory, and prepare ourselves in advance to catch it. Although the act of recognising the
tennis ball is seemingly independent of our intuition of Newtonian dynamics [31], very little of this
assumption has yet been captured in the end-to-end models that presently mark the path towards
artificial general intelligence. Instead of basing inference on any abstract grasp of dynamics that is
learned from experience, current successes are autoregressive: to imagine the tennis ball’s trajectory,
one forward-generates a frame-by-frame rendering of the full sensory input [5, 7, 23, 24, 29, 30].
To disentangle two latent representations, an object’s, and that of its dynamics, this paper introduces
Kalman variational auto-encoders (KVAEs), a model that separates an intuition of dynamics from
an object recognition network (section 3). At each time step t, a variational auto-encoder [18, 25]
compresses high-dimensional visual stimuli xt into latent encodings at . The temporal dynamics in
the learned at -manifold are modelled with a linear Gaussian state space model that is adapted to
handle complex dynamics (despite the linear relations among its states zt ). The parameters of the
state space model are adapted at each time step, and non-linearly depend on past at ’s via a recurrent
neural network. Exact posterior inference for the linear Gaussian state space model can be preformed
with the Kalman filtering and smoothing algorithms, and is used for imputing missing data, for
instance when we imagine the trajectory of a bouncing ball after observing it in initial and final video
frames (section 4). The separation between recognition and dynamics model allows for missing data
imputation to be done via a combination of the latent states zt of the model and its encodings at only,
without having to forward-sample high-dimensional images xt in an autoregressive way. KVAEs are
tested on videos of a variety of simulated physical systems in section 5: from raw visual stimuli, it
“end-to-end” learns the interplay between the recognition and dynamics components. As KVAEs can
do smoothing, they outperform an array of methods in generative and missing data imputation tasks
(section 5).
∗

Equal contribution.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

