Estimating Accuracy from Unlabeled Data:
A Probabilistic Logic Approach

Emmanouil A. Platanios
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA
e.a.platanios@cs.cmu.edu

Hoifung Poon
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA
hoifung@microsoft.com

Tom M. Mitchell
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA
tom.mitchell@cs.cmu.edu

Eric Horvitz
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA
horvitz@microsoft.com

Abstract
We propose an efficient method to estimate the accuracy of classifiers using only
unlabeled data. We consider a setting with multiple classification problems where
the target classes may be tied together through logical constraints. For example, a
set of classes may be mutually exclusive, meaning that a data instance can belong to
at most one of them. The proposed method is based on the intuition that: (i) when
classifiers agree, they are more likely to be correct, and (ii) when the classifiers
make a prediction that violates the constraints, at least one classifier must be making
an error. Experiments on four real-world data sets produce accuracy estimates
within a few percent of the true accuracy, using solely unlabeled data. Our models
also outperform existing state-of-the-art solutions in both estimating accuracies,
and combining multiple classifier outputs. The results emphasize the utility of
logical constraints in estimating accuracy, thus validating our intuition.

1

Introduction

Estimating the accuracy of classifiers is central to machine learning and many other fields. Accuracy
is defined as the probability of a system’s output agreeing with the true underlying output, and thus
is a measure of the system’s performance. Most existing approaches to estimating accuracy are
supervised, meaning that a set of labeled examples is required for the estimation. Being able to
estimate the accuracies of classifiers using only unlabeled data is important for many applications,
including: (i) any autonomous learning system that operates under no supervision, as well as (ii)
crowdsourcing applications, where multiple workers provide answers to questions, for which the
correct answer is unknown. Furthermore, tasks which involve making several predictions which are
tied together by logical constraints are abundant in machine learning. As an example, we may have
two classifiers in the Never Ending Language Learning (NELL) project [Mitchell et al., 2015] which
predict whether noun phrases represent animals or cities, respectively, and we know that something
cannot be both an animal and a city (i.e., the two categories are mutually exclusive). In such cases, it
is not hard to observe that if the predictions of the system violate at least one of the constraints, then
at least one of the system’s components must be wrong. This paper extends this intuition and presents
an unsupervised approach (i.e., only unlabeled data are needed) for estimating accuracies that is able
to use information provided by such logical constraints. Furthermore, the proposed approach is also
able to use any available labeled data, thus also being applicable to semi-supervised settings.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

