Premise Selection for Theorem Proving
by Deep Graph Embedding

Mingzhe Wang∗ Yihe Tang∗ Jian Wang Jia Deng
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

Abstract
We propose a deep learning-based approach to the problem of premise selection:
selecting mathematical statements relevant for proving a given conjecture. We
represent a higher-order logic formula as a graph that is invariant to variable
renaming but still fully preserves syntactic and semantic information. We then
embed the graph into a vector via a novel embedding method that preserves the
information of edge ordering. Our approach achieves state-of-the-art results on the
HolStep dataset, improving the classification accuracy from 83% to 90.3%.

1

Introduction

Automated reasoning over mathematical proofs is a core question of artificial intelligence that dates
back to the early days of computer science [1]. It not only constitutes a key aspect of general
intelligence, but also underpins a broad set of applications ranging from circuit design to compilers,
where it is critical to verify the correctness of a computer system [2, 3, 4].
A key challenge of theorem proving is premise selection [5]: selecting relevant statements that are
useful for proving a given conjecture. Theorem proving is essentially a search problem with the
goal of finding a sequence of deductions leading from presumed facts to the given conjecture. The
space of this search is combinatorial—with today’s large mathematical knowledge bases [6, 7], the
search can quickly explode beyond the capability of modern automated theorem provers, despite
the fact that often only a small fraction of facts in the knowledge base are relevant for proving a
given conjecture. Premise selection thus plays a critical role in narrowing down the search space and
making it tractable.
Premise selection has been mainly tackled as hand-designed heuristics based on comparing and
analyzing symbols [8]. Recently, some machine learning methods have emerged as a promising
alternative for premise selection, which can naturally be cast as a classification or ranking problem.
Alama et al. [9] trained a kernel-based classifier using essentially bag-of-words features, and demonstrated large improvement over the state of the art system. Alemi et al. [5] were the first to apply
deep learning approaches to premise selection and demonstrated competitive results without manual
feature engineering. Kaliszyk et al. [10] introduced HolStep, a large dataset of higher-order logic
proofs, and provided baselines based on logistic regression and deep networks.
In this paper we propose a new deep learning approach to premise selection. The key idea of our
approach is to represent mathematical formulas as graphs and embed them into vector space. This
is different from prior work on premise selection that directly applies deep networks to sequences
of characters or tokens [5, 10]. Our approach is motivated by the observation that a mathematical
formula can be represented as a graph that encodes the syntactic and semantic structure of the formula.
For example, the formula ∀x∃y(P (x) ∧ Q(x, y)) can be expressed as the graph shown in Fig. 1,
where edges link terms to their constituents and connect quantifiers to their variables.
∗

Equal contribution.

