Differentiable Learning of Submodular Models

Andreas Krause
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
krausea@ethz.ch

Josip Djolonga
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
josipd@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Can we incorporate discrete optimization algorithms within modern machine learning models? For example, is it possible to incorporate in deep architectures a layer
whose output is the minimal cut of a parametrized graph? Given that these models
are trained end-to-end by leveraging gradient information, the introduction of such
layers seems very challenging due to their non-continuous output. In this paper we
focus on the problem of submodular minimization, for which we show that such
layers are indeed possible. The key idea is that we can continuously relax the output
without sacrificing guarantees. We provide an easily computable approximation
to the Jacobian complemented with a complete theoretical analysis. Finally, these
contributions let us experimentally learn probabilistic log-supermodular models
via a bi-level variational inference formulation.

1

Introduction

Discrete optimization problems are ubiquitous in machine learning. While the majority of them are
provably hard, a commonly exploitable trait that renders some of them tractable is that of submodularity [1, 2]. In addition to capturing many useful phenomena, submodular functions can be minimized
in polynomial time and also enjoy a powerful connection to convex optimization [3]. Both of these
properties have been used to great effect in both computer vision and machine learning, to e.g. compute the MAP configuration in undirected graphical models with long-reaching interactions [4]
and higher-order factors [5], clustering [6], to perform variational inference in log-supermodular
models [7, 8], or to design norms useful for structured sparsity problems [9, 10].
Despite all the benefits of submodular functions, the question of how to learn them in a practical
manner remains open. Moreover, if we want to open the toolbox of submodular optimization to
modern practitioners, an intriguing question is how to to use them in conjunction with deep learning
networks. For instance, we need to develop mechanisms that would enable them to be trained
together in a fully end-to-end fashion. As a concrete example from the computer vision domain,
consider the problem of image segmentation. Namely, we are given as input an RGB representation
x ∈ Rn×3 of an image captured by say a dashboard camera, and the goal is to identify the set of pixels
A ⊆ {1, 2, . . . , n} that are occupied by pedestrians. While we could train a network θ : x → v ∈ Rn
to output per-pixel scores, it would be helpful, especially in domains with limited data, to bias the
predictions by encoding some prior beliefs about the expected output. For example, we might prefer
segmentations that are spatially consistent. One common approach to encourage such configurations
is to first define a graph over the image G = (V, E) by connecting neighbouring pixels, specify
weights w over the edges, and then solve the following graph-cut problem
X
X
A∗ (w, v) = arg min F (A) = arg min
wi,j JA ∩ {i, j} = 1K +
vi . (1)
|{z}
|
{z
}
A⊆V
A⊆V
{i,j}∈E

1 iff the predictions disagree

i∈A pixel score

While this can be easily seen as a module computing the best configuration as a function of the edge
weights and per-pixel scores, incorporating it as a layer in a deep network seems at a first glance to
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

