Preventing Gradient Explosions
in Gated Recurrent Units
Sekitoshi Kanai, Yasuhiro Fujiwara, Sotetsu Iwamura
NTT Software Innovation Center
3-9-11, Midori-cho, Musashino-shi, Tokyo
{kanai.sekitoshi, fujiwara.yasuhiro, iwamura.sotetsu}@lab.ntt.co.jp

Abstract
A gated recurrent unit (GRU) is a successful recurrent neural network architecture
for time-series data. The GRU is typically trained using a gradient-based method,
which is subject to the exploding gradient problem in which the gradient increases
significantly. This problem is caused by an abrupt change in the dynamics of the
GRU due to a small variation in the parameters. In this paper, we find a condition
under which the dynamics of the GRU changes drastically and propose a learning
method to address the exploding gradient problem. Our method constrains the
dynamics of the GRU so that it does not drastically change. We evaluated our
method in experiments on language modeling and polyphonic music modeling. Our
experiments showed that our method can prevent the exploding gradient problem
and improve modeling accuracy.

1

Introduction

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) can handle time-series data in many applications such as speech
recognition [14, 1], natural language processing [26, 30], and hand writing recognition [13]. Unlike
feed-forward neural networks, RNNs have recurrent connections and states to represent the data.
Back propagation through time (BPTT) is a standard approach to train RNNs. BPTT propagates the
gradient of the cost function with respect to the parameters, such as weight matrices, at each layer and
at each time step by unfolding the recurrent connections through time. The parameters are updated
using the gradient in a way that minimizes the cost function. The cost function is selected according
to the task, such as classification or regression.
Although RNNs are used in many applications, they have problems in that the gradient can be
extremely small or large; these problems are called the vanishing gradient and exploding gradient
problems [5, 28]. If the gradient is extremely small, RNNs can not learn data with long-term
dependencies [5]. On the other hand, if the gradient is extremely large, the gradient moves the RNNs
parameters far away and disrupts the learning process. To handle the vanishing gradient problem,
previous studies [18, 8] proposed sophisticated models of RNN architectures. One successful model
is a long short-term memory (LSTM). However, the LSTM has the complex structures and numerous
parameters with which to learn the long-term dependencies. As a way of reducing the number of
parameters while avoiding the vanishing gradient problem, a gated recurrent unit (GRU) was proposed
in [8]; the GRU has only two gate functions that hold or update the state which summarizes the past
information. In addition, Tang et al. [33] show that the GRU is more robust to noise than the LSTM
is, and it outperforms the LSTM in several tasks [9, 20, 33, 10].
Gradient clipping is a popular approach to address the exploding gradient problem [26, 28]. This
method rescales the gradient so that the norm of the gradient is always less than a threshold. Although
gradient clipping is a very simple method and can be used with GRUs, it is heuristic and does not
analytically derive the appropriate threshold. The threshold has to be manually tuned to the data
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

