Do Deep Neural Networks Suffer from Crowding?

Anna Volokitin†\
Gemma Roig†‡ι
Tomaso Poggio†‡
voanna@vision.ee.ethz.ch
gemmar@mit.edu
tp@csail.mit.edu
†
Center for Brains, Minds and Machines, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
‡
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
\
Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
ι
Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore

Abstract
Crowding is a visual effect suffered by humans, in which an object that can be
recognized in isolation can no longer be recognized when other objects, called
flankers, are placed close to it. In this work, we study the effect of crowding in
artificial Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) for object recognition. We analyze both
deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) as well as an extension of DCNNs
that are multi-scale and that change the receptive field size of the convolution filters
with their position in the image. The latter networks, that we call eccentricitydependent, have been proposed for modeling the feedforward path of the primate
visual cortex. Our results reveal that the eccentricity-dependent model, trained on
target objects in isolation, can recognize such targets in the presence of flankers,
if the targets are near the center of the image, whereas DCNNs cannot. Also, for
all tested networks, when trained on targets in isolation, we find that recognition
accuracy of the networks decreases the closer the flankers are to the target and
the more flankers there are. We find that visual similarity between the target and
flankers also plays a role and that pooling in early layers of the network leads
to more crowding. Additionally, we show that incorporating flankers into the
images of the training set for learning the DNNs does not lead to robustness against
configurations not seen at training.

1

Introduction

Despite stunning successes in many computer vision problems [1, 2, 3, 4, 5], Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) lack interpretability in terms of how the networks make predictions, as well as how an
arbitrary transformation of the input, such as addition of clutter in images in an object recognition
task, will affect the function value.
Examples of an empirical approach to this problem are testing the network with adversarial examples [6, 7] or images with different geometrical transformations such as scale, position and rotation,
as well as occlusion [8]. In this paper, we add clutter to images to analyze the crowding in DNNs.
Crowding is a well known effect in human vision [9, 10], in which objects (targets) that can be
recognized in isolation can no longer be recognized in the presence of nearby objects (flankers), even
though there is no occlusion. We believe that crowding is a special case of the problem of clutter in
object recognition. In crowding studies, human subjects are asked to fixate at a cross at the center of
a screen, and objects are presented at the periphery of their visual field in a flash such that the subject
has no time to move their eyes. Experimental data suggests that crowding depends on the distance of
the target and the flankers [11], eccentricity (the distance of the target to the fixation point), as well as
the similarity between the target and the flankers [12, 13] or the configuration of the flankers around
the target object [11, 14, 15].
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

