Identification of Gaussian Process State Space Models
Stefanos Eleftheriadis† , Thomas F.W. Nicholson† , Marc P. Deisenroth†‡ , James Hensman†
†
PROWLER.io, ‡ Imperial College London
{stefanos, tom, marc, james}@prowler.io

Abstract
The Gaussian process state space model (GPSSM) is a non-linear dynamical system, where unknown transition and/or measurement mappings are described by
GPs. Most research in GPSSMs has focussed on the state estimation problem,
i.e., computing a posterior of the latent state given the model. However, the key
challenge in GPSSMs has not been satisfactorily addressed yet: system identification, i.e., learning the model. To address this challenge, we impose a structured
Gaussian variational posterior distribution over the latent states, which is parameterised by a recognition model in the form of a bi-directional recurrent neural
network. Inference with this structure allows us to recover a posterior smoothed
over sequences of data. We provide a practical algorithm for efficiently computing
a lower bound on the marginal likelihood using the reparameterisation trick. This
further allows for the use of arbitrary kernels within the GPSSM. We demonstrate
that the learnt GPSSM can efficiently generate plausible future trajectories of the
identified system after only observing a small number of episodes from the true
system.

1 Introduction
State space models can effectively address the problem of learning patterns and predicting behaviour
in sequential data. Due to their modelling power they have a vast applicability in various domains of
science and engineering, such as robotics, finance, neuroscience, etc. (Brown et al., 1998).
Most research and applications have focussed on linear state space models for which solutions for
inference (state estimation) and learning (system identification) are well established (Kalman, 1960;
Ljung, 1999). In this work, we are interested in non-linear state space models. In particular, we
consider the case where a Gaussian process (GP) (Rasmussen and Williams, 2006) is responsible for
modelling the underlying dynamics. This is widely known as the Gaussian process state space model
(GPSSM). We choose to build upon GPs for a number of reasons. First, they are non-parametric,
which makes them effective in learning from small datasets. This can be advantageous over wellknown parametric models (e.g., recurrent neural networks—RNNs), especially in situation where
data are not abundant. Second, we want to take advantage of the probabilistic properties of GPs.
By using a GP for the latent transitions, we can get away with an approximate model and learn a
distribution over functions. This allows us to account for model errors whilst quantifying uncertainty,
as discussed and empirically shown by Schneider (1997) and Deisenroth et al. (2015). Consequently,
the system will not become overconfident in regions of the space where data are scarce.
System identification with the GPSSM is a challenging task. This is due to un-identifiability issues:
both states and transition functions are unknown. Most work so far has focused only on state
estimation of the GPSSM. In this paper, we focus on addressing the challenge of system identification
and based on recent work by Frigola et al. (2014) we propose a novel inference method for learning
the GPSSM. We approximate the entire process of the state transition function by employing the
framework of variational inference. We assume a Markov-structured Gaussian posterior distribution
over the latent states. The variational posterior can be naturally combined with a recognition model
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

