Extracting low-dimensional dynamics from
multiple large-scale neural population recordings
by learning to predict correlations

1

Marcel Nonnenmacher1 , Srinivas C. Turaga2 and Jakob H. Macke1∗
research center caesar, an associate of the Max Planck Society, Bonn, Germany
2
HHMI Janelia Research Campus, Ashburn, VA
marcel.nonnenmacher@caesar.de, turagas@janelia.hhmi.org
jakob.macke@caesar.de

Abstract
A powerful approach for understanding neural population dynamics is to extract
low-dimensional trajectories from population recordings using dimensionality
reduction methods. Current approaches for dimensionality reduction on neural
data are limited to single population recordings, and can not identify dynamics
embedded across multiple measurements. We propose an approach for extracting
low-dimensional dynamics from multiple, sequential recordings. Our algorithm
scales to data comprising millions of observed dimensions, making it possible
to access dynamics distributed across large populations or multiple brain areas.
Building on subspace-identification approaches for dynamical systems, we perform
parameter estimation by minimizing a moment-matching objective using a scalable
stochastic gradient descent algorithm: The model is optimized to predict temporal
covariations across neurons and across time. We show how this approach naturally
handles missing data and multiple partial recordings, and can identify dynamics
and predict correlations even in the presence of severe subsampling and small
overlap between recordings. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the approach
both on simulated data and a whole-brain larval zebrafish imaging dataset.

1

Introduction

Dimensionality reduction methods based on state-space models [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] are useful for uncovering low-dimensional dynamics hidden in high-dimensional data. These models exploit structured
correlations in neural activity, both across neurons and over time [6]. This approach has been used to
identify neural activity trajectories that are informative about stimuli and behaviour and yield insights
into neural computations [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. However, these methods are designed for analyzing
one population measurement at a time and are typically applied to population recordings of a few
dozens of neurons, yielding a statistical description of the dynamics of a small sample of neurons
within a brain area. How can we, from sparse recordings, gain insights into dynamics distributed
across entire circuits or multiple brain areas? One promising approach to scaling up the empirical
study of neural dynamics is to sequentially record from multiple neural populations, for instance by
moving the field-of-view of a microscope [14]. Similarly, chronic multi-electrode recordings make it
possible to record neural activity within a brain area over multiple days, but with neurons dropping
in and out of the measurement over time [15]. While different neurons will be recorded in different
sessions, we expect the underlying dynamics to be preserved across measurements.
The goal of this paper is to provide methods for extracting low-dimensional dynamics shared across
multiple, potentially overlapping recordings of neural population activity. Inferring dynamics from
∗

current primary affiliation: Centre for Cognitive Science, Technical University Darmstadt

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

