Non-parametric Structured Output Networks
Andreas M. Lehrmann
Disney Research
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
andreas.lehrmann@disneyresearch.com

Leonid Sigal
Disney Research
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
lsigal@disneyresearch.com

Abstract

Deep neural networks (DNNs) and probabilistic graphical models (PGMs) are
the two main tools for statistical modeling. While DNNs provide the ability to
model rich and complex relationships between input and output variables, PGMs
provide the ability to encode dependencies among the output variables themselves.
End-to-end training methods for models with structured graphical dependencies
on top of neural predictions have recently emerged as a principled way of combining these two paradigms. While these models have proven to be powerful in
discriminative settings with discrete outputs, extensions to structured continuous
spaces, as well as performing efficient inference in these spaces, are lacking. We
propose non-parametric structured output networks (NSON), a modular approach
that cleanly separates a non-parametric, structured posterior representation from
a discriminative inference scheme but allows joint end-to-end training of both
components. Our experiments evaluate the ability of NSONs to capture structured
posterior densities (modeling) and to compute complex statistics of those densities
(inference). We compare our model to output spaces of varying expressiveness and
popular variational and sampling-based inference algorithms.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep neural networks have led to tremendous progress in domains such as image
classification [1, 2] and segmentation [3], object detection [4, 5] and natural language processing [6, 7].
These achievements can be attributed to their hierarchical feature representation, the development of
effective regularization techniques [8, 9] and the availability of large amounts of training data [10, 11].
While a lot of effort has been spent on identifying optimal network structures and trainings schemes
to enable these advances, the expressiveness of the output space has not evolved at the same rate.
Indeed, it is striking that most neural architectures model categorical posterior distributions that
do not incorporate any structural assumptions about the underlying task; they are discrete and
global (Figure 1a). However, many tasks are naturally formulated as structured problems or would
benefit from continuous representations due to their high cardinality. In those cases, it is desirable to
learn an expressive posterior density reflecting the dependencies in the underlying task.
As a simple example, consider a stripe of n noisy pixels in a natural image. If we want to learn
a neural network that encodes the posterior distribution p✓ (y | x) of the clean output y given the
noisy input x, we must ensure that p✓ is expressive enough to represent potentially complex noise
distributions and structured enough to avoid modeling spurious dependencies between the variables.
Probabilistic graphical models [12], such as Bayesian networks or Markov random fields, have a
long history in machine learning and provide principled frameworks for such structured data. It is
therefore natural to use their factored representations as a means of enforcing structure in a deep
neural network. While initial results along this line of research have been promising [13, 14], they
focus exclusively on the discrete case and/or mean-field inference.
Instead, we propose a deep neural network that encodes a non-parametric posterior density that
factorizes over a graph (Figure 1b). We perform recurrent inference inspired by message-passing in
this structured output space and show how to learn all components end-to-end.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

