Deep Sets

Manzil Zaheer1,2 , Satwik Kottur1 , Siamak Ravanbhakhsh1 ,
Barnabás Póczos1 , Ruslan Salakhutdinov1 , Alexander J Smola1,2
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Amazon Web Services
{manzilz,skottur,mravanba,bapoczos,rsalakhu,smola}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of designing models for machine learning tasks defined on
sets. In contrast to traditional approach of operating on fixed dimensional vectors,
we consider objective functions defined on sets that are invariant to permutations.
Such problems are widespread, ranging from estimation of population statistics [1],
to anomaly detection in piezometer data of embankment dams [2], to cosmology [3,
4]. Our main theorem characterizes the permutation invariant functions and provides
a family of functions to which any permutation invariant objective function must
belong. This family of functions has a special structure which enables us to design
a deep network architecture that can operate on sets and which can be deployed on
a variety of scenarios including both unsupervised and supervised learning tasks.
We also derive the necessary and sufficient conditions for permutation equivariance
in deep models. We demonstrate the applicability of our method on population
statistic estimation, point cloud classification, set expansion, and outlier detection.

1

Introduction

A typical machine learning algorithm, like regression or classification, is designed for fixed dimensional data instances. Their extensions to handle the case when the inputs or outputs are permutation
invariant sets rather than fixed dimensional vectors is not trivial and researchers have only recently
started to investigate them [5–8]. In this paper, we present a generic framework to deal with the
setting where input and possibly output instances in a machine learning task are sets.
Similar to fixed dimensional data instances, we can characterize two learning paradigms in case of
sets. In supervised learning, we have an output label for a set that is invariant or equivariant to the
permutation of set elements. Examples include tasks like estimation of population statistics [1], where
applications range from giga-scale cosmology [3, 4] to nano-scale quantum chemistry [9].
Next, there can be the unsupervised setting, where the “set” structure needs to be learned, e.g. by
leveraging the homophily/heterophily tendencies within sets. An example is the task of set expansion
(a.k.a. audience expansion), where given a set of objects that are similar to each other (e.g. set of
words {lion, tiger, leopard}), our goal is to find new objects from a large pool of candidates such
that the selected new objects are similar to the query set (e.g. find words like jaguar or cheetah
among all English words). This is a standard problem in similarity search and metric learning, and
a typical application is to find new image tags given a small set of possible tags. Likewise, in the
field of computational advertisement, given a set of high-value customers, the goal would be to find
similar people. This is an important problem in many scientific applications, e.g. given a small set of
interesting celestial objects, astrophysicists might want to find similar ones in large sky surveys.
Main contributions. In this paper, (i) we propose a fundamental architecture, DeepSets, to deal
with sets as inputs and show that the properties of this architecture are both necessary and sufficient
(Sec. 2). (ii) We extend this architecture to allow for conditioning on arbitrary objects, and (iii) based
on this architecture we develop a deep network that can operate on sets with possibly different sizes
(Sec. 3). We show that a simple parameter-sharing scheme enables a general treatment of sets within
supervised and semi-supervised settings. (iv) Finally, we demonstrate the wide applicability of our
framework through experiments on diverse problems (Sec. 4).
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

