Approximation Bounds for Hierarchical Clustering:
Average Linkage, Bisecting K-means, and Local
Search
Benjamin Moseley∗
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
moseleyb@andrew.cmu.edu

Joshua R. Wang†
Department of Computer Science Stanford University
353 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
joshua.wang@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Hierarchical clustering is a data analysis method that has been used for decades.
Despite its widespread use, the method has an underdeveloped analytical foundation. Having a well understood foundation would both support the currently
used methods and help guide future improvements. The goal of this paper is to
give an analytic framework to better understand observations seen in practice.
This paper considers the dual of a problem framework for hierarchical clustering
introduced by Dasgupta [Das16]. The main result is that one of the most popular
algorithms used in practice, average linkage agglomerative clustering, has a small
constant approximation ratio for this objective. Furthermore, this paper establishes
that using bisecting k-means divisive clustering has a very poor lower bound on
its approximation ratio for the same objective. However, we show that there are
divisive algorithms that perform well with respect to this objective by giving two
constant approximation algorithms. This paper is some of the first work to establish
guarantees on widely used hierarchical algorithms for a natural objective function.
This objective and analysis give insight into what these popular algorithms are
optimizing and when they will perform well.

1

Introduction

Hierarchical clustering is a widely used method to analyze data. See [MC12, KBXS12, HG05] for an
overview and pointers to relevant work. In a typical hierarchical clustering problem, one is given a set
of n data points and a notion of similarity between the points. The output is a hierarchy of clusters of
the input. Specifically, a dendrogram (tree) is constructed where the leaves correspond to the n input
data points and the root corresponds to a cluster containing all data points. Each internal node of the
tree corresponds to a cluster of the data points in its subtree. The clusters (internal nodes) become
more refined as the nodes are lower in the tree. The goal is to construct the tree so that the clusters
deeper in the tree contain points that are relatively more similar.
There are many reasons for the popularity of hierarchical clustering, including that the number of
clusters is not predetermined and that the clusters produced induce taxonomies that give meaningful
ways to interpret data.
Methods used to perform hierarchical clustering are divided into two classes: agglomerative and
divisive. Agglomerative algorithms are a bottom-up approach and are more commonly used than
∗
Benjamin Moseley was supported in part by a Google Research Award, a Yahoo Research Award and NSF
Grants CCF-1617724, CCF-1733873 and CCF-1725661. This work was partially done while the author was
working at Washington University in St. Louis.
†
Joshua R. Wang was supported in part by NSF Grant CCF-1524062.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

