A PAC-Bayesian Analysis of Randomized Learning
with Application to Stochastic Gradient Descent

Ben London
blondon@amazon.com
Amazon AI

Abstract
We study the generalization error of randomized learning algorithms—focusing
on stochastic gradient descent (SGD)—using a novel combination of PAC-Bayes
and algorithmic stability. Importantly, our generalization bounds hold for all posterior distributions on an algorithm’s random hyperparameters, including distributions that depend on the training data. This inspires an adaptive sampling algorithm for SGD that optimizes the posterior at runtime. We analyze this algorithm
in the context of our generalization bounds and evaluate it on a benchmark dataset.
Our experiments demonstrate that adaptive sampling can reduce empirical risk
faster than uniform sampling while also improving out-of-sample accuracy.

1

Introduction

Randomized algorithms are the workhorses of modern machine learning. One such algorithm is
stochastic gradient descent (SGD), a first-order optimization method that approximates the gradient
of the learning objective by a random point estimate, thereby making it efficient for large datasets.
Recent interest in studying the generalization properties of SGD has led to several breakthroughs.
Notably, Hardt et al. [10] showed that SGD is stable with respect to small perturbations of the
training data, which let them bound the risk of a learned model. Related studies followed thereafter
[13, 16]. Simultaneously, Lin and Rosasco [15] derived risk bounds that show that early stopping
acts as a regularizer in multi-pass SGD (echoing studies of incremental gradient descent [19]).
In this paper, we study generalization in randomized learning, with SGD as a motivating example.
Using a novel analysis that combines PAC-Bayes with algorithmic stability (reminiscent of [17]),
we prove new generalization bounds for randomized learning algorithms, which apply to SGD under various assumptions on the loss function and optimization objective. Our bounds improve on
related work in two important ways. While some previous bounds for SGD [1, 10, 13, 16] hold in
expectation over draws of the training data, our bounds hold with high probability. Further, existing
generalization bounds for randomized learning [6, 7] only apply to algorithms with fixed distributions (such as SGD with uniform sampling); thanks to our PAC-Bayesian treatment, our bounds hold
for all posterior distributions, meaning they support data-dependent randomization. The penalty for
overfitting the posterior to the data is captured by the posterior’s divergence from a fixed prior.
Our generalization bounds suggest a sampling strategy for SGD that adapts to the training data and
model, focusing on useful examples while staying close to a uniform prior. We therefore propose
an adaptive sampling algorithm that dynamically updates its distribution using multiplicative weight
updates (similar to boosting [8, 21], focused online learning [22] and exponentiated gradient dual
coordinate ascent [4]). The algorithm requires minimal tuning and works with any stochastic gradient update rule. We analyze the divergence of the adaptive posterior and conduct experiments
on a benchmark dataset, using several combinations of update rule and sampling utility function.
Our experiments demonstrate that adaptive sampling can reduce empirical risk faster than uniform
sampling while also improving out-of-sample accuracy.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

