Learning to Prune Deep Neural Networks via
Layer-wise Optimal Brain Surgeon

Xin Dong
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
n1503521a@e.ntu.edu.sg

Shangyu Chen
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
schen025@e.ntu.edu.sg

Sinno Jialin Pan
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
sinnopan@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
How to develop slim and accurate deep neural networks has become crucial for realworld applications, especially for those employed in embedded systems. Though
previous work along this research line has shown some promising results, most
existing methods either fail to significantly compress a well-trained deep network
or require a heavy retraining process for the pruned deep network to re-boost its
prediction performance. In this paper, we propose a new layer-wise pruning method
for deep neural networks. In our proposed method, parameters of each individual
layer are pruned independently based on second order derivatives of a layer-wise
error function with respect to the corresponding parameters. We prove that the
final prediction performance drop after pruning is bounded by a linear combination
of the reconstructed errors caused at each layer. By controlling layer-wise errors
properly, one only needs to perform a light retraining process on the pruned network
to resume its original prediction performance. We conduct extensive experiments
on benchmark datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness of our pruning method
compared with several state-of-the-art baseline methods. Codes of our work are
released at: https://github.com/csyhhu/L-OBS.

1

Introduction

Intuitively, deep neural networks [1] can approximate predictive functions of arbitrary complexity
well when they are of a huge amount of parameters, i.e., a lot of layers and neurons. In practice, the
size of deep neural networks has been being tremendously increased, from LeNet-5 with less than
1M parameters [2] to VGG-16 with 133M parameters [3]. Such a large number of parameters not
only make deep models memory intensive and computationally expensive, but also urge researchers
to dig into redundancy of deep neural networks. On one hand, in neuroscience, recent studies point
out that there are significant redundant neurons in human brain, and memory may have relation with
vanishment of specific synapses [4]. On the other hand, in machine learning, both theoretical analysis
and empirical experiments have shown the evidence of redundancy in several deep models [5, 6].
Therefore, it is possible to compress deep neural networks without or with little loss in prediction by
pruning parameters with carefully designed criteria.
However, finding an optimal pruning solution is NP-hard because the search space for pruning
is exponential in terms of parameter size. Recent work mainly focuses on developing efficient
algorithms to obtain a near-optimal pruning solution [7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. A common idea behind most
exiting approaches is to select parameters for pruning based on certain criteria, such as increase in
training error, magnitude of the parameter values, etc. As most of the existing pruning criteria are
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

