A Regularized Framework for
Sparse and Structured Neural Attention

Vlad Niculae∗
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY
vlad@cs.cornell.edu

Mathieu Blondel
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
Kyoto, Japan
mathieu@mblondel.org

Abstract
Modern neural networks are often augmented with an attention mechanism, which
tells the network where to focus within the input. We propose in this paper a
new framework for sparse and structured attention, building upon a smoothed
max operator. We show that the gradient of this operator defines a mapping from
real values to probabilities, suitable as an attention mechanism. Our framework
includes softmax and a slight generalization of the recently-proposed sparsemax as
special cases. However, we also show how our framework can incorporate modern
structured penalties, resulting in more interpretable attention mechanisms, that
focus on entire segments or groups of an input. We derive efficient algorithms to
compute the forward and backward passes of our attention mechanisms, enabling
their use in a neural network trained with backpropagation. To showcase their
potential as a drop-in replacement for existing ones, we evaluate our attention
mechanisms on three large-scale tasks: textual entailment, machine translation, and
sentence summarization. Our attention mechanisms improve interpretability without sacrificing performance; notably, on textual entailment and summarization, we
outperform the standard attention mechanisms based on softmax and sparsemax.

1

Introduction

Modern neural network architectures are commonly augmented with an attention mechanism, which
tells the network where to look within the input in order to make the next prediction. Attentionaugmented architectures have been successfully applied to machine translation [2, 29], speech
recognition [10], image caption generation [44], textual entailment [38, 31], and sentence summarization [39], to name but a few examples. At the heart of attention mechanisms is a mapping function
that converts real values to probabilities, encoding the relative importance of elements in the input.
For the case of sequence-to-sequence prediction, at each time step of generating the output sequence,
attention probabilities are produced, conditioned on the current state of a decoder network. They are
then used to aggregate an input representation (a variable-length list of vectors) into a single vector,
which is relevant for the current time step. That vector is finally fed into the decoder network to
produce the next element in the output sequence. This process is repeated until the end-of-sequence
symbol is generated. Importantly, such architectures can be trained end-to-end using backpropagation.
Alongside empirical successes, neural attention—while not necessarily correlated with human
attention—is increasingly crucial in bringing more interpretability to neural networks by helping explain how individual input elements contribute to the model’s decisions. However, the most
commonly used attention mechanism, softmax, yields dense attention weights: all elements in the input always make at least a small contribution to the decision. To overcome this limitation, sparsemax
was recently proposed [31], using the Euclidean projection onto the simplex as a sparse alternative to
∗

Work performed during an internship at NTT Commmunication Science Laboratories, Kyoto, Japan.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

