On Frank-Wolfe and Equilibrium Computation

Jacob Abernethy
Georgia Institute of Technology
prof@gatech.edu

Jun-Kun Wang
Georgia Institute of Technology
jimwang@gatech.edu

Abstract
We consider the Frank-Wolfe (FW) method for constrained convex optimization,
and we show that this classical technique can be interpreted from a different
perspective: FW emerges as the computation of an equilibrium (saddle point) of
a special convex-concave zero sum game. This saddle-point trick relies on the
existence of no-regret online learning to both generate a sequence of iterates but
also to provide a proof of convergence through vanishing regret. We show that our
stated equivalence has several nice properties, as it exhibits a modularity that gives
rise to various old and new algorithms. We explore a few such resulting methods,
and provide experimental results to demonstrate correctness and efficiency.

1

Introduction

There has been a burst of interest in a technique known as the Frank-Wolfe method (FW) [10], also
known as conditional gradient, for solving constrained optimization problems. FW is entirely a
first-order method, does not require any projection operation, and instead relies on access to a linear
optimization oracle. Given a compact and convex constraint set X ⊂ Rd , we require the ability
to (quickly) answer queries of the form O(v) := arg minx∈X x> v, for any vector v ∈ Rd . Other
techniques such as gradient descent methods require repeated projections into the constraint set which
can be prohibitively expensive. Interior point algorithms, such as Newton path following schemes
[1], require computing a hessian inverse at each iteration which generally does not scale well with the
dimension.
In the present paper we aim to give a new perspective on the Frank-Wolfe method by showing that,
in a broad sense, it can be viewed as a special case of equilibrium computation via online learning.
Indeed, when the optimization objective is cast as a particular convex-concave payoff function,
then we are able to extract the desired optimal point via the equilibrium of the associated zero-sum
game. Within Machine Learning there has been a lot of attention paid to the computation of optimal
strategies for zero-sum games using online learning techniques. An amazing result, attributed to [12]
yet now practically folklore in the literature, says that we can compute the optimal equilibrium in
a zero sum game by pitting two online learning strategies against each other and, as long as they
achieve the desired regret-minimization guarantee, the long-run empirical average of their actions
(strategy choices) must converge to the optimal equilibrium. This trick is both very beautiful but also
extremely useful: it was in some sense the core of early work in Boosting [11], has been shown to
generalize many linear programming techniques [3], it serves as the key tool for recent advances in
flow optimization problems [8], and has been instrumental in understanding differential privacy [9].
We begin in Section 2 by reviewing the method of proving a generalized minimax theorem using
regret minimization, and we show how this proof is actually constructive and gives rise to a generic
meta-algorithm. This meta-algorithm is especially modular, and allows for the substitution of various
algorithmic tools that achieve, up to convergence rates, essentially the same core result. We then show
that the original Frank-Wolfe algorithm is simply one instantiation of this meta-algorithm, yet where
the convergence rate follows as a trivial consequence of main theorem, albeit with an additional
O(log T ) factor.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

