Experimental Design for Learning Causal Graphs
with Latent Variables
Murat Kocaoglu⇤
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
The University of Texas at Austin, USA
mkocaoglu@utexas.edu

Karthikeyan Shanmugam⇤
IBM Research NY, USA
karthikeyan.shanmugam2@ibm.com

Elias Bareinboim
Department of Computer Science and Statistics
Purdue University, USA
eb@purdue.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning causal structures with latent variables using
interventions. Our objective is not only to learn the causal graph between the
observed variables, but to locate unobserved variables that could confound the
relationship between observables. Our approach is stage-wise: We first learn the
observable graph, i.e., the induced graph between observable variables. Next we
learn the existence and location of the latent variables given the observable graph.
We propose an efficient randomized algorithm that can learn the observable graph
using O(d log2 n) interventions where d is the degree of the graph. We further
propose an efficient deterministic variant which uses O(log n + l) interventions,
where l is the longest directed path in the graph. Next, we propose an algorithm that
uses only O(d2 log n) interventions that can learn the latents between both nonadjacent and adjacent variables. While a naive baseline approach would require
O(n2 ) interventions, our combined algorithm can learn the causal graph with
latents using O(d log2 n + d2 log (n)) interventions.

1

Introduction

Causality shapes how we view, understand, and react to the world around us. It is arguably a key
ingredient in building intelligent systems that are autonomous and can act efficiently in complex
environments. Not surprisingly, the task of automating the learning of cause-and-effect relationships
have attracted great interest in the artificial intelligence and machine learning communities. This effort
has led to a general theoretical and algorithmic understanding of the assumptions under which causeand-effect relationships can be inferred from data. These results have started to percolate through the
applied fields ranging from genetics to medicine, from psychology to economics [5, 26, 33, 25].
The endeavour of algorithmically learning causal relations may have started from the independent
discovery of the IC [35] and PC algorithms [33], which almost identically, and contrary to previously
held beliefs, showed the feasibility of recovering these relations from purely observational, nonexperimental data. A plethora of methods followed this breakthrough, and now we understand, at
least in principle, the limits of what can be inferred from purely observational data, including (not
exhaustively) [31, 14, 21, 27, 19, 13]. There are a number of assumptions that have been considered
about the data-generating model when attempting to unveil the causal structure. One of the most
⇤

Equal contribution.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

