Reconstructing perceived faces from brain activations
with deep adversarial neural decoding

Yağmur Güçlütürk*, Umut Güçlü*,
Katja Seeliger, Sander Bosch,
Rob van Lier, Marcel van Gerven,
Radboud University, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour
Nijmegen, the Netherlands
{y.gucluturk, u.guclu}@donders.ru.nl
*Equal contribution

Abstract
Here, we present a novel approach to solve the problem of reconstructing perceived
stimuli from brain responses by combining probabilistic inference with deep learning. Our approach first inverts the linear transformation from latent features to brain
responses with maximum a posteriori estimation and then inverts the nonlinear
transformation from perceived stimuli to latent features with adversarial training
of convolutional neural networks. We test our approach with a functional magnetic resonance imaging experiment and show that it can generate state-of-the-art
reconstructions of perceived faces from brain activations.

ConvNet (adversarial training)

likelihood (Gaussian)

posterior (Gaussian)
maximum a posteriori

brain resp.

ConvNet (pretrained) + PCA

prior (Gaussian)

latent feat.

perceived stim.

*reconstruction
*from brain resp.

Figure 1: An illustration of our approach to solve the problem of reconstructing perceived stimuli
from brain responses by combining probabilistic inference with deep learning.

1

Introduction

A key objective in sensory neuroscience is to characterize the relationship between perceived stimuli
and brain responses. This relationship can be studied with neural encoding and neural decoding
in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) [1]. The goal of neural encoding is to predict
brain responses to perceived stimuli [2]. Conversely, the goal of neural decoding is to classify [3, 4],
identify [5, 6] or reconstruct [7–11] perceived stimuli from brain responses.
The recent integration of deep learning into neural encoding has been a very successful endeavor [12,
13]. To date, the most accurate predictions of brain responses to perceived stimuli have been
achieved with convolutional neural networks [14–20], leading to novel insights about the functional
organization of neural representations. At the same time, the use of deep learning as the basis for
neural decoding has received less widespread attention. Deep neural networks have been used for
classifying or identifying stimuli via the use of a deep encoding model [16, 21] or by predicting
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

