Learning Active Learning from Data
Ksenia Konyushkova⇤
CVLab, EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
ksenia.konyushkova@epfl.ch

Sznitman Raphael
ARTORG Center, University of Bern
Bern, Switzerland
raphael.sznitman@artorg.unibe.ch

Pascal Fua
CVLab, EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
pascal.fua@epfl.ch

Abstract
In this paper, we suggest a novel data-driven approach to active learning (AL).
The key idea is to train a regressor that predicts the expected error reduction for a
candidate sample in a particular learning state. By formulating the query selection
procedure as a regression problem we are not restricted to working with existing
AL heuristics; instead, we learn strategies based on experience from previous AL
outcomes. We show that a strategy can be learnt either from simple synthetic 2D
datasets or from a subset of domain-specific data. Our method yields strategies that
work well on real data from a wide range of domains.

1

Introduction

Many modern machine learning techniques require large amounts of training data to reach their full
potential. However, annotated data is hard and expensive to obtain, notably in specialized domains
where only experts whose time is scarce and precious can provide reliable labels. Active learning
(AL) aims to ease the data collection process by automatically deciding which instances an annotator
should label to train an algorithm as quickly and effectively as possible.
Over the years many AL strategies have been developed for various classification tasks, without
any one of them clearly outperforming others in all cases. Consequently, a number of meta-AL
approaches have been proposed to automatically select the best strategy. Recent examples include
bandit algorithms [2, 11, 3] and reinforcement learning approaches [5]. A common limitation of these
methods is that they cannot go beyond combining pre-existing hand-designed heuristics. Besides,
they require reliable assessment of the classification performance which is problematic because
the annotated data is scarce. In this paper, we overcome these limitations thanks to two features
of our approach. First, we look at a whole continuum of AL strategies instead of combinations
of pre-specified heuristics. Second, we bypass the need to evaluate the classification quality from
application-specific data because we rely on experience from previous tasks and can seamlessly
transfer strategies to new domains.
More specifically, we formulate Learning Active Learning (LAL) as a regression problem. Given
a trained classifier and its output for a specific sample without a label, we predict the reduction in
generalization error that can be expected by adding the label to that datapoint. In practice, we show
that we can train this regression function on synthetic data by using simple features, such as the
variance of the classifier output or the predicted probability distribution over possible labels for a
⇤

http://ksenia.konyushkova.com

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

