Improving Regret Bounds for Combinatorial
Semi-Bandits with Probabilistically Triggered Arms
and Its Applications

Qinshi Wang
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
qinshiw@princeton.edu

Wei Chen
Microsoft Research
Beijing, China
weic@microsoft.com

Abstract
We study combinatorial multi-armed bandit with probabilistically triggered arms
and semi-bandit feedback (CMAB-T). We resolve a serious issue in the prior
CMAB-T studies where the regret bounds contain a possibly exponentially large
factor of 1/p∗ , where p∗ is the minimum positive probability that an arm is triggered by any action. We address this issue by introducing a triggering probability
modulated (TPM) bounded smoothness condition into the general CMAB-T framework, and show that many applications such as influence maximization bandit
and combinatorial cascading bandit satisfy this TPM condition. As a result, we
completely remove the factor of 1/p∗ from the regret bounds, achieving significantly better regret bounds for influence maximization and cascading bandits than
before. Finally, we provide lower bound results showing that the factor 1/p∗ is
unavoidable for general CMAB-T problems, suggesting that the TPM condition is
crucial in removing this factor.

1

Introduction

Stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) is a classical online learning framework modeled as a game
between a player and the environment with m arms. In each round, the player selects one arm and
the environment generates a reward of the arm from a distribution unknown to the player. The player
observes the reward, and use it as the feedback to the player’s algorithm (or policy) to select arms in
future rounds. The goal of the player is to cumulate as much reward as possible over time. MAB
models the classical dilemma between exploration and exploitation: whether the player should keep
exploring arms in search for a better arm, or should stick to the best arm observed so far to collect
rewards. The standard performance measure of the player’s algorithm is the (expected) regret, which
is the difference in expected cumulative reward between always playing the best arm in expectation
and playing according to the player’s algorithm.
In recent years, stochastic combinatorial multi-armed bandit (CMAB) receives many attention (e.g.
[9, 7, 6, 10, 13, 15, 14, 16, 8]), because it has wide applications in wireless networking, online
advertising and recommendation, viral marketing in social networks, etc. In the typical setting of
CMAB, the player selects a combinatorial action to play in each round, which would trigger the
play of a set of arms, and the outcomes of these triggered arms are observed as the feedback (called
semi-bandit feedback). Besides the exploration and exploitation tradeoff, CMAB also needs to deal
with the exponential explosion of the possible actions that makes exploring all actions infeasible.
One class of the above CMAB problems involves probabilistically triggered arms [7, 14, 16], in
which actions may trigger arms probabilistically. We denote it as CMAB-T in this paper. Chen et al.
[7] provide such a general model and apply it to the influence maximization bandit, which models
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

