Deep Recurrent Neural Network-Based Identification
of Precursor microRNAs
Seunghyun Park
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Seoul National University
Seoul 08826, Korea
School of Electrical Engineering
Korea University
Seoul 02841, Korea

Seonwoo Min
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Seoul National University
Seoul 08826, Korea

Hyun-Soo Choi
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Seoul National University
Seoul 08826, Korea

Sungroh Yoon∗
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Seoul National University
Seoul 08826, Korea
sryoon@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding ribonucleic acids (RNAs) which play
key roles in post-transcriptional gene regulation. Direct identification of mature
miRNAs is infeasible due to their short lengths, and researchers instead aim at identifying precursor miRNAs (pre-miRNAs). Many of the known pre-miRNAs have
distinctive stem-loop secondary structure, and structure-based filtering is usually
the first step to predict the possibility of a given sequence being a pre-miRNA. To
identify new pre-miRNAs that often have non-canonical structure, however, we
need to consider additional features other than structure. To obtain such additional
characteristics, existing computational methods rely on manual feature extraction,
which inevitably limits the efficiency, robustness, and generalization of computational identification. To address the limitations of existing approaches, we propose
a pre-miRNA identification method that incorporates (1) a deep recurrent neural
network (RNN) for automated feature learning and classification, (2) multimodal
architecture for seamless integration of prior knowledge (secondary structure), (3)
an attention mechanism for improving long-term dependence modeling, and (4) an
RNN-based class activation mapping for highlighting the learned representations
that can contrast pre-miRNAs and non-pre-miRNAs. In our experiments with recent
benchmarks, the proposed approach outperformed the compared state-of-the-art
alternatives in terms of various performance metrics.

1

Introduction

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play crucial roles in post-transcriptional gene regulation by binding to the 30
untranslated region of target messenger RNAs [16]. Among the research problems related to miRNA,
computational identification of miRNAs has been one of the most significant. The biogenesis of
a miRNA consists of the primary miRNA stage, the precursor miRNA (pre-miRNA) stage, and
the mature miRNA stage [17]. Mature miRNAs are usually short, having only 20–23 base pairs
(bp), and it is difficult to identify them directly. Most computational approaches focus on detecting
∗ To whom correspondence should be addressed.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

