Active Learning from Peers

Keerthiram Murugesan
Jaime Carbonell
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
{kmuruges,jgc}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
This paper addresses the challenge of learning from peers in an online multitask
setting. Instead of always requesting a label from a human oracle, the proposed
method first determines if the learner for each task can acquire that label with
sufficient confidence from its peers either as a task-similarity weighted sum, or
from the single most similar task. If so, it saves the oracle query for later use in
more difficult cases, and if not it queries the human oracle. The paper develops the
new algorithm to exhibit this behavior and proves a theoretical mistake bound for
the method compared to the best linear predictor in hindsight. Experiments over
three multitask learning benchmark datasets show clearly superior performance
over baselines such as assuming task independence, learning only from the oracle
and not learning from peer tasks.

1

Introduction

Multitask learning leverages the relationship between the tasks to transfer relevant knowledge from
information-rich tasks to information-poor ones. Most existing work in multitask learning focuses
on how to take advantage of these task relationships, either by sharing data directly [1] or learning
model parameters via cross-task regularization techniques [2, 3, 4]. This paper focuses on a specific
multitask setting where tasks are allowed to interact by requesting labels from other tasks for difficult
cases.
In a broad sense, there are two settings to learn multiple related tasks together: 1) batch learning, in
which an entire training set is available to the learner 2) online learning, in which the learner sees
the data sequentially. In recent years, online multitask learning has attracted increasing attention
[5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. The online multitask setting starts with a learner at each round t, receiving an
example (along with a task identifier) and predicts the output label. One may also consider learning
multiple tasks simultaneously by receiving K examples for K tasks at each round t. Subsequently,
the learner receives the true label and updates the model(s) as necessary. This sequence is repeated
over the entire data, simulating a data stream. In this setting, the assumption is that the true label is
readily available for the task learner, which is impractical in many applications.
Recent works in active learning for sequential problems have addressed this concern by allowing
the learner to make a decision on whether to ask the oracle to provide the true label for the current
example and incur a cost or to skip this example. Most approach in active learning for sequential
problems use a measure such a confidence of the learner in the current example [11, 12, 13, 14, 15].
In online multitask learning, one can utilize the task relationship to further reduce the total number
of labels requested from the oracle. This paper presents a novel active learning for the sequential
decision problems using peers or related tasks. The key idea is that when the learner is not confident
on the current example, the learner is allowed to query its peers, which usually has a low cost, before
requesting a true label from the oracle and incur a high cost. Our approach follows a perceptron-based
update rule in which the model for a given task is updated only when the prediction for that task is
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

