Multi-Modal Imitation Learning from Unstructured
Demonstrations using Generative Adversarial Nets

Karol Hausman∗† , Yevgen Chebotar∗†‡ , Stefan Schaal†‡ , Gaurav Sukhatme† , Joseph J. Lim†
†

University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
Max-Planck-Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
{hausman, ychebota, sschaal, gaurav, limjj}@usc.edu

‡

Abstract
Imitation learning has traditionally been applied to learn a single task from demonstrations thereof. The requirement of structured and isolated demonstrations
limits the scalability of imitation learning approaches as they are difficult to
apply to real-world scenarios, where robots have to be able to execute a multitude of tasks. In this paper, we propose a multi-modal imitation learning
framework that is able to segment and imitate skills from unlabelled and unstructured demonstrations by learning skill segmentation and imitation learning
jointly. The extensive simulation results indicate that our method can efficiently
separate the demonstrations into individual skills and learn to imitate them using a single multi-modal policy. The video of our experiments is available at
http://sites.google.com/view/nips17intentiongan.

1

Introduction

One of the key factors to enable deployment of robots in unstructured real-world environments is
their ability to learn from data. In recent years, there have been multiple examples of robot learning
frameworks that present promising results. These include: reinforcement learning [31] - where a
robot learns a skill based on its interaction with the environment and imitation learning [2, 5] - where
a robot is presented with a demonstration of a skill that it should imitate. In this work, we focus on
the latter learning setup.
Traditionally, imitation learning has focused on using isolated demonstrations of a particular skill [29].
The demonstration is usually provided in the form of kinesthetic teaching, which requires the user to
spend sufficient time to provide the right training data. This constrained setup for imitation learning
is difficult to scale to real world scenarios, where robots have to be able to execute a combination
of different skills. To learn these skills, the robots would require a large number of robot-tailored
demonstrations, since at least one isolated demonstration has to be provided for every individual skill.
In order to improve the scalability of imitation learning, we propose a framework that can learn to
imitate skills from a set of unstructured and unlabeled demonstrations of various tasks.
As a motivating example, consider a highly unstructured data source, e.g. a video of a person cooking
a meal. A complex activity, such as cooking, involves a set of simpler skills such as grasping,
reaching, cutting, pouring, etc. In order to learn from such data, three components are required: i) the
ability to map the image stream to state-action pairs that can be executed by a robot, ii) the ability to
segment the data into simple skills, and iii) the ability to imitate each of the segmented skills. In this
work, we tackle the latter two components, leaving the first one for future work. We believe that the
capability proposed here of learning from unstructured, unlabeled demonstrations is an important
step towards scalable robot learning systems.
∗

Equal contribution

