On Separability of Loss Functions, and Revisiting
Discriminative Vs Generative Models
Adarsh Prasad
Machine Learning Dept.
CMU
adarshp@andrew.cmu.edu

Alexandru Niculescu-Mizil
NEC Laboratories America
Princeton, NJ, USA
alex@nec-labs.com

Pradeep Ravikumar
Machine Learning Dept.
CMU
pradeepr@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We revisit the classical analysis of generative vs discriminative models for general
exponential families, and high-dimensional settings. Towards this, we develop
novel technical machinery, including a notion of separability of general loss functions, which allow us to provide a general framework to obtain `1 convergence
rates for general M -estimators. We use this machinery to analyze `1 and `2
convergence rates of generative and discriminative models, and provide insights
into their nuanced behaviors in high-dimensions. Our results are also applicable to
differential parameter estimation, where the quantity of interest is the difference
between generative model parameters.

1

Introduction

Consider the classical conditional generative model setting, where we have a binary random response
Y 2 {0, 1}, and a random covariate vector X 2 Rp , such that X|(Y = i) ⇠ P✓i for i 2
{0, 1}. Assuming that we know P (Y ) and {P✓i }1i=0 , we can use the Bayes rule to predict the
response Y given covariates X. This is said to be the generative model approach to classification.
Alternatively, consider the conditional distribution P (Y |X) as specified by the Bayes rule, also
called the discriminative model corresponding to the generative model specified above. Learning
this conditional model directly is said to be the discriminative model approach to classification. In a
classical paper [8], the authors provided theoretical justification for the common wisdom regarding
generative and discriminative models: when the generative model assumptions hold, the generative
model estimators initially converge faster as a function of the number of samples, but have the same
asymptotic error rate as discriminative models. And when the generative model assumptions do
not hold, the discriminative model estimators eventually overtake the generative model estimators.
Their analysis however was for the specific generative-discriminative model pair of Naive Bayes, and
logistic regression models, and moreover, was not under a high-dimensional sampling regime, when
the number of samples could even be smaller than the number of parameters. In this paper, we aim to
extend their analysis to these more general settings.
Doing so however required some novel technical and conceptual developments. To motivate the
machinery we develop, consider why the Naive Bayes model estimator might initially converge
faster.
The Naive Bayes model makes the conditional independence assumption that P (X|Y ) =
Qp
s=1 P (Xs |Y ), so that the parameters of each of the conditional distributions P (Xs |Y ) for s 2
{1, . . . , p} could be estimated independently. The corresponding log-likelihood loss function is thus
fully “separable” into multiple components. The logistic regression log-likelihood on the other hand
is seemingly much less “separable”, and in particular, it does not split into multiple components each
of which can be estimated independently. In general, we do not expect the loss functions underlying
statistical estimators to be fully separable into multiple components, so that we need a more flexible
notion of separability, where different losses could be shown to be separable to differing degrees. In
a very related note, though it might seem unrelated at first, the analysis of `1 convergence rates of
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

