Learning Populations of Parameters

Kevin Tian, Weihao Kong, and Gregory Valiant
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA, 94305
(kjtian, whkong, valiant)@stanford.edu

Abstract
Consider the following estimation problem: there are n entities, each with an
unknown parameter pi ∈ [0, 1], and we observe n independent random variables,
X1 , . . . , Xn , with Xi ∼ Binomial(t, pi ). How accurately can one recover the
“histogram” (i.e. cumulative density function) of the pi ’s? While the empirical
estimates would recover the histogram to earth mover distance Θ( √1t ) (equivalently,
`1 distance between the CDFs), we show that, provided n is sufficiently large, we
can achieve error O( 1t ) which is information theoretically optimal. We also extend
our results to the multi-dimensional parameter case, capturing settings where
each member of the population has multiple associated parameters. Beyond the
theoretical results, we demonstrate that the recovery algorithm performs well
in practice on a variety of datasets, providing illuminating insights into several
domains, including politics, sports analytics, and variation in the gender ratio of
offspring.

1

Introduction

In many domains, from medical records, to the outcomes of political elections, performance in sports,
and a number of biological studies, we have enormous datasets that reflect properties of a large
number of entities/individuals. Nevertheless, for many of these datasets, the amount of information
that we have about each entity is relatively modest—often too little to accurately infer properties about
that entity. In this work, we consider the extent to which we can accurately recover an estimate of the
population or set of property values of the entities, even in the regime in which there is insufficient
data to resolve properties of each specific entity.
To give a concrete example, suppose we have a large dataset representing 1M people, that records
whether each person had the flu in each of the past 5 years. Suppose each person has some underlying
probability of contracting the flu in a given year, with pi representing the probability that the ith
person contracts the flu each year (and assuming independence between years). With 5 years of data,
the empirical estimates pˆi for each person are quite noisy (and the estimates will all be multiples
of 15 ). Despite this, to what extent can we hope to accurately recover the population or set of pi ’s?
An accurate recovery of this population of parameters might be very useful—is it the case that most
people have similar underlying probabilities of contracting the flu, or is there significant variation
between people? Additionally, such an estimate of this population could be fruitfully leveraged as a
prior in making concrete predictions about individuals’ pi ’s, as a type of empirical Bayes method.
The following example motivates the hope for significantly improving upon the empirical estimates:
Example 1. Consider a set of n biased coins, with the ith coin having an unknown bias pi . Suppose
we flip each coin twice (independently), and observe that the number of coins where both flips landed
heads is roughly n4 , and similarly for the number coins that landed HT, T H, and T T . We can
safely conclude that almost all of the pi ’s are almost exactly 12 . The reasoning proceeds in two
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

