Reconstruct & Crush Network
Erinç Merdivan1,2 , Mohammad Reza Loghmani3 and Matthieu Geist4
1
AIT Austrian Institute of Technology GmbH, Vienna, Austria
2
LORIA (Univ. Lorraine & CNRS), CentraleSupélec, Univ. Paris-Saclay, 57070 Metz, France
3
Vision4Robotics lab, ACIN, TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
4
Université de Lorraine & CNRS, LIEC, UMR 7360, Metz, F-57070 France
erinc.merdivan@ait.ac.at, loghmani@acin.tuwien.ac.at
matthieu.geist@univ-lorraine.fr

Abstract
This article introduces an energy-based model that is adversarial regarding data:
it minimizes the energy for a given data distribution (the positive samples) while
maximizing the energy for another given data distribution (the negative or unlabeled
samples). The model is especially instantiated with autoencoders where the energy,
represented by the reconstruction error, provides a general distance measure for
unknown data. The resulting neural network thus learns to reconstruct data from the
first distribution while crushing data from the second distribution. This solution can
handle different problems such as Positive and Unlabeled (PU) learning or covariate
shift, especially with imbalanced data. Using autoencoders allows handling a large
variety of data, such as images, text or even dialogues. Our experiments show
the flexibility of the proposed approach in dealing with different types of data in
different settings: images with CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 (not-in-training setting),
text with Amazon reviews (PU learning) and dialogues with Facebook bAbI (next
response classification and dialogue completion).

1

Introduction

The main purpose of machine learning is to make inferences about unknown data based on encoded
dependencies between variables learned from known data. Energy-based learning [16] is a framework
that achieves this goal by using an energy function that maps each point of an input space to a
single scalar, called energy. The fact that energy-based models are not subject to the normalizability
condition of probabilistic models makes them a flexible framework for dealing with tasks such as
prediction or classification.
In the recent years, with the advancement of deep learning, astonishing results have been achieved in
classification [15, 25, 8, 26]. These solutions focus on the standard setting, in which the classifier
learns to discriminate between K classes, based on the underlying assumption that the training and
test samples belong to the same distribution. This assumption is violated in many applications in
which the dynamic nature [6] or the high cardinality [19] of the problem prevent the collection of a
representative training set. In the literature, this problem is referred to as covariate shift [7, 24].
In this work, we address the covariate shift problem by explicitly learning features that define the
intrinsic characteristics of a given class of data rather than features that discriminate between different
classes. The aim is to distinguish between samples of a positive class (A) and samples that do not
belong to this class (¬A), even when test samples are not drawn from the same distribution as the
training samples. We achieve this goal by introducing an energy-based model that is adversarial
regarding data: it minimizes the energy for a given data distribution (the positive samples) while
maximizing the energy for another given data distribution (the negative or unlabeled samples). The
model is instantiated with autoencoders because of their ability to learn data manifolds.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

