Clustering Stable Instances of Euclidean k-means

Abhratanu Dutta∗
Northwestern University
adutta@u.northwestern.edu

Aravindan Vijayaraghavan∗
Northwestern University
aravindv@northwestern.edu

Alex Wang†
Carnegie Mellon University
alexwang@u.northwestern.edu

Abstract
The Euclidean k-means problem is arguably the most widely-studied clustering
problem in machine learning. While the k-means objective is NP-hard in the
worst-case, practitioners have enjoyed remarkable success in applying heuristics
like Lloyd’s algorithm for this problem. To address this disconnect, we study
the following question: what properties of real-world instances will enable us to
design efficient algorithms and prove guarantees for finding the optimal clustering?
We consider a natural notion called additive perturbation stability that we believe
captures many practical instances of Euclidean k-means clustering. Stable instances
have unique optimal k-means solutions that does not change even when each point
is perturbed a little (in Euclidean distance). This captures the property that kmeans optimal solution should be tolerant to measurement errors and uncertainty
in the points. We design efficient algorithms that provably recover the optimal
clustering for instances that are additive perturbation stable. When the instance
has some additional separation, we can design a simple, efficient algorithm with
provable guarantees that is also robust to outliers. We also complement these
results by studying the amount of stability in real datasets, and demonstrating that
our algorithm performs well on these benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

One of the major challenges in the theory of clustering is to bridge the large disconnect between our
theoretical and practical understanding of the complexity of clustering. While theory tells us that
most common clustering objectives like k-means or k-median clustering problems are intractable in
the worst case, many heuristics like Lloyd’s algorithm or k-means++ seem to be effective in practice.
In fact, this has led to the “CDNM” thesis [11, 9]: “Clustering is difficult only when it does not
matter”.
We try to address the following natural questions in this paper: Why are real-world instances of
clustering easy? Can we identify properties of real-world instances that make them tractable?
We focus on the Euclidean k-means clustering problem where we are given n points X =
{ x1 , . . . , xn } ⊂ Rd , and we need to find k centers µ1 , µ2 , . . . , µk ∈ Rd minimizing the objecP
2
tive x∈X mini∈[k] kx − µi k . The k-means clustering problem is the most well-studied objective
for clustering points in Euclidean space [18, 3]. The problem is NP-hard in the worst-case [14] even
for k = 2, and a constant factor hardness of approximation is known for larger k [5].
∗
†

Supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant No. CCF-1637585.
Part of the work was done while the author was at Northwestern University.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

