Multi-Agent Actor-Critic for Mixed
Cooperative-Competitive Environments

Ryan Lowe∗
McGill University
OpenAI
Jean Harb
McGill University
OpenAI

Yi Wu∗
UC Berkeley

Aviv Tamar
UC Berkeley

Pieter Abbeel
UC Berkeley
OpenAI

Igor Mordatch
OpenAI

Abstract
We explore deep reinforcement learning methods for multi-agent domains. We
begin by analyzing the difficulty of traditional algorithms in the multi-agent case:
Q-learning is challenged by an inherent non-stationarity of the environment, while
policy gradient suffers from a variance that increases as the number of agents grows.
We then present an adaptation of actor-critic methods that considers action policies
of other agents and is able to successfully learn policies that require complex multiagent coordination. Additionally, we introduce a training regimen utilizing an
ensemble of policies for each agent that leads to more robust multi-agent policies.
We show the strength of our approach compared to existing methods in cooperative
as well as competitive scenarios, where agent populations are able to discover
various physical and informational coordination strategies.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has recently been applied to solve challenging problems, from game
playing [23, 28] to robotics [18]. In industrial applications, RL is seeing use in large scale systems
such as data center cooling [1]. Most of the successes of RL have been in single agent domains,
where modelling or predicting the behaviour of other actors in the environment is largely unnecessary.
However, there are a number of important applications that involve interaction between multiple
agents, where emergent behavior and complexity arise from agents co-evolving together. For example,
multi-robot control [20], the discovery of communication and language [29, 8, 24], multiplayer games
[27], and the analysis of social dilemmas [17] all operate in a multi-agent domain. Related problems,
such as variants of hierarchical reinforcement learning [6] can also be seen as a multi-agent system,
with multiple levels of hierarchy being equivalent to multiple agents. Additionally, multi-agent
self-play has recently been shown to be a useful training paradigm [28, 30]. Successfully scaling RL
to environments with multiple agents is crucial to building artificially intelligent systems that can
productively interact with humans and each other.
Unfortunately, traditional reinforcement learning approaches such as Q-Learning or policy gradient
are poorly suited to multi-agent environments. One issue is that each agent’s policy is changing
as training progresses, and the environment becomes non-stationary from the perspective of any
individual agent (in a way that is not explainable by changes in the agent’s own policy). This presents
learning stability challenges and prevents the straightforward use of past experience replay, which is
∗

Equal contribution.
mordatch@openai.com.

Corresponding authors:

ryan.lowe@cs.mcgill.ca, jxwuyi@gmail.com,

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

