Straggler Mitigation in Distributed Optimization
Through Data Encoding

Can Karakus
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA
karakus@ucla.edu

Yifan Sun
Technicolor Research
Los Altos, CA
Yifan.Sun@technicolor.com

Suhas Diggavi
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA
suhasdiggavi@ucla.edu

Wotao Yin
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA
wotaoyin@math.ucla.edu

Abstract
Slow running or straggler tasks can significantly reduce computation speed in
distributed computation. Recently, coding-theory-inspired approaches have been
applied to mitigate the effect of straggling, through embedding redundancy in
certain linear computational steps of the optimization algorithm, thus completing
the computation without waiting for the stragglers. In this paper, we propose an
alternate approach where we embed the redundancy directly in the data itself, and
allow the computation to proceed completely oblivious to encoding. We propose
several encoding schemes, and demonstrate that popular batch algorithms, such as
gradient descent and L-BFGS, applied in a coding-oblivious manner, deterministically achieve sample path linear convergence to an approximate solution of the
original problem, using an arbitrarily varying subset of the nodes at each iteration.
Moreover, this approximation can be controlled by the amount of redundancy
and the number of nodes used in each iteration. We provide experimental results
demonstrating the advantage of the approach over uncoded and data replication
strategies.

1

Introduction

Solving large-scale optimization problems has become feasible through distributed implementations.
However, the efficiency can be significantly hampered by slow processing nodes, network delays or
node failures. In this paper we develop an optimization framework based on encoding the dataset,
which mitigates the effect of straggler nodes in the distributed computing system. Our approach
can be readily adapted to the existing distributed computing infrastructure and software frameworks,
since the node computations are oblivious to the data encoding.
In this paper, we focus on problems of the form
min f (w) :=

w∈Rp

1
min kXw − yk2 ,
2n w∈Rp

(1)

where X ∈ Rn×p , y ∈ Rn×1 represent the data matrix and vector respectively. The function f (w) is
mapped onto a distributed computing setup depicted in Figure 1, consisting of one central server and
m worker nodes, which collectively store the row-partitioned matrix X and vector y. We focus on
batch, synchronous optimization methods, where the delayed or failed nodes can significantly slow
down the overall computation. Note that asynchronous methods are inherently robust to delays caused
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

