Multi-way Interacting Regression via Factorization
Machines
XuanLong Nguyen
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
xuanlong@umich.edu

Mikhail Yurochkin
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
moonfolk@umich.edu

Nikolaos Vasiloglou
LogicBlox
nikolaos.vasiloglou@logicblox.com

Abstract
We propose a Bayesian regression method that accounts for multi-way interactions
of arbitrary orders among the predictor variables. Our model makes use of a
factorization mechanism for representing the regression coefficients of interactions
among the predictors, while the interaction selection is guided by a prior distribution
on random hypergraphs, a construction which generalizes the Finite Feature Model.
We present a posterior inference algorithm based on Gibbs sampling, and establish
posterior consistency of our regression model. Our method is evaluated with
extensive experiments on simulated data and demonstrated to be able to identify
meaningful interactions in applications in genetics and retail demand forecasting.1

1

Introduction

A fundamental challenge in supervised learning, particularly in regression, is the need for learning
functions which produce accurate prediction of the response, while retaining the explanatory power
for the role of the predictor variables in the model. The standard linear regression method is favored
for the latter requirement, but it fails the former when there are complex interactions among the
predictor variables in determining the response. The challenge becomes even more pronounced in a
high-dimensional setting – there are exponentially many potential interactions among the predictors,
for which it is simply not computationally feasible to resort to standard variable selection techniques
(cf. Fan & Lv (2010)).
There are numerous examples where accounting for the predictors’ interactions is of interest, including problems of identifying epistasis (gene-gene) and gene-environment interactions in genetics
(Cordell, 2009), modeling problems in political science (Brambor et al., 2006) and economics (Ai &
Norton, 2003). In the business analytics of retail demand forecasting, a strong prediction model that
also accurately accounts for the interactions of relevant predictors such as seasons, product types,
geography, promotions, etc. plays a critical role in the decision making of marketing design.
A simple way to address the aforementioned issue in the regression problem is to simply restrict
our attention to lower order interactions (i.e. 2- or 3-way) among predictor variables. This can be
achieved, for instance, via a support vector machine (SVM) using polynomial kernels (Cristianini &
Shawe-Taylor, 2000), which pre-determine the maximum order of predictor interactions. In practice,
for computational reasons the degree of the polynomial kernel tends to be small. Factorization
machines (Rendle, 2010) can be viewed as an extension of SVM to sparse settings where most
1

Code is available at https://github.com/moonfolk/MiFM.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

