Reinforcement Learning under Model Mismatch
Aurko Roy1 , Huan Xu2 , and Sebastian Pokutta2
1 Google ,∗ Email: aurkor@google.com
2 ISyE, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA.

Email: huan.xu@isye.gatech.edu
2 ISyE, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA.

Email: sebastian.pokutta@isye.gatech.edu

Abstract
We study reinforcement learning under model misspecification, where we do not
have access to the true environment but only to a reasonably close approximation
to it. We address this problem by extending the framework of robust MDPs of
[1, 15, 11] to the model-free Reinforcement Learning setting, where we do not have
access to the model parameters, but can only sample states from it. We define robust
versions of Q-learning, SARSA, and TD-learning and prove convergence to an
approximately optimal robust policy and approximate value function respectively.
We scale up the robust algorithms to large MDPs via function approximation
and prove convergence under two different settings. We prove convergence of
robust approximate policy iteration and robust approximate value iteration for linear
architectures (under mild assumptions). We also define a robust loss function, the
mean squared robust projected Bellman error and give stochastic gradient descent
algorithms that are guaranteed to converge to a local minimum.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning is concerned with learning a good policy for sequential decision making
problems modeled as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), via interacting with the environment [20, 18].
In this work we address the problem of reinforcement learning from a misspecified model. As a
motivating example, consider the scenario where the problem of interest is not directly accessible,
but instead the agent can interact with a simulator whose dynamics is reasonably close to the true
problem. Another plausible application is when the parameters of the model may evolve over time
but can still be reasonably approximated by an MDP.
To address this problem we use the framework of robust MDPs which was proposed by [1, 15, 11]
to solve the planning problem under model misspecification. The robust MDP framework considers a
class of models and finds the robust optimal policy which is a policy that performs best under the
worst model. It was shown by [1, 15, 11] that the robust optimal policy satisfies the robust Bellman
equation which naturally leads to exact dynamic programming algorithms to find an optimal policy.
However, this approach is model dependent and does not immediately generalize to the model-free
case where the parameters of the model are unknown.
Essentially, reinforcement learning is a model-free framework to solve the Bellman equation using
samples. Therefore, to learn policies from misspecified models, we develop sample based methods to
solve the robust Bellman equation. In particular, we develop robust versions of classical reinforcement
learning algorithms such as Q-learning, SARSA, and TD-learning and prove convergence to an
approximately optimal policy under mild assumptions on the discount factor. We also show that
∗ Work done while at Georgia Tech

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

