Uprooting and Rerooting Higher-Order Graphical
Models
Mark Rowland∗
University of Cambridge
mr504@cam.ac.uk

Adrian Weller∗
University of Cambridge and Alan Turing Institute
aw665@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
The idea of uprooting and rerooting graphical models was introduced specifically
for binary pairwise models by Weller [19] as a way to transform a model to any
of a whole equivalence class of related models, such that inference on any one
model yields inference results for all others. This is very helpful since inference, or
relevant bounds, may be much easier to obtain or more accurate for some model
in the class. Here we introduce methods to extend the approach to models with
higher-order potentials and develop theoretical insights. In particular, we show
that the triplet-consistent polytope TRI is unique in being ‘universally rooted’.
We demonstrate empirically that rerooting can significantly improve accuracy of
methods of inference for higher-order models at negligible computational cost.

1

Introduction

Undirected graphical models with discrete variables are a central tool in machine learning. In this
paper, we focus on three canonical tasks of inference: identifying a configuration with highest
probability (termed maximum a posteriori or MAP inference), computing marginal probabilities of
subsets of variables (marginal inference) and calculating the normalizing constant (partition function).
All three tasks are typically computationally intractable, leading to much work to identify settings
where exact polynomial-time methods apply, or to develop approximate algorithms that perform well.
Weller [19] introduced an elegant method which first uproots and then reroots a given model M to any
of a whole class of rerooted models {Mi }. The method relies on specific properties of binary pairwise
models and makes use of an earlier construction which reduced MAP inference to the MAXCUT
problem on the suspension graph ∇G (1; 2; 12; 19, see §3 for details). For many important inference
tasks, the rerooted models are equivalent in the sense that results for any one model yield results for
all others with negligible computational cost. This can be very helpful since various models in the
class may present very different computational difficulties for inference.
Here we show how the idea may be generalized to apply to models with higher-order potentials over
any number of variables. Such models have many important applications, for example in computer
vision [6] or modeling protein interactions [5]. As for pairwise models, we again obtain significant
benefits for inference. We also develop a deeper theoretical understanding and derive important new
results. We highlight the following contributions:
• In §3-§4, we show how to achieve efficient uprooting and rerooting of binary graphical models
with potentials of any order, while still allowing easy recovery of inference results.
• In §5, to simplify the subsequent analysis, we introduce pure k-potentials for any order k, which
may be of independent interest. We show that there is essentially only one pure k-potential which
we call the even k-potential, and that even k-potentials form a basis for all model potentials.
• In §6, we carefully analyze the effect of uprooting and rerooting on Sherali-Adams [11] relaxations
Lr of the marginal polytope, for any order r. One surprising observation in §6.2 is that L3 (the
∗

Authors contributed equally.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

