Deconvolutional Paragraph Representation Learning

Yizhe Zhang

Dinghan Shen

Guoyin Wang

Zhe Gan

Ricardo Henao

Lawrence Carin
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Duke University

Abstract
Learning latent representations from long text sequences is an important first step
in many natural language processing applications. Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs) have become a cornerstone for this challenging task. However, the quality of sentences during RNN-based decoding (reconstruction) decreases with the
length of the text. We propose a sequence-to-sequence, purely convolutional and
deconvolutional autoencoding framework that is free of the above issue, while
also being computationally efficient. The proposed method is simple, easy to
implement and can be leveraged as a building block for many applications. We
show empirically that compared to RNNs, our framework is better at reconstructing and correcting long paragraphs. Quantitative evaluation on semi-supervised
text classification and summarization tasks demonstrate the potential for better
utilization of long unlabeled text data.

1

Introduction

A central task in natural language processing is to learn representations (features) for sentences or
multi-sentence paragraphs. These representations are typically a required first step toward more
applied tasks, such as sentiment analysis [1, 2, 3, 4], machine translation [5, 6, 7], dialogue systems
[8, 9, 10] and text summarization [11, 12, 13]. An approach for learning sentence representations
from data is to leverage an encoder-decoder framework [14]. In a standard autoencoding setup, a
vector representation is first encoded from an embedding of an input sequence, then decoded to the
original domain to reconstruct the input sequence. Recent advances in Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs) [15], especially Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [16] and variants [17], have achieved
great success in numerous tasks that heavily rely on sentence-representation learning.
RNN-based methods typically model sentences recursively as a generative Markov process with
hidden units, where the one-step-ahead word from an input sentence is generated by conditioning on
previous words and hidden units, via emission and transition operators modeled as neural networks.
In principle, the neural representations of input sequences aim to encapsulate sufficient information
about their structure, to subsequently recover the original sentences via decoding. However, due to the
recursive nature of the RNN, challenges exist for RNN-based strategies to fully encode a sentence into
a vector representation. Typically, during training, the RNN generates words in sequence conditioning
on previous ground-truth words, i.e., teacher forcing training [18], rather than decoding the whole
sentence solely from the encoded representation vector. This teacher forcing strategy has proven
important because it forces the output sequence of the RNN to stay close to the ground-truth sequence.
However, allowing the decoder to access ground truth information when reconstructing the sequence
weakens the encoder’s ability to produce self-contained representations, that carry enough information
to steer the decoder through the decoding process without additional guidance. Aiming to solve
this problem, [19] proposed a scheduled sampling approach during training, which gradually shifts
from learning via both latent representation and ground-truth signals to solely use the encoded latent
representation. Unfortunately, [20] showed that scheduled sampling is a fundamentally inconsistent
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

