Excess Risk Bounds for the Bayes Risk using
Variational Inference in Latent Gaussian Models
Rishit Sheth and Roni Khardon
Department of Computer Science, Tufts University
Medford, MA, 02155, USA
rishit.sheth@tufts.edu | roni@cs.tufts.edu

Abstract
Bayesian models are established as one of the main successful paradigms for
complex problems in machine learning. To handle intractable inference, research
in this area has developed new approximation methods that are fast and effective.
However, theoretical analysis of the performance of such approximations is not
well developed. The paper furthers such analysis by providing bounds on the excess
risk of variational inference algorithms and related regularized loss minimization
algorithms for a large class of latent variable models with Gaussian latent variables.
We strengthen previous results for variational algorithms by showing that they
are competitive with any point-estimate predictor. Unlike previous work, we
provide bounds on the risk of the Bayesian predictor and not just the risk of the
Gibbs predictor for the same approximate posterior. The bounds are applied in
complex models including sparse Gaussian processes and correlated topic models.
Theoretical results are complemented by identifying novel approximations to
the Bayesian objective that attempt to minimize the risk directly. An empirical
evaluation compares the variational and new algorithms shedding further light on
their performance.

1

Introduction

Bayesian models are established as one of the main successful paradigms for complex problems
in machine learning. Since inference in complex models is intractable, research in this area is
devoted to developing new approximation methods that are fast and effective (Laplace/Taylor
approximation, variational approximation, expectation propagation, MCMC, etc.), i.e., these can
be seen as algorithmic contributions. Much less is known about theoretical guarantees on the
loss incurred by such approximations, either when the Bayesian model is correct or under model
misspecification.
Several authors provide risk bounds for the Bayesian predictor (that aggregates predictions over its
posterior and then predicts), e.g., see [15, 6, 12]. However, the analysis is specialized to certain
classification or regression settings, and the results have not been shown to be applicable to complex
Bayesian models and algorithms like the ones studied in this paper.
In recent work, [7] and [1] identified strong connections between variational inference [10] and
PAC-Bayes bounds [14] and have provided oracle inequalities for variational inference. As we show
in Section 3, similar results that are stronger in some aspects can be obtained by viewing variational
inference as performing regularized loss minimization. These results are an exciting first step, but
they are limited in two aspects. First, they hold for the Gibbs predictor (that samples a hypothesis
and uses it to predict) and not the Bayesian predictor and, second, they are only meaningful against
“weak” competitors. For example, the bounds go to infinity if the competitor is a point estimate
with zero variance. In addition, these results do not explicitly address hierarchical Bayesian models
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

