EX2: Exploration with Exemplar Models for Deep
Reinforcement Learning

Justin Fu∗
John D. Co-Reyes∗
Sergey Levine
University of California Berkeley
{justinfu,jcoreyes,svlevine}@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning algorithms have been shown to learn complex tasks
using highly general policy classes. However, sparse reward problems remain a
significant challenge. Exploration methods based on novelty detection have been
particularly successful in such settings but typically require generative or predictive
models of the observations, which can be difficult to train when the observations
are very high-dimensional and complex, as in the case of raw images. We propose a
novelty detection algorithm for exploration that is based entirely on discriminatively
trained exemplar models, where classifiers are trained to discriminate each visited
state against all others. Intuitively, novel states are easier to distinguish against
other states seen during training. We show that this kind of discriminative modeling
corresponds to implicit density estimation, and that it can be combined with countbased exploration to produce competitive results on a range of popular benchmark
tasks, including state-of-the-art results on challenging egocentric observations in
the vizDoom benchmark.

1

Introduction

Recent work has shown that methods that combine reinforcement learning with rich function approximators, such as deep neural networks, can solve a range of complex tasks, from playing Atari
games (Mnih et al., 2015) to controlling simulated robots (Schulman et al., 2015). Although deep
reinforcement learning methods allow for complex policy representations, they do not by themselves
solve the exploration problem: when the reward signals are rare and sparse, such methods can struggle
to acquire meaningful policies. Standard exploration strategies, such as -greedy strategies (Mnih
et al., 2015) or Gaussian noise (Lillicrap et al., 2015), are undirected and do not explicitly seek out
interesting states. A promising avenue for more directed exploration is to explicitly estimate the
novelty of a state, using predictive models that generate future states (Schmidhuber, 1990; Stadie
et al., 2015; Achiam & Sastry, 2017) or model state densities (Bellemare et al., 2016; Tang et al., 2017;
Abel et al., 2016). Related concepts such as count-based bonuses have been shown to provide substantial speedups in classic reinforcement learning (Strehl & Littman, 2009; Kolter & Ng, 2009), and
several recent works have proposed information-theoretic or probabilistic approaches to exploration
based on this idea (Houthooft et al., 2016; Chentanez et al., 2005) by drawing on formal results in
simpler discrete or linear systems (Bubeck & Cesa-Bianchi, 2012). However, most novelty estimation
methods rely on building generative or predictive models that explicitly model the distribution over
the current or next observation. When the observations are complex and high-dimensional, such as in
the case of raw images, these models can be difficult to train, since generating and predicting images
and other high-dimensional objects is still an open problem, despite recent progress (Salimans et al.,
2016). Though successful results with generative novelty models have been reported with simple
synthetic images, such as in Atari games (Bellemare et al., 2016; Tang et al., 2017), we show in our
∗

equal contribution.

