Near-Optimal Edge Evaluation in Explicit
Generalized Binomial Graphs

Sanjiban Choudhury
The Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
sanjiban@cmu.edu

Shervin Javdani
The Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
sjavdani@cmu.edu

Siddhartha Srinivasa
The Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
siddh@cs.cmu.edu

Sebastian Scherer
The Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
basti@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Robotic motion-planning problems, such as a UAV flying fast in a partially-known
environment or a robot arm moving around cluttered objects, require finding
collision-free paths quickly. Typically, this is solved by constructing a graph,
where vertices represent robot configurations and edges represent potentially valid
movements of the robot between these configurations. The main computational
bottlenecks are expensive edge evaluations to check for collisions. State of the art
planning methods do not reason about the optimal sequence of edges to evaluate
in order to find a collision free path quickly. In this paper, we do so by drawing
a novel equivalence between motion planning and the Bayesian active learning
paradigm of decision region determination (DRD). Unfortunately, a straight application of existing methods requires computation exponential in the number
of edges in a graph. We present B I SEC T, an efficient and near-optimal algorithm to solve the DRD problem when edges are independent Bernoulli random
variables. By leveraging this property, we are able to significantly reduce computational complexity from exponential to linear in the number of edges. We show
that B I SEC T outperforms several state of the art algorithms on a spectrum of
planning problems for mobile robots, manipulators, and real flight data collected
from a full scale helicopter. Open-source code and details can be found here:
https://github.com/sanjibac/matlab_learning_collision_checking

1

Introduction

Motion planning, the task of computing collision-free motions for a robotic system from a start to
a goal configuration, has a rich and varied history [23]. Up until now, the bulk of the prominent
research has focused on the development of tractable planning algorithms with provable worst-case
performance guarantees such as computational complexity [3], probabilistic completeness [24] or
asymptotic optimality [20]. In contrast, analysis of the expected performance of these algorithms
on the real world planning problems a robot encounters has received considerably less attention,
primarily due to the lack of standardized datasets or robotic platforms. However, recent advances in
affordable sensors and actuators have enabled mass deployment of robots that navigate, interact and
collect real data. This motivates us to examine the following question: “How can we design planning
algorithms that, subject to on-board computation constraints, maximize their expected performance
on the actual distribution of problems that a robot encounters?”
This paper addresses a class of robotic motion planning problems where path evaluation is expensive.
For example, in robot arm planning [12], evaluation requires expensive geometric intersection
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

