Decomposable Submodular Function Minimization
Discrete and Continuous
Alina Ene∗

Huy L. Nguyễn†

László A. Végh‡

Abstract
This paper investigates connections between discrete and continuous approaches for
decomposable submodular function minimization. We provide improved running
time estimates for the state-of-the-art continuous algorithms for the problem using
combinatorial arguments. We also provide a systematic experimental comparison
of the two types of methods, based on a clear distinction between level-0 and
level-1 algorithms.

1

Introduction

Submodular functions arise in a wide range of applications: graph theory, optimization, economics,
game theory, to name a few. A function f : 2V → R on a ground set V is submodular if f (X) +
f (Y ) ≥ f (X ∩ Y ) + f (X ∪ Y ) for all sets X, Y ⊆ V . Submodularity can also be interpreted as a
diminishing returns property.
There has been significant interest in submodular optimization in the machine learning and computer
vision communities. The submodular function minimization (SFM) problem arises in problems
in image segmentation or MAP inference tasks in Markov Random Fields. Landmark results in
combinatorial optimization give polynomial-time exact algorithms for SFM. However, the highdegree polynomial dependence in the running time is prohibitive for large-scale problem instances.
The main objective in this context is to develop fast and scalable SFM algorithms.
Instead of minimizing arbitrary submodular functions, several recent papers aim to exploit special
structural properties of submodular functions arising in practical applications. This paper focuses on
the popular model of decomposable submodular functions. These are functions that can be written as
sums of several “simple” submodular functions defined on small supports.
Some definitions are needed to introduce our problem setting. Let f : 2V → R be a submodular
function, and let n := |V |. We can assume w.l.o.g. that f (∅) = 0. We are interested in solving the
submodular function minimization problem:
min f (S).

(SFM)

S⊆V

For a vector y ∈ RV and a set S ⊆ V , we use the notation y(S) :=
of a submodular function is defined as

P

v∈S y(v). The base polytope

B(f ) := {y ∈ RV : y(S) ≤ f (S) ∀S ⊆ V, y(V ) = f (V )}.
One can optimize linear functions over B(f ) using the greedy algorithm. The SFM problem can be
reduced to finding the minimum norm point of the base polytope B(f ) [10].


1
min
kyk22 : y ∈ B(f ) .
(Min-Norm)
2
∗

Department of Computer Science, Boston University, aene@bu.edu
College of Computer and Information Science, Northeastern University, hu.nguyen@northeastern.edu
‡
Department of Mathematics, London School of Economics, L.Vegh@lse.ac.uk
†

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

