Multiplicative Weights Update with Constant
Step-Size in Congestion Games: Convergence, Limit
Cycles and Chaos

Gerasimos Palaiopanos∗
SUTD
Singapore
gerasimosath@yahoo.com

Ioannis Panageas†
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
ioannis@csail.mit.edu

Georgios Piliouras‡
SUTD
Singapore
georgios@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
The Multiplicative Weights Update (MWU) method is a ubiquitous meta-algorithm
that works as follows: A distribution is maintained on a certain set, and at each
step the probability assigned to action γ is multiplied by (1 − C(γ)) > 0 where
C(γ) is the “cost" of action γ and then rescaled to ensure that the new values form
a distribution. We analyze MWU in congestion games where agents use arbitrary
admissible constants as learning rates  and prove convergence to exact Nash
equilibria. Interestingly, this convergence result does not carry over to the nearly
homologous MWU variant where at each step the probability assigned to action γ
is multiplied by (1 − )C(γ) even for the simplest case of two-agent, two-strategy
load balancing games, where such dynamics can provably lead to limit cycles or
even chaotic behavior.

1

Introduction

The Multiplicative Weights Update (MWU) is a ubiquitous meta-algorithm with numerous applications in different fields [2]. It is particularly useful in game theory due to its regret-minimizing
properties [24, 11]. It is typically introduced in two nearly identical variants, the one in which at
each step the probability assigned to action γ is multiplied by (1 − C(γ)) and the one in which
it is multiplied by (1 − )C(γ) where C(γ) is the cost of action γ. We will refer to the first as the
linear variant, MWU` , and the second as the exponential, MWUe (also known as Hedge). In the
literature there is little distinction between these two variants as both carry the same advantageous
regret-minimizing property. It is also well known that in order to achieve sublinear regret, the learning
rate  must be decreasing as time progresses. This constraint raises a natural question: Are there
interesting classes of games where MWU behaves well without the need to fine-tune its learning rate?
A natural setting to test the learning behavior of MWU with constant learning rates  is the wellstudied class of congestion games. Unfortunately, even for the simplest instances of congestion
games MWUe fails to converge to equilibria. For example, even in the simplest case of two balls two
∗

Gerasimos Palaiopanos would like to acknowledge a SUTD Presidential fellowship.
Ioannis Panageas would like to acknowledge a MIT-SUTD postdoctoral fellowship. Part of this work was
completed while Ioannis Panageas was a PhD student at Georgia Institute of Technology and a visiting scientist
at the Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing.
‡
Georgios Piliouras would like to acknowledge SUTD grant SRG ESD 2015 097, MOE AcRF Tier 2 Grant
2016-T2-1-170 and a NRF Fellowship. Part of this work was completed while Georgios Piliouras was a visiting
scientist at the Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing.
†

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

