Unsupervised learning of object frames by dense
equivariant image labelling

James Thewlis1

Hakan Bilen2

1

Andrea Vedaldi1
2

Visual Geometry Group
University of Oxford
{jdt,vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk

School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
hbilen@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
One of the key challenges of visual perception is to extract abstract models of 3D
objects and object categories from visual measurements, which are affected by
complex nuisance factors such as viewpoint, occlusion, motion, and deformations.
Starting from the recent idea of viewpoint factorization, we propose a new approach
that, given a large number of images of an object and no other supervision, can
extract a dense object-centric coordinate frame. This coordinate frame is invariant
to deformations of the images and comes with a dense equivariant labelling neural
network that can map image pixels to their corresponding object coordinates.
We demonstrate the applicability of this method to simple articulated objects
and deformable objects such as human faces, learning embeddings from random
synthetic transformations or optical flow correspondences, all without any manual
supervision.

1

Introduction

Humans can easily construct mental models of complex 3D objects and object categories from
visual observations. This is remarkable because the dependency between an object’s appearance
and its structure is tangled in a complex manner with extrinsic nuisance factors such as viewpoint,
illumination, and articulation. Therefore, learning the intrinsic structure of an object from images
requires removing these unwanted factors of variation from the data.
The recent work of [39] has proposed an unsupervised approach to do so, based on on the concept
of viewpoint factorization. The idea is to learn a deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) that
can, given an image of the object, detect a discrete set of object landmarks. Differently from
traditional approaches to landmark detection, however, landmarks are neither defined nor supervised
manually. Instead, the detectors are learned using only the requirement that the detected points must
be equivariant (consistent) with deformations of the input images. The authors of [39] show that this
constraint is sufficient to learn landmarks that are “intrinsic” to the objects and hence capture their
structure; remarkably, due to the generalization ability of CNNs, the landmark points are detected
consistently not only across deformations of a given object instance, which are observed during
training, but also across different instances. This behaviour emerges automatically from training on
thousands of single-instance correspondences.
In this paper, we take this idea further, moving beyond a sparse set of landmarks to a dense model
of the object structure (section 3). Our method relates each point on an object to a point in a low
dimensional vector space in a way that is consistent across variation in motion and in instance identity.
This gives rise to an object-centric coordinate system, which allows points on the surface of an object
to be indexed semantically (figure 1). As an illustrative example, take the object category of a face
and the vector space R3 . Our goal is to semantically map out the object such that any point on a
face, such as the left eye, lives at a canonical position in this “label space”. We train a CNN to learn
the function that projects any face image into this space, essentially “coloring” each pixel with its
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

