Causal Effect Inference with
Deep Latent-Variable Models

Christos Louizos
University of Amsterdam
TNO Intelligent Imaging
c.louizos@uva.nl

Uri Shalit
New York University
CIMS
uas1@nyu.edu

David Sontag
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
CSAIL & IMES
dsontag@mit.edu

Joris Mooij
University of Amsterdam
j.m.mooij@uva.nl

Richard Zemel
University of Toronto
CIFAR∗
zemel@cs.toronto.edu

Max Welling
University of Amsterdam
CIFAR∗
m.welling@uva.nl

Abstract
Learning individual-level causal effects from observational data, such as inferring
the most effective medication for a specific patient, is a problem of growing
importance for policy makers. The most important aspect of inferring causal effects
from observational data is the handling of confounders, factors that affect both an
intervention and its outcome. A carefully designed observational study attempts
to measure all important confounders. However, even if one does not have direct
access to all confounders, there may exist noisy and uncertain measurement of
proxies for confounders. We build on recent advances in latent variable modeling
to simultaneously estimate the unknown latent space summarizing the confounders
and the causal effect. Our method is based on Variational Autoencoders (VAE)
which follow the causal structure of inference with proxies. We show our method
is significantly more robust than existing methods, and matches the state-of-the-art
on previous benchmarks focused on individual treatment effects.

1

Introduction

Understanding the causal effect of an intervention t on an individual with features X is a fundamental
problem across many domains. Examples include understanding the effect of medications on a
patient’s health, or of teaching methods on a student’s chance of graduation. With the availability
of large datasets in domains such as healthcare and education, there is much interest in developing
methods for learning individual-level causal effects from observational data [42, 53, 25, 43].
The most crucial aspect of inferring causal relationships from observational data is confounding. A
variable which affects both the intervention and the outcome is known as a confounder of the effect
of the intervention on the outcome. On the one hand, if such a confounder can be measured, the
standard way to account for its effect is by “controlling” for it, often through covariate adjustment or
propensity score re-weighting [39]. On the the other hand, if a confounder is hidden or unmeasured,
it is impossible in the general case (i.e. without further assumptions) to estimate the effect of the
intervention on the outcome [40]. For example, socio-economic status can affect both the medication
a patient has access to, and the patient’s general health. Therefore socio-economic status acts as
confounder between the medication and health outcomes, and without measuring it we cannot in
∗

Canadian Institute For Advanced Research

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

