Multi-view Matrix Factorization for Linear
Dynamical System Estimation
Mahdi Karami, Martha White, Dale Schuurmans, Csaba Szepesvári
Department of Computer Science
University of Alberta
Edmonton, AB, Canada
{karami1, whitem, daes, szepesva}@ualberta.ca

Abstract
We consider maximum likelihood estimation of linear dynamical systems with
generalized-linear observation models. Maximum likelihood is typically considered
to be hard in this setting since latent states and transition parameters must be
inferred jointly. Given that expectation-maximization does not scale and is prone
to local minima, moment-matching approaches from the subspace identification
literature have become standard, despite known statistical efficiency issues. In this
paper, we instead reconsider likelihood maximization and develop an optimization
based strategy for recovering the latent states and transition parameters. Key to
the approach is a two-view reformulation of maximum likelihood estimation for
linear dynamical systems that enables the use of global optimization algorithms for
matrix factorization. We show that the proposed estimation strategy outperforms
widely-used identification algorithms such as subspace identification methods, both
in terms of accuracy and runtime.

1

Introduction

Linear dynamical systems (LDS) provide a fundamental model for estimation and forecasting in
discrete-time multi-variate time series. In an LDS, each observation is associated with a latent state;
these unobserved states evolve as a Gauss-Markov process where each state is a linear function of the
previous state plus noise. Such a model of a partially observed dynamical system has been widely
adopted, particularly due to its efficiency for prediction of future observations using Kalman filtering.
Estimating the parameters of an LDS—sometimes referred to as system identification—is a difficult
problem, particularly if the goal is to obtain the maximum likelihood estimate of parameters. Consequently, spectral methods from the subspace identification literature, based on moment-matching
rather than maximum likelihood, have become popular. These methods provide closed form solutions,
often involving a singular value decomposition of a matrix constructed from the empirical moments
of observations (Moonen and Ramos, 1993; Van Overschee and De Moor, 1994; Viberg, 1995;
Katayama, 2006; Song et al., 2010; Boots and Gordon, 2012). The most widely used such algorithms
for parameter estimation in LDSs are the family of N4SID algorithms (Van Overschee and De Moor,
1994), which are computationally efficient and asymptotically consistent (Andersson, 2009; Hsu
et al., 2012). Recent evidence, however, suggests that these moment-matching approaches may suffer
from weak statistical efficiency, performing particularly poorly with small sample sizes (Foster et al.,
2012; Zhao and Poupart, 2014).
Maximum likelihood for LDS estimation, on the other hand, has several advantages. For example, it
is asymptotically efficient under general conditions (Cramér, 1946, Ch.33), and this property often
translates to near-minimax finite-sample performance. Further, maximum likelihood is amenable
to coping with missing data. Another benefit is that, since the likelihood for exponential families
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

