Fast, Sample-Efﬁcient Algorithms for
Structured Phase Retrieval
Gauri jagatap
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Iowa State University

Chinmay Hegde
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Iowa State University

Abstract
We consider the problem of recovering a signal x∗ ∈ Rn , from magnitude-only
measurements, yi = |ai , x∗ | for i = {1, 2, . . . , m}. Also known as the phase
retrieval problem, it is a fundamental challenge in nano-, bio- and astronomical
imaging systems, and speech processing. The problem is ill-posed, and therefore
additional assumptions on the signal and/or the measurements are necessary.
In this paper, we ﬁrst study the case where the underlying signal x∗ is s-sparse.
We develop a novel recovery algorithm that we call Compressive Phase Retrieval
with Alternating Minimization, or CoPRAM. Our algorithm is simple and can
be obtained via a natural combination of the classical alternating minimization
approach for phase retrieval, with the CoSaMP algorithm for sparse recovery.
Despite
simplicity, we prove that our algorithm achieves a sample complexity
 its 
of O s2 log n with Gaussian samples, which matches the best known existing
results. It also demonstrates linear convergence in theory and practice and requires
no extra tuning parameters other than the signal sparsity level s.
We then consider the case where the underlying signal x∗ arises from structured
sparsity models. We speciﬁcally examine the case of block-sparse signals with
uniform block size of b and block sparsity k = s/b. For this problem, we design
a recovery algorithm that we call Block CoPRAM that further reduces the sample
complexity to O (ks log n). For sufﬁciently large block lengths of b = Θ(s), this
bound equates to O (s log n). To our knowledge, this constitutes the ﬁrst end-toend linearly convergent family of algorithms for phase retrieval where the Gaussian
sample complexity has a sub-quadratic dependence on the sparsity level of the
signal.

1

Introduction

1.1

Motivation

In this paper, we consider the problem of recovering a signal x∗ ∈ Rn from (possibly noisy)
magnitude-only linear measurements. That is, for sampling vector ai ∈ Rn , if
(1)
yi = |ai , x∗ | , for i = 1, . . . , m,
then the task is to recover x∗ using the measurements y and the sampling matrix A = [a1 . . . am ] .
Problems of this kind arise in numerous scenarios in machine learning, imaging, and statistics.
For example, the classical problem of phase retrieval is encountered in imaging systems such as
diffraction imaging, X-ray crystallography, ptychography, and astronomy [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. For such
imaging systems, the optical sensors used for light acquisition can only record the intensity of the
light waves but not their phase. In terms of our setup, the vector x∗ corresponds to an image (with
a resolution of n pixels) and the measurements correspond to the magnitudes of its 2D Fourier
coefﬁcients. The goal is to stably recover the image x∗ using as few observations m as possible.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

