Regularized Modal Regression with Applications in
Cognitive Impairment Prediction

Xiaoqian Wang1 , Hong Chen1 , Weidong Cai2 , Dinggang Shen3 , Heng Huang1∗
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, USA
2
School of Information Technologies, University of Sydney, Australia
3
Department of Radiology and BRIC, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA
xqwang1991@gmail.com,chenh@mail.hzau.edu.cn
tom.cai@sydney.edu.au,dinggang_shen@med.unc.edu,heng.huang@pitt.edu
1

Abstract
Linear regression models have been successfully used to function estimation and
model selection in high-dimensional data analysis. However, most existing methods
are built on least squares with the mean square error (MSE) criterion, which
are sensitive to outliers and their performance may be degraded for heavy-tailed
noise. In this paper, we go beyond this criterion by investigating the regularized
modal regression from a statistical learning viewpoint. A new regularized modal
regression model is proposed for estimation and variable selection, which is robust
to outliers, heavy-tailed noise, and skewed noise. On the theoretical side, we
establish the approximation estimate for learning the conditional mode function,
the sparsity analysis for variable selection, and the robustness characterization. On
the application side, we applied our model to successfully improve the cognitive
impairment prediction using the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative
(ADNI) cohort data.

1

Introduction

Modal regression [21, 5] has gained increasing attention recently due to its effectiveness on function
estimation and robustness to outliers and heavy-tailed noise. Unlike the traditional least-square
estimator pursuing the conditional mean, modal regression aims to estimate the conditional mode of
output Y given the input X = x. It is well known that the conditional modes can reveal the structure
of outputs and the trends of observation, which is missed by the conditional mean [29, 4]. Thus,
modal regression often achieves better performance than the traditional least square regression in
practical applications.
There are some studies for modal regression with (semi-)parametric or nonparametric methods, such
as [29, 28, 4, 6]. For parametric approaches, a parametric form is required for the global conditional
mode function. Recent works in [29, 28] belong to this category, where the method in [28] is based
on linear mode function assumption and the algorithm in [29] is associated with the local polynomial
regression. For non-parametric approaches, the conditional mode is usually derived by maximizing a
conditional density or a joint density. Typical work for this setting is established in [4], where a local
modal regression is proposed based on kernel density estimation and theoretical analysis is provided
to characterize asymptotic error bounds.
Most of the above mentioned works consider the asymptotic theory on the conditional mode function
estimation. Recently, several studies on variable selection under modal regression were also conducted in [30, 27]. These approaches addressed the problem from statistical theory viewpoint (e.g.,
∗

X. Wang and H. Chen made equal contributions to this paper. H. Huang is the corresponding author.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

