The Marginal Value of Adaptive Gradient Methods
in Machine Learning
Ashia C. Wilson] , Rebecca Roelofs] , Mitchell Stern] , Nathan Srebro† , and Benjamin Recht]
{ashia,roelofs,mitchell}@berkeley.edu, nati@ttic.edu, brecht@berkeley.edu
†

]
University of California, Berkeley
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago

Abstract
Adaptive optimization methods, which perform local optimization with a metric
constructed from the history of iterates, are becoming increasingly popular for
training deep neural networks. Examples include AdaGrad, RMSProp, and Adam.
We show that for simple overparameterized problems, adaptive methods often find
drastically different solutions than gradient descent (GD) or stochastic gradient
descent (SGD). We construct an illustrative binary classification problem where
the data is linearly separable, GD and SGD achieve zero test error, and AdaGrad,
Adam, and RMSProp attain test errors arbitrarily close to half. We additionally
study the empirical generalization capability of adaptive methods on several stateof-the-art deep learning models. We observe that the solutions found by adaptive
methods generalize worse (often significantly worse) than SGD, even when these
solutions have better training performance. These results suggest that practitioners
should reconsider the use of adaptive methods to train neural networks.

1

Introduction

An increasing share of deep learning researchers are training their models with adaptive gradient
methods [3, 12] due to their rapid training time [6]. Adam [8] in particular has become the default
algorithm used across many deep learning frameworks. However, the generalization and out-ofsample behavior of such adaptive gradient methods remains poorly understood. Given that many
passes over the data are needed to minimize the training objective, typical regret guarantees do not
necessarily ensure that the found solutions will generalize [17].
Notably, when the number of parameters exceeds the number of data points, it is possible that the
choice of algorithm can dramatically influence which model is learned [15]. Given two different
minimizers of some optimization problem, what can we say about their relative ability to generalize?
In this paper, we show that adaptive and non-adaptive optimization methods indeed find very different
solutions with very different generalization properties. We provide a simple generative model for
binary classification where the population is linearly separable (i.e., there exists a solution with large
margin), but AdaGrad [3], RMSProp [21], and Adam converge to a solution that incorrectly classifies
new data with probability arbitrarily close to half. On this same example, SGD finds a solution with
zero error on new data. Our construction suggests that adaptive methods tend to give undue influence
to spurious features that have no effect on out-of-sample generalization.
We additionally present numerical experiments demonstrating that adaptive methods generalize worse
than their non-adaptive counterparts. Our experiments reveal three primary findings. First, with
the same amount of hyperparameter tuning, SGD and SGD with momentum outperform adaptive
methods on the development/test set across all evaluated models and tasks. This is true even when
the adaptive methods achieve the same training loss or lower than non-adaptive methods. Second,
adaptive methods often display faster initial progress on the training set, but their performance quickly
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

