Unsupervised Image-to-Image Translation Networks
Ming-Yu Liu,

Thomas Breuel, Jan Kautz
NVIDIA
{mingyul,tbreuel,jkautz}@nvidia.com

Abstract
Unsupervised image-to-image translation aims at learning a joint distribution of
images in different domains by using images from the marginal distributions in
individual domains. Since there exists an infinite set of joint distributions that
can arrive the given marginal distributions, one could infer nothing about the joint
distribution from the marginal distributions without additional assumptions. To
address the problem, we make a shared-latent space assumption and propose an
unsupervised image-to-image translation framework based on Coupled GANs.
We compare the proposed framework with competing approaches and present
high quality image translation results on various challenging unsupervised image
translation tasks, including street scene image translation, animal image translation,
and face image translation. We also apply the proposed framework to domain
adaptation and achieve state-of-the-art performance on benchmark datasets. Code
and additional results are available in https://github.com/mingyuliutw/unit.

1

Introduction

Many computer visions problems can be posed as an image-to-image translation problem, mapping
an image in one domain to a corresponding image in another domain. For example, super-resolution
can be considered as a problem of mapping a low-resolution image to a corresponding high-resolution
image; colorization can be considered as a problem of mapping a gray-scale image to a corresponding
color image. The problem can be studied in supervised and unsupervised learning settings. In the
supervised setting, paired of corresponding images in different domains are available [8, 15]. In the
unsupervised setting, we only have two independent sets of images where one consists of images
in one domain and the other consists of images in another domain—there exist no paired examples
showing how an image could be translated to a corresponding image in another domain. Due to
lack of corresponding images, the UNsupervised Image-to-image Translation (UNIT) problem is
considered harder, but it is more applicable since training data collection is easier.
When analyzing the image translation problem from a probabilistic modeling perspective, the key
challenge is to learn a joint distribution of images in different domains. In the unsupervised setting,
the two sets consist of images from two marginal distributions in two different domains, and the task is
to infer the joint distribution using these images. The coupling theory [16] states there exist an infinite
set of joint distributions that can arrive the given marginal distributions in general. Hence, inferring
the joint distribution from the marginal distributions is a highly ill-posed problem. To address the
ill-posed problem, we need additional assumptions on the structure of the joint distribution.
To this end we make a shared-latent space assumption, which assumes a pair of corresponding images
in different domains can be mapped to a same latent representation in a shared-latent space. Based on
the assumption, we propose a UNIT framework that are based on generative adversarial networks
(GANs) and variational autoencoders (VAEs). We model each image domain using a VAE-GAN. The
adversarial training objective interacts with a weight-sharing constraint, which enforces a sharedlatent space, to generate corresponding images in two domains, while the variational autoencoders
relate translated images with input images in the respective domains. We applied the proposed
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

