Deep Lattice Networks and Partial Monotonic
Functions
Seungil You, David Ding, Kevin Canini, Jan Pfeifer, Maya R. Gupta
Google Research
1600 Amphitheatre Parkway, Mountain View, CA 94043
{siyou,dwding,canini,janpf,mayagupta}@google.com

Abstract
We propose learning deep models that are monotonic with respect to a userspecified set of inputs by alternating layers of linear embeddings, ensembles of
lattices, and calibrators (piecewise linear functions), with appropriate constraints
for monotonicity, and jointly training the resulting network. We implement the layers and projections with new computational graph nodes in TensorFlow and use the
Adam optimizer and batched stochastic gradients. Experiments on benchmark and
real-world datasets show that six-layer monotonic deep lattice networks achieve
state-of-the art performance for classification and regression with monotonicity
guarantees.

1

Introduction

We propose building models with multiple layers of lattices, which we refer to as deep lattice networks
(DLNs). While we hypothesize that DLNs may generally be useful, we focus on the challenge of
learning flexible partially-monotonic functions, that is, models that are guaranteed to be monotonic
with respect to a user-specified subset of the inputs. For example, if one is predicting whether to
give someone else a loan, we expect and would like to constrain the prediction to be monotonically
increasing with respect to the applicant’s income, if all other features are unchanged. Imposing
monotonicity acts as a regularizer, improves generalization to test data, and makes the end-to-end
model more interpretable, debuggable, and trustworthy.
To learn more flexible partial monotonic functions, we propose architectures that alternate three
kinds of layers: linear embeddings, calibrators, and ensembles of lattices, each of which is trained
discriminatively to optimize a structural risk objective and obey any given monotonicity constraints.
See Fig. 2 for an example DLN with nine such layers.
Lattices are interpolated look-up tables, as shown in Fig. 1. Lattices have been shown to be an
efficient nonlinear function class that can be constrained to be monotonic by adding appropriate
sparse linear inequalities on the parameters [1], and can be trained in a standard empirical risk
minimization framework [2, 1]. Recent work showed lattices could be jointly trained as an ensemble
to learn flexible monotonic functions for an arbitrary number of inputs [3].
Calibrators are one-dimensional lattices, which nonlinearly transform a single input [1]; see Fig. 1 for
an example. They have been used to pre-process inputs in two-layer models: calibrators-then-linear
models [4], calibrators-then-lattice models [1], and calibrators-then-ensemble-of-lattices model [3].
Here, we extend their use to discriminatively normalize between other layers of the deep model, as
well as act as a pre-processing layer. We also find that using a calibrator for a last layer can help
nonlinearly transform the outputs to better match the labels.
We first describe the proposed DLN layers in detail in Section 2. In Section 3, we review more related
work in learning flexible partial monotonic functions. We provide theoretical results characterizing
the flexibility of the DLN in Section 4, followed by details on our open-source TensorFlow imple31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

