Hierarchical Implicit Models and
Likelihood-Free Variational Inference
Dustin Tran
Columbia University

Rajesh Ranganath
Princeton University

David M. Blei
Columbia University

Abstract
Implicit probabilistic models are a flexible class of models defined by a simulation process for data. They form the basis for theories which encompass our
understanding of the physical world. Despite this fundamental nature, the use
of implicit models remains limited due to challenges in specifying complex latent
structure in them, and in performing inferences in such models with large data sets.
In this paper, we first introduce hierarchical implicit models (HIMs). HIMs combine the idea of implicit densities with hierarchical Bayesian modeling, thereby
defining models via simulators of data with rich hidden structure. Next, we develop likelihood-free variational inference (LFVI), a scalable variational inference
algorithm for HIMs. Key to LFVI is specifying a variational family that is also implicit. This matches the model’s flexibility and allows for accurate approximation
of the posterior. We demonstrate diverse applications: a large-scale physical simulator for predator-prey populations in ecology; a Bayesian generative adversarial
network for discrete data; and a deep implicit model for text generation.

1

Introduction

Consider a model of coin tosses. With probabilistic models, one typically posits a latent probability,
and supposes each toss is a Bernoulli outcome given this probability [36, 15]. After observing a collection of coin tosses, Bayesian analysis lets us describe our inferences about the probability.
However, we know from the laws of physics that the outcome of a coin toss is fully determined by
its initial conditions (say, the impulse and angle of flip) [25, 9]. Therefore a coin toss’ randomness
does not originate from a latent probability but in noisy initial parameters. This alternative model
incorporates the physical system, better capturing the generative process. Furthermore the model is
implicit, also known as a simulator: we can sample data from its generative process, but we may not
have access to calculate its density [11, 20].
Coin tosses are simple, but they serve as a building block for complex implicit models. These
models, which capture the laws and theories of real-world physical systems, pervade fields such as
population genetics [40], statistical physics [1], and ecology [3]; they underlie structural equation
models in economics and causality [39]; and they connect deeply to generative adversarial networks
(GANs) [18], which use neural networks to specify a flexible implicit density [35].
Unfortunately, implicit models, including GANs, have seen limited success outside specific domains.
There are two reasons. First, it is unknown how to design implicit models for more general applications, exposing rich latent structure such as priors, hierarchies, and sequences. Second, existing
methods for inferring latent structure in implicit models do not sufficiently scale to high-dimensional
or large data sets. In this paper, we design a new class of implicit models and we develop a new
algorithm for accurate and scalable inference.
For modeling, § 2 describes hierarchical implicit models, a class of Bayesian hierarchical models
which only assume a process that generates samples. This class encompasses both simulators in the
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

