Solid Harmonic Wavelet Scattering: Predicting
Quantum Molecular Energy from Invariant
Descriptors of 3D Electronic Densities

Michael Eickenberg
Department of computer science
Ecole normale supérieure
PSL Research University, 75005 Paris, France
michael.eickenberg@nsup.org

Georgios Exarchakis
Department of computer science
Ecole normale supérieure
PSL Research University, 75005 Paris, France
georgios.exarchakis@ens.fr

Matthew Hirn
Department of Computational Mathematics,
Science and Engineering;
Department of Mathematics
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824, USA
mhirn@msu.edu

Stéphane Mallat
Collège de France
Ecole Normale Supérieure
PSL Research University
75005 Paris, France

Abstract
We introduce a solid harmonic wavelet scattering representation, invariant to
rigid motion and stable to deformations, for regression and classification of 2D
and 3D signals. Solid harmonic wavelets are computed by multiplying solid
harmonic functions with Gaussian windows dilated at different scales. Invariant
scattering coefficients are obtained by cascading such wavelet transforms with
the complex modulus nonlinearity. We study an application of solid harmonic
scattering invariants to the estimation of quantum molecular energies, which are
also invariant to rigid motion and stable with respect to deformations. A multilinear
regression over scattering invariants provides close to state of the art results over
small and large databases of organic molecules.

1

Introduction

Deep convolutional neural networks provide state of the art results over most classification and
regression problems when there is enough training data. The convolutional architecture builds a
representation which translates when the input is translated. It can compute invariants to translations
with a global spatial pooling operator such as averaging or max pooling. A major issue is to understand
if one can reduce the amount of training data, by refining the architecture or specifying network
weights, from prior information on the classification or regression problem. Beyond translation
invariance, such prior information can be provided by invariance over other known groups of
transformations.
This paper studies the construction of generic translation and rotation invariant representations for
any 2D and 3D signals, and their application. Rotation invariant representations have been developed
for 2D images, for instance in [20], where a descriptor based on oriented wavelets was used to create
a jointly translation and rotation-invariant representation of texture images which retained all identity
information necessary for classification. These representations have not been extended to 3D because
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

