Conservative Contextual Linear Bandits
Abbas Kazerouni
Stanford University
abbask@stanford.edu

Mohammad Ghavamzadeh
DeepMind
ghavamza@google.com

Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori
Adobe Research
abbasiya@adobe.com

Benjamin Van Roy
Stanford University
bvr@stanford.edu

Abstract
Safety is a desirable property that can immensely increase the applicability of
learning algorithms in real-world decision-making problems. It is much easier
for a company to deploy an algorithm that is safe, i.e., guaranteed to perform at
least as well as a baseline. In this paper, we study the issue of safety in contextual
linear bandits that have application in many different fields including personalized
recommendation. We formulate a notion of safety for this class of algorithms. We
develop a safe contextual linear bandit algorithm, called conservative linear UCB
(CLUCB), that simultaneously minimizes its regret and satisfies the safety constraint, i.e., maintains its performance above a fixed percentage of the performance
of a baseline strategy, uniformly over time. We prove an upper-bound on the regret
of CLUCB and show that it can be decomposed into two terms: 1) an upper-bound
for the regret of the standard linear UCB algorithm that grows with the time horizon
and 2) a constant term that accounts for the loss of being conservative in order to
satisfy the safety constraint. We empirically show that our algorithm is safe and
validate our theoretical analysis.

1

Introduction

Many problems in science and engineering can be formulated as decision-making problems under
uncertainty. Although many learning algorithms have been developed to find a good policy/strategy
for these problems, most of them do not provide any guarantee for the performance of their resulting
policy during the initial exploratory phase. This is a major obstacle in using learning algorithms in
many different fields, such as online marketing, health sciences, finance, and robotics. Therefore,
developing learning algorithms with safety guarantees can immensely increase the applicability of
learning in solving decision problems. A policy generated by a learning algorithm is considered to be
safe, if it is guaranteed to perform at least as well as a baseline. The baseline can be either a baseline
value or the performance of a baseline strategy. It is important to note that since the policy is learned
from data, it is a random variable, and thus, the safety guarantees are in high probability.
Safety can be studied in both offline and online scenarios. In the offline case, the algorithm learns
the policy from a batch of data, usually generated by the current strategy or recent strategies of the
company, and the question is whether the learned policy will perform as well as the current strategy or
no worse than a baseline value, when it is deployed. This scenario has been recently studied heavily
in both model-based (e.g., Petrik et al. [2016]) and model-free (e.g., Bottou et al. 2013; Thomas et
al. 2015a,b; Swaminathan and Joachims 2015a,b) settings. In the model-based approach, we first
use the batch of data and build a simulator that mimics the behavior of the dynamical system under
study (hospital’s ER, financial market, robot), and then use this simulator to generate data and learn
the policy. The main challenge here is to have guarantees on the performance of the learned policy,
given the error in the simulator. This line of research is closely related to the area of robust learning
and control. In the model-free approach, we learn the policy directly from the batch of data, without
building a simulator. This line of research is related to off-policy evaluation and control. While the
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

