Efficient Second-Order Online Kernel
Learning with Adaptive Embedding

Daniele Calandriello
Alessandro Lazaric
Michal Valko
SequeL team, INRIA Lille - Nord Europe, France
{daniele.calandriello, alessandro.lazaric, michal.valko}@inria.fr

Abstract
Online kernel learning (OKL) is a flexible framework for prediction problems,
since the large approximation space provided by reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces
often contains an accurate function for the problem. Nonetheless, optimizing over
this√space is computationally expensive. Not only first order methods accumulate
O( T ) more loss than the optimal function, but the curse of kernelization results
in a O(t) per-step complexity. Second-order methods get closer to the optimum
much faster, suffering only O(log T ) regret, but second-order updates are even
more expensive with their O(t2 ) per-step cost. Existing approximate OKL methods
reduce this complexity either by limiting the support vectors (SV) used by the
predictor, or by avoiding the kernelization process altogether using embedding.
Nonetheless, as long as the size of the approximation space or the number of
SV does not grow over time, an adversarial environment can always exploit the
approximation process. In this paper, we propose PROS-N-KONS, a method that
combines Nyström sketching to project the input point to a small and accurate
embedded space; and to perform efficient second-order updates in this space. The
embedded space is continuously updated to guarantee that the embedding remains
accurate. We show that the per-step cost only grows with the effective dimension
of the problem and not with T . Moreover, the second-order updated allows us to
achieve the logarithmic regret. We empirically compare our algorithm on recent
large-scales benchmarks and show it performs favorably.

1

Introduction

Online learning (OL) represents a family of efficient and scalable learning algorithms for building a
predictive model incrementally from a sequence of T data points. A popular online learning approach
[26] is to learn a linear predictor using gradient descent (GD) in the input space Rd . Since we can
explicitly store and update the d weights of the linear predictor, the total runtime of this algorithm is
O(T d), allowing it to scale to large problems. Unfortunately, it is sometimes the case that no good
predictor can be constructed starting from only the linear combination of the input features. For this
reason, online kernel learning (OKL) [10] first maps the points into a high-dimensional reproducing
kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) using a non-linear feature map ϕ, and then runs GD on the projected
points, which is often referred to as functional GD (FGD) [10]. With the kernel approach, each
gradient step does not update a fixed set of weights, but instead introduces the feature-mapped point
in the predictor as a support vector (SV). The resulting kernel-based predictor is flexible and data
adaptive, but the number of parameters, and therefore the per-step space and time cost, now scales
with O(t), the number of SVs included after t steps of GD. This curse of kernelization results in an
O(T 2 ) total runtime, and prevents standard OKL methods from scaling to large problems.
Given an RKHS H containing functions with very small prediction loss, the objective of an OL
algorithm is to approach over time the performance of the best predictor in H and thus minimize the
regret, that is the difference in cumulative loss between the OL algorithm and the best predictor in
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

