Tomography of the London Underground:
a Scalable Model for Origin-Destination Data

Nicolò Colombo
Department of Statistical Science
University College London
nicolo.colombo@ucl.ac.uk

Ricardo Silva
The Alan Turing Institute and
Department of Statistical Science
University College London
ricardo.silva@ucl.ac.uk

Soong Kang
School of Management
University College London
smkang@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
The paper addresses the classical network tomography problem of inferring local
traffic given origin-destination observations. Focusing on large complex public
transportation systems, we build a scalable model that exploits input-output information to estimate the unobserved link/station loads and the users’ path preferences.
Based on the reconstruction of the users’ travel time distribution, the model is
flexible enough to capture possible different path-choice strategies and correlations
between users travelling on similar paths at similar times. The corresponding
likelihood function is intractable for medium or large-scale networks and we propose two distinct strategies, namely the exact maximum-likelihood inference of
an approximate but tractable model and the variational inference of the original
intractable model. As an application of our approach, we consider the emblematic
case of the London underground network, where a tap-in/tap-out system tracks
the starting/exit time and location of all journeys in a day. A set of synthetic
simulations and real data provided by Transport For London are used to validate
and test the model on the predictions of observable and unobservable quantities.

1

Introduction

In the last decades, networks have been playing an increasingly important role in our all-day lives
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. Most of the time, networks cannot be inspected directly and their properties should be
reconstructed form end-point or partial and local observations [7, 8]. The problem has been referred
to as network ‘tomography’, a medical word to denote clinical techniques that produce detailed
images of the interior of the body from external signals [9, 10]. Nowadays the concept of tomography
has gained wider meanings and the idea applies, in different forms, to many kinds of communication
and transportation networks [11, 12, 13]. In particular, as the availability of huge amounts of data has
grown exponentially, network tomography has become an important branch of statistical modelling
[14, 15, 16, 17, 8]. However, due to the complexity of the task, existing methods are usually only
designed for small-size networks and become intractable for most real-world applications (see [7, 18]
for a discussion on this point). The case of large public transportation networks has attracted special
attention since massive datasets of input-output single-user data have been produced by tap-in and
tap-out systems installed in big city as London, Singapore and Beijing [19, 20, 18, 21].
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

