Revisit Fuzzy Neural Network:
Demystifying Batch Normalization and ReLU with
Generalized Hamming Network

Lixin Fan
lixin.fan@nokia.com
Nokia Technologies
Tampere, Finland

Abstract
We revisit fuzzy neural network with a cornerstone notion of generalized hamming distance, which provides a novel and theoretically justified framework to
re-interpret many useful neural network techniques in terms of fuzzy logic. In particular, we conjecture and empirically illustrate that, the celebrated batch normalization (BN) technique actually adapts the “normalized” bias such that it approximates
the rightful bias induced by the generalized hamming distance. Once the due bias
is enforced analytically, neither the optimization of bias terms nor the sophisticated
batch normalization is needed. Also in the light of generalized hamming distance,
the popular rectified linear units (ReLU) can be treated as setting a minimal hamming distance threshold between network inputs and weights. This thresholding
scheme, on the one hand, can be improved by introducing double-thresholding on
both positive and negative extremes of neuron outputs. On the other hand, ReLUs
turn out to be non-essential and can be removed from networks trained for simple
tasks like MNIST classification. The proposed generalized hamming network
(GHN) as such not only lends itself to rigorous analysis and interpretation within
the fuzzy logic theory but also demonstrates fast learning speed, well-controlled
behaviour and state-of-the-art performances on a variety of learning tasks.

1

Introduction

Since early 1990s the integration of fuzzy logic and computational neural networks has given birth to
the fuzzy neural networks (FNN) [1]. While the formal fuzzy set theory provides a strict mathematical
framework in which vague conceptual phenomena can be precisely and rigorously studied [2, 3, 4, 5],
application-oriented fuzzy technologies lag far behind theoretical studies. In particular, fuzzy neural
networks have only demonstrated limited successes on some toy examples such as [6, 7]. In order to
catch up with the rapid advances in recent neural network developments, especially those with deep
layered structures, it is the goal of this paper to demonstrate the relevance of FNN, and moreover, to
provide a novel view on its non-fuzzy counterparts.
Our revisiting of FNN is not merely for the fond remembrances of the golden age of “soft computing”
[8]. Instead it provides a novel and theoretically justified perspective of neural computing, in which
we are able to re-examine and demystify some useful techniques that were proposed to improve
either effectiveness or efficiency of neural networks training processes. Among many others, batch
normalization (BN) [9] is probably the most influential yet mysterious trick, that significantly
improved the training efficiency by adapting to the change in the distribution of layers’ inputs (coined
as internal covariate shift). Such kind of adaptations, when viewed within the fuzzy neural network
framework, can be interpreted as rectifications to the deficiencies of neuron outputs with respect to the
rightful generalized hamming distance (see definition 1) between inputs and neuron weights. Once
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

