Elementary Symmetric Polynomials for Optimal
Experimental Design

Zelda Mariet
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
zelda@csail.mit.edu

Suvrit Sra
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
suvrit@mit.edu

Abstract
We revisit the classical problem of optimal experimental design (OED) under a
new mathematical model grounded in a geometric motivation. Specifically, we
introduce models based on elementary symmetric polynomials; these polynomials
capture “partial volumes” and offer a graded interpolation between the widely
used A-optimal design and D-optimal design models, obtaining each of them as
special cases. We analyze properties of our models, and derive both greedy and
convex-relaxation algorithms for computing the associated designs. Our analysis
establishes approximation guarantees on these algorithms, while our empirical
results substantiate our claims and demonstrate a curious phenomenon concerning
our greedy method. Finally, as a byproduct, we obtain new results on the theory
of elementary symmetric polynomials that may be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

Optimal Experimental Design (OED) develops the theory of selecting experiments to perform in
order to estimate a hidden parameter as well as possible. It operates under the assumption that
experiments are costly and cannot be run as many times as necessary or run even once without
tremendous difficulty [33]. OED has been applied in a large number of experimental settings [35, 9,
28, 46, 36], and has close ties to related machine-learning problems such as outlier detection [15, 22],
active learning [19, 18], Gaussian process driven sensor placement [27], among others.
We revisit the classical setting where each experiment depends linearly on a hidden parameter θ ∈
Rm . We assume there are n possible experiments whose outcomes yi ∈ R can be written as
yi = x⊤
i θ + ϵi

1 ≤ i ≤ n,

where the xi ∈ R and ϵi are independent, zero mean, and homoscedastic noises. OED seeks to
answer the question: how to choose a set S of k experiments that allow us to estimate θ without bias
and with minimal variance?
∑
Given a feasible set S of experiments (i.e., i∈S xi x⊤
i is invertible), the Gauss-Markov theorem
∑
−1
shows that the lowest variance for an unbiased estimate θ̂ satisfies Var[θ̂] = ( i∈S xi x⊤
. Howi )
ever, Var[θ̂] is a matrix, and matrices do not admit a total order, making it difficult to compare
different designs. Hence, OED is cast as an optimization problem that seeks an optimal design S ∗
(( ∑
)−1 )
S ∗ ∈ argmin Φ
xi x⊤
,
(1.1)
i
m

S∈[n],|S|≤k

i∈S

where Φ maps positive definite matrices to R to compare the variances for each design, and may
help elicit different properties that a solution should satisfy, either statistical or structural.
Elfving [16] derived some of the earliest theoretical results for the linear dependency setting, focusing on the case where one is interested in reconstructing a predefined linear combination of the
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

