Cold-Start Reinforcement Learning with
Softmax Policy Gradient

Nan Ding
Google Inc.
Venice, CA 90291
dingnan@google.com

Radu Soricut
Google Inc.
Venice, CA 90291
rsoricut@google.com

Abstract
Policy-gradient approaches to reinforcement learning have two common and undesirable overhead procedures, namely warm-start training and sample variance
reduction. In this paper, we describe a reinforcement learning method based on a
softmax value function that requires neither of these procedures. Our method combines the advantages of policy-gradient methods with the efficiency and simplicity
of maximum-likelihood approaches. We apply this new cold-start reinforcement
learning method in training sequence generation models for structured output
prediction problems. Empirical evidence validates this method on automatic summarization and image captioning tasks.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning is the study of optimal sequential decision-making in an environment [16]. Its
recent developments underpin a large variety of applications related to robotics [11, 5] and games [20].
Policy search in reinforcement learning refers to the search for optimal parameters for a given policy
parameterization [5]. Policy search based on policy-gradient [26, 21] has been recently applied to
structured output prediction for sequence generations. These methods alleviate two common problems
that approaches based on training with the Maximum-likelihood Estimation (MLE) objective exhibit,
namely the exposure-bias problem [24, 19] and the wrong-objective problem [19, 15] (more on this
in Section 2). As a result of addressing these problems, policy-gradient methods achieve improved
performance compared to MLE training in various tasks, including machine translation [19, 7], text
summarization [19], and image captioning [19, 15].
Policy-gradient methods for sequence generation work as follows: first the model proposes a sequence,
and the ground-truth target is used to compute a reward for the proposed sequence with respect to
the reward of choice (using metrics known to correlate well with human-rated correctness, such
as ROUGE [13] for summarization, BLEU [18] for machine translation, CIDEr [23] or SPICE [1]
for image captioning, etc.). The reward is used as a weight for the log-likelihood of the proposed
sequence, and learning is done by optimizing the weighted average of the log-likelihood of the
proposed sequences. The policy-gradient approach works around the difficulty of differentiating the
reward function (the majority of which are non-differentiable) by using it as a weight. However, since
sequences proposed by the model are also used as the target of the model, they are very noisy and
their initial quality is extremely poor. The difficulty of aligning the model output distribution with
the reward distribution over the large search space of possible sequences makes training slow and
inefficient∗ . As a result, overhead procedures such as warm-start training with the MLE objective
and sophisticated methods for sample variance reduction are required to train with policy gradient.
∗
Search space size is O(V T ), where V is the number of word types in the vocabulary (typically between 104
and 106 ) and T is the the sequence length (typically between 10 and 50), hence between 1040 and 10300 .

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

