Nonparametric Online Regression
while Learning the Metric

Ilja Kuzborskij
EPFL
Switzerland
ilja.kuzborskij@gmail.com

Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi
Dipartimento di Informatica
Università degli Studi di Milano
Milano 20135, Italy
nicolo.cesa-bianchi@unimi.it

Abstract
We study algorithms for online nonparametric regression that learn the directions
along which the regression function is smoother. Our algorithm learns the Mahalanobis metric based on the gradient outer product matrix G of the regression
function (automatically adapting to the effective rank of this matrix), while simultaneously bounding the regret —on the same data sequence— in terms of the
spectrum of G. As a preliminary step in our analysis, we extend a nonparametric
online learning algorithm by Hazan and Megiddo enabling it to compete against
functions whose Lipschitzness is measured with respect to an arbitrary Mahalanobis
metric.

1

Introduction

An online learner is an agent interacting with an unknown and arbitrary environment over a sequence
of rounds. At each round t, the learner observes a data point (or instance) xt ∈ X ⊂ Rd , outputs a
prediction ybt for the label yt ∈ R associated with that instance, and incurs some loss `t (b
yt ), which in
this paper is the square loss (b
yt − yt )2 . At the end of the round, the label yt is given to the learner,
which he can use to reduce his loss in subsequent rounds. The performance of an online learner is
typically measured using the regret. This is defined as the amount by which the learner’s cumulative
loss exceeds the cumulative loss (on the same sequence of instances and labels) of any function f in
a given reference class F of functions,
T 
X

RT (f ) =
`t (b
yt ) − `t f (xt )
∀f ∈ F .
(1)
t=1

Note that typical regret bounds apply to all f ∈ F and to all individual data sequences. However,
the bounds are allowed to scale with parameters arising from the interplay between f and the data
sequence.
In order to capture complex environments, the reference class of functions should be large. In this
work we focus on nonparametric classes F, containing all differentiable functions that are smooth
with respect to some metric on X . Our approach builds on the simple and versatile algorithm for
nonparametric online learning introduced in [6]. This algorithm has a bound on the regret RT (f ) of
order (ignoring logarithmic factors)
v


u d
uX
d
2
1 + t
k∂i f k  T 1+d
∀f ∈ F .
(2)
∞

i=1


Here k∂i f k∞ is the value of the partial derivative ∂f (x) ∂xi maximized over x ∈ X . The square
root term is the Lipschitz constant of f , measuring smoothness with respect to the Euclidean metric.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

