Learning Koopman Invariant Subspaces
for Dynamic Mode Decomposition

Naoya Takeishi§ , Yoshinobu Kawahara†,‡ , Takehisa Yairi§
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, The University of Tokyo
†
The Institute of Scientific and Industrial Research, Osaka University
‡
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
{takeishi,yairi}@ailab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp, ykawahara@sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp
§

Abstract
Spectral decomposition of the Koopman operator is attracting attention as a tool
for the analysis of nonlinear dynamical systems. Dynamic mode decomposition
is a popular numerical algorithm for Koopman spectral analysis; however, we
often need to prepare nonlinear observables manually according to the underlying
dynamics, which is not always possible since we may not have any a priori
knowledge about them. In this paper, we propose a fully data-driven method for
Koopman spectral analysis based on the principle of learning Koopman invariant
subspaces from observed data. To this end, we propose minimization of the residual
sum of squares of linear least-squares regression to estimate a set of functions that
transforms data into a form in which the linear regression fits well. We introduce
an implementation with neural networks and evaluate performance empirically
using nonlinear dynamical systems and applications.

1

Introduction

A variety of time-series data are generated from nonlinear dynamical systems, in which a state evolves
according to a nonlinear map or differential equation. In summarization, regression, or classification
of such time-series data, precise analysis of the underlying dynamical systems provides valuable
information to generate appropriate features and to select an appropriate computation method. In
applied mathematics and physics, the analysis of nonlinear dynamical systems has received significant
interest because a wide range of complex phenomena, such as fluid flows and neural signals, can
be described in terms of nonlinear dynamics. A classical but popular view of dynamical systems
is based on state space models, wherein the behavior of the trajectories of a vector in state space is
discussed (see, e.g., [1]). Time-series modeling based on a state space is also common in machine
learning. However, when the dynamics are highly nonlinear, analysis based on state space models
becomes challenging compared to the case of linear dynamics.
Recently, there is growing interest in operator-theoretic approaches for the analysis of dynamical
systems. Operator-theoretic approaches are based on the Perron–Frobenius operator [2] or its adjoint,
i.e., the Koopman operator (composition operator) [3], [4]. The Koopman operator defines the
evolution of observation functions (observables) in a function space rather than state vectors in a state
space. Based on the Koopman operator, the analysis of nonlinear dynamical systems can be lifted
to a linear (but infinite-dimensional) regime. Consequently, we can consider modal decomposition,
with which the global characteristics of nonlinear dynamics can be inspected [4], [5]. Such modal
decomposition has been intensively used for scientific purposes to understand complex phenomena
(e.g., [6]–[9]) and also for engineering tasks, such as signal processing and machine learning. In fact,
modal decomposition based on the Koopman operator has been utilized in various engineering tasks,
including robotic control [10], image processing [11], and nonlinear system identification [12].
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

