An Inner-loop Free Solution to Inverse Problems
using Deep Neural Networks

Kai Fai∗
Duke University
kai.fan@stat.duke.edu
Lawrence Carin
Duke University
lcarin@duke.edu

Qi Wei∗
Duke University
qi.wei@duke.edu
Katherine Heller
Duke University
kheller@stat.duke.edu

Abstract
We propose a new method that uses deep learning techniques to accelerate the
popular alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) solution for inverse
problems. The ADMM updates consist of a proximity operator, a least squares
regression that includes a big matrix inversion, and an explicit solution for updating
the dual variables. Typically, inner loops are required to solve the first two subminimization problems due to the intractability of the prior and the matrix inversion.
To avoid such drawbacks or limitations, we propose an inner-loop free update rule
with two pre-trained deep convolutional architectures. More specifically, we learn
a conditional denoising auto-encoder which imposes an implicit data-dependent
prior/regularization on ground-truth in the first sub-minimization problem. This
design follows an empirical Bayesian strategy, leading to so-called amortized
inference. For matrix inversion in the second sub-problem, we learn a convolutional
neural network to approximate the matrix inversion, i.e., the inverse mapping is
learned by feeding the input through the learned forward network. Note that
training this neural network does not require ground-truth or measurements, i.e.,
data-independent. Extensive experiments on both synthetic data and real datasets
demonstrate the efficiency and accuracy of the proposed method compared with
the conventional ADMM solution using inner loops for solving inverse problems.

1

Introduction

Most of the inverse problems are formulated directly to the setting of an optimization problem related
to the a forward model [25]. The forward model maps unknown signals, i.e., the ground-truth, to
acquired information about them, which we call data or measurements. This mapping, or forward
problem, generally depends on a physical theory that links the ground-truth to the measurements.
Solving inverse problems involves learning the inverse mapping from the measurements to the groundtruth. Specifically, it recovers a signal from a small number of degraded or noisy measurements. This
is usually ill-posed [26, 25]. Recently, deep learning techniques have emerged as excellent models
and gained great popularity for their widespread success in allowing for efficient inference techniques
on applications include pattern analysis (unsupervised), classification (supervised), computer vision,
image processing, etc [6]. Exploiting deep neural networks to help solve inverse problems has been
explored recently [24, 1] and deep learning based methods have achieved state-of-the-art performance
in many challenging inverse problems like super-resolution [3, 24], image reconstruction [20],
∗

The authors contributed equally to this work.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

