Houdini: Fooling Deep Structured Visual and Speech
Recognition Models with Adversarial Examples

Moustapha Cisse
Facebook AI Research
moustaphacisse@fb.com

Yossi Adi*
Bar-Ilan University, Israel
yossiadidrum@gmail.com

Natalia Neverova*
Facebook AI Research
nneverova@fb.com

Joseph Keshet
Bar-Ilan University, Israel
jkeshet@cs.biu.ac.il

Abstract
Generating adversarial examples is a critical step for evaluating and improving
the robustness of learning machines. So far, most existing methods only work
for classification and are not designed to alter the true performance measure of
the problem at hand. We introduce a novel flexible approach named Houdini for
generating adversarial examples specifically tailored for the final performance
measure of the task considered, be it combinatorial and non-decomposable. We
successfully apply Houdini to a range of applications such as speech recognition,
pose estimation and semantic segmentation. In all cases, the attacks based on
Houdini achieve higher success rate than those based on the traditional surrogates
used to train the models while using a less perceptible adversarial perturbation.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has redefined the landscape of machine intelligence [22] by enabling several breakthroughs in notoriously difficult problems such as image classification [20, 16], speech recognition [2],
human pose estimation [35] and machine translation [4]. As the most successful models are permeating nearly all the segments of the technology industry from self-driving cars to automated dialog
agents, it becomes critical to revisit the evaluation protocol of deep learning models and design new
ways to assess their reliability beyond the traditional metrics. Evaluating the robustness of neural
networks to adversarial examples is one step in that direction [32]. Adversarial examples are synthetic
patterns carefully crafted by adding a peculiar noise to legitimate examples. They are indistinguishable from the legitimate examples by a human, yet they have demonstrated a strong ability to cause
catastrophic failure of state of the art classification systems [12, 25, 21]. The existence of adversarial
examples highlights a potential threat for machine learning systems at large [28] that can limit their
adoption in security sensitive applications. It has triggered an active line of research concerned with
understanding the phenomenon [10, 11], and making neural networks more robust [29, 7] .
Adversarial examples are crucial for reliably evaluating and improving the robustness of the models [12]. Ideally, they must be generated to alter the task loss unique to the application considered
directly. For instance, an adversarial example crafted to attack a speech recognition system should be
designed to maximize the word error rate of the targetted system. The existing methods for generating
adversarial examples exploit the gradient of a given differentiable loss function to guide the search in
the neighborhood of legitimates examples [12, 25]. Unfortunately, the task loss of several structured
prediction problems of interest is a combinatorial non-decomposable quantity that is not amenable
*

equal contribution

