Few-Shot Learning Through an Information
Retrieval Lens
Eleni Triantafillou
University of Toronto
Vector Institute

Richard Zemel
University of Toronto
Vector Institute

Raquel Urtasun
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
Uber ATG

Abstract
Few-shot learning refers to understanding new concepts from only a few examples.
We propose an information retrieval-inspired approach for this problem that is
motivated by the increased importance of maximally leveraging all the available
information in this low-data regime. We define a training objective that aims to
extract as much information as possible from each training batch by effectively
optimizing over all relative orderings of the batch points simultaneously. In particular, we view each batch point as a ‘query’ that ranks the remaining ones based
on its predicted relevance to them and we define a model within the framework
of structured prediction to optimize mean Average Precision over these rankings.
Our method achieves impressive results on the standard few-shot classification
benchmarks while is also capable of few-shot retrieval.

1

Introduction

Recently, the problem of learning new concepts from only a few labelled examples, referred to
as few-shot learning, has received considerable attention [1, 2]. More concretely, K-shot N-way
classification is the task of classifying a data point into one of N classes, when only K examples
of each class are available to inform this decision. This is a challenging setting that necessitates
different approaches from the ones commonly employed when the labelled data of each new concept
is abundant. Indeed, many recent success stories of machine learning methods rely on large datasets
and suffer from overfitting in the face of insufficient data. It is however not realistic nor preferred to
always expect many examples for learning a new class or concept, rendering few-shot learning an
important problem to address.
We propose a model for this problem that aims to extract as much information as possible from each
training batch, a capability that is of increased importance when the available data for learning each
class is scarce. Towards this goal, we formulate few-shot learning in information retrieval terms: each
point acts as a ‘query’ that ranks the remaining ones based on its predicted relevance to them. We are
then faced with the choice of a ranking loss function and a computational framework for optimization.
We choose to work within the framework of structured prediction and we optimize mean Average
Precision (mAP) using a standard Structural SVM (SSVM) [3], as well as a Direct Loss Minimization
(DLM) [4] approach. We argue that the objective of mAP is especially suited for the low-data regime
of interest since it allows us to fully exploit each batch by simultaneously optimizing over all relative
orderings of the batch points. Figure 1 provides an illustration of this training objective.
Our contribution is therefore to adopt an information retrieval perspective on the problem of few-shot
learning; we posit that a model is prepared for the sparse-labels setting by being trained in a manner
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

