Regret Analysis for Continuous Dueling Bandit

Wataru Kumagai
Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
RIKEN
1-4-1, Nihonbashi, Chuo, Tokyo 103-0027, Japan
wataru.kumagai@riken.jp

Abstract
The dueling bandit is a learning framework wherein the feedback information in
the learning process is restricted to a noisy comparison between a pair of actions.
In this research, we address a dueling bandit problem based on a cost function over
a continuous space. We propose a√stochastic mirror descent algorithm and show
that the algorithm achieves an O( T log T )-regret bound under strong convexity
and smoothness assumptions for the cost function. Subsequently, we clarify the
equivalence between regret minimization in dueling bandit and convex optimization for the cost function. Moreover, when considering a lower bound in convex
optimization, our algorithm is shown to achieve the optimal convergence rate in
convex optimization and the optimal regret in dueling bandit except for a logarithmic factor.

1

Introduction

Information systems and computer algorithms often have many parameters which should be tuned.
When cost or utility are explicitly given as numerical values or concrete functions, the system parameters can be appropriately determined depending on the the values or the functions. However,
in a human-computer interaction system, it is difficult or impossible for users of the system to provide user preference as numerical values or concrete functions. Dueling bandit is introduced to
model such situations in Yue and Joachims (2009) and enables us to appropriately tune the parameters based only on comparison results on two parameters by the users. In the learning process of
a dueling bandit algorithm, the algorithm chooses a pair of parameters called actions (or arms) and
receives only the corresponding comparison result. Since dueling bandit algorithms do not require
an individual evaluation value for each action, they can be applied for wider areas that cannot be
formulated using the conventional bandit approach.
When action cost (or user utility) implicitly exists, the comparison between two actions is modeled
via a cost (or utility) function, which represents the degree of the cost (or utility), and a link function,
which determines the noise in the comparison results. We refer to such a modeling method as costbased (or utility-based) approach and employ it in this research. Yue and Joachims (2009) first
introduced the utility-based approach as a model for a dueling bandit problem.
The cost-based dueling bandit relates to function optimization with noisy comparisons
(Jamieson et al., 2012; Matsui et al., 2016) because in both frameworks an oracle compare two actions and the feedback from the oracle is represented by binary information. In particular, the same
algorithm can be applied to both frameworks. However, as different performance measures are applied to the algorithms in function optimization and dueling bandit, it has not been demonstrated that
an algorithm that works efficiently in one framework will also perform well in the other framework.
This study clarifies relation between function optimization and dueling bandit thorough their regret
analysis.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

