Compatible Reward Inverse Reinforcement Learning

Alberto Maria Metelli
DEIB
Politecnico di Milano, Italy

Matteo Pirotta
SequeL Team
Inria Lille, France

Marcello Restelli
DEIB
Politecnico di Milano, Italy

albertomaria.metelli@polimi.it

matteo.pirotta@inria.fr

marcello.restelli@polimi.it

Abstract
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) is an effective approach to recover a reward
function that explains the behavior of an expert by observing a set of demonstrations.
This paper is about a novel model-free IRL approach that, differently from most
of the existing IRL algorithms, does not require to specify a function space where
to search for the expert’s reward function. Leveraging on the fact that the policy
gradient needs to be zero for any optimal policy, the algorithm generates a set of
basis functions that span the subspace of reward functions that make the policy
gradient vanish. Within this subspace, using a second-order criterion, we search
for the reward function that penalizes the most a deviation from the expert’s policy.
After introducing our approach for finite domains, we extend it to continuous ones.
The proposed approach is empirically compared to other IRL methods both in the
(finite) Taxi domain and in the (continuous) Linear Quadratic Gaussian (LQG) and
Car on the Hill environments.

1

Introduction

Imitation learning aims to learn to perform a task by observing only expert’s demonstrations. We
consider the settings where only expert’s demonstrations are given, no information about the dynamics
and the objective of the problem is provided (e.g., reward) or ability to query for additional samples.
The main approaches solving this problem are behavioral cloning [1] and inverse reinforcement
learning [2]. The former recovers the demonstrated policy by learning the state-action mapping in a
supervised learning way, while inverse reinforcement learning aims to learn the reward function that
makes the expert optimal. Behavioral Cloning (BC) is simple, but its main limitation is the intrinsic
goal, i.e., to replicate the observed policy. This task has several limitations: it requires a huge amount
of data when the environment (or the expert) is stochastic [3]; it does not provide good generalization
or a description of the expert’s goal. On the contrary, Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) accounts
for generalization and transferability by directly learning the reward function. This information can
be transferred to any new environment in which the features are well defined. As a consequence, IRL
allows recovering the optimal policy a posteriori, even under variations of the environment. IRL has
received a lot of attention in literature and has succeeded in several applications [e.g., 4, 5, 6, 7, 8].
However, BC and IRL are tightly related by the intrinsic relationship between reward and optimal
policy. The reward function defines the space of optimal policies and to recover the reward it is
required to observe/recover the optimal policy. The idea of this paper, and of some recent paper [e.g.,
9, 8, 3], is to exploit the synergy between BC and IRL.
Unfortunately, also IRL approaches present issues. First, several IRL methods require solving the
forward problem as part of an inner loop [e.g., 4, 5]. Literature has extensively focused on removing
this limitation [10, 11, 9] in order to scale IRL to real-world applications [12, 3, 13]. Second, IRL
methods generally require designing the function space by providing features that capture the structure
of the reward function [e.g., 4, 14, 5, 10, 15, 9]. This information, provided in addition to expert’s
demonstrations, is critical for the success of the IRL approach. The issue of designing the function
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

