Generalized Linear Model Regression under
Distance-to-set Penalties
Jason Xu
University of California, Los Angeles
jqxu@ucla.edu

Eric C. Chi
North Carolina State University
eric_chi@ncsu.edu

Kenneth Lange
University of California, Los Angeles
klange@ucla.edu

Abstract
Estimation in generalized linear models (GLM) is complicated by the presence of
constraints. One can handle constraints by maximizing a penalized log-likelihood.
Penalties such as the lasso are effective in high dimensions, but often lead to
unwanted shrinkage. This paper explores instead penalizing the squared distance
to constraint sets. Distance penalties are more flexible than algebraic and regularization penalties, and avoid the drawback of shrinkage. To optimize distance
penalized objectives, we make use of the majorization-minimization principle. Resulting algorithms constructed within this framework are amenable to acceleration
and come with global convergence guarantees. Applications to shape constraints,
sparse regression, and rank-restricted matrix regression on synthetic and real data
showcase strong empirical performance, even under non-convex constraints.

1

Introduction and Background

In classical linear regression, the response variable y follows a Gaussian distribution whose mean
xt β depends linearly on a parameter vector β through a vector of predictors x. Generalized linear
models (GLMs) extend classical linear regression by allowing y to follow any exponential family
distribution, and the conditional mean of y to be a nonlinear function h(xt β) of xt β [24]. This
encompasses a broad class of important models in statistics and machine learning. For instance, count
data and binary classification come within the purview of generalized linear regression.
In many settings, it is desirable to impose constraints on the regression coefficients. Sparse regression
is a prominent example. In high-dimensional problems where the number of predictors n exceeds the
number of cases m, inference is possible provided the regression function lies in a low-dimensional
manifold [11]. In this case, the coefficient vector β is sparse, and just a few predictors explain the
response y. The goals of sparse regression are to correctly identify the relevant predictors and to
estimate their effect sizes. One approach, best subset regression, is known to be NP hard. Penalizing
the likelihood by including an `0 penalty kβk0 (the number of nonzero coefficients) is a possibility,
but the resulting objective function is nonconvex and discontinuous. The convex relaxation of `0
regression replaces kβk0 by the `1 norm kβk1 . This LASSO proxy for kβk0 restores convexity
and continuity [31]. While LASSO regression has been a great success, it has the downside of
simultaneously inducing both sparsity and parameter shrinkage. Unfortunately, shrinkage often has
the undesirable side effect of including spurious predictors (false positives) with the true predictors.
Motivated by sparse regression, we now consider the alternative of penalizing the log-likelihood by
the squared distance from the parameter vector β to the constraint set. If there are several constraints,
then we add a distance penalty for each constraint set. Our approach is closely related to the proximal
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

