Improved Graph Laplacian via Geometric
Consistency

Dominique C. Perrault-Joncas
Google, Inc.
dominiquep@google.com

Marina Meilă
Department of Statistics
University of Washington
mmp2@uw.edu

James McQueen
Amazon
jmcq@amazon.com

Abstract
In all manifold learning algorithms and tasks setting the kernel bandwidth  used
construct the graph Laplacian is critical. We address this problem by choosing
a quality criterion for the Laplacian, that measures its ability to preserve the
geometry of the data. For this, we exploit the connection between manifold
geometry, represented by the Riemannian metric, and the Laplace-Beltrami operator.
Experiments show that this principled approach is effective and robust.

1

Introduction

Manifold learning and manifold regularization are popular tools for dimensionality reduction and
clustering [1, 2], as well as for semi-supervised learning [3, 4, 5, 6] and modeling with Gaussian
Processes [7]. Whatever the task, a manifold learning method requires the user to provide an external
parameter, called “bandwidth” or “scale” , that defines the size of the local neighborhood.
More formally put, a common challenge in semi-supervised and unsupervised manifold learning
lies in obtaining a “good” graph Laplacian estimator L. We focus on the practical problem of
optimizing the parameters used to construct L and, in particular, . As we see empirically, since the
Laplace-Beltrami operator on a manifold is intimately related to the geometry of the manifold, our
estimator for  has advantages even in methods that do not explicitly depend on L.
In manifold learning, there has been sustained interest for determining the asymptotic properties of L
[8, 9, 10, 11]. The most relevant is [12], which derives the optimal rate for  w.r.t. the sample size N
1

2 = C(M)N − 3+d/2 ,

(1)

with d denoting the intrinsic dimension of the data manifold M. The problem is that C(M) is a
constant that depends on the yet unknown data manifold, so it is rarely known in practice.
Considerably fewer studies have focused on the parameters used to construct L in a finite sample
problem. A common approach is to “tune” parameters by cross-validation in the semi-supervised
context. However, in an unsurpervised problem like non-linear dimensionality reduction, there is
no context in which to apply cross-validation. While several approaches [13, 14, 15, 16] may yield
a usable parameter, they generally do not aim to improve L per se and offer no geometry-based
justification for its selection.
In this paper, we present a new, geometrically inspired approach to selecting the bandwidth parameter
 of L for a given data set. Under the data manifold hypothesis, the Laplace-Beltrami operator ∆M
of the data manifold M contains all the intrinsic geometry of M. We set out to exploit this fact by
comparing the geometry induced by the graph Laplacian L with the local data geometry and choose
the value of  for which these two are closest.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

