PixelGAN Autoencoders
Alireza Makhzani, Brendan Frey
University of Toronto
{makhzani,frey}@psi.toronto.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we describe the “PixelGAN autoencoder”, a generative autoencoder
in which the generative path is a convolutional autoregressive neural network on
pixels (PixelCNN) that is conditioned on a latent code, and the recognition path
uses a generative adversarial network (GAN) to impose a prior distribution on the
latent code. We show that different priors result in different decompositions of
information between the latent code and the autoregressive decoder. For example,
by imposing a Gaussian distribution as the prior, we can achieve a global vs. local
decomposition, or by imposing a categorical distribution as the prior, we can
disentangle the style and content information of images in an unsupervised fashion.
We further show how the PixelGAN autoencoder with a categorical prior can be
directly used in semi-supervised settings and achieve competitive semi-supervised
classification results on the MNIST, SVHN and NORB datasets.

1

Introduction

In recent years, generative models that can be trained via direct back-propagation have enabled
remarkable progress in modeling natural images. One of the most successful models is the generative
adversarial network (GAN) [1], which employs a two player min-max game. The generative model,
G, samples the prior p(z) and generates the sample G(z). The discriminator, D(x), is trained to
identify whether a point x is a sample from the data distribution or a sample from the generative
model. The generator is trained to maximally confuse the discriminator into believing that generated
samples come from the data distribution. The cost function of GAN is
min max Ex∼pdata [log D(x)] + Ez∼p(z) [log(1 − D(G(z))].
G

D

GANs can be considered within the wider framework of implicit generative models [2, 3, 4]. Implicit
distributions can be sampled through their generative path, but their likelihood function is not
tractable. Recently, several papers have proposed another application of GAN-style algorithms for
approximate inference [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. These algorithms use implicit distributions to learn
posterior approximations that are more expressive than the distributions with tractable densities that
are often used in variational inference. For example, adversarial autoencoders [6] use a universal
approximator posterior as the implicit posterior distribution and use adversarial training to match the
aggregated posterior of the latent code to the prior distribution. Adversarial variational Bayes [3, 7]
uses a more general amortized GAN inference framework within a maximum-likelihood learning
setting. Another type of GAN inference technique is used in the ALI [8] and BiGAN [9] models,
which have been shown to approximate maximum likelihood learning [3]. In these models, both
the recognition and generative models are implicit and are jointly learnt by an adversarial training
process.
Variational autoencoders (VAE) [10, 11] are another state-of-the-art image modeling technique that
use neural networks to parametrize the posterior distribution and pair it with a top-down generative
network. Both networks are jointly trained to maximize a variational lower bound on the data loglikelihood. A different framework for learning density models is autoregressive neural networks such
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

