Structured Bayesian Pruning via Log-Normal
Multiplicative Noise
Kirill Neklyudov 1,2

k.necludov@gmail.com
1

Dmitry Molchanov 1,3
dmolchanov@hse.ru

Arsenii Ashukha 1,2

Dmitry Vetrov 1,2

aashukha@hse.ru

National Research University Higher School of Economics
3
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology

dvetrov@hse.ru

2

Yandex

Abstract
Dropout-based regularization methods can be regarded as injecting random noise
with pre-defined magnitude to different parts of the neural network during training.
It was recently shown that Bayesian dropout procedure not only improves generalization but also leads to extremely sparse neural architectures by automatically
setting the individual noise magnitude per weight. However, this sparsity can hardly
be used for acceleration since it is unstructured. In the paper, we propose a new
Bayesian model that takes into account the computational structure of neural networks and provides structured sparsity, e.g. removes neurons and/or convolutional
channels in CNNs. To do this we inject noise to the neurons outputs while keeping
the weights unregularized. We establish the probabilistic model with a proper
truncated log-uniform prior over the noise and truncated log-normal variational
approximation that ensures that the KL-term in the evidence lower bound is computed in closed-form. The model leads to structured sparsity by removing elements
with a low SNR from the computation graph and provides significant acceleration
on a number of deep neural architectures. The model is easy to implement as it can
be formulated as a separate dropout-like layer.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are a flexible family of models which provides state-of-the-art results in many
machine learning problems [14, 20]. However, this flexibility often results in overfitting. A common
solution for this problem is regularization. One of the most popular ways of regularization is Binary
Dropout [19] that prevents co-adaptation of neurons by randomly dropping them during training. An
equally effective alternative is Gaussian Dropout [19] that multiplies the outputs of the neurons by
Gaussian random noise. In recent years several Bayesian generalizations of these techniques have
been developed, e.g. Variational Dropout [8] and Variational Spike-and-Slab Neural Networks [13].
These techniques provide theoretical justification of different kinds of Dropout and also allow for
automatic tuning of dropout rates, which is an important practical result.
Besides overfitting, compression and acceleration of neural networks are other important challenges,
especially when memory or computational resources are restricted. Further studies of Variational
Dropout show that individual dropout rates for each weight allow to shrink the original network
architecture and result in a highly sparse model [16]. General sparsity provides a way of neural
network compression, while the time of network evaluation may remain the same, as most modern
DNN-oriented software can’t work with sparse matrices efficiently. At the same time, it is possible
to achieve acceleration by enforcing structured sparsity in convolutional filters or data tensors. In
the simplest case it means removing redundant neurons or convolutional filters instead of separate
weights; but more complex patterns can also be considered. This way Group-wise Brain Damage
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

