Is the Bellman residual a bad proxy?

Matthieu Geist1 , Bilal Piot2,3 and Olivier Pietquin 2,3
Université de Lorraine & CNRS, LIEC, UMR 7360, Metz, F-57070 France
2
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Centrale Lille, Inria, UMR 9189 - CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France
3
Now with Google DeepMind, London, United Kingdom
matthieu.geist@univ-lorraine.fr
bilal.piot@univ-lille1.fr, olivier.pietquin@univ-lille1.fr
1

Abstract
This paper aims at theoretically and empirically comparing two standard optimization criteria for Reinforcement Learning: i) maximization of the mean value and
ii) minimization of the Bellman residual. For that purpose, we place ourselves in
the framework of policy search algorithms, that are usually designed to maximize
the mean value, and derive a method that minimizes the residual kT∗ vπ − vπ k1,ν
over policies. A theoretical analysis shows how good this proxy is to policy optimization, and notably that it is better than its value-based counterpart. We also
propose experiments on randomly generated generic Markov decision processes,
specifically designed for studying the influence of the involved concentrability
coefficient. They show that the Bellman residual is generally a bad proxy to policy
optimization and that directly maximizing the mean value is much better, despite
the current lack of deep theoretical analysis. This might seem obvious, as directly
addressing the problem of interest is usually better, but given the prevalence of
(projected) Bellman residual minimization in value-based reinforcement learning,
we believe that this question is worth to be considered.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) aims at estimating a policy π close to the optimal one, in the sense
that its value, vπ (the expected discounted return), is close to maximal, i.e kv∗ − vπ k is small (v∗
being the optimal value), for some norm. Controlling the residual kT∗ vθ − vθ k (where T∗ is the
optimal Bellman operator and vθ a value function parameterized by θ) over a class of parameterized
value functions is a classical approach in value-based RL, and especially in Approximate Dynamic
Programming (ADP). Indeed, controlling this residual allows controlling the distance to the optimal
value function: generally speaking, we have that
C
kv∗ − vπvθ k ≤
kT∗ vθ − vθ k,
(1)
1−γ
with the policy πvθ being greedy with respect to vθ [17, 19].
Some classical ADP approaches actually minimize a projected Bellman residual, kΠ(T∗ vθ − vθ )k,
where Π is the operator projecting onto the hypothesis space to which vθ belongs: Approximate Value
Iteration (AVI) [11, 9] tries to minimize this using a fixed-point approach, vθk+1 = ΠT∗ vθk , and it has
been shown recently [18] that Least-Squares Policy Iteration (LSPI) [13] tries to minimize it using
a Newton approach1 . Notice that in this case (projected residual), there is no general performance
bound2 for controlling kv∗ − vπvθ k.
1

(Exact) policy iteration actually minimizes kT∗ v − vk using a Newton descent [10].
With a single action, this approach reduces to LSTD (Least-Squares Temporal Differences) [5], that can be
arbitrarily bad in an off-policy setting [20].
2

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

