Linearly constrained Gaussian processes

Carl Jidling
Department of Information Technology
Uppsala University, Sweden
carl.jidling@it.uu.se

Niklas Wahlström
Department of Information Technology
Uppsala University, Sweden
niklas.wahlstrom@it.uu.se

Adrian Wills
School of Engineering
University of Newcastle, Australia
adrian.wills@newcastle.edu.au

Thomas B. Schön
Department of Information Technology
Uppsala University, Sweden
thomas.schon@it.uu.se

Abstract
We consider a modification of the covariance function in Gaussian processes to
correctly account for known linear operator constraints. By modeling the target
function as a transformation of an underlying function, the constraints are explicitly
incorporated in the model such that they are guaranteed to be fulfilled by any
sample drawn or prediction made. We also propose a constructive procedure for
designing the transformation operator and illustrate the result on both simulated
and real-data examples.

Introduction

Bayesian non-parametric modeling has had a
profound impact in machine learning due, in
no small part, to the flexibility of these model
structures in combination with the ability to encode prior knowledge in a principled manner [6].
These properties have been exploited within the
class of Bayesian non-parametric models known
as Gaussian Processes (GPs), which have received significant research attention and have
demonstrated utility across a very large range of
real-world applications [16].

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

1.1

1.2

Predicted
magnetic field
strength [a.u.]

1.3

2

1.5

x3 [m]

1

1

0.5

0
1

Abstracting from the myriad number of these applications, it has been observed that the efficacy
of GPs modeling is often intimately dependent
on the appropriate choice of mean and covariance functions, and the appropriate tuning of
their associated hyper-parameters. Often, the
most appropriate mean and covariance functions
are connected to prior knowledge of the underlying problem. For example, [10] uses functional
expectation constraints to consider the problem
of gene-disease association, and [13] employs
a multivariate generalized von Mises distribution to produce a GP-like regression that handles
circular variable problems.

3
0

2
1

-1

0

-2

x2 [m]

-3

-1

x1 [m]

Figure 1: Predicted strength of a magnetic field at
three heights, given measured data sampled from
the trajectory shown (blue curve). The three components (x1 , x2 , x3 ) denote the Cartesian coordinates, where the x3 -coordinate is the height above
the floor. The magnetic field is curl-free, which
can be formulated in terms of three linear constraints. The method proposed in this paper can
exploit these constraints to improve the predictions.
See Section 5.2 for details.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

