FALKON: An Optimal Large Scale Kernel Method

Alessandro Rudi ∗
INRIA – Sierra Project-team,
École Normale Supérieure, Paris

Luigi Carratino
University of Genoa
Genova, Italy

Lorenzo Rosasco
University of Genoa,
LCSL, IIT & MIT

Abstract
Kernel methods provide a principled way to perform non linear, nonparametric
learning. They rely on solid functional analytic foundations and enjoy optimal
statistical properties. However, at least in their basic form, they have limited
applicability in large scale scenarios because of stringent computational requirements in terms of time and especially memory. In this paper, we take a substantial
step in scaling up kernel methods, proposing FALKON, a novel algorithm that
allows to efficiently process millions of points. FALKON is derived combining
several algorithmic principles, namely stochastic subsampling, iterative solvers and
preconditioning. Our theoretical analysis shows that optimal
√ statistical accuracy
is achieved requiring essentially O(n) memory and O(n n) time. An extensive
experimental analysis on large scale datasets shows that, even with a single machine, FALKON outperforms previous state of the art solutions, which exploit
parallel/distributed architectures.

1

Introduction

The goal in supervised learning is to learn from examples a function that predicts well new data.
Nonparametric methods are often crucial since the functions to be learned can be non-linear and
complex Kernel methods are probably the most popular among nonparametric learning methods, but
despite excellent theoretical properties, they have limited applications in large scale learning because
of time and memory requirements, typically at least quadratic in the number of data points.
Overcoming these limitations has motivated a variety of practical approaches including gradient
methods, as well accelerated, stochastic and preconditioned extensions, to improve time complexity
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. Random projections provide an approach to reduce memory requirements, popular
methods including Nyström [7, 8], random features [9], and their numerous extensions. From a
theoretical perspective a key question has become to characterize statistical and computational tradeoffs, that is if, or under which conditions, computational gains come at the expense of statistical
accuracy. In particular, recent results considering least squares, show that there are large class of
problems for which, by combining Nyström or random features approaches [10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15]
with ridge regression, it is possible to substantially reduce computations, while preserving the
same optimal statistical accuracy of exact kernel ridge regression (KRR). While statistical lower
bounds exist for this setting, there are no corresponding computational lower bounds. The state of
the art approximation of KRR, for which optimal statistical bounds are known, typically requires
complexities that are roughly O(n2 ) in time and memory (or possibly O(n) in memory, if kernel
computations are made on the fly).
In this paper, we propose and study FALKON, a new algorithm that, to the best of our knowledge,
has the best known theoretical guarantees. At the same time FALKON provides an efficient approach
to apply kernel methods on millions of points, and tested on a variety of large scale problems
∗
E-mail: alessandro.rudi@inria.fr. This work was done when A.R. was working at Laboratory of
Computational and Statistical Learning (Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia).

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

