Countering Feedback Delays in Multi-Agent Learning

Zhengyuan Zhou
Stanford University
zyzhou@stanford.edu
Nicholas Bambos
Stanford University
bambos@stanford.edu

Panayotis Mertikopoulos
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, LIG
panayotis.mertikopoulos@imag.fr

Peter Glynn
Stanford University
glynn@stanford.edu

Claire Tomlin
UC Berkeley
tomlin@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
We consider a model of game-theoretic learning based on online mirror descent (OMD) with asynchronous and delayed feedback information. Instead of
focusing on specific games, we consider a broad class of continuous games defined
by the general equilibrium stability notion, which we call λ-variational stability. Our first contribution is that, in this class of games, the actual sequence of
play induced by OMD-based learning converges to Nash equilibria provided that
the feedback delays faced by the players are synchronous and bounded. Subsequently, to tackle fully decentralized, asynchronous environments with (possibly)
unbounded delays between actions and feedback, we propose a variant of OMD
which we call delayed mirror descent (DMD), and which relies on the repeated
leveraging of past information. With this modification, the algorithm converges to
Nash equilibria with no feedback synchronicity assumptions and even when the
delays grow superlinearly relative to the horizon of play.

1

Introduction

Online learning is a broad and powerful theoretical framework enjoying widespread applications and
great success in machine learning, data science, operations research, and many other fields [3, 7, 22].
The prototypical online learning problem may be described as follows: At each round t = 0, 1, . . . , a
player selects an action xt from some convex, compact set, and obtains a reward ut (xt ) based on
some a priori unknown payoff function ut . Subsequently, the player receives some feedback (e.g. the
past history of the reward functions) and selects a new action xt+1 with the goal of maximizing the
obtained reward. Aggregating over the rounds of the process, this is usually quantified by asking that
PT
the player’s (external) regret Reg(T ) ≡ maxx∈X t=1 [ut (x) − ut (xt )] grow sublinearly with the
horizon of play T , a property known as “no regret”.
One of the most widely used algorithmic schemes for learning in this context is the online mirror
descent (OMD) class of algorithms [23]. Tracing its origins to [17] for offline optimization problems,
OMD proceeds by taking a gradient step in the dual (gradient) space and projecting it back to the
primal (decision) space via a mirror map generated by a strongly convex regularizer function (with
different regularizers giving rise to different algorithms). In particular, OMD includes as special cases
several seminal learning algorithms, such as Zinkevich’s online gradient descent (OGD) scheme
[29], and the multiplicative/exponential weights (EW) algorithm [1, 13]. Several variants of this
class also exist and, perhaps unsurprisingly, they occur with a variety of different names – such as
“Follow-the-Regularized-Leader" [9], dual averaging [18, 25], and so on.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

