Fast Black-box Variational Inference
through Stochastic Trust-Region Optimization
Jeffrey Regier
jregier@cs.berkeley.edu

Michael I. Jordan
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Jon McAuliffe
jon@stat.berkeley.edu

Abstract
We introduce TrustVI, a fast second-order algorithm for black-box variational
inference based on trust-region optimization and the “reparameterization trick.” At
each iteration, TrustVI proposes and assesses a step based on minibatches of draws
from the variational distribution. The algorithm provably converges to a stationary
point. We implemented TrustVI in the Stan framework and compared it to two
alternatives: Automatic Differentiation Variational Inference (ADVI) and Hessianfree Stochastic Gradient Variational Inference (HFSGVI). The former is based
on stochastic first-order optimization. The latter uses second-order information,
but lacks convergence guarantees. TrustVI typically converged at least one order
of magnitude faster than ADVI, demonstrating the value of stochastic second-order
information. TrustVI often found substantially better variational distributions than
HFSGVI, demonstrating that our convergence theory can matter in practice.

1

Introduction

The “reparameterization trick” [1, 2, 3] has led to a resurgence of interest in variational inference (VI),
making it applicable to essentially any differentiable model. This new approach, however, requires
stochastic optimization rather than fast deterministic optimization algorithms like closed-form
coordinate ascent. Some fast stochastic optimization algorithms exist, but variational objectives have
properties that make them unsuitable: they are typically nonconvex, and the relevant expectations
cannot usually be replaced by finite sums. Thus, to date, practitioners have used SGD and its variants
almost exclusively. Automatic Differentiation Variational Inference (ADVI) [4] has been especially
successful at making variational inference based on first-order stochastic optimization accessible.
Stochastic first-order optimization, however, is slow in theory (sublinear convergence) and in practice
(thousands of iterations), negating a key benefit of VI.
This article presents TrustVI, a fast algorithm for variational inference based on second-order
trust-region optimization and the reparameterization trick. TrustVI routinely converges in tens
of iterations for models that take thousands of ADVI iterations. TrustVI’s iterations can be more
expensive, but on a large collection of Bayesian models, TrustVI typically reduced total computation
by an order of magnitude. Usually TrustVI and ADVI find the same objective value, but when they
differ, TrustVI is typically better.
TrustVI adapts to the stochasticity of the optimization problem, raising the sampling rate for assessing
proposed steps based on a Hoeffding bound. It provably converges to a stationary point. TrustVI
generalizes the Newton trust-region method [5], which converges quadratically and has performed
well at optimizing analytic variational objectives even at an extreme scale [6]. With large enough
minibatches, TrustVI iterations are nearly as productive as those of a deterministic trust region
method. Fortunately, large minibatches make effective use of single-instruction multiple-data (SIMD)
parallelism on modern CPUs and GPUs.
TrustVI uses either explicitly formed approximations of Hessians or approximate Hessian-vector
products. Explicitly formed Hessians can be fast for low-dimensional problems or problems with
sparse Hessians, particularly when expensive computations (e.g., exponentiation) already need to be

