Partial Hard Thresholding: Towards A Principled
Analysis of Support Recovery

Jie Shen
Department of Computer Science
School of Arts and Sciences
Rutgers University
New Jersey, USA
js2007@rutgers.edu

Ping Li
Department of Statistics and Biostatistics
Department of Computer Science
Rutgers University
New Jersey, USA
pingli@stat.rutgers.edu

Abstract
In machine learning and compressed sensing, it is of central importance to understand when a tractable algorithm recovers the support of a sparse signal from its
compressed measurements. In this paper, we present a principled analysis on the
support recovery performance for a family of hard thresholding algorithms. To
this end, we appeal to the partial hard thresholding (PHT) operator proposed recently by Jain et al. [IEEE Trans. Information Theory, 2017]. We show that under
proper conditions, PHT recovers an arbitrary s-sparse signal within O(sκ log κ)
iterations where κ is an appropriate condition number. Specifying the PHT operator, we obtain the best known results for hard thresholding pursuit and orthogonal
matching pursuit with replacement. Experiments on the simulated data complement our theoretical findings and also illustrate the effectiveness of PHT.

1 Introduction
This paper is concerned with the problem of recovering an arbitrary sparse signal from a set of its
(compressed) measurements. We say that a signal x̄ ∈ Rd is s-sparse if there are no more than s
non-zeros in x̄. This problem, together with its many variants, have found a variety of successful
applications in compressed sensing, machine learning and statistics. Of particular interest is the
setting where x̄ is the true signal and only a small number of linear measurements are given, referred
to as compressed sensing. Such instance has been exhaustively studied in the last decade, along with
a large body of elegant work devoted to efficient algorithms including ℓ1 -based convex optimization
and hard thresholding based greedy pursuits [7, 6, 15, 8, 3, 5, 11]. Another quintessential example is
the sparsity-constrained minimization program recently considered in machine learning [30, 2, 14,
22], for which the goal is to efficiently learn the global sparse minimizer x̄ from a set of training
data. Though in most cases, the underlying signal can be categorized into either of the two classes,
we note that it could also be other object such as the parameter of logistic regression [19]. Hence, for
a unified analysis, this paper copes with an arbitrary sparse signal and the results to be established
quickly apply to the special instances above.
It is also worth mentioning that while one can characterize the performance of an algorithm and
can evaluate the obtained estimate from various aspects, we are specifically interested in the quality of support recovery. Recall that for sparse recovery problems, there are two prominent metrics:
the ℓ2 distance and the support recovery. Theoretical results phrased in terms of the ℓ2 metric is
also referred to as parameter estimation, on which most of the previous papers emphasized. Under
this metric, many popular algorithms, e.g., the Lasso [24, 27] and hard thresholding based algorithms [9, 3, 15, 8, 10, 22], are guaranteed with accurate approximation up to the energy of noise.
Support recovery is another important factor to evaluate an algorithm, which is also known as feature
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

