Concrete Dropout
Yarin Gal
yarin.gal@eng.cam.ac.uk
University of Cambridge
and Alan Turing Institute, London

Jiri Hron
jh2084@cam.ac.uk
University of Cambridge

Alex Kendall
agk34@cam.ac.uk
University of Cambridge

Abstract

Dropout is used as a practical tool to obtain uncertainty estimates in large vision
models and reinforcement learning (RL) tasks. But to obtain well-calibrated
uncertainty estimates, a grid-search over the dropout probabilities is necessary—
a prohibitive operation with large models, and an impossible one with RL. We
propose a new dropout variant which gives improved performance and better
calibrated uncertainties. Relying on recent developments in Bayesian deep learning,
we use a continuous relaxation of dropout’s discrete masks. Together with a
principled optimisation objective, this allows for automatic tuning of the dropout
probability in large models, and as a result faster experimentation cycles. In RL
this allows the agent to adapt its uncertainty dynamically as more data is observed.
We analyse the proposed variant extensively on a range of tasks, and give insights
into common practice in the field where larger dropout probabilities are often used
in deeper model layers.

1

Introduction

Well-calibrated uncertainty is crucial for many tasks in deep learning. From the detection of adversarial examples [25], through an agent exploring its environment safely [10, 18], to analysing failure
cases in autonomous driving vision systems [20]. Tasks such as these depend on good uncertainty
estimates to perform well, with miscalibrated uncertainties in reinforcement learning (RL) having the
potential to lead to over-exploration of the environment. Or, much worse, miscalibrated uncertainties
in an autonomous driving vision systems leading to its failure to detect its own ignorance about the
world, resulting in the loss of human life [29].
A principled technique to obtaining uncertainty in models such as the above is Bayesian inference,
with dropout [9, 14] being a practical inference approximation. In dropout inference the neural
network is trained with dropout at training time, and at test time the output is evaluated by dropping
units randomly to generate samples from the predictive distribution [9]. But to get well-calibrated
uncertainty estimates it is necessary to adapt the dropout probability as a variational parameter to the
data at hand [7]. In previous works this was done through a grid-search over the dropout probabilities
[9]. Grid-search can pose difficulties though in certain tasks. Grid-search is a prohibitive operation
with large models such as the ones used in Computer Vision [19, 20], where multiple GPUs would
be used to train a single model. Grid-searching over the dropout probability in such models would
require either an immense waste of computational resources, or extremely prolonged experimentation
cycles. More so, the number of possible per-layer dropout configurations grows exponentially as
the number of model layers increases. Researchers have therefore restricted the grid-search to a
small number of possible dropout values to make such search feasible [8], which in turn might hurt
uncertainty calibration in vision models for autonomous systems.
In other tasks a grid-search over the dropout probabilities is impossible altogether. In tasks where the
amount of data changes over time, for example, the dropout probability should be decreased as the
amount of data increases [7]. This is because the dropout probability has to diminish to zero in the
limit of data—with the model explaining away its uncertainty completely (this is explained in more
detail in §2). RL is an example setting where the dropout probability has to be adapted dynamically.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

