Learning Mixture of Gaussians with Streaming Data

Aditi Raghunathan
Stanford University
aditir@stanford.edu

Prateek Jain
Microsoft Research, India
prajain@microsoft.com

Ravishankar Krishnaswamy
Microsoft Research, India
rakri@microsoft.com

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of learning a mixture of Gaussians with streaming data: given a stream of N points in d dimensions generated by an unknown
mixture of k spherical Gaussians, the goal is to estimate the model parameters using
a single pass over the data stream. We analyze a streaming version of the popular
Lloyd’s heuristic and show that the algorithm estimates all the unknown centers of
the component Gaussians accurately if they are sufficiently separated. Assuming
each pair of centers are Cσ distant with C = Ω((k log k)1/4 σ) and where σ 2 is
the maximum variance of any Gaussian component, we show that asymptotically
the algorithm estimates the centers optimally (up to certain constants); our center
separation requirement matches the best known result for spherical Gaussians [18].
For finite samples, we show that a bias term based on the initial estimate decreases
at O(1/poly(N )) rate while variance decreases at nearly optimal rate of σ 2 d/N .
Our analysis requires seeding the algorithm with a good initial estimate of the true
cluster centers for which we provide an online PCA based clustering algorithm.
Indeed, the asymptotic per-step time complexity of our algorithm is the optimal
d · k while space complexity of our algorithm is O(dk log k).
In addition to the bias and variance terms which tend to 0, the hard-thresholding
based updates of streaming Lloyd’s algorithm is agnostic to the data distribution
and hence incurs an approximation error that cannot be avoided. However, by
using a streaming version of the classical (soft-thresholding-based) EM method
that exploits the Gaussian distribution explicitly, we show that for a mixture of
two Gaussians the true means can be estimated consistently, with estimation error
decreasing at nearly optimal rate, and tending to 0 for N → ∞.

1

Introduction

Clustering data into homogeneous clusters is a critical first step in any data analysis/exploration task
and is used extensively to pre-process data, form features, remove outliers and visualize data. Due
to the explosion in amount of data collected and processed, designing clustering algorithms that
can handle large datasets that do not fit in RAM is paramount to any big-data system. A common
approach in such scenarios is to treat the entire dataset as a stream of data, and then design algorithms
which update the model after every few points from the data stream. In addition, there are several
practical applications where the data itself is not available beforehand and is streaming in, for example
in any typical online system like web-search.
For such a model, the algorithm of choice in practice is the so-called streaming k-means heuristic.
It is essentially a streaming version of the celebrated k-means algorithm or Lloyd’s heuristic [8].
The basic k-means algorithm is designed for offline/batch data where each data point is assigned to
the nearest centroid and the centroids are then updated based on the assigned points; this process is
iterated till the solution is locally optimal. The streaming version of the k-means algorithm assigns
the new point from the stream to the closest centroid and updates this centroid immediately. That is,
unlike offline k-means which first assigns all the points to the respective centroids and then updates
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

