Scalable Generalized Linear Bandits:
Online Computation and Hashing

Kwang-Sung Jun
UW-Madison
kjun@discovery.wisc.edu

Aniruddha Bhargava
UW-Madison
aniruddha@wisc.edu

Robert Nowak
UW-Madison
rdnowak@wisc.edu

Rebecca Willett
UW-Madison
willett@discovery.wisc.edu

Abstract
Generalized Linear Bandits (GLBs), a natural extension of the stochastic linear
bandits, has been popular and successful in recent years. However, existing GLBs
scale poorly with the number of rounds and the number of arms, limiting their
utility in practice. This paper proposes new, scalable solutions to the GLB problem
in two respects. First, unlike existing GLBs, whose per-time-step space and time
complexity grow at least linearly with time t, we propose a new algorithm that
performs online computations to enjoy a constant space and time complexity. At
its heart is a novel Generalized Linear extension of the Online-to-confidence-set
Conversion (GLOC method) that takes any online learning algorithm and turns it
into a GLB algorithm. As a special case, we apply GLOC to the online Newton
step algorithm, which results in a low-regret GLB algorithm with much lower
time and memory complexity than prior work. Second, for the case where the
number N of arms is very large, we propose new algorithms in which each next
arm is selected via an inner product search. Such methods can be implemented
via hashing algorithms (i.e., “hash-amenable”) and result in a time complexity
sublinear in N . While a Thompson sampling extension of GLOC is hash-amenable,
its regret bound for d-dimensional arm sets scales with d3/2 , whereas GLOC’s
regret bound scales with d. Towards closing this gap, we propose a new hashamenable algorithm whose regret bound scales with d5/4 . Finally, we propose a
fast approximate hash-key computation (inner product) with a better accuracy than
the state-of-the-art, which can be of independent interest. We conclude the paper
with preliminary experimental results confirming the merits of our methods.

1

Introduction

This paper considers the problem of making generalized linear bandits (GLBs) scalable. In the
stochastic GLB problem, a learner makes successive decisions to maximize her cumulative rewards.
Specifically, at time t the learner observes a set of arms Xt ⊆ Rd . The learner then chooses an arm
∗
xt ∈ Xt and receives a stochastic reward yt that is a noisy function of xt : yt = µ(x>
t θ ) + ηt , where
∗
θ ∈ Rd is unknown, µ:R→R is a known nonlinear mapping, and ηt ∈ R is some zero-mean noise.
This reward structure encompasses generalized linear models [29]; e.g., Bernoulli, Poisson, etc.
The key aspect of the bandit problem is that the learner does not know how much reward she would
have received, had she chosen another arm. The estimation on θ ∗ is thus biased by the history of the
selected arms, and one needs to mix in exploratory arm selections to avoid ruling out the optimal
arm. This is well-known as the exploration-exploitation dilemma. The performance of a learner is
evaluated by its regret that measures how much cumulative reward she would have gained additionally
if she had known the true θ ∗ . We provide backgrounds and formal definitions in Section 2.
A linear case of the problem above (µ(z) = z) is called the (stochastic) linear bandit problem. Since
the first formulation of the linear bandits [7], there has been a flurry of studies on the problem [11,
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

