Robust Hypothesis Test for Nonlinear Effect
with Gaussian Processes
Jeremiah Zhe Liu, Brent Coull
Department of Biostatistics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
{zhl112@mail, bcoull@hsph}.harvard.edu

Abstract
This work constructs a hypothesis test for detecting whether an data-generating
function h : Rp → R belongs to a specific reproducing kernel Hilbert space
H0 , where the structure of H0 is only partially known. Utilizing the theory of
reproducing kernels, we reduce this hypothesis to a simple one-sided score test
for a scalar parameter, develop a testing procedure that is robust against the misspecification of kernel functions, and also propose an ensemble-based estimator
for the null model to guarantee test performance in small samples. To demonstrate
the utility of the proposed method, we apply our test to the problem of detecting
nonlinear interaction between groups of continuous features. We evaluate the
finite-sample performance of our test under different data-generating functions and
estimation strategies for the null model. Our results reveal interesting connections
between notions in machine learning (model underfit/overfit) and those in statistical
inference (i.e. Type I error/power of hypothesis test), and also highlight unexpected
consequences of common model estimating strategies (e.g. estimating kernel
hyperparameters using maximum likelihood estimation) on model inference.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of constructing a hypothesis test for an unknown data-generating function h :
Rp → R, when h is estimated with a black-box algorithm (specifically, Gaussian Process regression)
from n observations {yi , xi }ni=1 . Specifically, we are interested in testing for the hypothesis:
H0 : h ∈ H0

v.s.

Ha : h ∈ Ha

where H0 , Ha are the function spaces for h under the null and the alternative hypothesis. We assume
only partial knowledge about H0 . For example, we may assume H0 = {h|h(xi ) = h(xi,1 )} is the
space of functions depend only on x1 , while claiming no knowledge about other properties (linearity,
smoothness, etc) about h. We pay special attention to the setting where the sample size n is small.
This type of tests carries concrete significance in scientific studies. In areas such as genetics,
drug trials and environmental health, a hypothesis test for feature effect plays a critical role in
answering scientific questions of interest. For example, assuming for simplicity x2×1 = [x1 , x2 ]T ,
an investigator might inquire the effect of drug dosage x1 on patient’s biometric measurement y
(corresponds to the null hypothesis H0 = {h(x) = h(x2 )}), or whether the adverse health effect
of air pollutants x1 is modified by patients’ nutrient intake x2 (corresponds to the null hypothesis
H0 = {h(x) = h1 (x1 ) + h2 (x2 )}). In these studies, h usually represents some complex, nonlinear
biological process whose exact mathematical properties are not known. Sample size in these studies
are often small (n ≈ 100 − 200), due to the high monetary and time cost in subject recruitment and
the lab analysis of biological samples.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

