Bayesian Dyadic Trees and Histograms for Regression

Stéphanie van der Pas
Mathematical Institute
Leiden University
Leiden, The Netherlands
svdpas@math.leidenuniv.nl

Veronika Ročková
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL, 60637
Veronika.Rockova@ChicagoBooth.edu

Abstract
Many machine learning tools for regression are based on recursive partitioning
of the covariate space into smaller regions, where the regression function can
be estimated locally. Among these, regression trees and their ensembles have
demonstrated impressive empirical performance. In this work, we shed light
on the machinery behind Bayesian variants of these methods. In particular, we
study Bayesian regression histograms, such as Bayesian dyadic trees, in the simple
regression case with just one predictor. We focus on the reconstruction of regression
surfaces that are piecewise constant, where the number of jumps is unknown. We
show that with suitably designed priors, posterior distributions concentrate around
the true step regression function at a near-minimax rate. These results do not require
the knowledge of the true number of steps, nor the width of the true partitioning
cells. Thus, Bayesian dyadic regression trees are fully adaptive and can recover the
true piecewise regression function nearly as well as if we knew the exact number
and location of jumps. Our results constitute the first step towards understanding
why Bayesian trees and their ensembles have worked so well in practice. As an
aside, we discuss prior distributions on balanced interval partitions and how they
relate to an old problem in geometric probability. Namely, we relate the probability
of covering the circumference of a circle with random arcs whose endpoints are
confined to a grid, a new variant of the original problem.

1

Introduction

Histogram regression methods, such as regression trees [1] and their ensembles [2], have an impressive
record of empirical success in many areas of application [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Tree-based machine learning
(ML) methods build a piecewise constant reconstruction of the regression surface based on ideas
of recursive partitioning. Perhaps the most popular partitioning schemes are the ones based on
parallel-axis splits. One recent example is the Mondrian process [8], which was introduced to the
ML community as a prior over tree data structures with interesting self-consistency properties. Many
efficient algorithms exist that can be deployed to fit regression histograms underpinned by some
partitioning scheme. Among these, Bayesian variants, such as Bayesian CART [9, 10] and BART
[11], have appealed to umpteen practitioners. There are several reasons why. Bayesian tree-based
regression tools (a) can adapt to regression surfaces without any need for pruning, (b) are reluctant to
overfit, (c) provide an avenue for uncertainty statements via posterior distributions. While practical
success stories abound [3, 4, 5, 6, 7], the theoretical understanding of Bayesian regression tree
methods has been lacking. In this work, we study the quality of posterior distributions with regard
to the three properties mentioned above. We provide first theoretical results that contribute to the
understanding of Bayesian Gaussian regression methods based on recursive partitioning.
Our performance metric will be the speed of posterior concentration/contraction around the true
regression function. This is ultimately a frequentist assessment, describing the typical behavior of the
posterior under the true generative model [12]. Posterior concentration rate results are now slowly
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

