Improving the Expected Improvement Algorithm

Chao Qin
Columbia Business School
New York, NY 10027
cqin22@gsb.columbia.edu

Diego Klabjan
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
d-klabjan@northwestern.edu

Daniel Russo
Columbia Business School
New York, NY 10027
djr2174@gsb.columbia.edu

Abstract
The expected improvement (EI) algorithm is a popular strategy for information
collection in optimization under uncertainty. The algorithm is widely known to
be too greedy, but nevertheless enjoys wide use due to its simplicity and ability
to handle uncertainty and noise in a coherent decision theoretic framework. To
provide rigorous insight into EI, we study its properties in a simple setting of
Bayesian optimization where the domain consists of a finite grid of points. This
is the so-called best-arm identification problem, where the goal is to allocate
measurement effort wisely to confidently identify the best arm using a small
number of measurements. In this framework, one can show formally that EI is far
from optimal. To overcome this shortcoming, we introduce a simple modification
of the expected improvement algorithm. Surprisingly, this simple change results in
an algorithm that is asymptotically optimal for Gaussian best-arm identification
problems, and provably outperforms standard EI by an order of magnitude.

1

Introduction

Recently Bayesian optimization has received much attention in the machine learning community
[21]. This literature studies the problem of maximizing an unknown black-box objective function by
collecting noisy measurements of the function at carefully chosen sample points. At first a prior belief
over the objective function is prescribed, and then the statistical model is refined sequentially as data
are observed. Expected improvement (EI) [13] is one of the most widely-used Bayesian optimization
algorithms. It is a greedy improvement-based heuristic that samples the point offering greatest
expected improvement over the current best sampled point. EI is simple and readily implementable,
and it offers reasonable performance in practice.
Although EI is reasonably effective, it is too greedy, focusing nearly all sampling effort near the
estimated optimum and gathering too little information about other regions in the domain. This
phenomenon is most transparent in the simplest setting of Bayesian optimization where the function’s
domain is a finite grid of points. This is the problem of best-arm identification (BAI) [1] in a multiarmed bandit. The player sequentially selects arms to measure and observes noisy reward samples
with the hope that a small number of measurements enable a confident identification of the best
arm. Recently Ryzhov [20] studied the performance of EI in this setting. His work focuses on a link
between EI and another algorithm known as the optimal computing budget allocation [3], but his
analysis reveals EI allocates a vanishing proportion of samples to suboptimal arms as the total number
of samples grows. Any method with this property will be far from optimal in BAI problems [1].
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

