Detrended Partial Cross Correlation
for Brain Connectivity Analysis

Jaime S Ide∗
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06519
jaime.ide@yale.edu

Fabio A Cappabianco
Federal University of Sao Paulo
S.J. dos Campos, 12231, Brazil
cappabianco@unifesp.br

Fabio A Faria
Federal University of Sao Paulo
S.J. dos Campos, 12231, Brazil
ffaria@unifesp.br

Chiang-shan R Li
Yale University
New Haven, CT
chiang-shan.li-yale.edu

Abstract
Brain connectivity analysis is a critical component of ongoing human connectome
projects to decipher the healthy and diseased brain. Recent work has highlighted
the power-law (multi-time scale) properties of brain signals; however, there remains
a lack of methods to specifically quantify short- vs. long- time range brain connections. In this paper, using detrended partial cross-correlation analysis (DPCCA),
we propose a novel functional connectivity measure to delineate brain interactions
at multiple time scales, while controlling for covariates. We use a rich simulated
fMRI dataset to validate the proposed method, and apply it to a real fMRI dataset
in a cocaine dependence prediction task. We show that, compared to extant methods, the DPCCA-based approach not only distinguishes short and long memory
functional connectivity but also improves feature extraction and enhances classification accuracy. Together, this paper contributes broadly to new computational
methodologies in understanding neural information processing.

1

Introduction

Brain connectivity is crucial to understanding the healthy and diseased brain states [15, 1]. In recent
years, investigators have pursued the construction of human connectomes and made large datasets
available in the public domain [23, 24]. Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) has been
widely used to examine complex processes of perception and cognition. In particular, functional
connectivity derived from fMRI signals has proven to be effective in delineating biomarkers for many
neuropsychiatric conditions [15].
One of the challenges encountered in functional connectivity analysis is the precise definition of
nodes and edges of connected brain regions [21]. Functional nodes can be defined based on activation
maps or with the use of functional or anatomical atlases. Once nodes are defined, the next step is to
estimate the weights associated with the edges. Traditionally, these functional connectivity weights
are measured using correlation-based metrics. Previous simulation studies have shown that they can
be quite successful, outperforming higher-order statistics (e.g. linear non-gaussian acyclic causal
models) and lag-based approaches (e.g. Granger causality) [20].
On the other hand, very few studies have investigated the power-law cross-correlation properties
(equivalent to multi-time scale measures) of brain connectivity. Recent research suggested that fMRI
∗

Corresponding author: Department of Psychiatry, 34 Park St. S110. New Haven CT 06519.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

