Optimized Pre-Processing for Discrimination
Prevention
Flavio P. Calmon
Harvard University
flavio@seas.harvard.edu

Dennis Wei
IBM Research AI
dwei@us.ibm.com

Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy
IBM Research AI
knatesa@us.ibm.com

Bhanukiran Vinzamuri
IBM Research AI
bhanu.vinzamuri@ibm.com
Kush R. Varshney
IBM Research AI
krvarshn@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Non-discrimination is a recognized objective in algorithmic decision making. In
this paper, we introduce a novel probabilistic formulation of data pre-processing
for reducing discrimination. We propose a convex optimization for learning a data
transformation with three goals: controlling discrimination, limiting distortion
in individual data samples, and preserving utility. We characterize the impact
of limited sample size in accomplishing this objective. Two instances of the
proposed optimization are applied to datasets, including one on real-world criminal
recidivism. Results show that discrimination can be greatly reduced at a small cost
in classification accuracy.

1

Introduction

Discrimination is the prejudicial treatment of an individual based on membership in a legally protected
group such as a race or gender. Direct discrimination occurs when protected attributes are used
explicitly in making decisions, also known as disparate treatment. More pervasive nowadays is
indirect discrimination, in which protected attributes are not used but reliance on variables correlated
with them leads to significantly different outcomes for different groups. The latter phenomenon is
termed disparate impact. Indirect discrimination may be intentional, as in the historical practice of
“redlining” in the U.S. in which home mortgages were denied in zip codes populated primarily by
minorities. However, the doctrine of disparate impact applies regardless of actual intent.
Supervised learning algorithms, increasingly used for decision making in applications of consequence,
may at first be presumed to be fair and devoid of inherent bias, but in fact, inherit any bias or discrimination present in the data on which they are trained [Calders and Žliobaitė, 2013]. Furthermore,
simply removing protected variables from the data is not enough since it does nothing to address
indirect discrimination and may in fact conceal it. The need for more sophisticated tools has made
discrimination discovery and prevention an important research area [Pedreschi et al., 2008].
Algorithmic discrimination prevention involves modifying one or more of the following to ensure
that decisions made by supervised learning methods are less biased: (a) the training data, (b) the
learning algorithm, and (c) the ensuing decisions themselves. These are respectively classified as
pre-processing [Hajian, 2013], in-processing [Fish et al., 2016, Zafar et al., 2016, Kamishima et al.,
2011] and post-processing approaches [Hardt et al., 2016]. In this paper, we focus on pre-processing
since it is the most flexible in terms of the data science pipeline: it is independent of the modeling
algorithm and can be integrated with data release and publishing mechanisms.
Researchers have also studied several notions of discrimination and fairness. Disparate impact is
addressed by the principles of statistical parity and group fairness [Feldman et al., 2015], which seek
similar outcomes for all groups. In contrast, individual fairness [Dwork et al., 2012] mandates that
similar individuals be treated similarly irrespective of group membership. For classifiers and other
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

