Nonlinear Acceleration of Stochastic Algorithms

Damien Scieur
INRIA, ENS,
PSL Research University,
Paris France
damien.scieur@inria.fr

Francis Bach
INRIA, ENS,
PSL Research University,
Paris France
francis.bach@inria.fr

Alexandre d’Aspremont
CNRS, ENS,
PSL Research University,
Paris France
aspremon@ens.fr

Abstract
Extrapolation methods use the last few iterates of an optimization algorithm to
produce a better estimate of the optimum. They were shown to achieve optimal
convergence rates in a deterministic setting using simple gradient iterates. Here,
we study extrapolation methods in a stochastic setting, where the iterates are
produced by either a simple or an accelerated stochastic gradient algorithm. We
first derive convergence bounds for arbitrary, potentially biased perturbations, then
produce asymptotic bounds using the ratio between the variance of the noise and
the accuracy of the current point. Finally, we apply this acceleration technique
to stochastic algorithms such as SGD, SAGA, SVRG and Katyusha in different
settings, and show significant performance gains.

1

Introduction

We focus on the problem
min f (x)

x∈Rd

(1)

where f is a L-smooth and µ-strongly convex function with respect to the Euclidean norm, i.e.,
L
µ
ky − xk2 ≤ f (y) − f (x) − ∇f (x)T (y − x) ≤ ky − xk2 .
2
2
We consider a stochastic first-order oracle, which gives a noisy estimate of the gradient of f (x), with
∇ε f (x) = ∇f (x) + ε,

(2)

where ε is a noise term with bounded variance. This is the case for example when f is a sum of
strongly convex functions, and we only have access to the gradient of one randomly selected function.
Stochastic optimization (2) is typically challenging as classical algorithms are not convergent (for
example, gradient descent or Nesterov’s accelerated gradient). Even the averaged version of stochastic
gradient descent with constant step size does not converge to the solution of (1), but to another point
whose proximity to the real minimizer depends of the step size [Nedić and Bertsekas, 2001; Moulines
and Bach, 2011].
When f is a finite sum of N functions, then algorithms such as SAG [Schmidt et al., 2013], SAGA
[Defazio et al., 2014], SDCA [Shalev-Shwartz and Zhang, 2013] and SVRG [Johnson and Zhang,
2013] accelerate convergence using a variance reduction technique akin to control variate in MonteCarlo methods. Their rate of convergence depends on 1p− µ/L and thus does not exhibit an
accelerated rate on par with the deterministic setting (in 1 − µ/L). Recently a generic acceleration
algorithm called Catalyst [Lin et al., 2015], based on the proximal point method improved this rate
of convergence, but the practical performances highly depends on the input parameters. On the
other hand, recent papers, for example [Shalev-Shwartz and Zhang, 2014] (Accelerated SDCA) and
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

