QSGD: Communication-Efficient SGD
via Gradient Quantization and Encoding

Dan Alistarh
IST Austria & ETH Zurich
dan.alistarh@ist.ac.at

Demjan Grubic
ETH Zurich & Google
demjangrubic@gmail.com

Ryota Tomioka
Microsoft Research
ryoto@microsoft.com

Jerry Z. Li
MIT
jerryzli@mit.edu

Milan Vojnovic
London School of Economics
M.Vojnovic@lse.ac.uk

Abstract
Parallel implementations of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) have received significant research attention, thanks to its excellent scalability properties. A fundamental
barrier when parallelizing SGD is the high bandwidth cost of communicating gradient updates between nodes; consequently, several lossy compresion heuristics have
been proposed, by which nodes only communicate quantized gradients. Although
effective in practice, these heuristics do not always converge.
In this paper, we propose Quantized SGD (QSGD), a family of compression
schemes with convergence guarantees and good practical performance. QSGD
allows the user to smoothly trade off communication bandwidth and convergence
time: nodes can adjust the number of bits sent per iteration, at the cost of possibly
higher variance. We show that this trade-off is inherent, in the sense that improving
it past some threshold would violate information-theoretic lower bounds. QSGD
guarantees convergence for convex and non-convex objectives, under asynchrony,
and can be extended to stochastic variance-reduced techniques.
When applied to training deep neural networks for image classification and automated speech recognition, QSGD leads to significant reductions in end-to-end
training time. For instance, on 16GPUs, we can train the ResNet-152 network to
full accuracy on ImageNet 1.8× faster than the full-precision variant.

1

Introduction

The surge of massive data has led to significant interest in distributed algorithms for scaling computations in the context of machine learning and optimization. In this context, much attention has
been devoted to scaling large-scale stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithms [33], which can be
briefly defined as follows. Let f : Rn → R be a function which we want to minimize. We have access
to stochastic gradients ge such that E[e
g (x)] = ∇f (x). A standard instance of SGD will converge
towards the minimum by iterating the procedure
xt+1 = xt − ηt ge(xt ),

(1)

where xt is the current candidate, and ηt is a variable step-size parameter. Notably, this arises if
we are given i.i.d. data points X1 , . . . , Xm generated from an unknown distribution D, and a loss
function `(X, θ), which measures the loss of the model θ at data point X. We wish to find a model
θ∗ which minimizes f (θ) = EX∼D [`(X, θ)], the expected loss to the data. This framework captures
many fundamental tasks, such as neural network training.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

