Neural system identification for large populations
separating “what” and “where”

David A. Klindt * 1-3 , Alexander S. Ecker * 1,2,4,6 , Thomas Euler 1-3 , Matthias Bethge 1,2,4-6
*
Authors contributed equally
1
Centre for Integrative Neuroscience, University of Tübingen, Germany
2
Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, University of Tübingen, Germany
3
Institute for Ophthalmic Research, University of Tübingen, Germany
4
Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of Tübingen, Germany
5
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, Tübingen, Germany
6
Center for Neuroscience and Artificial Intelligence, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, USA
klindt.david@gmail.com, alexander.ecker@uni-tuebingen.de,
thomas.euler@cin.uni-tuebingen.de, matthias.bethge@bethgelab.org

Abstract
Neuroscientists classify neurons into different types that perform similar computations at different locations in the visual field. Traditional methods for neural
system identification do not capitalize on this separation of “what” and “where”.
Learning deep convolutional feature spaces that are shared among many neurons
provides an exciting path forward, but the architectural design needs to account for
data limitations: While new experimental techniques enable recordings from thousands of neurons, experimental time is limited so that one can sample only a small
fraction of each neuron’s response space. Here, we show that a major bottleneck
for fitting convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to neural data is the estimation
of the individual receptive field locations – a problem that has been scratched only
at the surface thus far. We propose a CNN architecture with a sparse readout layer
factorizing the spatial (where) and feature (what) dimensions. Our network scales
well to thousands of neurons and short recordings and can be trained end-to-end.
We evaluate this architecture on ground-truth data to explore the challenges and
limitations of CNN-based system identification. Moreover, we show that our network model outperforms current state-of-the art system identification models of
mouse primary visual cortex.

1 Introduction
In neural system identification, we seek to construct quantitative models that describe how a neuron
responds to arbitrary stimuli [1, 2]. In sensory neuroscience, the standard way to approach this problem is with a generalized linear model (GLM): a linear filter followed by a point-wise nonlinearity
[3, 4]. However, neurons elicit complex nonlinear responses to natural stimuli even as early as in
the retina [5, 6] and the degree of nonlinearity increases as ones goes up the visual hierarchy. At the
same time, neurons in the same brain area tend to perform similar computations at different positions
in the visual field. This separability of what is computed from where it is computed is a key idea
underlying the notion of functional cell types tiling the visual field in a retinotopic fashion.
For early visual processing stages like the retina or primary visual cortex, several nonlinear methods
have been proposed, including energy models [7, 8], spike-triggered covariance methods [9, 10],
linear-nonlinear (LN-LN) cascades [11, 12], convolutional subunit models [13, 14] and GLMs based
on handcrafted nonlinear feature spaces [15]. While these models outperform the simple GLM, they
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

