Training Deep Networks without Learning Rates
Through Coin Betting

Francesco Orabona∗
Department of Computer Science
Stony Brook University
Stony Brook, NY
francesco@orabona.com

Tatiana Tommasi∗
Department of Computer, Control, and
Management Engineering
Sapienza, Rome University, Italy
tommasi@dis.uniroma1.it

Abstract
Deep learning methods achieve state-of-the-art performance in many application
scenarios. Yet, these methods require a significant amount of hyperparameters
tuning in order to achieve the best results. In particular, tuning the learning rates
in the stochastic optimization process is still one of the main bottlenecks. In this
paper, we propose a new stochastic gradient descent procedure for deep networks
that does not require any learning rate setting. Contrary to previous methods, we
do not adapt the learning rates nor we make use of the assumed curvature of the
objective function. Instead, we reduce the optimization process to a game of betting
on a coin and propose a learning-rate-free optimal algorithm for this scenario.
Theoretical convergence is proven for convex and quasi-convex functions and
empirical evidence shows the advantage of our algorithm over popular stochastic
gradient algorithms.

1

Introduction

In the last years deep learning has demonstrated a great success in a large number of fields and has
attracted the attention of various research communities with the consequent development of multiple
coding frameworks (e.g., Caffe [Jia et al., 2014], TensorFlow [Abadi et al., 2015]), the diffusion of
blogs, online tutorials, books, and dedicated courses. Besides reaching out scientists with different
backgrounds, the need of all these supportive tools originates also from the nature of deep learning: it
is a methodology that involves many structural details as well as several hyperparameters whose
importance has been growing with the recent trend of designing deeper and multi-branches networks.
Some of the hyperparameters define the model itself (e.g., number of hidden layers, regularization
coefficients, kernel size for convolutional layers), while others are related to the model training
procedure. In both cases, hyperparameter tuning is a critical step to realize deep learning full potential
and most of the knowledge in this area comes from living practice, years of experimentation, and, to
some extent, mathematical justification [Bengio, 2012].
With respect to the optimization process, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) has proved itself to be a
key component of the deep learning success, but its effectiveness strictly depends on the choice of
the initial learning rate and learning rate schedule. This has primed a line of research on algorithms
to reduce the hyperparameter dependence in SGD—see Section 2 for an overview on the related
literature. However, all previous algorithms resort on adapting the learning rates, rather than removing
them, or rely on assumptions on the shape of the objective function.
In this paper we aim at removing at least one of the hyperparameter of deep learning models. We
leverage over recent advancements in the stochastic optimization literature to design a backprop∗

The authors contributed equally.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

