Fast-Slow Recurrent Neural Networks
Asier Mujika
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
asierm@ethz.ch

Florian Meier
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
meierflo@inf.ethz.ch

Angelika Steger
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
steger@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Processing sequential data of variable length is a major challenge in a wide range
of applications, such as speech recognition, language modeling, generative image
modeling and machine translation. Here, we address this challenge by proposing
a novel recurrent neural network (RNN) architecture, the Fast-Slow RNN (FSRNN). The FS-RNN incorporates the strengths of both multiscale RNNs and
deep transition RNNs as it processes sequential data on different timescales and
learns complex transition functions from one time step to the next. We evaluate
the FS-RNN on two character level language modeling data sets, Penn Treebank
and Hutter Prize Wikipedia, where we improve state of the art results to 1.19
and 1.25 bits-per-character (BPC), respectively. In addition, an ensemble of two
FS-RNNs achieves 1.20 BPC on Hutter Prize Wikipedia outperforming the best
known compression algorithm with respect to the BPC measure. We also present
an empirical investigation of the learning and network dynamics of the FS-RNN,
which explains the improved performance compared to other RNN architectures.
Our approach is general as any kind of RNN cell is a possible building block for
the FS-RNN architecture, and thus can be flexibly applied to different tasks.

1

Introduction

Processing, modeling and predicting sequential data of variable length is a major challenge in the
field of machine learning. In recent years, recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [34, 32, 39, 41] have
been the most popular tool to approach this challenge. RNNs have been successfully applied to
improve state of the art results in complex tasks like language modeling and speech recognition. A
popular variation of RNNs are long short-term memories (LSTMs) [18], which have been proposed
to address the vanishing gradient problem [16, 5, 17]. LSTMs maintain constant error flow and thus
are more suitable to learn long-term dependencies compared to standard RNNs.
Our work contributes to the ongoing debate on how to interconnect several RNN cells with the goals
of promoting the learning of long-term dependencies, favoring efficient hierarchical representations of
information, exploiting the computational advantages of deep over shallow networks and increasing
computational efficiency of training and testing. In deep RNN architectures, RNNs or LSTMs
are stacked layer-wise on top of each other [9, 20, 11]. The additional layers enable the network
to learn complex input to output relations and encourage a efficient hierarchical representation
of information. In these architectures, the hidden states of all the hierarchical layers are updated
once per time step (by one time step we refer to the time between two consecutive input elements).
In multiscale RNN architectures [35, 9, 25, 6], the operation on different timescales is enforced
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

