Submultiplicative Glivenko-Cantelli and
Uniform Convergence of Revenues

Noga Alon
Tel Aviv University, Israel
and Microsoft Research
nogaa@tau.ac.il

Moshe Babaioff
Microsoft Research
moshe@microsoft.com

Yannai A. Gonczarowski
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel
and Microsoft Research
yannai@gonch.name
Shay Moran
Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton
shaymoran1@gmail.com

Yishay Mansour
Tel Aviv University, Israel
and Google Research, Israel
mansour@tau.ac.il
Amir Yehudayoff
Technion — IIT, Israel
amir.yehudayoff@gmail.com

Abstract
In this work we derive a variant of the classic Glivenko-Cantelli Theorem, which
asserts uniform convergence of the empirical Cumulative Distribution Function
(CDF) to the CDF of the underlying distribution. Our variant allows for tighter
convergence bounds for extreme values of the CDF.
We apply our bound in the context of revenue learning, which is a well-studied
problem in economics and algorithmic game theory. We derive sample-complexity
bounds on the uniform convergence rate of the empirical revenues to the true
revenues, assuming a bound on the kth moment of the valuations, for any (possibly
fractional) k > 1.
For uniform convergence in the limit, we give a complete characterization and a
zero-one law: if the first moment of the valuations is finite, then uniform convergence almost surely occurs; conversely, if the first moment is infinite, then uniform
convergence almost never occurs.

1

Introduction

A basic task in machine learning is to learn an unknown distribution µ, given access to samples
from it. A natural and widely studied criterion for learning a distribution is approximating its
Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF). The seminal Glivenko-Cantelli Theorem [13, 6] addresses
this question when the distribution µ is over the real numbers. It determines the behavior of the
empirical distribution function as the number of samples grows: let X1 , X2 , . . . be a sequence of i.i.d.
random variables drawn from a distribution µ on R with Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) F ,
and let x1 , x2 , . . . be their realizations. The empirical distribution µn is
n

µn ,

1X
δx ,
n i=1 i

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

