Semi-Supervised Learning for Optical Flow
with Generative Adversarial Networks
Wei-Sheng Lai1
Jia-Bin Huang2
Ming-Hsuan Yang1,3
2
3
University of California, Merced
Virginia Tech
Nvidia Research
1
2
{wlai24|mhyang}@ucmerced.edu
jbhuang@vt.edu

1

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have recently been applied to the optical
flow estimation problem. As training the CNNs requires sufficiently large amounts
of labeled data, existing approaches resort to synthetic, unrealistic datasets. On
the other hand, unsupervised methods are capable of leveraging real-world videos
for training where the ground truth flow fields are not available. These methods,
however, rely on the fundamental assumptions of brightness constancy and spatial
smoothness priors that do not hold near motion boundaries. In this paper, we
propose to exploit unlabeled videos for semi-supervised learning of optical flow
with a Generative Adversarial Network. Our key insight is that the adversarial
loss can capture the structural patterns of flow warp errors without making explicit
assumptions. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrate that the
proposed semi-supervised algorithm performs favorably against purely supervised
and baseline semi-supervised learning schemes.

1

Introduction

Optical flow estimation is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision. The classical formulation builds upon the assumptions of brightness constancy and spatial smoothness [15, 25]. Recent
advancements in this field include using sparse descriptor matching as guidance [4], leveraging dense
correspondences from hierarchical features [2, 39], or adopting edge-preserving interpolation techniques [32]. Existing classical approaches, however, involve optimizing computationally expensive
non-convex objective functions.
With the rapid growth of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs), several approaches have
been proposed to solve optical flow estimation in an end-to-end manner. Due to the lack of the
large-scale ground truth flow datasets of real-world scenes, existing approaches [8, 16, 30] rely on
training on synthetic datasets. These synthetic datasets, however, do not reflect the complexity of
realistic photometric effects, motion blur, illumination, occlusion, and natural image noise. Several
recent methods [1, 40] propose to leverage real-world videos for training CNNs in an unsupervised
setting (i.e., without using ground truth flow). The main idea is to use loss functions measuring
brightness constancy and spatial smoothness of flow fields as a proxy for losses using ground truth
flow. However, the assumptions of brightness constancy and spatial smoothness often do not hold
near motion boundaries. Despite the acceleration in computational speed, the performance of these
approaches still does not match up to the classical flow estimation algorithms.
With the limited quantity and unrealistic of ground truth flow and the large amounts of real-world
unlabeled data, it is thus of great interest to explore the semi-supervised learning framework. A
straightforward approach is to minimize the End Point Error (EPE) loss for data with ground truth
flow and the loss functions that measure classical brightness constancy and smoothness assumptions
for unlabeled training images (Figure 1 (a)). However, we show that such an approach is sensitive
to the choice of parameters and may sometimes decrease the accuracy of flow estimation. Prior
work [1, 40] minimizes a robust loss function (e.g., Charbonnier function) on the flow warp error
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

