Learned in Translation: Contextualized Word Vectors
Bryan McCann
bmccann@salesforce.com

James Bradbury
james.bradbury@salesforce.com

Caiming Xiong
cxiong@salesforce.com

Richard Socher
rsocher@salesforce.com

Abstract
Computer vision has benefited from initializing multiple deep layers with weights
pretrained on large supervised training sets like ImageNet. Natural language processing (NLP) typically sees initialization of only the lowest layer of deep models
with pretrained word vectors. In this paper, we use a deep LSTM encoder from
an attentional sequence-to-sequence model trained for machine translation (MT)
to contextualize word vectors. We show that adding these context vectors (CoVe)
improves performance over using only unsupervised word and character vectors on
a wide variety of common NLP tasks: sentiment analysis (SST, IMDb), question
classification (TREC), entailment (SNLI), and question answering (SQuAD). For
fine-grained sentiment analysis and entailment, CoVe improves performance of our
baseline models to the state of the art.

1

Introduction

Significant gains have been made through transfer and multi-task learning between synergistic tasks.
In many cases, these synergies can be exploited by architectures that rely on similar components. In
computer vision, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) pretrained on ImageNet [Krizhevsky et al.,
2012, Deng et al., 2009] have become the de facto initialization for more complex and deeper models.
This initialization improves accuracy on other related tasks such as visual question answering [Xiong
et al., 2016] or image captioning [Lu et al., 2016, Socher et al., 2014].
In NLP, distributed representations pretrained with models like Word2Vec [Mikolov et al., 2013]
and GloVe [Pennington et al., 2014] have become common initializations for the word vectors of
deep learning models. Transferring information from large amounts of unlabeled training data in
the form of word vectors has shown to improve performance over random word vector initialization
on a variety of downstream tasks, e.g. part-of-speech tagging [Collobert et al., 2011], named entity
recognition [Pennington et al., 2014], and question answering [Xiong et al., 2017]; however, words
rarely appear in isolation. The ability to share a common representation of words in the context of
sentences that include them could further improve transfer learning in NLP.
Inspired by the successful transfer of CNNs trained on ImageNet to other tasks in computer vision,
we focus on training an encoder for a large NLP task and transferring that encoder to other tasks
in NLP. Machine translation (MT) requires a model to encode words in context so as to decode
them into another language, and attentional sequence-to-sequence models for MT often contain an
LSTM-based encoder, which is a common component in other NLP models. We hypothesize that MT
data in general holds potential comparable to that of ImageNet as a cornerstone for reusable models.
This makes an MT-LSTM pairing in NLP a natural candidate for mirroring the ImageNet-CNN
pairing of computer vision.
As depicted in Figure 1, we begin by training LSTM encoders on several machine translation datasets,
and we show that these encoders can be used to improve performance of models trained for other
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

