Beyond Worst-case: A Probabilistic Analysis of Affine
Policies in Dynamic Optimization
Omar El Housni
IEOR Department
Columbia University
oe2148@columbia.edu

Vineet Goyal
IEOR Department
Columbia University
vg2277@columbia.edu

Abstract
Affine policies (or control) are widely used as a solution approach in dynamic
optimization where computing an optimal adjustable solution is usually intractable.
While the worst case performance of affine policies can be significantly bad, the
empirical performance is observed to be near-optimal for a large class of problem
instances. For instance, in the two-stage dynamic robust optimization problem with
linear covering constraints and uncertain
p right hand side, the worst-case approximation bound for affine policies is O( m) that is also tight (see Bertsimas and
Goyal [8]), whereas observed empirical performance is near-optimal. In this paper,
we aim to address this stark-contrast between the worst-case and the empirical
performance of affine policies. In particular, we show that affine policies give
a good approximation for the two-stage adjustable robust optimization problem
with high probability on random instances where the constraint coefficients are
generated i.i.d. from a large class of distributions; thereby, providing a theoretical justification of the observed empirical performance. On the other hand, we
also present a distribution such that the performance bound
p for affine policies on
instances generated according to that distribution is ⌦( m) with high probability; however, the constraint coefficients are not i.i.d.. This demonstrates that the
empirical performance of affine policies can depend on the generative model for
instances.

1

Introduction

In most real word problems, parameters are uncertain at the optimization phase and decisions need
to be made in the face of uncertainty. Stochastic and robust optimization are two widely used
paradigms to handle uncertainty. In the stochastic optimization approach, uncertainty is modeled as a
probability distribution and the goal is to optimize an expected objective [13]. We refer the reader
to Kall and Wallace [19], Prekopa [20], Shapiro [21], Shapiro et al. [22] for a detailed discussion
on stochastic optimization. On the other hand, in the robust optimization approach, we consider
an adversarial model of uncertainty using an uncertainty set and the goal is to optimize over the
worst-case realization from the uncertainty set. This approach was first introduced by Soyster [23] and
has been extensively studied in recent past. We refer the reader to Ben-Tal and Nemirovski [3, 4, 5],
El Ghaoui and Lebret [14], Bertsimas and Sim [10, 11], Goldfarb and Iyengar [17], Bertsimas et
al. [6] and Ben-Tal et al. [1] for a detailed discussion of robust optimization. However, in both these
paradigms, computing an optimal dynamic solution is intractable in general due to the “curse of
dimensionality”.
This intractability of computing the optimal adjustable solution necessitates considering approximate
solution policies such as static and affine policies where the decision in any period t is restricted
to a particular function of the sample path until period t. Both static and affine policies have been
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

