Ensemble Sampling

Xiuyuan Lu
Stanford University
lxy@stanford.edu

Benjamin Van Roy
Stanford University
bvr@stanford.edu

Abstract
Thompson sampling has emerged as an effective heuristic for a broad range of
online decision problems. In its basic form, the algorithm requires computing
and sampling from a posterior distribution over models, which is tractable only
for simple special cases. This paper develops ensemble sampling, which aims to
approximate Thompson sampling while maintaining tractability even in the face
of complex models such as neural networks. Ensemble sampling dramatically
expands on the range of applications for which Thompson sampling is viable. We
establish a theoretical basis that supports the approach and present computational
results that offer further insight.

1

Introduction

Thompson sampling [8] has emerged as an effective heuristic for trading off between exploration
and exploitation in a broad range of online decision problems. To select an action, the algorithm
samples a model of the system from the prevailing posterior distribution and then determines which
action maximizes expected immediate reward according to the sampled model. In its basic form,
the algorithm requires computing and sampling from a posterior distribution over models, which is
tractable only for simple special cases.
With complex models such as neural networks, exact computation of posterior distributions becomes
intractable. One can resort to to the Laplace approximation, as discussed, for example, in [2, 5], but
this approach is suitable only when posterior distributions are unimodal, and computations become
an obstacle with complex models like neural networks because compute time requirements grow
quadratically with the number of parameters. An alternative is to leverage Markov chain Monte Carlo
methods, but those are computationally onerous, especially when the model is complex.
A practical approximation to Thompson sampling that can address complex models and problems
requiring frequent decisions should facilitate fast incremental updating. That is, the time required per
time period to learn from new data and generate a new sample model should be small and should not
grow with time. Such a fast incremental method that builds on the Laplace approximation concept is
presented in [5]. In this paper, we study a fast incremental method that applies more broadly, without
relying on unimodality. As a sanity check we offer theoretical assurances that apply to the special
case of linear bandits. We also present computational results involving simple bandit problems as
well as complex neural network models that demonstrate efficacy of the approach.
Our approach is inspired by [6], which applies a similar concept to the more complex context of deep
reinforcement learning, but without any theoretical analysis. The essential idea is to maintain and
incrementally update an ensemble of statistically plausible models, and to sample uniformly from this
set in each time period as an approximation to sampling from the posterior distribution. Each model
is initially sampled from the prior, and then updated in a manner that incorporates data and random
perturbations that diversify the models. The intention is for the ensemble to approximate the posterior
distribution and the variance among models to diminish as the posterior concentrates. We refine this
methodology and bound the incremental regret relative to exact Thompson sampling for a broad class
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

