Monte-Carlo Tree Search by Best Arm Identification

Emilie Kaufmann
CNRS & Univ. Lille, UMR 9189 (CRIStAL), Inria SequeL
Lille, France
emilie.kaufmann@univ-lille1.fr
Wouter M. Koolen
Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica,
Science Park 123, 1098 XG Amsterdam, The Netherlands
wmkoolen@cwi.nl

Abstract
Recent advances in bandit tools and techniques for sequential learning are steadily
enabling new applications and are promising the resolution of a range of challenging related problems. We study the game tree search problem, where the goal is to
quickly identify the optimal move in a given game tree by sequentially sampling its
stochastic payoffs. We develop new algorithms for trees of arbitrary depth, that operate by summarizing all deeper levels of the tree into confidence intervals at depth
one, and applying a best arm identification procedure at the root. We prove new
sample complexity guarantees with a refined dependence on the problem instance.
We show experimentally that our algorithms outperform existing elimination-based
algorithms and match previous special-purpose methods for depth-two trees.

1

Introduction

We consider two-player zero-sum turn-based interactions, in which the sequence of possible successive moves is represented by a maximin game tree T . This tree models the possible actions sequences
by a collection of MAX nodes, that correspond to states in the game in which player A should take
action, MIN nodes, for states in the game in which player B should take action, and leaves which
specify the payoff for player A. The goal is to determine the best action at the root for player A. For
deterministic payoffs this search problem is primarily algorithmic, with several powerful pruning
strategies available [20]. We look at problems with stochastic payoffs, which in addition present a
major statistical challenge.
Sequential identification questions in game trees with stochastic payoffs arise naturally as robust
versions of bandit problems. They are also a core component of Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS)
approaches for solving intractably large deterministic tree search problems, where an entire sub-tree
is represented by a stochastic leaf in which randomized play-out and/or evaluations are performed [4].
A play-out consists in finishing the game with some simple, typically random, policy and observing
the outcome for player A.
For example, MCTS is used within the AlphaGo system [21], and the evaluation of a leaf position
combines supervised learning and (smart) play-outs. While MCTS algorithms for Go have now
reached expert human level, such algorithms remain very costly, in that many (expensive) leaf
evaluations or play-outs are necessary to output the next action to be taken by the player. In this
paper, we focus on the sample complexity of Monte-Carlo Tree Search methods, about which very
little is known. For this purpose, we work under a simplified model for MCTS already studied by
[22], and that generalizes the depth-two framework of [10].
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

