Communication-Efficient Distributed Learning
of Discrete Probability Distributions

Ilias Diakonikolas
CS, USC
diakonik@usc.edu
Abhiram Natarajan
CS, Purdue
nataraj2@purdue.edu

Elena Grigorescu
CS, Purdue
elena-g@purdue.edu

Jerry Li
EECS & CSAIL, MIT
jerryzli@mit.edu

Krzysztof Onak
IBM Research, NY
konak@us.ibm.com

Ludwig Schmidt
EECS & CSAIL, MIT
ludwigs@mit.edu

Abstract
We initiate a systematic investigation of distribution learning (density estimation)
when the data is distributed across multiple servers. The servers must communicate
with a referee and the goal is to estimate the underlying distribution with as few
bits of communication as possible. We focus on non-parametric density estimation
of discrete distributions with respect to the `1 and `2 norms. We provide the first
non-trivial upper and lower bounds on the communication complexity of this basic
estimation task in various settings of interest. Specifically, our results include the
following:
1. When the unknown discrete distribution is unstructured and each server has
only one sample, we show that any blackboard protocol (i.e., any protocol
in which servers interact arbitrarily using public messages) that learns the
distribution must essentially communicate the entire sample.
2. For the case of structured distributions, such as k-histograms and monotone
distributions, we design distributed learning algorithms that achieve significantly better communication guarantees than the naive ones, and obtain
tight upper and lower bounds in several regimes. Our distributed learning
algorithms run in near-linear time and are robust to model misspecification.
Our results provide insights on the interplay between structure and communication
efficiency for a range of fundamental distribution estimation tasks.

1

Introduction

1.1

Background and Motivation

We study the problem of distribution learning (or density estimation) in a distributed model, where
the data comes from an unknown distribution and is partitioned across multiple servers. The main
goal of this work is to explore the inherent tradeoff between sample size and communication for nonparametric density estimation of discrete distributions. We seek answers to the following questions:
What is the minimum amount of communication required to learn the underlying distribution of the
data? Is there a communication-efficient learning algorithm that runs in polynomial time? We obtain
the first non-trivial algorithms and lower bounds for distributed density estimation. Before we state
our results, we provide the relevant background.
Density Estimation. Distribution learning or density estimation is the following prototypical
inference task: Given samples drawn from an unknown target distribution that belongs to (or is
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

