A Learning Error Analysis for Structured Prediction
with Approximate Inference

1

Yuanbin Wu1, 2 , Man Lan1, 2 , Shiliang Sun1 , Qi Zhang3 , Xuanjing Huang3
School of Computer Science and Software Engineering, East China Normal University
2
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing
3
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
{ybwu, mlan, slsun}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, {qz, xjhuang}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
In this work, we try to understand the differences between exact and approximate
inference algorithms in structured prediction. We compare the estimation and approximation error of both underestimate (e.g., greedy search) and overestimate
(e.g., linear relaxation of integer programming) models. The result shows that,
from the perspective of learning errors, performances of approximate inference
could be as good as exact inference. The error analyses also suggest a new margin for existing learning algorithms. Empirical evaluations on text classification,
sequential labelling and dependency parsing witness the success of approximate
inference and the benefit of the proposed margin.

1

Introduction

Given an input x ∈ X , structured prediction is the task of recovering a structure y = h(x) ∈ Y,
where Y is a set of combinatorial objects such as sequences (sequential labelling) and trees (syntactic
parsing). Usually, the computation of h(x) needs an inference (decoding) procedure to find an
optimal y:
h(x) = arg max score(x, y).
y∈Y

Solving the “arg max” operation is essential for training and testing structured prediction models,
and it is also one of the most time-consuming parts due to its combinatorial natural. In practice, the
inference problem often reduces to combinatorial optimization or integer programming problems,
which are intractable in many cases. In order to accelerate models, faster approximate inference
methods are usually applied. Examples include underestimation algorithms which output structures
with suboptimal scores (e.g., greedy search, max-product belief propagation), and overestimation algorithms which output structures in a larger output space (e.g., linear relaxation of integer programming). Understanding the trade-offs between computational efficiency and statistical performance is
important for designing effective structured prediction models [Chandrasekaran and Jordan, 2013].
Prior work [Kulesza and Pereira, 2007] shows that approximate inference may not be sufficient
for learning a good statistical model, even with rigorous approximation guarantees. However, the
successful application of various approximate inference algorithms motivates a deeper exploration
of the topic. For example, the recent work [Globerson et al., 2015] shows that an approximate
inference can achieve optimal results on grid graphs. In this work, instead of focusing on specific
models and algorithms, we try to analyze general estimation and approximation errors for structured
prediction with approximate inference.
Recall that given a hypothesis space H, a learning algorithm A receives a set of training samples
S = {(xi , yi )}m
i=1 which are i.i.d. according to a distribution D on the space X × Y, and returns a
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

