Hierarchical Methods of Moments
Matteo Ruffini ⇤
Universitat Politècnica
de Catalunya

Guillaume Rabusseau †
McGill University

Borja Balle ‡
Amazon Research
Cambridge

Abstract
Spectral methods of moments provide a powerful tool for learning the parameters
of latent variable models. Despite their theoretical appeal, the applicability of
these methods to real data is still limited due to a lack of robustness to model
misspecification. In this paper we present a hierarchical approach to methods of
moments to circumvent such limitations. Our method is based on replacing the
tensor decomposition step used in previous algorithms with approximate joint
diagonalization. Experiments on topic modeling show that our method outperforms
previous tensor decomposition methods in terms of speed and model quality.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised learning of latent variable models is a fundamental machine learning problem. Algorithms for learning a variety of latent variable models, including topic models, hidden Markov
models, and mixture models are routinely used in practical applications for solving tasks ranging
from representation learning to exploratory data analysis. For practitioners faced with the problem of
training a latent variable model, the decades-old Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm [1] is
still the tool of choice. Despite its theoretical limitations, EM owes its appeal to (i) the robustness of
the maximum-likelihood principle to model misspecification, and (ii) the need, in most cases, to tune
a single parameter: the dimension of the latent variables.
On the other hand, method of moments (MoM) algorithms for learning latent variable models via
efficient tensor factorization algorithms have been proposed in the last few years [2–9]. Compared to
EM, moment-based algorithms provide a stronger theoretical foundation for learning latent variable
models. In particular, it is known that in the realizable setting the output of a MoM algorithm will
converge to the parameters of the true model as the amount of training data increases. Furthermore,
MoM algorithms only make a single pass over the training data, are highly parallelizable, and always
terminate in polynomial time. However, despite their apparent advantages over EM, the adoption of
MoM algorithms in practical applications is still limited.
Empirical studies indicate that initializing EM with the output of a MoM algorithm can improve
the convergence speed of EM by several orders of magnitude, yielding a very efficient strategy to
accurately learn latent variable models [8–10]. In the case of relatively simple models this approach
can be backed by intricate theoretical analyses [11]. Nonetheless, these strategies are not widely
deployed in practice either.
The main reason why MoM algorithms are not adopted by practitioners is their lack of robustness to
model misspecification. Even when combined with EM, MoM algorithms fail to provide an initial
estimate for the parameters of a model leading to fast convergence when the learning problem is too
far from the realizable setting. For example, this happens when the number of the latent variables
used in a MoM algorithm is too small to accurately represent the training data. In contrast, the model
⇤

mruffini@cs.upc.edu
guillaume.rabusseau@mail.mcgill.ca
‡
pigem@amazon.co.uk
†

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

