Learning to Inpaint for Image Compression

Mohammad Haris Baig∗
Department of Computer Science
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH

Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs
Santa Clara, CA

Lorenzo Torresani
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH

Abstract
We study the design of deep architectures for lossy image compression. We present
two architectural recipes in the context of multi-stage progressive encoders and empirically demonstrate their importance on compression performance. Specifically,
we show that: (a) predicting the original image data from residuals in a multi-stage
progressive architecture facilitates learning and leads to improved performance at
approximating the original content and (b) learning to inpaint (from neighboring
image pixels) before performing compression reduces the amount of information
that must be stored to achieve a high-quality approximation. Incorporating these
design choices in a baseline progressive encoder yields an average reduction of over
60% in file size with similar quality compared to the original residual encoder.

1

Introduction

Visual data constitutes most of the total information created and shared on the Web every day and it
forms a bulk of the demand for storage and network bandwidth [13]. It is customary to compress
image data as much as possible as long as there is no perceptible loss in content. In recent years
deep learning has made it possible to design deep models for learning compact representations for
image data [2, 16, 18, 19, 20]. Deep learning based approaches, such as the work of Rippel and
Bourdev [16], significantly outperform traditional methods of lossy image compression. In this paper,
we show how to improve the performance of deep models trained for lossy image compression.
We focus on the design of models that produce progressive codes. Progressive codes are a sequence
of representations that can be transmitted to improve the quality of an existing estimate (from a
previously sent code) by adding missing detail. This is in contrast to non-progressive codes whereby
the entire data for a certain quality approximation must be transmitted before the image can be viewed.
Progressive codes improve the user’s browsing experience by reducing loading time of pages that are
rich in images. Our main contributions in this paper are two-fold.
1. While traditional progressive encoders are optimized to compress residual errors in each
stage of their architecture (residual-in, residual-out), instead we propose a model that is
trained to predict at each stage the original image data from the residual of the previous
stage (residual-in, image-out). We demonstrate that this leads to an easier optimization
resulting in better image compression. The resulting architecture reduces the amount of
information that must be stored for reproducing images at similar quality by 18% compared
to a traditional residual encoder.
2. Existing deep architectures do not exploit the high degree of spatial coherence exhibited by
neighboring patches. We show how to design and train a model that can exploit dependences
between adjacent regions by learning to inpaint from the available content. We introduce
multi-scale convolutions that sample content at multiple scales to assist with inpainting.
∗

http://www.cs.dartmouth.edu/ haris/compression

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

