Learning with Feature Evolvable Streams

Bo-Jian Hou Lijun Zhang Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, China
{houbj,zhanglj,zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning with streaming data has attracted much attention during the past few years.
Though most studies consider data stream with fixed features, in real practice the
features may be evolvable. For example, features of data gathered by limitedlifespan sensors will change when these sensors are substituted by new ones. In
this paper, we propose a novel learning paradigm: Feature Evolvable Streaming
Learning where old features would vanish and new features would occur. Rather
than relying on only the current features, we attempt to recover the vanished
features and exploit it to improve performance. Specifically, we learn two models
from the recovered features and the current features, respectively. To benefit from
the recovered features, we develop two ensemble methods. In the first method,
we combine the predictions from two models and theoretically show that with the
assistance of old features, the performance on new features can be improved. In the
second approach, we dynamically select the best single prediction and establish a
better performance guarantee when the best model switches. Experiments on both
synthetic and real data validate the effectiveness of our proposal.

1

Introduction

In many real tasks, data are accumulated over time, and thus, learning with streaming data has attracted
much attention during the past few years. Many effective approaches have been developed, such
as hoeffding tree [7], Bayes tree [27], evolving granular neural network (eGNN) [17], Core Vector
Machine (CVM) [29], etc. Though these approaches are effective for certain scenarios, they have a
common assumption, i.e., the data stream comes with a fixed stable feature space. In other words,
the data samples are always described by the same set of features. Unfortunately, this assumption
does not hold in many streaming tasks. For example, for ecosystem protection one can deploy many
sensors in a reserve to collect data, where each sensor corresponds to an attribute/feature. Due to its
limited-lifespan, after some periods many sensors will wear out, whereas some new sensors can be
spread. Thus, features corresponding to the old sensors vanish while features corresponding to the
new sensors appear, and the learning algorithm needs to work well under such evolving environment.
Note that the ability of adapting to environmental change is one of the fundamental requirements for
learnware [37], where an important aspect is the ability of handling evolvable features.
A straightforward approach is to rely on the new features and learn a new model to use. However,
this solution suffers from some deficiencies. First, when new features just emerge, there are few data
samples described by these features, and thus, the training samples might be insufficient to train a
strong model. Second, the old model of vanished features is ignored, which is a big waste of our data
collection effort. To address these limitations, in this paper we propose a novel learning paradigm:
Feature Evolvable Streaming Learning (FESL). We formulate the problem based on a key observation:
in general features do not change in an arbitrary way; instead, there are some overlapping periods in
which both old and new features are available. Back to the ecosystem protection example, since the
lifespan of sensors is known to us, e.g., how long their battery will run out is a prior knowledge, we
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

