Visual Reference Resolution using Attention Memory
for Visual Dialog

Paul Hongsuck Seo†
Andreas Lehrmann§
Bohyung Han†
Leonid Sigal§
†
§
POSTECH
Disney Research
{hsseo, bhhan}@postech.ac.kr {andreas.lehrmann, lsigal}@disneyresearch.com

Abstract
Visual dialog is a task of answering a series of inter-dependent questions given an
input image, and often requires to resolve visual references among the questions.
This problem is different from visual question answering (VQA), which relies on
spatial attention (a.k.a. visual grounding) estimated from an image and question
pair. We propose a novel attention mechanism that exploits visual attentions in the
past to resolve the current reference in the visual dialog scenario. The proposed
model is equipped with an associative attention memory storing a sequence of
previous (attention, key) pairs. From this memory, the model retrieves the previous attention, taking into account recency, which is most relevant for the current
question, in order to resolve potentially ambiguous references. The model then
merges the retrieved attention with a tentative one to obtain the final attention for
the current question; specifically, we use dynamic parameter prediction to combine
the two attentions conditioned on the question. Through extensive experiments
on a new synthetic visual dialog dataset, we show that our model significantly
outperforms the state-of-the-art (by ≈ 16 % points) in situations, where visual reference resolution plays an important role. Moreover, the proposed model achieves
superior performance (≈ 2 % points improvement) in the Visual Dialog dataset [1],
despite having significantly fewer parameters than the baselines.

1

Introduction

In recent years, advances in the design and optimization of deep neural network architectures have led
to tremendous progress across many areas of computer vision (CV) and natural language processing
(NLP). This progress, in turn, has enabled a variety of multi-modal applications spanning both
domains, including image captioning [2–4], language grounding [5, 6], image generation from
captions [7, 8], and visual question answering (VQA) on images [9–21] and videos [22–24].
The VQA task, in particular, has received broad attention because its formulation requires a universal
understanding of image content. Most state-of-the-art methods [10, 13, 15] address this inherently
challenging problem through an attention mechanism [3] that allows to visually ground linguistic
expressions; they identify the region of visual interest referred to by the question and predict the
answer based on the visual information in that region.
More recently, Visual Dialog [1] has been introduced as a generalization of the VQA task. Unlike
VQA, where every question is asked independently, a visual dialog system needs to answer a sequence
of questions about an input image. The sequential and inter-dependent property of questions in a
dialog presents additional challenges. Consider the simple image and partial dialog in Figure 1. Some
questions (e.g., #1: ‘How many 9’s are there in the image?’) contain the full information needed to
attend to the regions within the image and answer the question accurately. Other questions (e.g., #6:
‘What is the number of the blue digit?’) are ambiguous on their own and require knowledge obtained
from the prior questions (1, 2, 3, and 5 in particular) in order to resolve attention to the specific region
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

