Resurrecting the sigmoid in deep learning through
dynamical isometry: theory and practice
Jeffrey Pennington
Google Brain

Samuel S. Schoenholz
Google Brain

Surya Ganguli
Applied Physics, Stanford University and Google Brain

Abstract
It is well known that weight initialization in deep networks can have a dramatic
impact on learning speed. For example, ensuring the mean squared singular value
of a network’s input-output Jacobian is O(1) is essential for avoiding exponentially
vanishing or exploding gradients. Moreover, in deep linear networks, ensuring that
all singular values of the Jacobian are concentrated near 1 can yield a dramatic
additional speed-up in learning; this is a property known as dynamical isometry.
However, it is unclear how to achieve dynamical isometry in nonlinear deep networks. We address this question by employing powerful tools from free probability
theory to analytically compute the entire singular value distribution of a deep
network’s input-output Jacobian. We explore the dependence of the singular value
distribution on the depth of the network, the weight initialization, and the choice of
nonlinearity. Intriguingly, we find that ReLU networks are incapable of dynamical
isometry. On the other hand, sigmoidal networks can achieve isometry, but only
with orthogonal weight initialization. Moreover, we demonstrate empirically that
deep nonlinear networks achieving dynamical isometry learn orders of magnitude
faster than networks that do not. Indeed, we show that properly-initialized deep
sigmoidal networks consistently outperform deep ReLU networks. Overall, our
analysis reveals that controlling the entire distribution of Jacobian singular values
is an important design consideration in deep learning.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved state-of-the-art performance in many domains, including computer
vision [1], machine translation [2], human games [3], education [4], and neurobiological modelling [5,
6]. A major determinant of success in training deep networks lies in appropriately choosing the
initial weights. Indeed the very genesis of deep learning rested upon the initial observation that
unsupervised pre-training provides a good set of initial weights for subsequent fine-tuning through
backpropagation [7]. Moreover, seminal work in deep learning suggested that appropriately-scaled
Gaussian weights can prevent gradients from exploding or vanishing exponentially [8], a condition
that has been found to be necessary to achieve reasonable learning speeds [9].
These random weight initializations were primarily driven by the principle that the mean squared
singular value of a deep network’s Jacobian from input to output should remain close to 1. This
condition implies that on average, a randomly chosen error vector will preserve its norm under
backpropagation; however, it provides no guarantees on the worst case growth or shrinkage of an error
vector. A stronger requirement one might demand is that every Jacobian singular value remain close
to 1. Under this stronger requirement, every single error vector will approximately preserve its norm,
and moreover all angles between different error vectors will be preserved. Since error information
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

