Attentional Pooling for Action Recognition

Rohit Girdhar
Deva Ramanan
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
http://rohitgirdhar.github.io/AttentionalPoolingAction

Abstract
We introduce a simple yet surprisingly powerful model to incorporate attention
in action recognition and human object interaction tasks. Our proposed attention
module can be trained with or without extra supervision, and gives a sizable boost
in accuracy while keeping the network size and computational cost nearly the
same. It leads to significant improvements over state of the art base architecture on
three standard action recognition benchmarks across still images and videos, and
establishes new state of the art on MPII dataset with 12.5% relative improvement.
We also perform an extensive analysis of our attention module both empirically and
analytically. In terms of the latter, we introduce a novel derivation of bottom-up
and top-down attention as low-rank approximations of bilinear pooling methods
(typically used for fine-grained classification). From this perspective, our attention
formulation suggests a novel characterization of action recognition as a fine-grained
recognition problem.

1

Introduction

Human action recognition is a fundamental and well studied problem in computer vision. Traditional
approaches to action recognition relied on object detection [11, 19, 57], articulated pose [29, 34, 35,
55, 57], dense trajectories [52, 53] and part-based/structured models [9, 56, 58]. However, more
recently these methods have been surpassed by deep CNN-based representations [18, 30, 42, 47].
Interestingly, even video based action recognition has benefited greatly from advancements in imagebased CNN models [20, 22, 43, 46]. With the exception of a few 3D-conv-based methods [33, 47, 49],
most approaches [12, 14, 15, 17, 54], including the current state of the art [54], use a variant of
discriminatively trained 2D-CNN [22] over the appearance (frames) and in some cases motion (optical
flow) modalities of the input video.
Attention: While using standard deep networks over the full image have shown great promise for
the task [54], it raises the question of whether action recognition can be considered as a general
classification problem. Some recent works have tried to generate more fine-grained representations
by extracting features around human pose keypoints [8] or on object/person bounding boxes [18, 30].
This form of ‘hard-coded attention’ helps improve performance, but requires labeling (or detecting)
objects or human pose. Moreover, these methods assume that focusing on the human or its parts is
always useful for discriminating actions. This might not necessarily be true for all actions; some
actions might be easier to distinguish using the background and context, like a ‘basketball shoot’ vs a
‘throw’; while others might require paying close attention to objects being interacted by the human,
like in case of ‘drinking from mug’ vs ‘drinking from water bottle’.
Our work: In this work, we propose a simple yet surprisingly powerful network modification that
learns attention maps which focus computation on specific parts of the input relevant to the task at
hand. Our attention maps can be learned without any additional supervision and automatically lead to
significant improvements over the baseline architecture. Our formulation is simple-to-implement,
and can be seen as a natural extension of average pooling into a “weighted” average pooling with
image-specific weights. Our formulation also provides a novel factorization of attentional processing
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

