Saliency-based Sequential Image Attention with
Multiset Prediction
Sean Welleck
New York University
wellecks@nyu.edu

Jialin Mao
New York University
jialin.mao@nyu.edu

Kyunghyun Cho
New York University
kyunghyun.cho@nyu.edu

Zheng Zhang
New York University
zz@nyu.edu

Abstract
Humans process visual scenes selectively and sequentially using attention. Central
to models of human visual attention is the saliency map. We propose a hierarchical
visual architecture that operates on a saliency map and uses a novel attention
mechanism to sequentially focus on salient regions and take additional glimpses
within those regions. The architecture is motivated by human visual attention, and
is used for multi-label image classification on a novel multiset task, demonstrating
that it achieves high precision and recall while localizing objects with its attention.
Unlike conventional multi-label image classification models, the model supports
multiset prediction due to a reinforcement-learning based training process that
allows for arbitrary label permutation and multiple instances per label.

1

Introduction

Humans can rapidly process complex scenes containing multiple objects despite having limited
computational resources. The visual system uses various forms of attention to prioritize and selectively
process subsets of the vast amount of visual input [6]. Computational models and various forms of
psychophysical and neuro-biological evidence suggest that this process may be implemented using
various "maps" that topographically encode the relevance of locations in the visual field [17, 39, 13].
Under these models, visual input is compiled into a saliency-map that encodes the conspicuity
of locations based on bottom-up features, computed in a parallel, feed-forward process [20, 17].
Top-down, goal-specific relevance of locations is then incorporated to form a priority map, which is
then used to select the next target of attention [39]. Thus processing a scene with multiple attentional
shifts may be interpreted as a feed-forward process followed by sequential, recurrent stages [23].
Furthermore, the allocation of attention can be separated into covert attention, which is deployed to
regions without eye movement and precedes eye movements, and overt attention associated with
an eye movement [6]. Despite their evident importance to human visual attention, the notions of
incorporating saliency to decide attentional targets, integrating covert and overt attention mechanisms,
and using multiple, sequential shifts while processing a scene have not been fully addressed by
modern deep learning architectures.
Motivated by the model of Itti et al. [17], we propose a hierarchical visual architecture that operates
on a saliency map computed by a feed-forward process, followed by a recurrent process that uses
a combination of covert and overt attention mechanisms to sequentially focus on relevant regions
and take additional glimpses within those regions. We propose a novel attention mechanism for
implementing the covert attention. Here, the architecture is used for multi-label image classifica31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

