Online Prediction with Selfish Experts
Tim Roughgarden
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
tim@cs.stanford.edu

Okke Schrijvers
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
okkes@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of binary prediction with expert advice in settings where
experts have agency and seek to maximize their credibility. This paper makes
three main contributions. First, it defines a model to reason formally about settings
with selfish experts, and demonstrates that “incentive compatible” (IC) algorithms
are closely related to the design of proper scoring rules. Second, we design
IC algorithms with good performance guarantees for the absolute loss function.
Third, we give a formal separation between the power of online prediction with
selfish versus honest experts by proving lower bounds for both IC and non-IC
algorithms. In particular, with selfish experts and the absolute loss function,
there is no (randomized) algorithm for online prediction—IC or otherwise—with
asymptotically vanishing regret.

1

Introduction

In the months leading up to elections and referendums, a plethora of pollsters try to figure out
how the electorate is going to vote. Different pollsters use different methodologies, reach different
people, and may have sources of random errors, so generally the polls don’t fully agree with each
other. Aggregators such as Nate Silver’s FiveThirtyEight, and The Upshot by the New York Times
consolidate these different reports into a single prediction, and hopefully reduce random errors.1
FiveThirtyEight in particular has a solid track record for their predictions, and as they are transparent
about their methodology we use them as a motivating example. To a first-order approximation, they
operate as follows: first they take the predictions of all the different pollsters, then they assign a
weight to each of the pollsters based on past performance (and other factors), and finally they use the
weighted average of the pollsters to run simulations and make their own prediction.2
But could the presence of an institution that rates pollsters inadvertently create perverse incentives
for pollsters? The FiveThirtyEight pollster ratings are publicly available.3 They can be interpreted
as a reputation, and a low rating can negatively impact future revenue opportunities for a pollster.
Moreover, it has been demonstrated in practice that experts do not always report their true beliefs
about future events. For example, in weather forecasting there is a known “wet bias,” where consumerfacing weather forecasters deliberately overestimate low chances of rain (e.g. a 5% chance of rain is
reported as a 25% chance of rain) because people don’t like to be surprised by rain [Bickel and Kim,
2008].
1

https://fivethirtyeight.com/, https://www.nytimes.com/section/upshot.
This is of course a simplification. FiveThirtyEight also uses features like the change in a poll over time,
the state of the economy, and correlations between states. See https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/
how-fivethirtyeight-calculates-pollster-ratings/ for details. Our goal in this paper is not to
accurately model all of the fine details of FiveThirtyEight (which are anyways changing all the time). Rather, it
is to formulate a general model of prediction with experts that clearly illustrates why incentives matter.
3
https://projects.fivethirtyeight.com/pollster-ratings/
2

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

