Dynamic-Depth Context Tree Weighting

João V. Messias∗
Morpheus Labs
Oxford, UK
jmessias@morpheuslabs.co.uk

Shimon Whiteson
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
shimon.whiteson@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) in partially observable settings is challenging because the agent’s observations are not Markov. Recently proposed methods can
learn variable-order Markov models of the underlying process but have steep
memory requirements and are sensitive to aliasing between observation histories
due to sensor noise. This paper proposes dynamic-depth context tree weighting
(D2-CTW), a model-learning method that addresses these limitations. D2-CTW
dynamically expands a suffix tree while ensuring that the size of the model, but
not its depth, remains bounded. We show that D2-CTW approximately matches
the performance of state-of-the-art alternatives at stochastic time-series prediction
while using at least an order of magnitude less memory. We also apply D2-CTW
to model-based RL, showing that, on tasks that require memory of past observations, D2-CTW can learn without prior knowledge of a good state representation,
or even the length of history upon which such a representation should depend.

1

Introduction

Agents must often act given an incomplete or noisy view of their environments. While decisiontheoretic planning and reinforcement learning (RL) methods can discover control policies for agents
whose actions can have uncertain outcomes, partial observability greatly increases the problem
difficulty since each observation does not provide sufficient information to disambiguate the true
state of the environment and accurately gauge the utility of the agent’s available actions. Moreover,
when stochastic models of the system are not available a priori, probabilistic inference over latent
state variables is not feasible. In such cases, agents must learn to memorize past observations and
actions [21, 9], or one must learn history-dependent models of the system [15, 8].
Variable-order Markov models (VMMs), which have long excelled in stochastic time-series prediction and universal coding [23, 14, 2], have recently also found application in RL under partial
observability [13, 7, 24, 19]. VMMs build a context-dependent predictive model of future observations and/or rewards, where a context is a variable-length subsequence of recent observations. Since
the number of possible contexts grows exponentially with both the context length and the number
of possible observations, VMMs’ memory requirements may grow accordingly. Conversely, the frequency of each particular context in the data decreases as its length increases, so it may be difficult
to accurately model long-term dependencies without requiring prohibitive amounts of data.
Existing VMMs address these problems by allowing models to differentiate between contexts at nonconsecutive past timesteps, ignoring intermediate observations [13, 22, 10, 24, 4]. However, they
typically assume that either the amount of input data is naturally limited or there is a known bound on
the length of the contexts to be considered. In most settings in which an agent interacts continuously
with its environment, neither assumption is well justified. The lack of a defined time limit means
the approaches that make the former assumption, e.g., [13, 24], may eventually and indiscriminately
∗

During the development of this work, the main author was employed by the University of Amsterdam.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

