Off-policy evaluation for slate recommendation

Adith Swaminathan
Microsoft Research, Redmond
adswamin@microsoft.com
Alekh Agarwal
Microsoft Research, New York
alekha@microsoft.com

Akshay Krishnamurthy
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
akshay@cs.umass.edu

Miroslav Dudík
Microsoft Research, New York
mdudik@microsoft.com

Damien Jose
Microsoft, Redmond
dajose@microsoft.com

John Langford
Microsoft Research, New York
jcl@microsoft.com

Imed Zitouni
Microsoft, Redmond
izitouni@microsoft.com

Abstract
This paper studies the evaluation of policies that recommend an ordered set of
items (e.g., a ranking) based on some context—a common scenario in web search,
ads, and recommendation. We build on techniques from combinatorial bandits to
introduce a new practical estimator that uses logged data to estimate a policy’s
performance. A thorough empirical evaluation on real-world data reveals that our
estimator is accurate in a variety of settings, including as a subroutine in a learningto-rank task, where it achieves competitive performance. We derive conditions
under which our estimator is unbiased—these conditions are weaker than prior
heuristics for slate evaluation—and experimentally demonstrate a smaller bias than
parametric approaches, even when these conditions are violated. Finally, our theory
and experiments also show exponential savings in the amount of required data
compared with general unbiased estimators.

1

Introduction

In recommendation systems for e-commerce, search, or news, we would like to use the data collected
during operation to test new content-serving algorithms (called policies) along metrics such as
revenue and number of clicks [4, 25]. This task is called off-policy evaluation. General approaches,
namely inverse propensity scores (IPS) [13, 18], require unrealistically large amounts of logged
data to evaluate whole-page metrics that depend on multiple recommended items, which happens
when showing ranked lists. The key challenge is that the number of possible lists (called slates) is
combinatorially large. As a result, the policy being evaluated is likely to choose different slates from
those recorded in the logs most of the time, unless it is very similar to the data-collection policy. This
challenge is fundamental [34], so any off-policy evaluation method that works with large slates needs
to make some structural assumptions about the whole-page metric or the user behavior.
Previous work on off-policy evaluation and whole-page optimization improves the probability of
match between logging and evaluation by restricting attention to small slate spaces [35, 26], introducing assumptions that allow for partial matches between the proposed and observed slates [27],
or assuming that the policies used for logging and evaluation are similar [4, 32]. Another line of
work constructs parametric models of slate quality [8, 16, 14] (see also Sec. 4.3 of [17]). While these
approaches require less data, they can have large bias, and their use in practice requires an expensive
trial-and-error cycle involving weeks-long A/B tests to develop new policies [20]. In this paper we
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

