A New Theory for Matrix Completion

Guangcan Liu∗

Qingshan Liu†

Xiao-Tong Yuan‡

B-DAT, School of Information & Control, Nanjing Univ Informat Sci & Technol
NO 219 Ningliu Road, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China, 210044
{gcliu,qsliu,xtyuan}@nuist.edu.cn

Abstract
Prevalent matrix completion theories reply on an assumption that the locations of
the missing data are distributed uniformly and randomly (i.e., uniform sampling).
Nevertheless, the reason for observations being missing often depends on the unseen
observations themselves, and thus the missing data in practice usually occurs in a
nonuniform and deterministic fashion rather than randomly. To break through the
limits of random sampling, this paper introduces a new hypothesis called isomeric
condition, which is provably weaker than the assumption of uniform sampling and
arguably holds even when the missing data is placed irregularly. Equipped with
this new tool, we prove a series of theorems for missing data recovery and matrix
completion. In particular, we prove that the exact solutions that identify the target
matrix are included as critical points by the commonly used nonconvex programs.
Unlike the existing theories for nonconvex matrix completion, which are built
upon the same condition as convex programs, our theory shows that nonconvex
programs have the potential to work with a much weaker condition. Comparing to
the existing studies on nonuniform sampling, our setup is more general.

1

Introduction

Missing data is a common occurrence in modern applications such as computer vision and image
processing, reducing significantly the representativeness of data samples and therefore distorting
seriously the inferences about data. Given this pressing situation, it is crucial to study the problem
of recovering the unseen data from a sampling of observations. Since the data in reality is often
organized in matrix form, it is of considerable practical significance to study the well-known problem
of matrix completion [1] which is to fill in the missing entries of a partially observed matrix.
Problem 1.1 (Matrix Completion). Denote the (i, j)th entry of a matrix as [·]ij . Let L0 ∈ Rm×n be
an unknown matrix of interest. In particular, the rank of L0 is unknown either. Given a sampling of
the entries in L0 and a 2D index set Ω ⊆ {1, 2, · · · , m} × {1, 2, · · · , n} consisting of the locations
of the observed entries, i.e., given
{[L0 ]ij |(i, j) ∈ Ω}

and

Ω,

can we restore the missing entries whose indices are not included in Ω, in an exact and scalable
fashion? If so, under which conditions?
Due to its unique role in a broad range of applications, e.g., structure from motion and magnetic
resonance imaging, matrix completion has received extensive attentions in the literatures, e.g., [2–13].
∗
The work of Guangcan Liu is supported in part by national Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC)
under Grant 61622305 and Grant 61502238, in part by Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province of China
(NSFJPC) under Grant BK20160040.
†
The work of Qingshan Liu is supported by NSFC under Grant 61532009.
‡
The work of Xiao-Tong Yuan is supported in part by NSFC under Grant 61402232 and Grant 61522308, in
part by NSFJPC under Grant BK20141003.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

