Streaming Robust Submodular Maximization:
A Partitioned Thresholding Approach

Slobodan Mitrović∗
EPFL

Ilija Bogunovic†
EPFL

Ashkan Norouzi-Fard‡
EPFL

Jakub Tarnawski§
EPFL

Volkan Cevher¶
EPFL

Abstract
We study the classical problem of maximizing a monotone submodular function
subject to a cardinality constraint k, with two additional twists: (i) elements arrive
in a streaming fashion, and (ii) m items from the algorithm’s memory are removed
after the stream is finished. We develop a robust submodular algorithm STAR-T.
It is based on a novel partitioning structure and an exponentially decreasing thresholding rule. STAR-T makes one pass over the data and retains a short but robust
summary. We show that after the removal of any m elements from the obtained
summary, a simple greedy algorithm STAR-T-G REEDY that runs on the remaining
elements achieves a constant-factor approximation guarantee. In two different
data summarization tasks, we demonstrate that it matches or outperforms existing
greedy and streaming methods, even if they are allowed the benefit of knowing the
removed subset in advance.

1

Introduction

A central challenge in many large-scale machine learning tasks is data summarization – the extraction
of a small representative subset out of a large dataset. Applications include image and document
summarization [1, 2], influence maximization [3], facility location [4], exemplar-based clustering [5],
recommender systems [6], and many more. Data summarization can often be formulated as the
problem of maximizing a submodular set function subject to a cardinality constraint.
On small datasets, a popular algorithm is the simple greedy method [7], which produces solutions
provably close to optimal. Unfortunately, it requires repeated access to all elements, which makes it
infeasible for large-scale scenarios, where the entire dataset does not fit in the main memory. In this
setting, streaming algorithms prove to be useful, as they make only a small number of passes over the
data and use sublinear space.
In many settings, the extracted representative set is also required to be robust. That is, the objective
value should degrade as little as possible when some elements of the set are removed. Such removals
may arise for any number of reasons, such as failures of nodes in a network, or user preferences
which the model failed to account for; they could even be adversarial in nature.
∗

e-mail: slobodan.mitrovic@epfl.ch
e-mail: ilija.bogunovic@epfl.ch
‡
e-mail: ashkan.norouzifard@epfl.ch
§
e-mail: jakub.tarnawski@epfl.ch
¶
e-mail: volkan.cevher@epfl.ch
†

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

