Nearest-Neighbor Sample Compression:
Efficiency, Consistency, Infinite Dimensions

Aryeh Kontorovich
Department of Computer Science
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
karyeh@cs.bgu.ac.il

Sivan Sabato
Department of Computer Science
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
sabatos@bgu.ac.il

Roi Weiss
Department of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics
Weizmann Institute of Science
roiw@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
We examine the Bayes-consistency of a recently proposed 1-nearest-neighbor-based
multiclass learning algorithm. This algorithm is derived from sample compression
bounds and enjoys the statistical advantages of tight, fully empirical generalization
bounds, as well as the algorithmic advantages of a faster runtime and memory
savings. We prove that this algorithm is strongly Bayes-consistent in metric
spaces with finite doubling dimension — the first consistency result for an efficient
nearest-neighbor sample compression scheme. Rather surprisingly, we discover
that this algorithm continues to be Bayes-consistent even in a certain infinitedimensional setting, in which the basic measure-theoretic conditions on which
classic consistency proofs hinge are violated. This is all the more surprising, since
it is known that k-NN is not Bayes-consistent in this setting. We pose several
challenging open problems for future research.

1

Introduction

This paper deals with Nearest-Neighbor (NN) learning algorithms in metric spaces. Initiated by
Fix and Hodges in 1951 [16], this seemingly naive learning paradigm remains competitive against
more sophisticated methods [8, 46] and, in its celebrated k-NN version, has been placed on a solid
theoretical foundation [11, 44, 13, 47].
Although the classic 1-NN is well known to be inconsistent in general, in recent years a series of
papers has presented variations on the theme of a regularized 1-NN classifier, as an alternative to the
Bayes-consistent k-NN. Gottlieb et al. [18] showed that approximate nearest neighbor search can
act as a regularizer, actually improving generalization performance rather than just injecting noise.
In a follow-up work, [27] showed that applying Structural Risk Minimization to (essentially) the
margin-regularized data-dependent bound in [18] yields a strongly Bayes-consistent 1-NN classifier.
A further development has seen margin-based regularization analyzed through the lens of sample
compression: a near-optimal nearest neighbor condensing algorithm was presented [20] and later
extended to cover semimetric spaces [21]; an activized version also appeared [25]. As detailed in
[27], margin-regularized 1-NN methods enjoy a number of statistical and computational advantages
over the traditional k-NN classifier. Salient among these are explicit data-dependent generalization
bounds, and considerable runtime and memory savings. Sample compression affords additional
advantages, in the form of tighter generalization bounds and increased efficiency in time and space.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

