Polynomial time algorithms for dual volume sampling
Chengtao Li
MIT
ctli@mit.edu

Stefanie Jegelka
MIT
stefje@csail.mit.edu

Suvrit Sra
MIT
suvrit@mit.edu

Abstract
We study dual volume sampling, a method for selecting k columns from an n ⇥ m
short and wide matrix (n  k  m) such that the probability of selection is proportional to the volume spanned by the rows of the induced submatrix. This method
was proposed by Avron and Boutsidis (2013), who showed it to be a promising
method for column subset selection and its multiple applications. However, its
wider adoption has been hampered by the lack of polynomial time sampling algorithms. We remove this hindrance by developing an exact (randomized) polynomial
time sampling algorithm as well as its derandomization. Thereafter, we study
dual volume sampling via the theory of real stable polynomials and prove that its
distribution satisfies the “Strong Rayleigh” property. This result has numerous
consequences, including a provably fast-mixing Markov chain sampler that makes
dual volume sampling much more attractive to practitioners. This sampler is closely
related to classical algorithms for popular experimental design methods that are to
date lacking theoretical analysis but are known to empirically work well.

1

Introduction

A variety of applications share the core task of selecting a subset of columns from a short, wide
matrix A with n rows and m > n columns. The criteria for selecting these columns typically aim at
preserving information about the span of A while generating a well-conditioned submatrix. Classical
and recent examples include experimental design, where we select observations or experiments [38];
preconditioning for solving linear systems and constructing low-stretch spanning trees (here A
is a version of the node-edge incidence matrix and we select edges in a graph) [6, 4]; matrix
approximation [11, 13, 24]; feature selection in k-means clustering [10, 12]; sensor selection [25]
and graph signal processing [14, 41].
In this work, we study a randomized approach that holds promise for all of these applications. This
approach relies on sampling columns of A according to a probability distribution defined over its
submatrices: the probability of selecting a set S of k columns from A, with n  k  m, is
P (S; A) / det(AS A>
S ),

(1.1)

where AS is the submatrix consisting of the selected columns. This distribution is reminiscent of
volume sampling, where k < n columns are selected with probability proportional to the determinant
det(A>
S AS ) of a k ⇥ k matrix, i.e., the squared volume of the parallelepiped spanned by the selected
columns. (Volume sampling does not apply to k > n as the involved determinants vanish.) In contrast,
P (S; A) uses the determinant of an n ⇥ n matrix and uses the volume spanned by the rows formed
by the selected columns. Hence we refer to P (S; A)-sampling as dual volume sampling (DVS).
Contributions. Despite the ostensible similarity between volume sampling and DVS, and despite
the many practical implications of DVS outlined below, efficient algorithms for DVS are not known
and were raised as open questions in [6]. In this work, we make two key contributions:
– We develop polynomial-time randomized sampling algorithms and their derandomization for
DVS. Surprisingly, our proofs require only elementary (but involved) matrix manipulations.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

