Best Response Regression

Omer Ben-Porat
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa 32000 Israel
omerbp@campus.technion.ac.il

Moshe Tennenholtz
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa 32000 Israel
moshet@ie.technion.ac.il

Abstract
In a regression task, a predictor is given a set of instances, along with a real value
for each point. Subsequently, she has to identify the value of a new instance as
accurately as possible. In this work, we initiate the study of strategic predictions in
machine learning. We consider a regression task tackled by two players, where the
payoff of each player is the proportion of the points she predicts more accurately
than the other player. We first revise the probably approximately correct learning
framework to deal with the case of a duel between two predictors. We then devise
an algorithm which finds a linear regression predictor that is a best response to
any (not necessarily linear) regression algorithm. We show that it has linearithmic
sample complexity, and polynomial time complexity when the dimension of the
instances domain is fixed. We also test our approach in a high-dimensional setting,
and show it significantly defeats classical regression algorithms in the prediction
duel. Together, our work introduces a novel machine learning task that lends itself
well to current competitive online settings, provides its theoretical foundations, and
illustrates its applicability.

1

Introduction

Prediction is fundamental to machine learning and statistics. In a prediction task, an algorithm is
given a sequence of examples composed of labeled instances, and its goal is to learn a general rule
that maps instances to labels. When the labels take continuous values, the task is typically referred
to as regression. The quality of a regression algorithm is measured by its success in predicting the
value of an unlabeled instance. Literature on regression is mostly concerned with minimizing the
discrepancy of the prediction, i.e. the difference between the true value and the predicted one.
Despite the tremendous amount of work on prediction and regression, online commerce presents new
challenges. In this context, prediction is not carried out in isolation. New entrants can utilize knowledge of previous expert predictions and the corresponding true values, to maximize their probability
of predicting better than that expert, treated as the new entrant’s opponent. This fundamental task is
the main challenge we tackle in this work.
We initiate the study of strategic predictions in machine learning. We present a regression learning
setting that stems from a game-theoretic point of view, where the goal of the learner is to maximize
the probability of being the most accurate among a set of predictors. Note that this approach may be
in conflict with the traditional prediction goal.
Consider an online real estate expert, who frequently predicts the sale value of apartments. This
expert, having been in the market for a while, has historical data on the values and characteristics
of similar apartments. For simplicity, assume the expert uses simple linear regression to predict the
value of an apartment as a function of its size. When a new apartment comes on the market, the
expert uses her gathered historical data to predict the new apartment’s value. When the apartment is
sold, the true value (and the accuracy of the prediction) is revealed.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

