Introspective Classification with Convolutional Nets

Long Jin
UC San Diego
longjin@ucsd.edu

Justin Lazarow
UC San Diego
jlazarow@ucsd.edu

Zhuowen Tu
UC San Diego
ztu@ucsd.edu

Abstract
We propose introspective convolutional networks (ICN) that emphasize the importance of having convolutional neural networks empowered with generative
capabilities. We employ a reclassification-by-synthesis algorithm to perform training using a formulation stemmed from the Bayes theory. Our ICN tries to iteratively:
(1) synthesize pseudo-negative samples; and (2) enhance itself by improving the
classification. The single CNN classifier learned is at the same time generative
— being able to directly synthesize new samples within its own discriminative
model. We conduct experiments on benchmark datasets including MNIST, CIFAR10, and SVHN using state-of-the-art CNN architectures, and observe improved
classification results.

1

Introduction

Great success has been achieved in obtaining powerful discriminative classifiers via supervised
training, such as decision trees [34], support vector machines [42], neural networks [23], boosting
[7], and random forests [2]. However, recent studies reveal that even modern classifiers like deep
convolutional neural networks [20] still make mistakes that look absurd to humans [11]. A common
way to improve the classification performance is by using more data, in particular “hard examples”,
to train the classifier. Different types of approaches have been proposed in the past including
bootstrapping [31], active learning [37], semi-supervised learning [51], and data augmentation [20].
However, the approaches above utilize data samples that are either already present in the given
training set, or additionally created by humans or separate algorithms.
In this paper, we focus on improving convolutional neural networks by endowing them with synthesis
capabilities to make them internally generative. In the past, attempts have been made to build
connections between generative models and discriminative classifiers [8, 27, 41, 15]. In [44], a
self supervised boosting algorithm was proposed to train a boosting algorithm by sequentially
learning weak classifiers using the given data and self-generated negative samples; the generative via
discriminative learning work in [40] generalizes the concept that unsupervised generative modeling
can be accomplished by learning a sequence of discriminative classifiers via self-generated pseudonegatives. Inspired by [44, 40] in which self-generated samples are utilized, as well as recent success
in deep learning [20, 9], we propose here an introspective convolutional network (ICN) classifier and
study how its internal generative aspect can benefit CNN’s discriminative classification task. There is
a recent line of work using a discriminator to help with an external generator, generative adversarial
networks (GAN) [10], which is different from our objective here. We aim at building a single CNN
model that is simultaneously discriminative and generative.
The introspective convolutional networks (ICN) being introduced here have a number of properties. (1)
We introduce introspection to convolutional neural networks and show its significance in supervised
classification. (2) A reclassification-by-synthesis algorithm is devised to train ICN by iteratively
augmenting the negative samples and updating the classifier. (3) A stochastic gradient descent
sampling process is adopted to perform efficient synthesis for ICN. (4) We propose a supervised
formulation to directly train a multi-class ICN classifier. We show consistent improvement over
state-of-the-art CNN classifiers (ResNet [12]) on benchmark datasets in the experiments.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

