Distral: Robust Multitask Reinforcement Learning
Yee Whye Teh, Victor Bapst, Wojciech Marian Czarnecki, John Quan,
James Kirkpatrick, Raia Hadsell, Nicolas Heess, Razvan Pascanu
DeepMind
London, UK

Abstract
Most deep reinforcement learning algorithms are data inefficient in complex and
rich environments, limiting their applicability to many scenarios. One direction
for improving data efficiency is multitask learning with shared neural network
parameters, where efficiency may be improved through transfer across related tasks.
In practice, however, this is not usually observed, because gradients from different
tasks can interfere negatively, making learning unstable and sometimes even less
data efficient. Another issue is the different reward schemes between tasks, which
can easily lead to one task dominating the learning of a shared model. We propose
a new approach for joint training of multiple tasks, which we refer to as Distral
(distill & transfer learning). Instead of sharing parameters between the different
workers, we propose to share a “distilled” policy that captures common behaviour
across tasks. Each worker is trained to solve its own task while constrained to stay
close to the shared policy, while the shared policy is trained by distillation to be the
centroid of all task policies. Both aspects of the learning process are derived by
optimizing a joint objective function. We show that our approach supports efficient
transfer on complex 3D environments, outperforming several related methods.
Moreover, the proposed learning process is more robust to hyperparameter settings
and more stable—attributes that are critical in deep reinforcement learning.

1

Introduction

Deep Reinforcement Learning is an emerging subfield of Reinforcement Learning (RL) that relies
on deep neural networks as function approximators that can scale RL algorithms to complex and
rich environments. One key work in this direction was the introduction of DQN [21] which is able
to play many games in the ATARI suite of games [1] at above human performance. However the
agent requires a fairly large amount of time and data to learn effective policies and the learning
process itself can be quite unstable, even with innovations introduced to improve wall clock time, data
efficiency, and robustness by changing the learning algorithm [27, 33] or by improving the optimizer
[20, 29]. A different approach was introduced by [12, 19, 14], whereby data efficiency is improved
by training additional auxiliary tasks jointly with the RL task.
With the success of deep RL has come interest in increasingly complex tasks and a shift in focus
towards scenarios in which a single agent must solve multiple related problems, either simultaneously
or sequentially. Due to the large computational cost, making progress in this direction requires
robust algorithms which do not rely on task-specific algorithmic design or extensive hyperparameter
tuning. Intuitively, solutions to related tasks should facilitate learning since the tasks share common
structure, and thus one would expect that individual tasks should require less data or achieve a
higher asymptotic performance. Indeed this intuition has long been pursued in the multitask and
transfer-learning literature [2, 31, 34, 5].
Somewhat counter-intuitively, however, the above is often not the result encountered in practice,
particularly in the RL domain [26, 23]. Instead, the multitask and transfer learning scenarios are
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

