Clone MCMC: Parallel High-Dimensional Gaussian
Gibbs Sampling

Andrei-Cristian Bărbos
IMS Laboratory
Univ. Bordeaux - CNRS - BINP
andbarbos@u-bordeaux.fr

François Caron
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
caron@stats.ox.ac.uk

Jean-François Giovannelli
IMS Laboratory
Univ. Bordeaux - CNRS - BINP
giova@ims-bordeaux.fr

Arnaud Doucet
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
doucet@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose a generalized Gibbs sampler algorithm for obtaining samples approximately distributed from a high-dimensional Gaussian distribution. Similarly to
Hogwild methods, our approach does not target the original Gaussian distribution
of interest, but an approximation to it. Contrary to Hogwild methods, a single parameter allows us to trade bias for variance. We show empirically that our method
is very flexible and performs well compared to Hogwild-type algorithms.

1

Introduction

Sampling high-dimensional distributions is notoriously difficult in the presence of strong dependence
between the different components. The Gibbs sampler proposes a simple and generic approach, but
may be slow to converge, due to its sequential nature. A number of recent papers have advocated
the use of so-called "Hogwild Gibbs samplers", which perform conditional updates in parallel,
without synchronizing the outputs. Although the corresponding algorithms do not target the correct
distribution, this class of methods has shown to give interesting empirical results, in particular for
Latent Dirichlet Allocation models [1, 2] and Gaussian distributions [3].
In this paper, we focus on the simulation of high-dimensional Gaussian distributions. In numerous
applications, such as computer vision, satellite imagery, medical imaging, tomography or weather
forecasting, simulation of high-dimensional Gaussians is needed for prediction, or as part of a Markov
chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm. For example, [4] simulate high dimensional Gaussian
random fields for prediction of hydrological and meteorological quantities. For posterior inference
via MCMC in a hierarchical Bayesian model, elementary blocks of a Gibbs sampler often require to
simulate high-dimensional Gaussian variables. In image processing, the typical number of variables
(pixels/voxels) is of the order of 106 /109 . Due to this large size, Cholesky factorization is not
applicable; see for example [5] or [6].
In [7, 8] the sampling problem is recast as an optimisation one: a sample is obtained by minimising a
perturbed quadratic criterion. The cost of the algorithm depends on the choice of the optimisation
technique. Exact resolution is prohibitively expensive so an iterative solver with a truncated number
of iterations is typically used [5] and the distribution of the samples one obtains is unknown.
In this paper, we propose an alternative class of iterative algorithms for approximately sampling
high-dimensional Gaussian distributions. The class of algorithms we propose borrows ideas from
optimization and linear solvers. Similarly to Hogwild algorithms, our sampler does not target the
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

