Cross-Spectral Factor Analysis
Neil M. Gallagher1,* , Kyle Ulrich2,* , Austin Talbot3 ,
Kafui Dzirasa1,4 , Lawrence Carin2 and David E. Carlson5,6
1

Department of Neurobiology, 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 3 Department of
Statistical Science, 4 Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, 5 Department of Civil and
Environmental Engineering, 6 Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics , Duke University
*
Contributed equally to this work
{neil.gallagher,austin.talbot,kafui.dzirasa,
lcarin,david.carlson}@duke.edu

Abstract
In neuropsychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia or depression, there is often a
disruption in the way that regions of the brain synchronize with one another. To facilitate understanding of network-level synchronization between brain regions, we
introduce a novel model of multisite low-frequency neural recordings, such as local
field potentials (LFPs) and electroencephalograms (EEGs). The proposed model,
named Cross-Spectral Factor Analysis (CSFA), breaks the observed signal into
factors defined by unique spatio-spectral properties. These properties are granted
to the factors via a Gaussian process formulation in a multiple kernel learning
framework. In this way, the LFP signals can be mapped to a lower dimensional
space in a way that retains information of relevance to neuroscientists. Critically,
the factors are interpretable. The proposed approach empirically allows similar
performance in classifying mouse genotype and behavioral context when compared
to commonly used approaches that lack the interpretability of CSFA. We also introduce a semi-supervised approach, termed discriminative CSFA (dCSFA). CSFA
and dCSFA provide useful tools for understanding neural dynamics, particularly
by aiding in the design of causal follow-up experiments.

1

Introduction

Neuropsychiatric disorders (e.g. schizophrenia, autism spectral disorder, etc.) take an enormous
toll on our society [16]. In spite of this, the underlying neural causes of many of these diseases are
poorly understood and treatments are developing at a slow pace [2]. Many of these disorders have
been linked to a disruption of neural dynamics and communication between brain regions [10, 33].
In recent years, tools such as optogenetics [15, 26] have facilitated the direct probing of causal
relationships between neural activity in different brain regions and neural disorders [28]. Planning a
well-designed experiment to study spatiotemoral dynamics in neural activity can present a challenge
due to the high number of design choices, such as which region(s) to stimulate, what neuron types,
and what stimulation pattern to use. In this manuscript we explore how a machine learning approach
can facilitate the design of these experiments by developing interpretable and predictive methods.
These two qualities are crucial because they allow exploratory experiments to be used more effectively
in the design of causal studies.
We explore how to construct a machine learning approach to capture neural dynamics from raw
neural data during changing behavioral and state conditions. A body of literature in theoretical and
experimental neuroscience has focused on linking synchronized oscillations, which are observable
in LFPs and EEGs, to neural computation [18, 24]. Such oscillations are often quantified by
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

