Is Input Sparsity Time Possible for
Kernel Low-Rank Approximation?
Cameron Musco
MIT
cnmusco@mit.edu

David P. Woodruff
Carnegie Mellon University
dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Low-rank approximation is a common tool used to accelerate kernel methods: the
n ⇥ n kernel matrix K is approximated via a rank-k matrix K̃ which can be stored
in much less space and processed more quickly. In this work we study the limits
of computationally efficient low-rank kernel approximation. We show that for a
broad class of kernels, including the popular Gaussian and polynomial kernels,
computing a relative error k-rank approximation to K is at least as difficult as
multiplying the input data matrix A 2 Rn⇥d by an arbitrary matrix C 2 Rd⇥k .
Barring a breakthrough in fast matrix multiplication, when k is not too large, this
requires ⌦(nnz(A)k) time where nnz(A) is the number of non-zeros in A. This
lower bound matches, in many parameter regimes, recent work on subquadratic
time algorithms for low-rank approximation of general kernels [MM16, MW17],
demonstrating that these algorithms are unlikely to be significantly improved, in
particular to O(nnz(A)) input sparsity runtimes. At the same time there is hope:
we show for the first time that O(nnz(A)) time approximation is possible for
general radial basis function kernels (e.g., the Gaussian kernel) for the closely
related problem of low-rank approximation of the kernelized dataset.

1

Introduction

The kernel method is a popular technique used to apply linear learning and classification algorithms
to datasets with nonlinear structure. Given training input points a1 , ..., an 2 Rd , the idea is to
replace the standard Euclidean dot product hai , aj i = aTi aj with the kernel dot product (ai , aj ),
where : Rd ⇥ Rd ! R+ is some positive semidefinite function. Popular kernel functions include
2
e.g., the Gaussian kernel with (ai , aj ) = e kai aj k / for some bandwidth parameter and the
polynomial kernel of degree q with (ai , aj ) = (c + aTi aj )q for some parameter c.
Throughout this work, we focus on kernels where (ai , aj ) is a function of the dot products
aTi ai = kai k2 , aTj aj = kaj k2 , and aTi aj . Such functions encompass many kernels used in practice,
including the Gaussian kernel, the Laplace kernel, the polynomial kernel, and the Matern kernels.
Letting F be the reproducing kernel Hilbert space associated with (·, ·), we can write (ai , aj ) =
h (ai ), (aj )i where
: Rd ! F is a typically non-linear feature map. We let
=
T
[ (a1 ), ..., (an )] denote the kernelized dataset, whose ith row is the kernelized datapoint (ai ).
There is no requirement that can be efficiently computed or stored – for example, in the case of the
Gaussian kernel, F is an infinite dimensional space. Thus, kernel methods typically work with the
kernel matrix K 2 Rn⇥n with Ki,j = (ai , aj ). We will also sometimes denote K = { (ai , aj )}
T
to make it clear which kernel function it is generated by. We can equivalently write K =
. As
long as all operations of an algorithm only access via the dot products between its rows, they can
thus be implemented using just K without explicitly computing the feature map.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

