Accuracy First: Selecting a Differential Privacy Level
for Accuracy-Constrained ERM

Katrina Ligett
Caltech and Hebrew University

Seth Neel
University of Pennsylvania

Bo Waggoner
University of Pennsylvania

Aaron Roth
University of Pennsylvania

Zhiwei Steven Wu
Microsoft Research

Abstract
Traditional approaches to differential privacy assume a fixed privacy requirement
ε for a computation, and attempt to maximize the accuracy of the computation
subject to the privacy constraint. As differential privacy is increasingly deployed in
practical settings, it may often be that there is instead a fixed accuracy requirement
for a given computation and the data analyst would like to maximize the privacy of
the computation subject to the accuracy constraint. This raises the question of how
to find and run a maximally private empirical risk minimizer subject to a given
accuracy requirement. We propose a general “noise reduction” framework that
can apply to a variety of private empirical risk minimization (ERM) algorithms,
using them to “search” the space of privacy levels to find the empirically strongest
one that meets the accuracy constraint, and incurring only logarithmic overhead
in the number of privacy levels searched. The privacy analysis of our algorithm
leads naturally to a version of differential privacy where the privacy parameters
are dependent on the data, which we term ex-post privacy, and which is related
to the recently introduced notion of privacy odometers. We also give an ex-post
privacy analysis of the classical AboveThreshold privacy tool, modifying it to allow
for queries chosen depending on the database. Finally, we apply our approach to
two common objective functions, regularized linear and logistic regression, and
empirically compare our noise reduction methods to (i) inverting the theoretical
utility guarantees of standard private ERM algorithms and (ii) a stronger, empirical
baseline based on binary search.1

1

Introduction and Related Work

Differential Privacy [7, 8] enjoys over a decade of study as a theoretical construct, and a much more
recent set of large-scale practical deployments, including by Google [10] and Apple [11]. As the large
theoretical literature is put into practice, we start to see disconnects between assumptions implicit
in the theory and the practical necessities of applications. In this paper we focus our attention on
one such assumption in the domain of private empirical risk minimization (ERM): that the data
analyst first chooses a privacy requirement, and then attempts to obtain the best accuracy guarantee
(or empirical performance) that she can, given the chosen privacy constraint. Existing theory is
tailored to this view: the data analyst can pick her privacy parameter ε via some exogenous process,
and either plug it into a “utility theorem” to upper bound her accuracy loss, or simply deploy her
algorithm and (privately) evaluate its performance. There is a rich and substantial literature on private
convex ERM that takes this approach, weaving tight connections between standard mechanisms in
1

A full version of this paper appears on the arXiv preprint site: https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.10829.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

