Asynchronous Parallel Coordinate Minimization
for MAP Inference
Ofer Meshi
Google
meshi@google.com

Alexander G. Schwing
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
aschwing@illinois.edu

Abstract
Finding the maximum a-posteriori (MAP) assignment is a central task for structured
prediction. Since modern applications give rise to very large structured problem
instances, there is increasing need for efficient solvers. In this work we propose
to improve the efficiency of coordinate-minimization-based dual-decomposition
solvers by running their updates asynchronously in parallel. In this case messagepassing inference is performed by multiple processing units simultaneously without
coordination, all reading and writing to shared memory. We analyze the convergence properties of the resulting algorithms and identify settings where speedup
gains can be expected. Our numerical evaluations show that this approach indeed
achieves significant speedups in common computer vision tasks.

1

Introduction

Finding the most probable configuration of a structured distribution is an important task in machine
learning and related applications. It is also known as the maximum a-posteriori (MAP) inference
problem in graphical models [Wainwright and Jordan, 2008, Koller and Friedman, 2009], and has
found use in a wide range of applications, from disparity map estimation in computer vision, to
part-of-speech tagging in natural language processing, protein-folding in computational biology and
others. Generally, MAP inference is intractable, and efficient algorithms only exist in some special
cases, such as tree-structured graphs. It is therefore common to use approximations.
In recent years, many approximate MAP inference methods have been proposed [see Kappes et al.,
2015, for a recent survey]. One of the major challenges in applying approximate inference techniques
is that modern applications give rise to very large instances. For example, in semantic image
segmentation the task is to assign labels to all pixels in an image [e.g., Zhou et al., 2016]. This can
translate into a MAP inference problem with hundreds of thousands of variables (one for each pixel).
For this reason, efficiency of approximate inference algorithms is becoming increasingly important.
One approach to dealing with the growth in problem complexity is to use cheap (but often inaccurate)
algorithms. For example, variants of the mean field algorithm have witnessed a surge in popularity
due to their impressive success in several computer vision tasks [Krähenbühl and Koltun, 2011]. A
shortcoming of this approach is that it is limited to a specific type of model (fully connected graphs
with Gaussian pairwise potentials). Moreover, the mean field approximation is often less accurate
than other approximations, e.g., those based on convex relaxations [Desmaison et al., 2016].
In this work we study an alternative approach to making approximate MAP inference algorithms
more efficient – parallel computation. Our study is motivated by two developments. First, current
hardware trends increase the availability of parallel processing hardware in the form of multi-core
CPUs as well as GPUs. Second, recent theoretical results improve our understanding of various
asynchronous parallel algorithms, and demonstrate their potential usefulness, especially for objective
functions that are typical in machine learning problems [e.g., Recht et al., 2011, Liu et al., 2015].
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

