Scalable trust-region method for deep reinforcement
learning using Kronecker-factored approximation

Yuhuai Wu∗
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
ywu@cs.toronto.edu

Elman Mansimov∗
New York University
mansimov@cs.nyu.edu

Roger Grosse
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
rgrosse@cs.toronto.edu

Shun Liao
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
sliao3@cs.toronto.edu

Jimmy Ba
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
jimmy@psi.utoronto.ca

Abstract
In this work, we propose to apply trust region optimization to deep reinforcement learning using a recently proposed Kronecker-factored approximation to
the curvature. We extend the framework of natural policy gradient and propose
to optimize both the actor and the critic using Kronecker-factored approximate
curvature (K-FAC) with trust region; hence we call our method Actor Critic using
Kronecker-Factored Trust Region (ACKTR). To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first scalable trust region natural gradient method for actor-critic methods.
It is also the method that learns non-trivial tasks in continuous control as well as
discrete control policies directly from raw pixel inputs. We tested our approach
across discrete domains in Atari games as well as continuous domains in the MuJoCo environment. With the proposed methods, we are able to achieve higher
rewards and a 2- to 3-fold improvement in sample efficiency on average, compared
to previous state-of-the-art on-policy actor-critic methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/openai/baselines.

1

Introduction

Agents using deep reinforcement learning (deep RL) methods have shown tremendous success in
learning complex behaviour skills and solving challenging control tasks in high-dimensional raw
sensory state-space [24, 17, 12]. Deep RL methods make use of deep neural networks to represent
control policies. Despite the impressive results, these neural networks are still trained using simple
variants of stochastic gradient descent (SGD). SGD and related first-order methods explore weight
space inefficiently. It often takes days for the current deep RL methods to master various continuous
and discrete control tasks. Previously, a distributed approach was proposed [17] to reduce training
time by executing multiple agents to interact with the environment simultaneously, but this leads to
rapidly diminishing returns of sample efficiency as the degree of parallelism increases.
Sample efficiency is a dominant concern in RL; robotic interaction with the real world is typically
scarcer than computation time, and even in simulated environments the cost of simulation often
dominates that of the algorithm itself. One way to effectively reduce the sample size is to use
more advanced optimization techniques for gradient updates. Natural policy gradient [10] uses the
technique of natural gradient descent [1] to perform gradient updates. Natural gradient methods
∗

Equal contribution.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

