Parallel Streaming Wasserstein Barycenters
Matthew Staib
MIT CSAIL
mstaib@mit.edu

Sebastian Claici
MIT CSAIL
sclaici@mit.edu

Justin Solomon
MIT CSAIL
jsolomon@mit.edu

Stefanie Jegelka
MIT CSAIL
stefje@mit.edu

Abstract
Efficiently aggregating data from different sources is a challenging problem, particularly when samples from each source are distributed differently. These differences
can be inherent to the inference task or present for other reasons: sensors in a sensor
network may be placed far apart, affecting their individual measurements. Conversely, it is computationally advantageous to split Bayesian inference tasks across
subsets of data, but data need not be identically distributed across subsets. One principled way to fuse probability distributions is via the lens of optimal transport: the
Wasserstein barycenter is a single distribution that summarizes a collection of input
measures while respecting their geometry. However, computing the barycenter
scales poorly and requires discretization of all input distributions and the barycenter
itself. Improving on this situation, we present a scalable, communication-efficient,
parallel algorithm for computing the Wasserstein barycenter of arbitrary distributions. Our algorithm can operate directly on continuous input distributions and is
optimized for streaming data. Our method is even robust to nonstationary input
distributions and produces a barycenter estimate that tracks the input measures
over time. The algorithm is semi-discrete, needing to discretize only the barycenter
estimate. To the best of our knowledge, we also provide the first bounds on the
quality of the approximate barycenter as the discretization becomes finer. Finally,
we demonstrate the practical effectiveness of our method, both in tracking moving
distributions on a sphere, as well as in a large-scale Bayesian inference task.

1

Introduction

A key challenge when scaling up data aggregation occurs when data comes from multiple sources,
each with its own inherent structure. Sensors in a sensor network may be configured differently or
placed far apart, but each individual sensor simply measures a different view of the same quantity.
Similarly, user data collected by a server in California will differ from that collected by a server in
Europe: the data samples may be independent but are not identically distributed.
One reasonable approach to aggregation in the presence of multiple data sources is to perform
inference on each piece independently and fuse the results. This is possible when the data can be
distributed randomly, using methods akin to distributed optimization [52, 53]. However, when the
data is not split in an i.i.d. way, Bayesian inference on different subsets of observed data yields
slightly different “subset posterior” distributions for each subset that must be combined [33]. Further
complicating matters, data sources may be nonstationary. How can we fuse these different data
sources for joint analysis in a consistent and structure-preserving manner?
We address this question using ideas from the theory of optimal transport. Optimal transport gives us a
principled way to measure distances between measures that takes into account the underlying space on
which the measures are defined. Intuitively, the optimal transport distance between two distributions
measures the amount of work one would have to do to move all mass from one distribution to the
other. Given J input measures {µj }Jj=1 , it is natural, in this setting, to ask for a measure ⌫ that
minimizes the total squared distance to the input measures. This measure ⌫ is called the Wasserstein
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

