A-NICE-MC: Adversarial Training for MCMC
Jiaming Song
Stanford University
tsong@cs.stanford.edu

Shengjia Zhao
Stanford University
zhaosj12@cs.stanford.edu

Stefano Ermon
Stanford University
ermon@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Existing Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods are either based on generalpurpose and domain-agnostic schemes, which can lead to slow convergence, or
problem-specific proposals hand-crafted by an expert. In this paper, we propose ANICE-MC, a novel method to automatically design efficient Markov chain kernels
tailored for a specific domain. First, we propose an efficient likelihood-free adversarial training method to train a Markov chain and mimic a given data distribution.
Then, we leverage flexible volume preserving flows to obtain parametric kernels
for MCMC. Using a bootstrap approach, we show how to train efficient Markov
chains to sample from a prescribed posterior distribution by iteratively improving
the quality of both the model and the samples. Empirical results demonstrate that
A-NICE-MC combines the strong guarantees of MCMC with the expressiveness of
deep neural networks, and is able to significantly outperform competing methods
such as Hamiltonian Monte Carlo.

1

Introduction

Variational inference (VI) and Monte Carlo (MC) methods are two key approaches to deal with
complex probability distributions in machine learning. The former approximates an intractable
distribution by solving a variational optimization problem to minimize a divergence measure with
respect to some tractable family. The latter approximates a complex distribution using a small number
of typical states, obtained by sampling ancestrally from a proposal distribution or iteratively using a
suitable Markov chain (Markov Chain Monte Carlo, or MCMC).
Recent progress in deep learning has vastly advanced the field of variational inference. Notable
examples include black-box variational inference and variational autoencoders [1–3], which enabled
variational methods to benefit from the expressive power of deep neural networks, and adversarial
training [4, 5], which allowed the training of new families of implicit generative models with efficient
ancestral sampling. MCMC methods, on the other hand, have not benefited as much from these recent
advancements. Unlike variational approaches, MCMC methods are iterative in nature and do not
naturally lend themselves to the use of expressive function approximators [6, 7]. Even evaluating
an existing MCMC technique is often challenging, and natural performance metrics are intractable
to compute [8–11]. Defining an objective to improve the performance of MCMC that can be easily
optimized in practice over a large parameter space is itself a difficult problem [12, 13].
To address these limitations, we introduce A-NICE-MC, a new method for training flexible MCMC
kernels, e.g., parameterized using (deep) neural networks. Given a kernel, we view the resulting
Markov Chain as an implicit generative model, i.e., one where sampling is efficient but evaluating the
(marginal) likelihood is intractable. We then propose adversarial training as an effective, likelihoodfree method for training a Markov chain to match a target distribution. First, we show it can be used in
a learning setting to directly approximate an (empirical) data distribution. We then use the approach
to train a Markov Chain to sample efficiently from a model prescribed by an analytic expression (e.g.,
a Bayesian posterior distribution), the classic use case for MCMC techniques. We leverage flexible
volume preserving flow models [14] and a “bootstrap” technique to automatically design powerful
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

