Protein Interface Prediction using Graph
Convolutional Networks
Alex Fout†
Department of Computer Science
Colorado State University
Fort Collins, CO 80525
fout@colostate.edu

Jonathon Byrd†
Department of Computer Science
Colorado State University
Fort Collins, CO 80525
jonbyrd@colostate.edu

Basir Shariat†
Department of Computer Science
Colorado State University
Fort Collins, CO 80525
basir@cs.colostate.edu

Asa Ben-Hur
Department of Computer Science
Colorado State University
Fort Collins, CO 80525
asa@cs.colostate.edu

Abstract
We consider the prediction of interfaces between proteins, a challenging problem with important applications in drug discovery and design, and examine the
performance of existing and newly proposed spatial graph convolution operators
for this task. By performing convolution over a local neighborhood of a node of
interest, we are able to stack multiple layers of convolution and learn effective
latent representations that integrate information across the graph that represent the
three dimensional structure of a protein of interest. An architecture that combines
the learned features across pairs of proteins is then used to classify pairs of amino
acid residues as part of an interface or not. In our experiments, several graph
convolution operators yielded accuracy that is better than the state-of-the-art SVM
method in this task.

1

Introduction

In many machine learning tasks we are faced with structured objects that can naturally be modeled as
graphs. Examples include the analysis of social networks, molecular structures, knowledge graphs,
and computer graphics to name a few. The remarkable success of deep neural networks in a wide range
of challenging machine learning tasks from computer vision [14, 15] and speech recognition [12] to
machine translation [24] and computational biology [4], has resulted in a resurgence of interest in
this area. This success has also led to the more recent interest in generalizing the standard notion
of convolution over a regular grid representing a sequence or an image, to convolution over graph
structures, making these techniques applicable to the wide range of prediction problems that can be
modeled in this way [8].
In this work we propose a graph convolution approach that allows us to tackle the challenging
problem of predicting protein interfaces. Proteins are chains of amino acid residues that fold into
a three dimensional structure that gives them their biochemical function. Proteins perform their
function through a complex network of interactions with other proteins. The prediction of those
interactions, and the interfaces through which they occur, are important and challenging problems
that have attracted much attention [10]. This paper focuses on predicting protein interfaces. Despite
†

denotes equal contribution

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

