Adversarial Ranking for Language Generation

Kevin Lin∗
University of Washington
kvlin@uw.edu
Xiaodong He
Microsoft Research
xiaohe@microsoft.com

Dianqi Li∗
University of Washington
dianqili@uw.edu

Zhengyou Zhang
Microsoft Research
zhang@microsoft.com

Ming-Ting Sun
University of Washington
mts@uw.edu

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have great successes on synthesizing data.
However, the existing GANs restrict the discriminator to be a binary classifier, and
thus limit their learning capacity for tasks that need to synthesize output with rich
structures such as natural language descriptions. In this paper, we propose a novel
generative adversarial network, RankGAN, for generating high-quality language
descriptions. Rather than training the discriminator to learn and assign absolute
binary predicate for individual data sample, the proposed RankGAN is able to
analyze and rank a collection of human-written and machine-written sentences
by giving a reference group. By viewing a set of data samples collectively and
evaluating their quality through relative ranking scores, the discriminator is able to
make better assessment which in turn helps to learn a better generator. The proposed
RankGAN is optimized through the policy gradient technique. Experimental results
on multiple public datasets clearly demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
approach.

1

Introduction

Language generation plays an important role in natural language processing, which is essential to
many applications such as machine translation [1], image captioning [6], and dialogue systems [26].
Recent studies [10, 11, 29, 33] show that the recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and the long shortterm memory networks (LSTMs) can achieve impressive performances for the task of language
generation. Evaluation metrics such as BLEU [22], METEOR [2], and CIDEr [32] are reported in
the literature.
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have drawn great attentions since Goodfellow et al. [8]
introduced the framework for generating the synthetic data that is similar to the real one. The
main idea behind GANs is to have two neural network models, the discriminator and the generator,
competing against each other during learning. The discriminator aims to distinguish the synthetic
from the real data, while the generator is trained to confuse the discriminator by generating high
quality synthetic data. During learning, the gradient of the training loss from the discriminator is then
used as the guidance for updating the parameters of the generator. Since then, GANs achieve great
performance in computer vision tasks such as image synthesis [5, 14, 17, 24, 27]. Their successes are
mainly attributed to training the discriminator to estimate the statistical properties of the continuous
real-valued data (e.g., pixel values).
∗

The authors contributed equally to this work.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

