Convergence rates of a partition based Bayesian
multivariate density estimation method

Linxi Liu ∗
Department of Statistics
Columbia University
ll3098@columbia.edu

Dangna Li
ICME
Stanford University
dangna@stanford.edu

Wing Hung Wong
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
whwong@stanford.edu

Abstract
We study a class of non-parametric density estimators under Bayesian settings.
The estimators are obtained by adaptively partitioning the sample space. Under
a suitable prior, we analyze the concentration rate of the posterior distribution,
and demonstrate that the rate does not directly depend on the dimension of the
problem in several special cases. Another advantage of this class of Bayesian
density estimators is that it can adapt to the unknown smoothness of the true
density function, thus achieving the optimal convergence rate without artificial
conditions on the density. We also validate the theoretical results on a variety of
simulated data sets.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we study the asymptotic behavior of posterior distributions of a class of Bayesian density
estimators based on adaptive partitioning. Density estimation is a building block for many other
statistical methods, such as classification, nonparametric testing, clustering, and data compression.
With univariate (or bivariate) data, the most basic non-parametric method for density estimation
is the histogram method. In this method, the sample space is partitioned into regular intervals
(or rectangles), and the density is estimated by the relative frequency of data points falling into
each interval (rectangle). However, this method is of limited utility in higher dimensional spaces
because the number of cells in a regular partition of a p-dimensional space will grow exponentially
with p, which makes the relative frequency highly variable unless the sample size is extremely
large. In this situation the histogram may be improved by adapting the partition to the data so
that larger rectangles are used in the parts of the sample space where data is sparse. Motivated
by this consideration, researchers have recently developed several multivariate density estimation
methods based on adaptive partitioning [13, 12]. For example, by generalizing the classical Pólya
Tree construction [7, 22] developed the Optional Pólya Tree (OPT) prior on the space of simple
functions. Computational issues related to OPT density estimates were discussed in [13], where
efficient algorithms were developed to compute the OPT estimate. The method performs quite well
when the dimension is moderately large (from 10 to 50).
The purpose of the current paper is to address the following questions on such Bayesian density
estimates based on partition-learning. Question 1: what is the class of density functions that can be
“well estimated” by the partition-learning based methods. Question 2: what is the rate at which the
posterior distribution is concentrated around the true density as the sample size increases. Our main
contributions lie in the following aspects:
∗

Work was done while the author was at Stanford University.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

