Dynamic Safe Interruptibility for Decentralized
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

El Mahdi El Mhamdi
EPFL, Switzerland
elmahdi.elmhamdi@epfl.ch

Rachid Guerraoui
EPFL, Switzerland
rachid.guerraoui@epfl.ch

Hadrien Hendrikx∗
École Polytechnique, France
hadrien.hendrikx@gmail.com

Alexandre Maurer
EPFL, Switzerland
alexandre.maurer@epfl.ch

Abstract
In reinforcement learning, agents learn by performing actions and observing their
outcomes. Sometimes, it is desirable for a human operator to interrupt an agent
in order to prevent dangerous situations from happening. Yet, as part of their
learning process, agents may link these interruptions, that impact their reward, to
specific states and deliberately avoid them. The situation is particularly challenging in a multi-agent context because agents might not only learn from their own
past interruptions, but also from those of other agents. Orseau and Armstrong [16]
defined safe interruptibility for one learner, but their work does not naturally extend to multi-agent systems. This paper introduces dynamic safe interruptibility,
an alternative definition more suited to decentralized learning problems, and studies this notion in two learning frameworks: joint action learners and independent
learners. We give realistic sufficient conditions on the learning algorithm to enable dynamic safe interruptibility in the case of joint action learners, yet show that
these conditions are not sufficient for independent learners. We show however that
if agents can detect interruptions, it is possible to prune the observations to ensure
dynamic safe interruptibility even for independent learners.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning is argued to be the closest thing we have so far to reason about the properties of artificial general intelligence [8]. In 2016, Laurent Orseau (Google DeepMind) and Stuart
Armstrong (Oxford) introduced the concept of safe interruptibility [16] in reinforcement learning.
This work sparked the attention of many newspapers [1, 2, 3], that described it as “Google’s big red
button” to stop dangerous AI. This description, however, is misleading: installing a kill switch is
no technical challenge. The real challenge is, roughly speaking, to train an agent so that it does not
learn to avoid external (e.g. human) deactivation. Such an agent is said to be safely interruptible.
While most efforts have focused on training a single agent, reinforcement learning can also be used
to learn tasks for which several agents cooperate or compete [23, 17, 21, 7]. The goal of this paper
is to study dynamic safe interruptibility, a new definition tailored for multi-agent systems.
∗

Main contact author. The order of authors is alphabetical.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

