Boltzmann Exploration Done Right

Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi
Università degli Studi di Milano
Milan, Italy
nicolo.cesa-bianchi@unimi.it

Claudio Gentile
INRIA Lille – Nord Europe
Villeneuve d’Ascq, France
cla.gentile@gmail.com

Gábor Lugosi
ICREA & Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona, Spain
gabor.lugosi@gmail.com

Gergely Neu
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona, Spain
gergely.neu@gmail.com

Abstract
Boltzmann exploration is a classic strategy for sequential decision-making under
uncertainty, and is one of the most standard tools in Reinforcement Learning (RL).
Despite its widespread use, there is virtually no theoretical understanding about
the limitations or the actual benefits of this exploration scheme. Does it drive
exploration in a meaningful way? Is it prone to misidentifying the optimal actions
or spending too much time exploring the suboptimal ones? What is the right tuning
for the learning rate? In this paper, we address several of these questions for the
classic setup of stochastic multi-armed bandits. One of our main results is showing
that the Boltzmann exploration strategy with any monotone learning-rate sequence
will induce suboptimal behavior. As a remedy, we offer a simple non-monotone
schedule that guarantees near-optimal performance, albeit only when given prior
access to key problem parameters that are typically not available in practical
situations (like the time horizon T and the suboptimality gap ∆). More importantly,
we propose a novel variant that uses different learning rates for different arms, and
2
T
achieves a distribution-dependent regret bound of order K log
and a distribution∆
√
independent bound of order KT log K without requiring such prior knowledge.
To demonstrate the flexibility of our technique, we also propose a variant that
guarantees the same performance bounds even if the rewards are heavy-tailed.

1

Introduction

Exponential weighting strategies are fundamental tools in a variety of areas, including Machine Learning, Optimization, Theoretical Computer Science, and Decision Theory [3]. Within Reinforcement
Learning [23, 25], exponential weighting schemes are broadly used for balancing exploration and
exploitation, and are equivalently referred to as Boltzmann, Gibbs, or softmax exploration policies
[22, 14, 24, 19]. In the most common version of Boltzmann exploration, the probability of choosing
an arm is proportional to an exponential function of the empirical mean of the reward of that arm.
Despite the popularity of this policy, very little is known about its theoretical performance, even in
the simplest reinforcement learning setting of stochastic bandit problems.
The variant of Boltzmann exploration we focus on in this paper is defined by
pt,i ∝ eηt µbt,i ,

(1)

where pt,i is the probability of choosing arm i in round t, µ
bt,i is the empirical average of the rewards
obtained from arm i up until round t, and ηt > 0 is the learning rate. This variant is broadly used
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

