On the Model Shrinkage Effect of
Gamma Process Edge Partition Models
Iku Ohama⋆‡
Issei Sato†
Takuya Kida‡
Hiroki Arimura‡
⋆
†
‡
Panasonic Corp., Japan The Univ. of Tokyo, Japan Hokkaido Univ., Japan
ohama.iku@jp.panasonic.com sato@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp {kida,arim}@ist.hokudai.ac.jp

Abstract
The edge partition model (EPM) is a fundamental Bayesian nonparametric model for extracting an overlapping structure from binary matrix. The
EPM adopts a gamma process (ΓP) prior to automatically shrink the number of active atoms. However, we empirically found that the model shrinkage of the EPM does not typically work appropriately and leads to an
overfitted solution. An analysis of the expectation of the EPM’s intensity
function suggested that the gamma priors for the EPM hyperparameters
disturb the model shrinkage effect of the internal ΓP. In order to ensure that
the model shrinkage effect of the EPM works in an appropriate manner, we
proposed two novel generative constructions of the EPM: CEPM incorporating constrained gamma priors, and DEPM incorporating Dirichlet priors
instead of the gamma priors. Furthermore, all DEPM’s model parameters
including the infinite atoms of the ΓP prior could be marginalized out, and
thus it was possible to derive a truly infinite DEPM (IDEPM) that can
be efficiently inferred using a collapsed Gibbs sampler. We experimentally
confirmed that the model shrinkage of the proposed models works well and
that the IDEPM indicated state-of-the-art performance in generalization
ability, link prediction accuracy, mixing efficiency, and convergence speed.

1

Introduction

Discovering low-dimensional structure from a binary matrix is an important problem in
relational data analysis. Bayesian nonparametric priors, such as Dirichlet process (DP) [1]
and hierarchical Dirichlet process (HDP) [2], have been widely applied to construct statistical
models with an automatic model shrinkage effect [3, 4]. Recently, more advanced stochastic
processes such as the Indian buffet process (IBP) [5] enabled the construction of statistical
models for discovering overlapping structures [6, 7], wherein each individual in a data matrix
can belong to multiple latent classes.
Among these models, the edge partition model (EPM) [8] is a fundamental Bayesian nonparametric model for extracting overlapping latent structure underlying a given binary matrix.
The EPM considers latent positive random counts for only non-zero entries in a given binary
matrix and factorizes the count matrix into two non-negative matrices and a non-negative
diagonal matrix. A link probability of the EPM for an entry is defined by transforming
the multiplication of the non-negative matrices into a probability, and thus the EPM can
capture overlapping structures with a noisy-OR manner [6]. By incorporating a gamma
process (ΓP) as a prior for the diagonal matrix, the number of active atoms of the EPM
shrinks automatically according to the given data. Furthermore, by truncating the infinite
atoms of the ΓP with a finite number, all parameters and hyperparameters of the EPM
can be inferred using closed-form Gibbs sampler. Although, the EPM is well designed to
capture an overlapping structure and has an attractive affinity with a closed-form posterior
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

