Character-Level Language Modeling with Recurrent
Highway Hypernetworks

Joseph Suarez
Stanford University
joseph15@stanford.edu

Abstract
We present extensive experimental and theoretical support for the efficacy of recurrent highway networks (RHNs) and recurrent hypernetworks complimentary to
the original works. Where the original RHN work primarily provides theoretical
treatment of the subject, we demonstrate experimentally that RHNs benefit from
far better gradient flow than LSTMs in addition to their improved task accuracy.
The original hypernetworks work presents detailed experimental results but leaves
several theoretical issues unresolved–we consider these in depth and frame several feasible solutions that we believe will yield further gains in the future. We
demonstrate that these approaches are complementary: by combining RHNs and
hypernetworks, we make a significant improvement over current state-of-the-art
character-level language modeling performance on Penn Treebank while relying on
much simpler regularization. Finally, we argue for RHNs as a drop-in replacement
for LSTMs (analogous to LSTMs for vanilla RNNs) and for hypernetworks as a
de-facto augmentation (analogous to attention) for recurrent architectures.

1

Introduction and related works

Recurrent architectures have seen much improvement since their inception in the 1990s, but they
still suffer significantly from the problem of vanishing gradients [1]. Though many consider LSTMs
[2] the de-facto solution to vanishing gradients, in practice, the problem is far from solved (see
Discussion). Several LSTM variants have been developed, most notably GRUs [3], which are simpler
than LSTM cells but benefit from only marginally better gradient flow. Greff et al. and Britz et al.
conducted exhaustive (for all practical purposes) architecture searches over simple LSTM variants
and demonstrated that none achieved significant improvement [4] [5]–in particular, the latter work
discovered that LSTMs consistently outperform comparable GRUs on machine translation, and no
proposed cell architecture to date has been proven significantly better than the LSTM. This result
necessitated novel approaches to the problem.
One approach is to upscale by simply stacking recurrent cells and increasing the number of hidden
units. While there is certainly some optimal trade off between depth and cell size, with enough data,
simply upscaling both has yielded remarkable results in neural machine translation (NMT) [6].1
However, massive upscaling is impractical in all but the least hardware constrained settings and fails
to remedy fundamental architecture issues, such as poor gradient flow inherent in recurrent cells
[8]. We later demonstrate that gradient issues persist in LSTMs (see Results) and that the grid-like
architecture of stacked LSTMs is suboptimal.
1
For fair comparison, Google’s NMT system does far more than upscaling and includes an explicit attentional
mechanism [7]. We do not experiment with attention and/or residual schemes, but we expect the gains made by
such techniques to stack with our work.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

