Convergence Analysis of Two-layer Neural Networks
with ReLU Activation
Yuanzhi Li
Computer Science Department
Princeton University
yuanzhil@cs.princeton.edu

Yang Yuan
Computer Science Department
Cornell University
yangyuan@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
In recent years, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) based techniques has become
the standard tools for training neural networks. However, formal theoretical understanding of why SGD can train neural networks in practice is largely missing.
In this paper, we make progress on understanding this mystery by providing a
convergence analysis for SGD on a rich subset of two-layer feedforward networks
with ReLU activations. This subset is characterized by a special structure called
“identity mapping”.√We prove that, if input follows from Gaussian distribution,
with standard O(1/ d) initialization of the weights, SGD converges to the global
minimum in polynomial number of steps. Unlike normal vanilla networks, the
“identity mapping” makes our network asymmetric and thus the global minimum is
unique. To complement our theory, we are also able to show experimentally that
multi-layer networks with this mapping have better performance compared with
normal vanilla networks.
Our convergence theorem differs from traditional non-convex optimization techniques. We show that SGD converges to optimal in “two phases”: In phase I, the
gradient points to the wrong direction, however, a potential function g gradually
decreases. Then in phase II, SGD enters a nice one point convex region and converges. We also show that the identity mapping is necessary for convergence, as it
moves the initial point to a better place for optimization. Experiment verifies our
claims.

1

Introduction

Deep learning is the mainstream technique for many machine learning tasks, including image
recognition, machine translation, speech recognition, etc. [17]. Despite its success, the theoretical
understanding on how it works remains poor. It is well known that neural networks have great
expressive power [22, 7, 3, 8, 31]. That is, for every function there exists a set of weights on the
neural network such that it approximates the function everywhere. However, it is unclear how to
obtain the desired weights. In practice, the most commonly used method is stochastic gradient
descent based methods (e.g., SGD, Momentum [40], Adagrad [10], Adam [25]), but to the best of
our knowledge, there were no theoretical guarantees that such methods will find good weights.
In this paper, we give the first convergence analysis of SGD for two-layer feedforward network with
ReLU activations. For this basic network, it is known that even in the simplified setting where the
weights are initialized symmetrically and the ground truth forms orthonormal basis, gradient descent
might get stuck at saddle points [41].
Inspired by the structure of residual network (ResNet) [21], we add an extra identity mapping for
the hidden layer (see Figure 1). Surprisingly, we show that simply by adding this mapping, with the
standard initialization scheme and small step size, SGD always converges to the ground truth. In other
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

