Learning Overcomplete HMMs

Vatsal Sharan
Stanford University
vsharan@stanford.edu

Sham Kakade
University of Washington
sham@cs.washington.edu

Percy Liang
Stanford University
pliang@cs.stanford.edu

Gregory Valiant
Stanford University
valiant@stanford.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of learning overcomplete HMMs—those that have many
hidden states but a small output alphabet. Despite having significant practical
importance, such HMMs are poorly understood with no known positive or negative
results for efficient learning. In this paper, we present several new results—both
positive and negative—which help define the boundaries between the tractable and
intractable settings. Specifically, we show positive results for a large subclass of
HMMs whose transition matrices are sparse, well-conditioned, and have small
probability mass on short cycles. On the other hand, we show that learning is
impossible given only a polynomial number of samples for HMMs with a small
output alphabet and whose transition matrices are random regular graphs with large
degree. We also discuss these results in the context of learning HMMs which can
capture long-term dependencies.

1

Introduction

Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) are commonly used for data with natural sequential structure (e.g.,
speech, language, video). This paper focuses on overcomplete HMMs, where the number of output
symbols m is much smaller than the number of hidden states n. As an example, for an HMM that
outputs natural language documents one character at a time, the number of characters m is quite
small, but the number of hidden states n would need to be very large to encode the rich syntactic,
semantic, and discourse structure of the document.
Most algorithms for learning HMMs with provable guarantees assume the transition T ∈ Rn×n and
observation O ∈ Rm×n matrices are full rank [2, 3, 20] and hence do not apply to the overcomplete
regime. A notable exception is the recent work of Huang et al. [14] who studied this setting where
m  n and showed that generic HMMs can be learned in polynomial time given exact moments
of the output process (which requires infinite data). Though understanding properties of generic
HMMs is an important first step, in reality, HMMs with a large number of hidden states typically have
structured, non-generic transition matrices—e.g., consider sparse transition matrices or transition
matrices of factorial HMMs [12]. Huang et al. [14] also assume access to exact moments, which
leaves open the question of when learning is possible with efficient sample complexity. Summarizing,
we are interested in the following questions:
1. What are the fundamental limitations for learning overcomplete HMMs?
2. What properties of HMMs make learning possible with polynomial samples?
3. Are there structured HMMs which can be learned in the overcomplete regime?
Our contributions. We make progress on all three questions in this work, sharpening our understanding of the boundary between tractable and intractable learning. We begin by stating a negative
result, which perhaps explains some of the difficulty of obtaining strong learning guarantees in the
overcomplete setting.
Theorem 1. The parameters of HMMs where i) the transition matrix encodes a random walk on a
regular graph on n nodes with degree polynomial in n, ii) the output alphabet m = polylog(n) and,

