Modulating early visual processing by language

Harm de Vries∗

Florian Strub∗

Jérémie Mary†

University of Montreal
mail@harmdevries.com

Univ. Lille, CNRS, Centrale Lille,
Inria, UMR 9189 CRIStAL
florian.strub@inria.fr

Univ. Lille, CNRS, Centrale Lille,
Inria, UMR 9189 CRIStAL
jeremie.mary@univ-lille3.fr

Hugo Larochelle

Olivier Pietquin

Aaron Courville

Google Brain
hugolarochelle@google.com

DeepMind
pietquin@google.com

University of Montreal
aaron.courville@gmail.com

Abstract
It is commonly assumed that language refers to high-level visual concepts while
leaving low-level visual processing unaffected. This view dominates the current
literature in computational models for language-vision tasks, where visual and
linguistic inputs are mostly processed independently before being fused into a
single representation. In this paper, we deviate from this classic pipeline and
propose to modulate the entire visual processing by a linguistic input. Specifically,
we introduce Conditional Batch Normalization (CBN) as an efficient mechanism
to modulate convolutional feature maps by a linguistic embedding. We apply
CBN to a pre-trained Residual Network (ResNet), leading to the MODulatEd
ResNet (MODERN) architecture, and show that this significantly improves strong
baselines on two visual question answering tasks. Our ablation study confirms that
modulating from the early stages of the visual processing is beneficial.

1

Introduction

Human beings combine the processing of language and vision with apparent ease. For example, we
can use natural language to describe perceived objects and we are able to imagine a visual scene
from a given textual description. Developing intelligent machines with such impressive capabilities
remains a long-standing research challenge with many practical applications.
Towards this grand goal, we have witnessed an increased interest in tasks at the intersection of
computer vision and natural language processing. In particular, image captioning [16], visual
question answering (VQA)[1, 23] and visually grounded dialogue systems[5, 6] constitute a popular
set of example tasks for which large-scale datasets are now available. Developing computational
models for language-vision tasks is challenging, especially because of the open question underlying
all these tasks: how to fuse/integrate visual and textual representations? To what extent should we
process visual and linguistic input separately, and at which stage should we fuse them? And equally
important, what fusion mechanism to use?
In this paper, we restrict our attention to the domain of visual question answering which is a natural
testbed for fusing language and vision. The VQA task concerns answering open-ended questions
about images and has received significant attention from the research community [1, 9, 17, 23].
Current state-of-the-art systems often use the following computational pipeline [2, 17, 20] illustrated
in Fig 1. They first extract high-level image features from an ImageNet pretrained convolutional
network (e.g. the activations from a ResNet network [12]), and obtain a language embedding using a
∗
†

The first two authors contributed equally
Now at Criteo

