Online Learning with a Hint

Ofer Dekel
Microsoft Research
oferd@microsoft.com

Nika Haghtalab
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
nika@cmu.edu

Arthur Flajolet
Operations Research Center
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
flajolet@mit.edu
Patrick Jaillet
EECS, LIDS, ORC
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
jaillet@mit.edu

Abstract
We study a variant of online linear optimization where the player receives a hint
about the loss function at the beginning of each round. The hint is given in the
form of a vector that is weakly correlated with the loss vector on that round. We
show that the player can benefit from such a hint if the set of feasible actions is
sufficiently round. Specifically, if the set is strongly convex, the hint can be used to
guarantee a regret of O(log(T )), and if the set is q-uniformly
convex for q ∈ (2, 3),
√
the√hint can be used to guarantee a regret of o( T ). In contrast, we establish
Ω( T ) lower bounds on regret when the set of feasible actions is a polyhedron.

1

Introduction

Online linear optimization is a canonical problem in online learning. In this setting, a player attempts
to minimize an online adversarial sequence of loss functions while incurring a small regret, compared
√
to the best offline solution. Many online algorithms exist that are designed to have
√ a regret of O( T )
in the worst case and it has been known that one cannot avoid a regret of Ω( T ) in the worst case.
While this worst-case perspective on online linear optimization has lead to elegant algorithms and
deep connections to other fields, such as boosting [9, 10] and game theory [4, 2], it can be overly
pessimistic. In particular, it does not account for the fact that the player may have
√ side-information
that allows him to anticipate the upcoming loss functions and evade the Ω( T ) regret. In this
work, we go beyond this worst case analysis and consider online linear optimization when additional
information in the form of a function that is correlated with the loss is presented to the player.
More formally, online convex optimization [24, 11] is a T -round repeated game between a player and
an adversary. On each round, the player chooses an action xt from a convex set of feasible actions
K ⊆ Rd and the adversary chooses a convex bounded loss function ft . Both choices are revealed and
the player incurs a loss of ft (xt ). The player then uses its knowledge of ft to adjust its strategy for
the subsequent rounds. The player’s goal is to accumulate a small loss compared to the best fixed
action in hindsight. This value is called regret and is a measure of success of the player’s algorithm.
When
√ the adversary is restricted to Lipschitz loss functions, several algorithms are known to guarantee
O( T ) regret [24, 16, 11]. If we further restrict the adversary to strongly convex loss functions, the
regret bound improves to O(log(T
√)) [14]. However, when the loss functions are linear, no online
algorithm can have a regret of o( T ) [5]. In this sense, linear loss functions are the most difficult
convex loss functions to handle [24].
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

