Inverse Filtering for Hidden Markov Models

Robert Mattila
Department of Automatic Control
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
rmattila@kth.se
Vikram Krishnamurthy
Cornell Tech
Cornell University
vikramk@cornell.edu

Cristian R. Rojas
Department of Automatic Control
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
crro@kth.se
Bo Wahlberg
Department of Automatic Control
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
bo@kth.se

Abstract
This paper considers a number of related inverse filtering problems for hidden
Markov models (HMMs). In particular, given a sequence of state posteriors and
the system dynamics; i) estimate the corresponding sequence of observations,
ii) estimate the observation likelihoods, and iii) jointly estimate the observation
likelihoods and the observation sequence. We show how to avoid a computationally expensive mixed integer linear program (MILP) by exploiting the algebraic
structure of the HMM filter using simple linear algebra operations, and provide
conditions for when the quantities can be uniquely reconstructed. We also propose a
solution to the more general case where the posteriors are noisily observed. Finally,
the proposed inverse filtering algorithms are evaluated on real-world polysomnographic data used for automatic sleep segmentation.

1

Introduction

The hidden Markov model (HMM) is a cornerstone of statistical modeling [1–4]. In it, a latent (i.e.,
hidden) state evolves according to Markovian dynamics. The state of the system is only indirectly
observed via a sensor that provides noisy observations. The observations are sampled independently,
conditioned on the state of the system, according to observation likelihood probabilities. Of paramount
importance in many applications of HMMs is the classical stochastic filtering problem, namely:
Given observations from an HMM with known dynamics and observation likelihood
probabilities, compute the posterior distribution of the latent state.
Throughout the paper, we restrict our attention to discrete-time finite observation-alphabet HMMs.
For such HMMs, the solution to the filtering problem is a recursive algorithm known as the HMM
filter [1, 4].
In this paper, we consider the inverse of the above problem. In particular, our aim is to provide
solutions to the following inverse filtering problems:
Given a sequence of posteriors (or, more generally, noisily observed posteriors)
from an HMM with known dynamics, compute (estimate) the observation likelihood
probabilities and/or the observations that generated the posteriors.
To motivate these problems, we give several possible applications of our results below.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

