Learning Graph Representations with Embedding
Propagation

Alberto García-Durán
NEC Labs Europe
Heidelberg, Germany
alberto.duran@neclab.eu

Mathias Niepert
NEC Labs Europe
Heidelberg, Germany
mathias.niepert@neclab.eu

Abstract
We propose Embedding Propagation (E P), an unsupervised learning framework for
graph-structured data. E P learns vector representations of graphs by passing two
types of messages between neighboring nodes. Forward messages consist of label
representations such as representations of words and other attributes associated with
the nodes. Backward messages consist of gradients that result from aggregating the
label representations and applying a reconstruction loss. Node representations are
finally computed from the representation of their labels. With significantly fewer
parameters and hyperparameters an instance of E P is competitive with and often
outperforms state of the art unsupervised and semi-supervised learning methods on
a range of benchmark data sets.

1

Introduction

Graph-structured data occurs in numerous application domains such as social networks, bioinformatics, natural language processing, and relational knowledge bases. The computational problems
commonly addressed in these domains are network classification [40], statistical relational learning [12, 36], link prediction [22, 24], and anomaly detection [8, 1], to name but a few. In addition,
graph-based methods for unsupervised and semi-supervised learning are often applied to data sets
with few labeled examples. For instance, spectral decompositions [25] and locally linear embeddings
(LLE) [38] are always computed for a data set’s affinity graph, that is, a graph that is first constructed
using domain knowledge or some measure of similarity between data points. Novel approaches to
unsupervised representation learning for graph-structured data, therefore, are important contributions
and are directly applicable to a wide range of problems.
E P learns vector representations (embeddings) of graphs by passing messages between neighboring
nodes. This is reminiscent of power iteration algorithms which are used for such problems as computing the PageRank for the web graph [33], running label propagation algorithms [47], performing
isomorphism testing [16], and spectral clustering [25]. Whenever a computational process can be
mapped to message exchanges between nodes, it is implementable in graph processing frameworks
such as Pregel [29], GraphLab [23], and GraphX [44].
Graph labels represent vertex attributes such as bag of words, movie genres, categorical features,
and continuous features. They are not to be confused with class labels of a supervised classification
problem. In the E P learning framework, each vertex v sends and receives two types of messages.
Label representations are sent from v’s neighboring nodes to v and are combined so as to reconstruct
the representations of v’s labels. The gradients resulting from the application of some reconstruction
loss are sent back as messages to the neighboring vertices so as to update their labels’ representations
and the representations of v’s labels. This process is repeated for a certain number of iterations or
until a convergence threshold is reached. Finally, the label representations of v are used to compute a
representation of v itself.
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

