NeuralFDR: Learning Discovery Thresholds
from Hypothesis Features
Fei Xia⇤ ,

Martin J. Zhang⇤, James Zou† , David Tse†
Stanford University
{feixia,jinye,jamesz,dntse}@stanford.edu

Abstract
As datasets grow richer, an important challenge is to leverage the full features
in the data to maximize the number of useful discoveries while controlling for
false positives. We address this problem in the context of multiple hypotheses
testing, where for each hypothesis, we observe a p-value along with a set of
features specific to that hypothesis. For example, in genetic association studies,
each hypothesis tests the correlation between a variant and the trait. We have a
rich set of features for each variant (e.g. its location, conservation, epigenetics etc.)
which could inform how likely the variant is to have a true association. However
popular empirically-validated testing approaches, such as Benjamini-Hochberg’s
procedure (BH) and independent hypothesis weighting (IHW), either ignore these
features or assume that the features are categorical or uni-variate. We propose a
new algorithm, NeuralFDR, which automatically learns a discovery threshold as a
function of all the hypothesis features. We parametrize the discovery threshold as
a neural network, which enables flexible handling of multi-dimensional discrete
and continuous features as well as efficient end-to-end optimization. We prove
that NeuralFDR has strong false discovery rate (FDR) guarantees, and show that it
makes substantially more discoveries in synthetic and real datasets. Moreover, we
demonstrate that the learned discovery threshold is directly interpretable.

1

Introduction

In modern data science, the analyst is often swarmed with a large number of hypotheses — e.g. is a
mutation associated with a certain trait or is this ad effective for that section of the users. Deciding
which hypothesis to statistically accept or reject is a ubiquitous task. In standard multiple hypothesis
testing, each hypothesis is boiled down to one number, a p-value computed against some null
distribution, with a smaller value indicating less likely to be null. We have powerful procedures to
systematically reject hypotheses while controlling the false discovery rate (FDR) Note that here the
convention is that a “discovery” corresponds to a “rejected” null hypothesis.
These FDR procedures are widely used but they ignore additional information that is often available
in modern applications. Each hypothesis, in addition to the p-value, could also contain a set of
features pertinent to the objects being tested in the hypothesis. In the genetic association setting
above, each hypothesis tests whether a mutation is correlated with the trait and we have a p-value
for this. Moreover, we also have other features about both the mutation (e.g. its location, epigenetic
status, conservation etc.) and the trait (e.g. if the trait is gene expression then we have features on the
gene). Together these form a feature representation of the hypothesis. This feature vector is ignored
by the standard multiple hypotheses testing procedures.
In this paper, we present a flexible method using neural networks to learn a nonlinear mapping
from hypothesis features to a discovery threshold. Popular procedures for multiple hypotheses
⇤
†

These authors contributed equally to this work and are listed in alphabetical order.
These authors contributed equally.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

