Sorting Out Lipschitz Function Approximation

Cem Anil * 1 2 James Lucas * 1 2 Roger Grosse 1 2

Abstract
Training neural networks under a strict Lipschitz
constraint is useful for provable adversarial robustness, generalization bounds, interpretable gradients, and Wasserstein distance estimation. By
the composition property of Lipschitz functions, it
suffices to ensure that each individual affine transformation or nonlinear activation is 1-Lipschitz.
The challenge is to do this while maintaining the
expressive power. We identify a necessary property for such an architecture: each of the layers
must preserve the gradient norm during backpropagation. Based on this, we propose to combine
a gradient norm preserving activation function,
GroupSort, with norm-constrained weight matrices. We show that norm-constrained GroupSort
architectures are universal Lipschitz function approximators. Empirically, we show that normconstrained GroupSort networks achieve tighter
estimates of Wasserstein distance than their ReLU
counterparts and can achieve provable adversarial
robustness guarantees with little cost to accuracy.

Constraining the Lipschitz constant of a neural network puts
a bound on how much its output can change in proportion
to a change in its input. For classification tasks, a small Lipschitz constant leads to better generalization (Sokolić et al.,
2017), improved adversarial robustness (Cisse et al., 2017;
Tsuzuku et al., 2018), and greater interpretability (Tsipras
et al., 2018). Additionally, the Wasserstein distance between
two probability distributions can be expressed as the solution
to a maximization problem over Lipschitz functions (Peyré
& Cuturi, 2018). Despite the wide-ranging applications, the
question of how to approximate Lipschitz functions with
neural networks without sacrificing expressive power has
remained largely unanswered.
*
1
Equal contribution
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada 2 Vector
Institute, Toronto, Canada.
Correspondence to: Cem
Anil <cem.anil@mail.utoronto.ca>, James Lucas <jlucas@cs.toronto.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Existing approaches to enforce Lipschitz constraints fall
into two categories: regularization and architectural constraints. Regularization approaches (Drucker & Le Cun,
1992; Gulrajani et al., 2017) perform well in practice, but do
not provably enforce the Lipschitz constraint globally. Approaches based on architectural constraints place limitations
on the operator norm (such as the matrix spectral norm) of
each layer’s weights (Cisse et al., 2017; Yoshida & Miyato,
2017). These provably satisfy the Lipschitz constraint, but
come at a cost in expressive power. E.g., norm-constrained
ReLU networks are provably unable to approximate simple
functions such as absolute value (Huster et al., 2018).
We first identify a simple property that expressive normconstrained Lipschitz architectures must satisfy: gradient
norm preservation. Specifically, in order to represent a
function with slope 1 almost everywhere, each layer must
preserve the norm of the gradient during backpropagation.
ReLU architectures satisfy this only when the activations are
positive; empirically, this manifests during training of normconstrained ReLU networks in that the activations are forced
to be positive most of the time, reducing the network’s capacity to represent nonlinear functions. We make use of an
alternative activation function called GroupSort — a variant
of which was proposed by Chernodub & Nowicki (2016) —
which sorts groups of activations. GroupSort is both Lipschitz and gradient norm preserving. Using a variant of the
Stone-Weierstrass theorem, we show that norm-constrained
GroupSort networks are universal Lipschitz function approximators. While we focus our attention, both theoretically
and empirically, on fully connected networks, the same general principles hold for convolutional networks where the
techniques we introduce could be applied.
Empirically, we show that ReLU networks are unable to
approximate even the simplest Lipschitz functions which
GroupSort networks can. We observe that norm-constrained
ReLU networks must trade non-linear processing for gradient norm, leading to less expressive networks. Moreover, we obtain tighter lower bounds on the Wasserstein
distance between complex, high dimensional distributions
using GroupSort architectures. We also train classifiers with
provable adversarial robustness guarantees and find that using GroupSort provides improved accuracy and robustness
compared to ReLU. Across all of our experiments, we found
that norm-constrained GroupSort architectures consistently
outperformed their ReLU counterparts.

