Anytime Online-to-Batch, Optimism and Acceleration

Ashok Cutkosky 1

Abstract
A standard way to obtain convergence guarantees in stochastic convex optimization is to run
an online learning algorithm and then output the
average of its iterates: the actual iterates of the
online learning algorithm do not come with individual guarantees. We close this gap by introducing a black-box modification to any online learning algorithm whose iterates converge to the optimum in stochastic scenarios. We then consider
the case of smooth losses, and show that combining our approach with optimistic online learning
algorithms immediately √
yields a fast convergence
rate of O(L/T 3/2 + σ/ T ) on L-smooth problems with σ 2 variance in the gradients. Finally,
we provide a reduction that converts any adaptive
online algorithm into one that obtains
√ the optimal
accelerated rate of √
Õ(L/T 2 + σ/ T ), while still
maintaining Õ(1/ T ) convergence in the nonsmooth setting. Importantly, our algorithms adapt
to L and σ automatically: they do not need to
know either to obtain these rates.

1. Online-to-Batch Conversions
We consider convex stochastic optimization problems,
where our objective is to minimize some convex function
L : D → R where D is some convex domain. We do not
have true access to L, however. Instead, we have a stochastic gradient oracle that given a point x ∈ D will provide a
random value g such that E[g] = ∇L(x). Our objective is
to use this noisy information to optimize L.
A simple and extremely effective method for solving
stochastic optimization problems is through online learning and online-to-batch conversion (Shalev-Shwartz, 2011;
Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2004). These techniques require remarkably few assumptions about the nature of the expected
loss or the stochasticity in the system and yet still obtain
1
Google Research, California, USA. Correspondence to: Ashok
Cutkosky <ashok@cutkosky.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

optimal or near-optimal guarantees. This has helped fuel
the widespread adoption of online learning algorithms as
the method-of-choice in training machine learning models.
Briefly, an online learning algorithm accepts a sequence of
convex loss functions `1 , . . . , `T and outputs a sequence of
iterates w1 , . . . , wT ∈ D where D is some convex space
and wt is output before the algorithm observes `t . Performance is measured by the regret:
RT (x? ) =

T
X

`t (wt ) − `t (x? )

t=1

A standard goal in online learning is to achieve sublinear
regret, which means that limT →∞ RT (x? )/T = 0. This
indicates that the algorithm is doing just as well “on average”
as the fixed benchmark point x? . In fact, most algorithms
?
obtain
√ non-asymptotic? guarantees of
√the form RT (x ) =
O( T ), so that RT (x )/T = O(1/ T ).
Online learning algorithms often adopt an adversarial model,
in which no relationship is posited between `t , but in
our stochastic optimization problem we know that the `t
are generated by some random process. This is where
the Online-to-Batch conversion technique comes in (CesaBianchi et al., 2004). The classic argument is as follows: Set
`t (x) = hgt , xi where gt is a stochastic gradient evaluated
at wt . Then observe L(wt ) − L(x? ) ≤ E[hgt , wt − x? i] and
apply Jensen’s inequality to obtain:
"
!
#
PT
E[RT (x? )]
?
t=1 wt
− L(x ) ≤
E L
T
T
PT

w

t
We therefore output x̂ = t=1
as an estimate of x? ,
T
and so long as the algorithm obtains sublinear regret,
L(x̂) − L(x? ) will approach
zero in expectation. In fact,
√
?
with R
(x
)
=
O(
T
),
one
obtains a convergence rate
T
√
O(1/ T ), which is often statistically optimal.

One drawback of the online-to-batch conversion is that the
iterates wt produced by the algorithm (where the noisy gradients are actually evaluated) do not necessarily converge to
the optimal loss value. In fact, there is typically very little
known about the behavior of any individual wt . This is aesthetically unsatisfying and may even reduce performance.
For example, optimistic online algorithms can take advantage of stability in the gradients, performing well when

