Benefits and Pitfalls of the Exponential Mechanism
with Applications to Hilbert Spaces and Functional PCA

Jordan Awan 1 Ana Kenney 1 Matthew Reimherr 1 Aleksandra Slavković 1

Abstract
The exponential mechanism is a fundamental tool
of Differential Privacy (DP) due to its strong privacy guarantees and flexibility. We study its extension to settings with summaries based on infinite dimensional outputs such as with functional
data analysis, shape analysis, and nonparametric
statistics. We show that the mechanism must be
designed with respect to a specific base measure
over the output space, such as a Gaussian process.
We provide a positive result that establishes a
Central Limit Theorem for the exponential mechanism quite broadly. We also provide a negative
result, showing that the magnitude of noise introduced for privacy is asymptotically non-negligible
relative to the statistical estimation error. We develop an -DP mechanism for functional principal component analysis, applicable in separable
Hilbert spaces, and demonstrate its performance
via simulations and applications to two datasets.

1. Introduction
Data privacy and security have become increasingly critical
to society as we continue to collect troves of highly individualized data. In the last decade, we have seen the emergence
of new tools and perspectives on data privacy such as Differential Privacy (DP), introduced by Dwork et al. (2006),
which provides a rigorous and interpretable definition of privacy. Within the DP framework, numerous tools have been
developed that achieve DP in a variety of applications and
contexts, such as empirical risk minimization (Chaudhuri
et al., 2011; Kifer et al., 2012), linear and logistic regression
(Chaudhuri & Monteleoni, 2009; Zhang et al., 2012; Yu
et al., 2014; Sheffet, 2017; Awan & Slavković, 2018), hypothesis testing (Vu & Slavkovic, 2009; Wang et al., 2015;
1

Department of Statistics, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania. Correspondence to: Jordan Awan
<awan@psu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Gaboardi et al., 2016; Awan & Slavković, 2018; Canonne
et al., 2018), network data (Karwa et al., 2016; Karwa &
Slavković, 2016), and density estimation (Wasserman &
Zhou, 2010), to name a few.
One of the most flexible and convenient DP tools is the
exponential mechanism, introduced by McSherry & Talwar
(2007), which often fits in naturally with estimation techniques from statistics and machine learning. Many estimation procedures can be described as maximizing a particular
objective or utility function:
b̂ = arg max ξ(b),
b∈Y

where ξ : Y → R,

or, equivalently, minimizing a loss function such as least
squares or a negative log-likelihood. The exponential mechanism provides a sanitized version of b̂ by using the objective
function directly to add noise. The sanitized estimate, b̃, is
drawn from a density, f (b), that is proportional to
o
n 
f (b) ∝ exp
ξ(b) ,
2∆
where ∆ captures the sensitivity of the objective function to
small perturbations in the data, and  is the desired privacy
budget (details in Sections 2 and 3). The idea behind this
mechanism is to assign higher density values to regions
with higher utility. The constant ∆/ adjusts the spread of
the density; as the sensitivity increases or as the privacy
budget decreases (meaning a decreased disclosure risk), the
variability of b̃ increases. A major advantage of such an
approach is its use of the objective function from the nonprivate estimate, b̂, which naturally promotes perturbations
with higher utility and discourages those with poor utility.
In this paper we study the exponential mechanism, especially as it pertains to functional data analysis (FDA), shape
analysis, and nonparametric statistics, where one has a (potentially) infinite dimensional output. Advances in technology and data collection as part of the ”big data era” have
made such structures more common across a wide variety of fields including economics, genetics, anthropology,
and kinesiology, to name a few. For instance, when studying growth trends in children, one can more fully leverage
longitudinal information through FDA by treating growth
measurements as trajectories or functions rather than using

