DeepNose: Using artificial neural networks to represent the space of odorants

Ngoc B. Tran 1 Daniel R. Kepple 1 Sergey A. Shuvaev 1 Alexei A. Koulakov 1

Abstract
The olfactory system employs an ensemble of
odorant receptors (ORs) to sense odorants and
to derive olfactory percepts. We trained artificial
neural networks to represent the chemical space
of odorants and used this representation to predict
human olfactory percepts. We hypothesized that
ORs may be considered 3D convolutional filters
that extract molecular features and, as such, can
be trained using machine learning methods. First,
we trained a convolutional autoencoder, called
DeepNose, to deduce a low-dimensional representation of odorant molecules which were represented by their 3D spatial structure. Next, we
tested the ability of DeepNose features in predicting physical properties and odorant percepts based
on 3D molecular structure alone. We found that,
despite the lack of human expertise, DeepNose
features often outperformed molecular descriptors used in computational chemistry in predicting
both physical properties and human perceptions.
We propose that DeepNose network can extract
de novo chemical features predictive of various
bioactivities and can help understand the factors
influencing the composition of ORs ensemble.

1. Introduction
The olfactory system has evolved to sense and recognize
a large number of chemicals present in the environment.
Olfactory receptors (ORs) act as molecular sensors that bind
odorants and convey information about their structure to
higher brain regions. ORs are activated by molecules in
a combinatorial manner: one receptor can bind to many
molecules, and one molecule can interact with many receptors (Buck & Axel, 1991; Malnic et al., 1999; Saito
et al., 2009; Soucy et al., 2009). The number of ORs varies
amongst species: from 350 in humans to about 1000 in other
1

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor,
New York, USA. Correspondence to: Alexei Koulakov
<koulakov@cshl.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

mammals (Olender et al., 2004). Here, we study the factors
influencing the OR ensemble composition.
We trained multilayer (deep) convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) to map the space of molecules and used the derived representation to predict human perceptual responses.
CNNs are multilayer neural networks that use ensembles of
spatial filters of increasing complexity to extract features of
the objects present in the input (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2012).
Networks based on CNNs are the best performing models
for image recognition, many of which perform better at classifying images than humans (Szegedy et al., 2015; He et al.,
2016). The performance of CNNs in 2D image recognition
tasks suggests that they are well-suited for learning other
types of spatial data, such as 3D molecular structures. Deep
networks have indeed been applied to classify molecules,
including the predictions of pharmacokinetics properties,
toxicity, and protein-ligand interactions (Unterthiner et al.,
2016; Xu et al., 2017; Ragoza et al., 2017; Torng & Altman, 2017). CNNs were used to represent the SMILES
string of molecules (Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018). In this
study, we derived CNNs that can recognize 3D molecular
structures and predict human olfactory percepts.
Our main hypothesis is that the OR ensemble forms a set of
3D filters that interact with molecules in real space. In this
regard, molecules play the role of 3D images (Figure 1) and
ORs can be viewed as analogs of receptive fields, such as
edge detectors of the visual system (Hubel & Wiesel, 1962).
Both the visual receptive fields and the OR ensemble have
been shaped by evolution to sense relevant features present
in the stimuli. We thus hypothesize that the in silico OR ensemble can be optimized using conventional machine learning methods, such as backpropagation (Rumelhart et al.,
1985), to accurately represent the space of molecules. Using
this approach, machine learning may help us understand the
factors influencing OR evolution and construct a realistic
model of OR-to-ligand binding.
One of the biggest limitations in building a robust predictive computational model of olfactory processing is the lack
of large-scale data on OR binding affinities and perceptual
odorant descriptors. Recent efforts have been successful in
generating data for hundreds of odorants (Dravnieks, 1985;
Saito et al., 2009; Keller et al., 2017), while modern machine learning methods require thousands to millions of data

