Improved Parallel Algorithms for Density-Based Network Clustering

Mohsen Ghaffari * 1 Silvio Lattanzi * 2 Slobodan Mitrović * 3

Abstract
Clustering large-scale networks is a central topic
in unsupervised learning with many applications
in machine learning and data mining. A classic
approach to cluster a network is to identify regions of high edge density, which in the literature
is captured by two fundamental problems: the
densest subgraph and the k-core decomposition
problems. We design massively parallel computation (MPC) algorithms for these problems
that are considerably faster than prior work. In
the case of k-core decomposition, our work improves exponentially on the algorithm provided
by Esfandiari et al. (ICML’18). Compared to
the prior work on densest subgraph presented
by Bahmani et al. (VLDB’12, ’14), our result
requires quadratically fewer MPC rounds. We
complement our analysis with an experimental
scalability analysis of our techniques.

1. Introduction
Density-based clustering is a classic technique in unsupervised learning. In this field, extracting dense subgraphs,
i.e., subgraphs that have large edge-to-vertex ratio, is a
basic primitive used in a wide range of machine learning
and data analysis tasks. In fact, thanks to their nice structural properties (for example they often correspond to wellconnected components that are also robust to outliers and
noise), extracting dense subgraphs has proved to be useful
in spam detection (Gibson et al., 2005), finding communities in social networks (Leskovec et al., 2008; Chen &
Saad, 2012; Gionis & Tsourakakis, 2015), computational
biology (Fratkin et al., 2006; Saha et al., 2010), and detecting common patterns (Liu & Yan, 2010; Chen et al., 2011).
In literature, there are two classic formalizations of density*
1
Equal contribution
ETH Zurich 2 Google Research
Zurich 3 MIT. Correspondence to: Mohsen Ghaffari <ghaffari@inf.ethz.ch>, Silvio Lattanzi <silviol@google.com>,
Slobodan Mitrović <slobo@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

based clustering in graphs: the densest subgraph problem
and the k-core decomposition problem. In the densest subgraph problem, we are interested in finding the subgraph
of highest density in a graph. This problem was originally
introduced by Goldberg (Goldberg, 1984) and since then,
it attracted extensive attention from the machine learning,
data mining, and algorithmic community (Esfandiari et al.,
2015; Bahmani et al., 2012; Epasto et al., 2015; Jethava
et al., 2012; Miller et al., 2010; Papailiopoulos et al., 2014).
In the k-core decomposition, a given network is decomposed into vertex-layers based on their local connectivity. Namely, for each node v this decomposition determines the maximum threshold k such that there exists a
subgraph whose minimum degree is at least k and the subgraph contains v. Such a decomposition is very useful in
practice and it induces a natural hierarchical clustering on
any graph. For this reason, the k-core decomposition has
found many applications in analyzing dynamic of social
networks (Bhawalkar et al., 2015), in community detection
(Mitzenmacher et al., 2015), in visualization of large-scale
complex networks (Alvarez-Hamelin et al., 2005), in analyzing protein-protein interaction (Altaf-Ul-Amin et al.,
2006) and, more broadly, is used for detecting dense components of graphs (Lee et al., 2010b).
In modern computational tasks, we often need to cope with
very large networks. Thus, it becomes increasingly more
important to design efficient parallel algorithms for unsupervised learning problems. Obtaining such algorithms is
often challenging because a bulk of graph problems are
inherently sequential, e.g., their structure is defined iteratively and in an adaptive manner. For instance, finding the
k-core decomposition of a graph on n vertices is a simple task if the underlying graph is sufficiently small to fit
on a single machine. To solve this problem sequentially, it
suffices to iteratively select a vertex v of the smallest degree, set that degree to be the label of v, and remove v from
the graph. Unfortunately, implementing this approach directly as a parallel algorithm requires n rounds of computation, which is prohibitive. Nevertheless, in many scenarios, if we allow approximate but relatively accurate solutions, then the problem becomes tractable. Motivated by
this, we study the approximate k-core decomposition and
the approximate densest subgraph problems, and provide
efficient parallel algorithms for them. Next, we discuss the

