Bayesian Leave-One-Out Cross-Validation for Large Data

Måns Magnusson 1 Michael Riis Andersen 1 2 Johan Jonasson 3 Aki Vehtari 1
Abstract
where log pM (ỹi |y) is the log predictive density for a new
observation for the model M .
Model inference, such as model comparison,
model checking, and model selection, is an imporLeave-one-out cross-validation (LOO-CV) is one approach
tant part of model development. Leave-one-out
to estimate the elpd for a given model, and is the method
cross-validation (LOO-CV) is a general approach
of focus in this paper (Bernardo & Smith, 1994; Vehtari &
for assessing the generalizability of a model, but
Ojanen, 2012; Vehtari et al., 2017). Using LOO-CV we can
unfortunately, LOO-CV does not scale well to
treat our observations as pseudo-Monte Carlo samples from
large datasets. We propose a combination of using
pt (ỹi ) and estimate the elpdloo as
approximate inference techniques and probabilityn
proportional-to-size-sampling (PPS) for fast LOO1X
elpd
=
log pM (yi |y−i )
(1)
loo
CV model evaluation for large data. We provide
n i=1
both theoretical and empirical results showing
Z
n
1X
good properties for large data.
=
log pM (yi |θ)pM (θ|y−i )dθ
n i=1

1. Introduction
Model inference, such as model comparison, checking, and
selection, is an integral part of developing new models.
From a Bayesian decision-theoretic point of view (see Vehtari & Ojanen, 2012) we want to make a choice a ∈ A, in
our case a model pM , that maximize our expected utility for
a utility function u(a, ·) as
Z
ū(a) = u(a, y˜i )pt (ỹi )dỹi ,

=

1
elpdloo ,
n

where n is the number of observations (that may be very
large), pM (yi |θ) is the likelihood, and pM (θ|y−i ) is the
posterior for θ where we hold out observation i. This will
henceforth be called the leave-one-out (LOO) posterior and
pM (θ|y) will be referred to as the full posterior. In this
paper both elpdloo and elpdloo will be quantities of interest,
depending on the situation.

1
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark, Denmark 3 Department of Mathematical Sciences, Chalmers University of Technology and University
of Gothenburg, Sweden. Correspondence to: Måns Magnusson
<mans.magnusson@aalto.fi>.

Bayesian LOO-CV has many appealing theoretical properties compared to other common model evaluation techniques. The popular k-fold cross-validation is, in general, a
biased estimator of elpdM , since each model is only trained
using a subset of the full data (Vehtari & Ojanen, 2012).
The LOO-CV is, just as the Watanabe-Akaike Information
criteria (WAIC), a consistent estimate of the true elpdM for
regular and singular models (Watanabe, 2010). A model
is regular if the map taking the parameters to the probability distribution is one-to-one and the Fisher information
is positive-definitive. If a model is not regular, then the
model is singular (Watanabe, 2010). Since many models,
such as neural networks, normal mixture models, hidden
Markov models, and topic models, are singular, we need
consistent methods to estimate the elpd for singular models
(Watanabe, 2010). Although the WAIC and LOO-CV have
the same asymptotic properties, recent research has shown
that the LOO-CV is more robust than WAIC in the finite
data domain (Vehtari et al., 2017).

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

In addition to the theoretical properties, the LOO-CV also
gives an intuitive framework for evaluating models where
the user easily can use different utility functions of interest

where pt (ỹi ) is the true probability distribution generating
observation ỹi .
A common scenario is to study how well a model generalizes to unseen data (Box, 1976; Vehtari & Ojanen, 2012;
Vehtari et al., 2017). A popular utility function u with good
theoretical properties for probabilistic models is the log
score function (Bernardo, 1979; Robert, 1996; Vehtari &
Ojanen, 2012). The log score function give rise to using the
expected log predictive density (elpd) for model inference,
defined as
Z
elpdM = log pM (ỹi |y)pt (ỹi )dỹi ,
2

