Active Manifolds: A non-linear analogue to Active Subspaces

Robert A. Bridges 1 Anthony D. Gruber 2 1 Christopher R. Felder 3 1 Miki E. Verma 1 Chelsey Hoff 1

Abstract
We present an approach to analyze C 1 (Rm ) functions that addresses limitations present in the Active Subspaces (AS) method of Constantine et al.
(2015; 2014). Under appropriate hypotheses, our Active Manifolds (AM) method identifies a 1-D curve
in the domain (the active manifold) on which nearly
all values of the unknown function are attained, and
which can be exploited for approximation or analysis, especially when m is large (high-dimensional input space). We provide theorems justifying our AM
technique and an algorithm permitting functional approximation and sensitivity analysis. Using accessible, low-dimensional functions as initial examples, we
show AM reduces approximation error by an order of
magnitude compared to AS, at the expense of more
computation. Following this, we revisit the sensitivity analysis by Glaws et al. (2017), who apply AS
to analyze a magnetohydrodynamic power generator
model, and compare the performance of AM on the
same data. Our analysis provides detailed information not captured by AS, exhibiting the influence of
each parameter individually along an active manifold.
Overall, AM represents a novel technique for analyzing functional models with benefits including: reducing m-dimensional analysis to a 1-D analogue, permitting more accurate regression than AS (at more computational expense), enabling more informative sensitivity analysis, and granting accessible visualizations
(2-D plots) of parameter sensitivity along the AM.

1. Introduction
Scientists and engineers rely on accurate mathematical
models to quantify the objects of their studies. Such
models can be difficult to analyze because they appear as
systems of implicitly defined equations, or they involve
a high number of parameters relative to the quantity of
data/observations. For example, regression to determine a
high number of parameters requires a large amount of data,
else the problem is under-determined. Similarly, models
This manuscript has been co-authored by UT-Battelle, LLC, under contract DEAC05-00OR22725 with the US Department of Energy (DOE). The US government
retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that
the US government retains a nonexclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, worldwide license
to publish or reproduce the published form of this manuscript, or allow others to do
so, for US government purposes. DOE will provide public access to these results
of federally sponsored research in accordance with the DOE Public Access Plan
(http://energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-access-plan).
1
Cyber & Applied Data Analytics Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory
2
Department of Mathematics, Texas Tech University 3 Department of Mathematics
and Statistics, Washington University in St. Louis. Correspondence to: Robert A.
Bridges <bridgesra@ornl.gov>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine Learning, Long
Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright 2019 by the author(s).

are frequently subject to questions of sensitivity, and to
prioritize next step research it is desirable to answer questions such as “According to the mathematical model, which
parameters should we change to get the most response in
the output?”, e.g., (Constantine & Diaz, 2017; Constantine
et al., 2014; 2015; 2016; Lukaczyk et al., 2014).
To this end, we consider the problem of analyzing a realvalued function that is C 1 (at least one continuous derivative) defined on a problematically high-dimensional domain, with the aim of performing dimension reduction and
sensitivity analysis. One way to address this problem is to
tailor methods of dimension reduction to the given model,
in order to work in a smaller parameter space while preserving fidelity of the output. Essentially, this entails approximating the original model using fewer inputs.
Given a C 1 function, f : U ⊂ Rm → R with potentially large m, we fashion our approach on a simple concept
from vector calculus. Suppose one is standing at a point
x0 ∈ U , observes the value c = f (x0 ), and takes a small
step. Then, there are m − 1 orthogonal directions (potentially a huge subspace!) that one can step without changing
the function (or more precisely, while exhibiting negligible
change in f ). Yet, there is one special direction, the gradient ∇fx0 , and so long as the step is in this direction, the
walker is guaranteed maximal change in f near x0 ! More
formally, we are simply stating that the m-dimensional tangent space to Rm at x0 can be decomposed into an (m−1)dimensional subspace of vectors tangent to the level set
{x : f (x) = c}, and a one-dimensional space consisting of scalar multiples of the gradient ∇fx0 . Armed with
this perspective, we explore a powerful hypothesis—by exploiting this decomposition, we can reduce analysis of any
f ∈ C 1 (Rm ) to a related fˆ ∈ C 1 (R), thereby allowing for
analysis of arbitrarily high-dimensional models in a single
dimension.
Contributions:
We provide the mathematical foundation and pseudo-algorithm for a novel method of analyzing functions with a problematically high-dimensional domain. The method first recovers a curve in the domain,
called the active manifold, and then reduces the problem to
analysis of the function restricted to only this 1-D manifold
by traversing level sets that necessarily intersect the active
manifold orthogonally. E.g., see Figure 1.

