Temporal Gaussian Mixture Layer for Videos

AJ Piergiovanni 1 Michael S. Ryoo 1

Abstract
We introduce a new convolutional layer named
the Temporal Gaussian Mixture (TGM) layer and
present how it can be used to efficiently capture
longer-term temporal information in continuous
activity videos. The TGM layer is a temporal convolutional layer governed by a much smaller set of
parameters (e.g., location/variance of Gaussians)
that are fully differentiable. We present our fully
convolutional video models with multiple TGM
layers for activity detection. The extensive experiments on multiple datasets, including Charades
and MultiTHUMOS, confirm the effectiveness
of TGM layers, significantly outperforming the
state-of-the-arts1 .

1. Introduction
Activity videos are spatio-temporal data: they are image
frames with a specific width/height (XY) concatenated along
time axis (T). Recognition from such videos requires capturing both spatial and temporal information, desirably using
learned convolutional kernels. Temporal convolution is
particularly beneficial in activity ‘detection’ tasks, which
require making activity decisions at every frame given a
continuous video (Sigurdsson et al., 2016b; Yeung et al.,
2015). Previous methods investigated using 3-D XYT convolutional filters (Tran et al., 2014; Carreira & Zisserman,
2017) as well as the models with 2-D XY conv. layers followed by 1-D temporal conv. (Tran et al., 2018), pooling or
attention layers (Piergiovanni et al., 2017).
Understanding complex multi-activity videos requires capturing information in long-term time intervals. Different
frames contain different information, and the model needs
to learn to take advantage of as many frames as possible,
while abstracting them efficiently. Previous attempts of simply pooling representations over time or learning temporal
1
Department of Computer Science, Indiana University. Correspondence to: AJ Piergiovanni <ajpiergi@indiana.edu>, Michael
Ryoo <mryoo@indiana.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).
1
Code/models: https://github.com/piergiaj/tgm-icml19

L

M

σ1
σ2

x M

C
ac,m

Soft-Attention

L

μ1

μ2

=

σ3

C

μ3
σ4

μ4

Gaussians

KC

Temporal Gaussian
Mixture

Figure 1. Example illustrating how our Temporal Gaussian Mixture layer is computed. Multiple (M ) temporal Gaussian distributions are learned, and they are combined with the learned soft
attention (mixing) weights to form the C temporal convolution
filters. L is the temporal length of the filter.

conv. filters with a small number of frames (e.g., 16 or 64)
was thus often insufficient to fully consider rich long-term
temporal context. Simultaneously, bruteforcely increasing
the temporal filter length (to look at more frames) results
more learnable parameters, requiring more training data,
which can be expensive when activities are rare.
In this paper, we introduce a new convolutional layer named
the Temporal Gaussian Mixture (TGM) layer, and present
how it can be used to efficiently capture longer-term temporal information in activity videos. Our temporal Gaussian
mixture layer is a temporal convolutional layer, whose filters/kernels are controlled by a set of (temporal) Gaussian
distribution parameters. Each of our temporal Gaussian
distributions specify (temporally) ‘where’ the model should
look, and our Gaussian mixture layer combines them as multiple convolutional filters to be applied on top of temporallycontinuous representations. This layer allows the video
representation at each time step to be constructed while focusing on different neighboring temporal regions, instead
of only focusing on its local segment. It is a convolutional
layer governed by a much smaller set of parameters (i.e.,
locations/variances of the Gaussians as well as their mixture weights) that are fully differentiable. Importantly, the
number of parameters of the TGM layer is independent of
the length of the filter, allowing the model to capture longerterm temporal information without additional parameters.
The motivation behind our temporal Gaussian mixture layer
is to learn the temporal structure of an activity as a composition of temporal Gaussian regions/attentions. Such structure
allows the model to obtain a compact spatio-temporal representation abstracting each (long-term) time interval, using
multiple temporal conv. layers with far fewer parameters.
It is also related to the previous temporal attention works

