Multivariate Submodular Optimization

Richard Santiago * 1 F. Bruce Shepherd * 2

Abstract
Submodular functions have found a wealth of new
applications in data science and machine learning models in recent years. This has been coupled
with many algorithmic advances in the area of submodular optimization: (SO) min / max f (S) :
S ∈ F, where F is a given family of feasible
sets over a ground set V and f : 2V → R is submodular. Our focus is on a more general class of
multivariate submodular optimization (MVSO)
problems: min / max f (S1 , S2 , . . . , Sk ) : S1 ]
S2 ]· · ·]Sk ∈ F. Here we use ] to denote union
of disjoint sets and hence this model is attractive where resources are being allocated across k
agents, who share a “joint” multivariate nonnegative objective f (S1 , S2 , . . . , Sk ) that captures
some type of submodularity (i.e. diminishing returns) property. We provide some explicit examples and potential applications for this new framework. For maximization, we show that practical
algorithms such as accelerated greedy variants
and distributed algorithms achieve good approximation guarantees for very general families (such
as matroids and p-systems). For arbitrary families, we show that monotone (resp. nonmonotone)
MVSO admits an α(1 − 1/e) (resp. α · 0.385)
approximation whenever monotone (resp. nonmonotone) SO admits an α-approximation over
the multilinear formulation. This substantially
expands the family of tractable models. On the
minimization side we give essentially optimal approximations in terms of the curvature of f .

1. Introduction
Submodularity is a property of set functions with deep theoretical consequences and a wide range of applications.
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science, McGill University, Montreal, Canada 2 Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. Correspondence
to: Richard Santiago <richard.santiagotorres@mail.mcgill.ca>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Optimizing submodular functions is a central subject in operations research and combinatorial optimization (Lovász,
1983). It appears in many important optimization frameworks including cuts in graphs, set covering problems, plant
location problems, certain satisfiability problems, combinatorial auctions, and maximum entropy sampling. In machine learning it has recently been identified and utilized in
domains such as viral marketing (Kempe et al., 2003), information gathering (Krause & Guestrin, 2007), image segmentation (Boykov & Jolly, 2001; Kohli et al., 2009; Jegelka
& Bilmes, 2011), document summarization (Lin & Bilmes,
2011), and speeding up satisfiability solvers (Streeter &
Golovin, 2009).
A set function f : 2V → R is submodular if f (S)+f (T ) ≥
f (S ∪T )+f (S ∩T ) for any S, T ⊆ V . We call f monotone
if f (S) ≤ f (T ) for S ⊆ T . Throughout, all functions
are nonnegative, and we usually assume f (∅) = 0. Our
functions are given by a value oracle, where for a given set
S an algorithm can query the oracle to find its value f (S).
We consider the following broad class of submodular optimization (SO) problems:
SO(F)

Min / Max f (S) : S ∈ F

where f is a nonnegative submodular set function on a finite
ground set V , and F ⊆ 2V is a family of feasible sets. These
problems have been well studied for a variety of set families
F. We explore the connections between these (single-agent)
problems and their more general multivariate incarnations.
In the multivariate (MV) version, we have k agents and a
“joint” multivariate nonnegative objective f (S1 , S2 , . . . , Sk )
that captures some type of submodularity (i.e. diminishing returns) property (see Section 1.1). As before, we are
looking for sets S ∈ F, however, we now have a 2-phase
task: the elements of S must also be partitioned amongst
the agents. Hence we have set variables Si and seek to
optimize f (S1 , S2 , . . . , Sk ). This leads to the multivariate
submodular optimization (MVSO) versions:
MVSO(F)

Min / Max f (S1 , S2 , . . . , Sk ) :
S1 ] S2 ] · · · ] Sk ∈ F.

Our main objective is to study the approximability of the
multivariate problems in terms of their single-agent versions.
We refer to the multivariate (MV) gap as the approximation

