Learning Action Representations for Reinforcement Learning

Yash Chandak 1 Georgios Theocharous 2 James E. Kostas 1 Scott M. Jordan 1 Philip S. Thomas 1

Abstract
Most model-free reinforcement learning methods
leverage state representations (embeddings) for
generalization, but either ignore structure in the
space of actions or assume the structure is provided a priori. We show how a policy can be
decomposed into a component that acts in a lowdimensional space of action representations and a
component that transforms these representations
into actual actions. These representations improve
generalization over large, finite action sets by allowing the agent to infer the outcomes of actions
similar to actions already taken. We provide an
algorithm to both learn and use action representations and provide conditions for its convergence.
The efficacy of the proposed method is demonstrated on large-scale real-world problems.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) methods have been applied
successfully to many simple and game-based tasks. However, their applicability is still limited for problems involving
decision making in many real-world settings. One reason
is that many real-world problems with significant human
impact involve selecting a single decision from a multitude
of possible choices. For example, maximizing long-term
portfolio value in finance using various trading strategies
(Jiang et al., 2017), improving fault tolerance by regulating voltage level of all the units in a large power system
(Glavic et al., 2017), and personalized tutoring systems for
recommending sequences of videos from a large collection
of tutorials (Sidney et al., 2005). Therefore, it is important
that we develop RL algorithms that are effective for real
problems, where the number of possible choices is large.
In this paper we consider the problem of creating RL algorithms that are effective for problems with large action sets.
1

University of Massachusetts, Amherst, USA. 2 Adobe Research, San Jose, USA.. Correspondence to: Yash Chandak
<ychandak@cs.umass.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Figure 1. The structure of the proposed overall policy, πo , consisting of f and πi , that learns action representations to generalize
over large action sets.

Existing RL algorithms handle large state sets (e.g., images
consisting of pixels) by learning a representation or embedding for states (e.g., using line detectors or convolutional
layers in neural networks), which allow the agent to reason
and learn using the state representation rather than the raw
state. We extend this idea to the set of actions: we propose
learning a representation for the actions, which allows the
agent to reason and learn by making decisions in the space
of action representations rather than the original large set of
possible actions. This setup is depicted in Figure 1, where
an internal policy, πi , acts in a space of action representations, and a function, f , transforms these representations
into actual actions. Together we refer to πi and f as the
overall policy, πo .
Recent work has shown the benefits associated with using action-embeddings (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2015), particularly that they allow for generalization over actions. For
real-world problems where there are thousands of possible (discrete) actions, this generalization can significantly
speed learning. However, this prior work assumes that fixed
and predefined representations are provided. In this paper
we present a method to autonomously learn the underlying structure of the action set by using the observed transitions. This method can both learn action representation from
scratch and improve upon a provided action representation.
A key component of our proposed method is that it frames
the problem of learning an action representation (learning
f ) as a supervised learning problem rather than an RL problem. This is desirable because supervised learning methods
tend to learn more quickly and reliably than RL algorithms

