Off-Policy Deep Reinforcement Learning without Exploration

Scott Fujimoto 1 2 David Meger 1 2 Doina Precup 1 2

Abstract
Many practical applications of reinforcement
learning constrain agents to learn from a fixed
batch of data which has already been gathered,
without offering further possibility for data collection. In this paper, we demonstrate that due to
errors introduced by extrapolation, standard offpolicy deep reinforcement learning algorithms,
such as DQN and DDPG, are incapable of learning without data correlated to the distribution under the current policy, making them ineffective
for this fixed batch setting. We introduce a novel
class of off-policy algorithms, batch-constrained
reinforcement learning, which restricts the action
space in order to force the agent towards behaving
close to on-policy with respect to a subset of the
given data. We present the first continuous control deep reinforcement learning algorithm which
can learn effectively from arbitrary, fixed batch
data, and empirically demonstrate the quality of
its behavior in several tasks.

1. Introduction
Batch reinforcement learning, the task of learning from a
fixed dataset without further interactions with the environment, is a crucial requirement for scaling reinforcement
learning to tasks where the data collection procedure is
costly, risky, or time-consuming. Off-policy batch reinforcement learning has important implications for many practical
applications. It is often preferable for data collection to
be performed by some secondary controlled process, such
as a human operator or a carefully monitored program. If
assumptions on the quality of the behavioral policy can
be made, imitation learning can be used to produce strong
policies. However, most imitation learning algorithms are
known to fail when exposed to suboptimal trajectories, or
1

Department of Computer Science, McGill University, Montreal, Canada 2 Mila Québec AI Institute. Correspondence to: Scott
Fujimoto <scott.fujimoto@mail.mcgill.ca>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

require further interactions with the environment to compensate (Hester et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2018; Cheng et al.,
2018). On the other hand, batch reinforcement learning offers a mechanism for learning from a fixed dataset without
restrictions on the quality of the data.
Most modern off-policy deep reinforcement learning algorithms fall into the category of growing batch learning (Lange et al., 2012), in which data is collected and
stored into an experience replay dataset (Lin, 1992), which
is used to train the agent before further data collection occurs. However, we find that these “off-policy” algorithms
can fail in the batch setting, becoming unsuccessful if the
dataset is uncorrelated to the true distribution under the current policy. Our most surprising result shows that off-policy
agents perform dramatically worse than the behavioral agent
when trained with the same algorithm on the same dataset.
This inability to learn truly off-policy is due to a fundamental problem with off-policy reinforcement learning we
denote extrapolation error, a phenomenon in which unseen
state-action pairs are erroneously estimated to have unrealistic values. Extrapolation error can be attributed to a
mismatch in the distribution of data induced by the policy
and the distribution of data contained in the batch. As a
result, it may be impossible to learn a value function for a
policy which selects actions not contained in the batch.
To overcome extrapolation error in off-policy learning, we
introduce batch-constrained reinforcement learning, where
agents are trained to maximize reward while minimizing
the mismatch between the state-action visitation of the policy and the state-action pairs contained in the batch. Our
deep reinforcement learning algorithm, Batch-Constrained
deep Q-learning (BCQ), uses a state-conditioned generative
model to produce only previously seen actions. This generative model is combined with a Q-network, to select the
highest valued action which is similar to the data in the batch.
Under mild assumptions, we prove this batch-constrained
paradigm is necessary for unbiased value estimation from
incomplete datasets for finite deterministic MDPs.
Unlike any previous continuous control deep reinforcement
learning algorithms, BCQ is able to learn successfully without interacting with the environment by considering extrapolation error. Our algorithm is evaluated on a series
of batch reinforcement learning tasks in MuJoCo environ-

