Detecting Overlapping and Correlated Communities without Pure Nodes:
Identifiability and Algorithm

Kejun Huang 1 Xiao Fu 2

Abstract
Many machine learning problems come in the
form of networks with relational data between
entities, and one of the key unsupervised learning tasks is to detect communities in such a network. We adopt the mixed-membership stochastic
blockmodel as the underlying probabilistic model,
and give conditions under which the memberships
of a subset of nodes can be uniquely identiﬁed.
Our method starts by constructing a second-order
graph moment, which can be shown to converge
to a speciﬁc product of the true parameters as the
size of the network increases. To correctly recover
the true membership parameters, we formulate an
optimization problem using insights from convex
geometry. We show that if the true memberships
satisfy a so-called sufﬁciently scattered condition,
then solving the proposed problem correctly identiﬁes the ground truth. We also propose an efﬁcient algorithm for detecting communities, which
is signiﬁcantly faster than prior work and with
better convergence properties. Experiments on
synthetic and real data justify the validity of the
proposed learning framework for network data.

1. Introduction
A lot of machine learning problems deal with pair-wise relational data. Examples include social networks and gene
interactions. One of the key analytical questions is to detect
latent communities from the ambient interactions in an unsupervised manner. Traditional methods usually deem this as
a clustering problem on graphs, and classical algorithms like
NormalizedCuts (Meila & Shi, 2001) and spectral clustering
1 Department of Computer and Information Science and En-

gineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA 2 School
of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State
University, Corvallis, OR, USA. Correspondence to: Kejun Huang
<kejun.huang@uﬂ.edu>, Xiao Fu <xiao.fu@oregonstate.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

(Ng et al., 2002) have been successfully applied in practice.
However, most clustering based learning frameworks lack
the ability of representing more complicated network structures, for example by modeling interaction patterns between
communities and mixed-memberships of the nodes. Several
probabilistic latent variable models for networks have been
proposed to enhance interpretability and expressibility of
the model (Goldenberg et al., 2010).
1.1. Stochastic blockmodel and MMSB
The most famous probabilistic models for networks are perhaps the stochastic block model (Snijders & Nowicki, 1997;
Nowicki & Snijders, 2001) and its mixed-membership variant (Airoldi et al., 2008). In these probabilistic models, an
edge Ai j is present or absent follows a Bernoulli distribution
with parameter Pi j , i.e.,
A

Pr(Ai j = {0, 1}) = Pi j i j (1 − Pi j )1−Ai j .

(1)

Furthermore, these models assume that the matrix P, whose
i, j-th entry is Pi j , admits the structure that
P = M⊤BM,

(2)

where B is k × k, assuming there are k communities in the
network, and M has k rows. The value Bpq ∈ [0, 1] indicates the probability that a node in community p connects
with a node in community q, for all p, q = 1, ..., k. The
i-th column of M, denoted as mi , represents the community
membership of node i. In the stochastic blockmodel (SB),
m i ’s are restricted to be coordinate vectors, indicating that
each node belongs to one and only one community; whereas
in the mixed-membership stochastic blockmodel (MMSB),
m i ’s belong to the probability simplex ∆, deﬁned as
∆ = {x : x ≥ 0, 1⊤x = 1},

(3)

allowing each node to hold mixed memberships across different communities. We will be focusing on the MMSB
assumptions since it is more ﬂexible to model complex
membership structures in the network.
There are some interesting properties of the MMSB. The
communities are allowed to be overlapping because of the
inter-community interactions modeled by the nonzero offdiagonals in B. Depending on whether we are dealing with

