Shallow-Deep Networks: Understanding and Mitigating Network Overthinking

Yigitcan Kaya 1 Sanghyun Hong 1 Tudor Dumitras, 1

Abstract
We characterize a prevalent weakness of deep
neural networks (DNNs)—overthinking—which
occurs when a DNN can reach correct predictions before its final layer. Overthinking is computationally wasteful, and it can also be destructive when, by the final layer, a correct prediction
changes into a misclassification. Understanding
overthinking requires studying how each prediction evolves during a DNN’s forward pass, which
conventionally is opaque. For prediction transparency, we propose the Shallow-Deep Network
(SDN), a generic modification to off-the-shelf
DNNs that introduces internal classifiers. We apply SDN to four modern architectures, trained on
three image classification tasks, to characterize
the overthinking problem. We show that SDNs
can mitigate the wasteful effect of overthinking
with confidence-based early exits, which reduce
the average inference cost by more than 50% and
preserve the accuracy. We also find that the destructive effect occurs for 50% of misclassifications on natural inputs and that it can be induced,
adversarially, with a recent backdooring attack.
To mitigate this effect, we propose a new confusion metric to quantify the internal disagreements
that will likely lead to misclassifications.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have enabled breakthroughs
in many tasks, such as image classification (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012) and speech recognition (Hinton et al., 2012).
In these tasks, a DNN’s sequence of layers resembles human perception in the way it combines simple representations, such as edges, into more complex ones, such as
faces (Zeiler & Fergus, 2014). A fundamental difference is
that people can learn simpler heuristics that allow them to
1
University of Maryland, Maryland, USA. Correspondence to:
Yigitcan Kaya <cankaya@umiacs.umd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

perform even complex tasks, such as driving or playing the
piano, with little mental effort (Kahneman, 2011). When
simpler heuristics are adequate to complete the task, using
excessively complex representations leads to overthinking.
Human overthinking is considered wasteful because it leads
to slow decision making, as people think too much or for
too long. Furthermore, overthinking is potentially destructive, by causing confusion and mistakes when human attention is drawn to irrelevant details.
In contrast, the decision-making process of conventional
DNNs—the forward pass—requires the same computational effort on all inputs, whether they are simple or difficult to classify. Building on this analogy, we ask: Are deep
neural networks also susceptible to overthinking?. We consider that a network overthinks1 on an input sample when
its simpler representations at an earlier layer—relative to
the final layer— are adequate to make a correct classification. Analogously to human overthinking, we hypothesize
that further computation after this layer leads to waste and,
potentially, a misclassification.
Our definition of overthinking relates to how a prediction
evolves throughout the forward pass. Intuitively, a DNN
produces predictions through a gradual process, as the subsequent layers recognize different features of the input. In
conventional DNNs, however, this process remains mostly
opaque as they are only able to provide a final prediction.
The prior work that proposed early exits (Lee et al., 2015;
Szegedy et al., 2015) or error indicators (Szegedy et al.,
2013; Papernot & McDaniel, 2018) for off-the-shelf DNNs
focused on producing and interpreting a single prediction
for each input, rather than on illuminating how this prediction evolves from layer to layer.
Our first contribution is the Shallow-Deep Network (SDN):
a generic modification to off-the-shelf DNNs for introducing internal classifiers (ICs). Our modification attaches ICs
to various stages of the forward pass, as Figure 1 illustrates,
and effectively combines shallower and deeper networks
into one. The feature reduction in an IC acts as a regularizer and ensures that our method can scale up to large
1
Prior work has utilized this term to describe a property of the
network as a whole, disregarding its internal state (Wang et al.,
2017). In contrast, our definition is closely tied to the network’s
internal state and is analogous to human overthinking.

