Finding Mixed Nash Equilibria of Generative Adversarial Networks
Ya-Ping Hsieh 1 Chen Liu 1 Volkan Cevher 1

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are
known to achieve the state-of-the-art performance
on various generative tasks, but these results come
at the expense of a notoriously difficult training
phase. Current training strategies typically draw
a connection to optimization theory, whose scope
is restricted to local convergence due to the presence of non-convexity. In this work, we tackle
the training of GANs by rethinking the problem formulation from the mixed Nash Equilibria
(NE) perspective. Via a classical lifting trick, we
show that essentially all existing GAN objectives
can be relaxed into their mixed strategy forms,
whose global optima can be solved via sampling,
in contrast to the exclusive use of optimization
framework in previous work. We further propose
a mean-approximation sampling scheme, which
allows to systematically exploit methods for biaffine games to delineate novel, practical training
algorithms of GANs. Finally, we provide experimental evidence that our approach yields comparable or superior results to contemporary training
algorithms, and outperforms classical methods
such as SGD, Adam, and RMSProp.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al.,
2014) achieve the state-of-the-art for learning real-world
images (Brock et al., 2018; Karras et al., 2018), as well
as a number of applications including image translation
(Isola et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2017), superresolution imaging (Wang et al., 2015; Ledig et al., 2017),
pose editing (Pumarola et al., 2018b), and facial animation
(Pumarola et al., 2018a).
A major obstacle blocking their full impact in machine learning is its notoriously difficult training phase (Goodfellow,
1
LIONS, EPFL, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Ya-Ping
Hsieh <ya-ping.hsieh@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

2016). Indeed, the stochastic gradient descent (SGD), along
with its variants, remain the method of choice for training
GANs. In order to understand the training dynamics of
gradient-based algorithms, a popular approach is to cast the
training into a min-max program, and then invoke results
in the mathematical programming or algorithmic game theory literature, with the caveat that the theory applies almost
exclusively to convex-concave objectives.
Despite having inspired many novel algorithms, the major
deviations from theory met several limitations. On one hand,
in the absence of convexity, the theory is bound to focus
only on the local convergence. Even under such a strong
restriction, it is recently shown by Adolphs et al. (2018) that
there exist stable stationary points that attract gradient-based
algorithms, but that are not locally min-max, suggesting that
even the local theory can break down if one blindly applies
intuitions from convex optimization.
On the other hand, current approaches tend to tackle different issues on a case-by-case basis, rendering the solution
of one incompatible to another, and therefore restricting
their applicability in new problems. Furthermore, to our
knowledge, these theoretical insights do not translate into
rigorous convergence of the proposed algorithms, even under as strong of an assumption as that SGD can globally
optimize a single neural net.
The aim of this paper is to resolve the above issues by
making the following contributions:
1. We propose to study the mixed Nash Equilibria (NE) of
GANs, which are global optima of infinite-dimensional
bi-affine games. We show that, in principle, any existing GAN objective can be lifted into its mixed NE
formulation, thereby admitting the search for a globally
optimizing algorithm.
2. We demonstrate how one can consistently derive novel
algorithms for finding mixed NE of GANs, via tapping into the abundant literature for solving finitedimensional bi-affine games. We showcase this by
proving rigorous convergence results for simple extensions of two prox methods, namely the Mirror Descent (Nemirovsky & Yudin, 1983) and Mirror-Prox
(Nemirovski, 2004), under the empirically-supported
assumption that sampling succeeds for a single neural

