Causal Discovery and Forecasting in Nonstationary Environments with
State-Space Models

Biwei Huang 1 Kun Zhang 1 Mingming Gong 1 2 Clark Glymour 1

Abstract
In many scientific fields, such as economics and
neuroscience, we are often faced with nonstationary time series, and concerned with both finding causal relations and forecasting the values of
variables of interest, both of which are particularly challenging in such nonstationary environments. In this paper, we study causal discovery
and forecasting for nonstationary time series. By
exploiting a particular type of state-space model
to represent the processes, we show that nonstationarity helps to identify causal structure and that
forecasting naturally benefits from learned causal
knowledge. Specifically, we allow changes in
both causal strengths and noise variances in the
nonlinear state-space models, which, interestingly,
renders both the causal structure and model parameters identifiable. Given the causal model, we
treat forecasting as a problem in Bayesian inference in the causal model, which exploits the timevarying property of the data and adapts to new
observations in a principled manner. Experimental results on synthetic and real-world data sets
demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed methods.

1. Introduction
One of the fundamental problems in empirical sciences is
to make prediction for passively observed data (a task that
machine learning is often concerned with) or to make prediction under interventions. In order to make prediction under
interventions, one has to find and make use of causal relations. Discovering causal relationships from observational
data, known as causal discovery, has recently attracted much
attention. In many scientific fields, we are often faced with
1
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh 2 Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh. Correspondence to: Biwei Huang <biweih@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

nonstationary time series, and concerned with both finding
causal relations and forecasting the values of variables of
interest, both of which are particularly challenging in such
nonstationary environments.
Traditional methods of causal discovery usually focus on
independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) data or stationary processes, and assume that the underlying causal
model is fixed. Such methods include constraint-based methods (Spirtes et al., 1993), score-based methods (Chickering,
2003; Heckerman et al., 1995; Huang et al., 2018), and
functional causal model-based approaches (Shimizu et al.,
2006; Zhang & Chan, 2006; Hoyer et al., 2009; Zhang &
Hyvärinen, 2009). Specifically, constraint-based methods
and score-based methods recover the causal graph up to the
Markov equivalence class, within which some causal directions may not be identifiable. Presuming certain constraints
on the class of causal mechanisms, functional causal modelbased approaches exploit asymmetries between causal and
anti-causal directions.
Those traditional methods may not be practical in a number
of situations. The assumption of a fixed causal model may
not hold in practice, especially for time series, where the
underlying data generating processes may change over time.
For example, neural connectivity in the brain may change
over time or across different states. The influences between
macroeconomic variables may be affected by latent common factors, e.g., economic policies, which may change
across different time periods and contribute to nonstationarity of observed macroeconomic variables. If we directly
apply causal discovery methods which are designed for a
fixed causal model, they may give us misleading results, e.g.,
spurious edges and wrong causal directions; see e.g., Zhang
et al. (2017). A second issue is that, with functional causal
model-based approaches, there are cases where causal directions are not identifiable, such as the linear-Gaussian
case and the case with a general functional class. Hence,
this criterion for direction identification is not generally applicable (Zhang et al., 2015a). Therefore, it is beneficial
to investigate other asymmetric criteria for the purpose of
causal discovery.
Interestingly, several research papers have shown that nonstationarity contains useful information for causal discovery

