Hierarchical Decompositional Mixtures of Variational Autoencoders

Ping Liang Tan 1 2 Robert Peharz 1

Abstract
Variational autoencoders (VAEs) have received
considerable attention, since they allow us to learn
expressive neural density estimators effectively
and efficiently. However, learning and inference
in VAEs is still problematic due to the sensitive
interplay between the generative model and the
inference network. Since these problems become
generally more severe in high dimensions, we
propose a novel hierarchical mixture model over
low-dimensional VAE experts. Our model decomposes the overall learning problem into many
smaller problems, which are coordinated by the hierarchical mixture, represented by a sum-product
network. In experiments we show that our models
outperform classical VAEs on almost all of our experimental benchmarks. Moreover, we show that
our model is highly data efficient and degrades
very gracefully in extremely low data regimes.

1. Introduction
Accurately estimating the probability distribution of highdimensional data is a central and long standing goal in unsupervised learning. Given an accurate joint model over the
random variables of interest allows us to answer – in principle – any statistical question we might have about our data,
such as inferring (conditional) marginal distributions, computing expectations, imputing missing data, and sampling
new data instances.
Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling,
2014) provide a particularly flexible approach to density estimation.
The VAE model defines an infinite mixR
ture p(x | f (z; θ)) p(z) dz, where prior p(z) is typically
isotropic Gaussian, f is a neural network parametrized by
θ, and p(x | f (z; θ)) is some “simple” distribution, e.g. in1
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge,
UK 2 DSO National Laboratories, Singapore. Correspondence
to: Ping Liang Tan <plt28j@gmail.com>, Robert Peharz
<rp587@cam.ac.uk>.
th

Proceedings of the 36 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

SPN

z1

z1

z2

z2

...

zL

zL

x1

x1

x2

x2

...

xL

xL

Figure 1. Our proposed hierarchical decompositional mixture over
variational autoencoders, a divide-and-conquer scheme which ameliorates learning and inference in comparison to classical VAEs.
The overall variable scope x is split into L sub-scopes x1 , . . . xL ,
following the structure of a sum-product network (SPN). Each
sub-scope is modeled by an expert, represented by a variational
autoencoder (VAE), which constitute the leaves of the SPN. In
the generative process (depicted with solid lines), the SPN probabilistically selects a combination of VAE experts, each of which
generates its part of the scope. The inference process (depicted
with dashed lines) utilizes local inference networks for each VAE,
yielding local estimates for the evidence-lower-bound (ELBO).
The local estimates are fed into the SPN, yielding an ELBO estimate for the entire model (Theorem 2). See supplementary for an
extended version of this figure.

dependent Gaussian, Bernoulli, etc. Classically, this model
has been known as density network (MacKay, 1995), and inference was performed using Monte Carlo methods, which
do not scale well to large datasets. Kingma & Welling
(2014) improved the applicability of this model by using an
inference network to amortize the inference effort over data
instances (Gershman & Goodman, 2014), applying stochastic variational inference (SVI) for optimizing the evidence
lower bound (ELBO) (Paisley et al., 2012; Hoffman et al.,
2013), and employing the re-parametrization trick (Titsias
& Gredilla-Lázaro, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014) to reduce
the variance in gradient estimates of the ELBO.
However, inference and learning in VAEs are still problematic. For the one, the additional approximation introduced
by amortization is generally compensated by the generative
model, leading to deteriorated learning (Cremer et al., 2018).

