Provably efficient RL with Rich Observations via Latent State Decoding
Simon S. Du 1 Akshay Krishnamurthy 2 Nan Jiang 3 Alekh Agarwal 4 Miroslav Dudı́k 2 John Langford 2

Abstract
We study the exploration problem in episodic
MDPs with rich observations generated from a
small number of latent states. Under certain identifiability assumptions, we demonstrate how to
estimate a mapping from the observations to latent states inductively through a sequence of regression and clustering steps—where previously
decoded latent states provide labels for later regression problems—and use it to construct good
exploration policies. We provide finite-sample
guarantees on the quality of the learned state
decoding function and exploration policies, and
complement our theory with an empirical evaluation on a class of hard exploration problems. Our
method exponentially improves over Q-learning
with naı̈ve exploration, even when Q-learning has
cheating access to latent states.

1. Introduction
We study reinforcement learning (RL) in episodic environments with rich observations, such as images and texts.
While many modern empirical RL algorithms are designed
to handle such settings (see, e.g., Mnih et al., 2015), only few
works study how to explore well in these environments (Ostrovski et al., 2017; Osband et al., 2016) and the sample efficiency of these techniques is not theoretically understood.
From a theoretical perspective, strategic exploration algorithms for provably sample-efficient RL have long existed in
the classical tabular setting (Kearns & Singh, 2002; Brafman
& Tennenholtz, 2002). However, these methods are difficult
to adapt to rich observation spaces, because they all require
a number of interactions polynomial in the number of observed states, and, without additional structural assumptions,
such a dependency is unavoidable (see, e.g., Jaksch et al.,
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Microsoft Research, New
York 3 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 4 Microsoft
Research, Redmond.
Correspondence to: Simon S. Du
<ssdu@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

2010; Lattimore & Hutter, 2012). Consequently, treating
the observations directly as unique states makes this class
of methods unsuitable for most settings of practical interest.
In order to avoid the dependency on the observation space,
one must exploit some inherent structure in the problem.
The recent line of work on contextual decision processes (Krishnamurthy et al., 2016; Jiang et al., 2017; Dann et al.,
2018) identified certain low-rank structures that enable exploration algorithms with sample complexity polynomial in
the rank parameter. Such low-rank structure is crucial to circumventing information-theoretic hardness, and is typically
found in problems where complex observations are emitted
from a small number of latent states. Unlike tabular approaches, which require the number of states to be small and
observed, these works are able to handle settings where the
observation spaces are uncountably large or continuous and
the underlying states never observed during learning. They
achieve this by exploiting the low-rank structure implicitly, operating only in the observation space. The resulting
algorithms are sample-efficient, but either provably computationally intractable, or practically quite cumbersome even
under strong assumptions (Dann et al., 2018).
In this work, we take an alternative route: we recover the
latent-state structure explicitly by learning a decoding function (from a large set of candidates) that maps a rich observation to the corresponding latent state; note that if such a
function is learned perfectly, the rich-observation problem is
reduced to a tabular problem where exploration is tractable.
We show that our algorithms are:
Provably sample-efficient: Under certain identifiability assumptions, we recover a mapping from the observations
to underlying latent states as well as a good exploration
policy using a number of samples which is polynomial in
the number of latent states, horizon and the complexity of
the decoding function class with no explicit dependence on
the observation space size. Thus we significantly generalize
beyond the works of Dann et al. (2018) who require deterministic dynamics and Azizzadenesheli et al. (2016a) whose
guarantees scale with the observation space size.
Computationally practical: Unlike many prior works in this
vein, our algorithm is easy to implement and substantially
outperforms naı̈ve exploration in experiments, even when
the baselines have cheating access to the latent states.

