On Variational Bounds of Mutual Information
Ben Poole 1 Sherjil Ozair 1 2 Aäron van den Oord 3 Alexander A. Alemi 1 George Tucker 1

Abstract
Estimating and optimizing Mutual Information (MI) is core to many problems in machine
learning; however, bounding MI in high dimensions is challenging. To establish tractable and
scalable objectives, recent work has turned to variational bounds parameterized by neural networks,
but the relationships and tradeoffs between these
bounds remains unclear. In this work, we unify
these recent developments in a single framework.
We find that the existing variational lower bounds
degrade when the MI is large, exhibiting either
high bias or high variance. To address this problem, we introduce a continuum of lower bounds
that encompasses previous bounds and flexibly
trades off bias and variance. On high-dimensional,
controlled problems, we empirically characterize
the bias and variance of the bounds and their gradients and demonstrate the effectiveness of our new
bounds for estimation and representation learning.

1. Introduction
Estimating the relationship between pairs of variables is a
fundamental problem in science and engineering. Quantifying the degree of the relationship requires a metric
that captures a notion of dependency. Here, we focus
on mutual information (MI), denoted I(X; Y ), which is
a reparameterization-invariant measure of dependency:




p(x|y)
p(y|x)
I(X; Y ) = Ep(x,y) log
= Ep(x,y) log
.
p(x)
p(y)
Mutual information estimators are used in computational
neuroscience (Palmer et al., 2015), Bayesian optimal experimental design (Ryan et al., 2016; Foster et al., 2018), understanding neural networks (Tishby et al., 2000; Tishby &
Zaslavsky, 2015; Gabrié et al., 2018), and more. In practice,
estimating MI is challenging as we typically have access to
1
Google Brain 2 MILA 3 DeepMind. Correspondence to: Ben
Poole <pooleb@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Schematic of variational bounds of mutual information
presented in this paper. Nodes are colored based on their tractability for estimation and optimization: green bounds can be used
for both, yellow for optimization but not estimation, and red for
neither. Children are derived from their parents by introducing
new approximations or assumptions.

samples but not the underlying distributions (Paninski, 2003;
McAllester & Stratos, 2018). Existing sample-based estimators are brittle, with the hyperparameters of the estimator
impacting the scientific conclusions (Saxe et al., 2018).
Beyond estimation, many methods use upper bounds on
MI to limit the capacity or contents of representations. For
example in the information bottleneck method (Tishby et al.,
2000; Alemi et al., 2016), the representation is optimized to
solve a downstream task while being constrained to contain
as little information as possible about the input. These
techniques have proven useful in a variety of domains, from
restricting the capacity of discriminators in GANs (Peng
et al., 2018) to preventing representations from containing
information about protected attributes (Moyer et al., 2018).
Lastly, there are a growing set of methods in representation
learning that maximize the mutual information between a
learned representation and an aspect of the data. Specifically, given samples from a data distribution, x ∼ p(x),
the goal is to learn a stochastic representation of the data
pθ (y|x) that has maximal MI with X subject to constraints
on the mapping (e.g. Bell & Sejnowski, 1995; Krause et al.,
2010; Hu et al., 2017; van den Oord et al., 2018; Hjelm
et al., 2018; Alemi et al., 2017). To maximize MI, we can
compute gradients of a lower bound on MI with respect to
the parameters θ of the stochastic encoder pθ (y|x), which
may not require directly estimating MI.

