Neural Inverse Knitting: From Images to Manufacturing Instructions

Alexandre Kaspar * 1 Tae-Hyun Oh * 1 Liane Makatura 1 Petr Kellnhofer 1 Wojciech Matusik 1

Abstract
Motivated by the recent potential of mass customization brought by whole-garment knitting
machines, we introduce the new problem of automatic machine instruction generation using a single image of the desired physical product, which
we apply to machine knitting. We propose to
tackle this problem by directly learning to synthesize regular machine instructions from real images. We create a cured dataset of real samples
with their instruction counterpart and propose to
use synthetic images to augment it in a novel way.
We theoretically motivate our data mixing framework and show empirical results suggesting that
making real images look more synthetic is beneficial in our problem setup.

1. Introduction
Advanced manufacturing methods that allow completely
automated production of customized objects and parts are
transforming today’s economy. One prime example of these
methods is whole-garment knitting that is used to massproduce many common textile products (e.g., socks, gloves,
sportswear, shoes, car seats, etc.). During its operation, a
whole garment knitting machine executes a custom lowlevel program to manufacture each textile object. Typically,
generating the code corresponding to each design is a difficult and tedious process requiring expert knowledge. A few
recent works have tackled the digital design workflow for
whole-garment knitting (Underwood, 2009; McCann et al.,
2016; Narayanan et al., 2018; Yuksel et al., 2012; Wu et al.,
2018a;b). None of these works, however, provide an easy
way to specify patterns.
The importance of patterning in textile design is evident
Project page: http://deepknitting.csail.mit.edu
Equal contribution 1 Computer Science & Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL), Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT), Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Alexandre
Kaspar <akaspar@mit.edu>.

*

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Illustration of our inverse problem and solution. An instruction map (top-left) is knitted into a physical artifact (top-right).
We propose a machine learning pipeline to solve the inverse problem by leveraging synthetic renderings of the instruction maps.

in pattern books (Donohue, 2015; Shida & Roehm, 2017),
which contain instructions for hundreds of decorative designs that have been manually crafted and tested over time.
Unfortunately, these pattern libraries are geared towards
hand-knitting and they are often incompatible with the operations of industrial knitting machines. Even in cases when a
direct translation is possible, the patterns are only specified
in stitch-level operation sequences. Hence, they would have
to be manually specified and tested for each machine type
similarly to low-level assembly programming.
In this work, we propose an inverse design method using
deep learning to automate the pattern design for industrial
knitting machines. In our inverse knitting, machine instructions are directly inferred from an image of the fabric pattern.
To this end, we collect a paired dataset of knitting instruction
maps and corresponding images of knitted patterns. We augment this dataset with synthetically generated pairs obtained
using a knitting simulator (Shima Seiki). This combined
dataset facilitates a learning-based approach. More specifically, we propose a theoretically inspired image-to-program
map synthesis method that leverages both real and simulated
data for learning. Our contributions include:

