CURIOUS: Intrinsically Motivated Modular
Multi-Goal Reinforcement Learning

Cédric Colas 1 Pierre Fournier 2 Olivier Sigaud 2 Mohamed Chetouani 2 Pierre-Yves Oudeyer 1

Abstract
In open-ended environments, autonomous learning agents must set their own goals and build their
own curriculum through an intrinsically motivated
exploration. They may consider a large diversity
of goals, aiming to discover what is controllable
in their environments, and what is not. Because
some goals might prove easy and some impossible, agents must actively select which goal to
practice at any moment, to maximize their overall
mastery on the set of learnable goals. This paper
proposes CURIOUS, an algorithm that leverages
1) a modular Universal Value Function Approximator with hindsight learning to achieve a diversity of goals of different kinds within a unique
policy and 2) an automated curriculum learning
mechanism that biases the attention of the agent
towards goals maximizing the absolute learning
progress. Agents focus sequentially on goals of
increasing complexity, and focus back on goals
that are being forgotten. Experiments conducted
in a new modular-goal robotic environment show
the resulting developmental self-organization of a
learning curriculum, and demonstrate properties
of robustness to distracting goals, forgetting and
changes in body properties.

1. Introduction
In autonomous continual learning, agents aim to discover
repertoires of skills in an ever-changing open-ended world,
and without external rewards. In such realistic environments,
the agent must be endowed with intrinsic motivations to
explore the diversity of ways in which it can control its
environment. One important form of intrinsic motivation
system is the ability to autonomously set one’s own goals
1

Flowers Team, Inria and Ensta ParisTech, FR. 2 ISIR, Sorbonne Univ., Paris, FR.. Correspondence to: Cédric Colas
<cedric.colas@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Figure 1. The Modular Goal Fetch Arm environment. An intrinsically motivated agent can set its own (modular) goals (Reach,
Push, Pick and Place, Stack), with multiple objects and distractors.

and self-organize one’s own curriculum. This challenge can
be tackled within the framework of Intrinsically Motivated
Goal Exploration Processes (IMGEP) (Baranes & Oudeyer,
2013; Forestier et al., 2017), leveraging computational models of autonomous development in human infants.
Modular goal representation. In a same environment,
an agent might want to ‘put the cube in position x’ or
to ‘reach position y’ for any x or y. Here, describing the full goal space requires modular goal representations. Goals are organized by modules, where module
refers to the pair of a reward function and a goal space
Mi = (RMi ,gi ∈GMi , GMi ). The reward function describes
a set of constraints that must be satisfied by the agent’s state
(e.g. Reach), given a continuous parameter (e.g. gi = y)
evolving in the associated goal space (e.g. 3D Euclidean
space), see Fig. 1.
While flat multi-goal problems with continuous (Schaul
et al., 2015; Andrychowicz et al., 2017; Plappert et al., 2018)
or discrete goals (Mankowitz et al., 2018; Riedmiller et al.,
2018) have been explored in the past, only few works tackle
the problem of modular multi-goal learning (Forestier &
Oudeyer, 2016), none in an RL setting. Here, we present
CURIOUS 1 , a modular multi-goal reinforcement learning
(RL) algorithm that uses intrinsic motivations to efficiently
learn a continuous set of diverse goals using modular goal
representations. To build an algorithm able to learn modular
goals, one must answer the following questions: 1) How
to choose the action policy architecture? 2) How to select
1
CURIOUS stands for Continual Universal Reinforcement learning with Intrinsically mOtivated sUbstitutionS.

