Distributed, Egocentric Representations of Graphs for
Detecting Critical Structures
Ruo-Chun Tzeng

1

Shan-Hung Wu

Abstract
We study the problem of detecting critical structures using a graph embedding model. Existing
graph embedding models lack the ability to precisely detect critical structures that are specific to
a task at the global scale. In this paper, we propose a novel graph embedding model, called the
Ego-CNNs, that employs the ego-convolutions
convolutions at each layer and stacks up layers
using an ego-centric way to detects precise critical structures efficiently. An Ego-CNN can be
jointly trained with a task model and help explain/discover knowledge for the task. We conduct extensive experiments and the results show
that Ego-CNNs (1) can lead to comparable task
performance as the state-of-the-art graph embedding models, (2) works nicely with CNN visualization techniques to illustrate the detected structures, and (3) is efficient and can incorporate with
scale-free priors, which commonly occurs in social network datasets, to further improve the training efficiency.

1. Introduction
A graph embedding algorithm converts graphs from structural representation to fixed-dimensional vectors. It is typically trained in a unsupervised manner for general learning
tasks but recently, deep learning approaches (Bruna et al.,
2013; Kipf & Welling, 2017; Atwood & Towsley, 2016; Duvenaud et al., 2015; Li et al., 2016; Pham et al., 2017; Gilmer
et al., 2017; Niepert et al., 2016) are trained in a supervised
manner and show superior results against unsupervised approaches on many tasks such as node classification and
graph classification.
While these algorithms lead to good performance on tasks,
1

Microsoft Inc. 2 CS Department, National Tsing Hua
University, Taiwan.
Correspondence to: Shan-Hung Wu
<shwu@cs.nthu.edu.tw>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Alkane

Alcohol

...

...

(a)

Alkane

Alcohol

...

...

2

2­methylnonane
(asymmetric isomer)

2­methylnonane
(asymmetric)

5­methylnoane
(symmetric isomer)

5­methylnoane
(symmetric)
...

...

...

(b)

Figure 1. (a) The OH function group is the critical structure to tell
Alcohols from Alkanes. (b) The symmetry hydrocarbon group (at
two sides ...of the methyl ...
branch)...is the critical structure to discriminate between symmetric and asymmetric isomer of methylnonane.

what valuable information can be jointly learned from the
graph embedding is less discussed. In this paper, we aim
to develop a graph embedding model that jointly discovers
the critical structures, i.e., partial graphs that are dominant
to a prediction in the task (e.g., graph classification) where
the embedding is applied to. This helps people running the
task understand the reason behind the task predictions, and
is particularly useful in certain domains such as the bioinformatics, cheminformatics, and social network analysis,
where valuable knowledge may be discovered by investigating the found critical structures.
However, identifying critical structures is a challenging
task. The first challenge is that critical structures are taskspecific—the shape and location of critical structures may
vary from task to task. This means that the graph embedding
model should be learned together with the task model (e.g., a
classifier or regressor). The second challenge is that model
needs to be able to detect precise critical structures. For
example, to discriminant Alcohols from Alkanes (Figure
1(a)), one should check if there exists an OH-base and if
the OH-base is at the end of the compound. To be helpful,
a model has to identify the exact OH-base rather than its
approximation in any form. Third, the critical structures
need to be found at the global-scale. For example, in the task
aiming to identify if a methyl-nonane is symmetric or not
(Figure 1(b)), one must check the entire graph to know if the
methyl is branched at the center position of the long carbon
chain. In this task, the critical structure is the symmetric
hydrocarbon at the two sides of the methyl branch, which
can only be found at the global-scale. Unfortunately, finding
out all matches of substructures in a graph is known as

