Improving Neural Network Quantization without Retraining using
Outlier Channel Splitting

Ritchie Zhao 1 Yuwei Hu 1 Jordan Dotzel 1 Christopher De Sa 1 Zhiru Zhang 1

Abstract
Quantization can improve the execution latency
and energy efficiency of neural networks on both
commodity GPUs and specialized accelerators.
The majority of existing literature focuses on training quantized DNNs, while this work examines
the less-studied topic of quantizing a floatingpoint model without (re)training. DNN weights
and activations follow a bell-shaped distribution
post-training, while practical hardware uses a linear quantization grid. This leads to challenges
in dealing with outliers in the distribution. Prior
work has addressed this by clipping the outliers
or using specialized hardware. In this work, we
propose outlier channel splitting (OCS), which duplicates channels containing outliers, then halves
the channel values. The network remains functionally identical, but affected outliers are moved
toward the center of the distribution. OCS requires no additional training and works on commodity hardware. Experimental evaluation on
ImageNet classification and language modeling
shows that OCS can outperform state-of-the-art
clipping techniques with only minor overhead.

1. Introduction
Over the past few years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have
become the state-of-the-art approach for many large-scale
computer vision and sequence modeling problems. Deep
convolutional networks dominate the leaderboards for popular image classification and object detection datasets such
as ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) and Microsoft COCO (Lin
et al., 2014). However, the significant compute and memory
requirements of running DNNs impedes the adoption of
neural nets in application domains such as edge computing
or latency-critical services (Xu et al., 2018). One approach
1
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14850, USA. Correspondence to: Ritchie Zhao <rz252@cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

to reducing the costs of DNN execution is to quantize the
floating-point weights and activations into low-precision
fixed-point numbers. This reduces the model size as well as
the complexity of multiply-accumulate (MAC) operations
in hardware, enabling better throughput and energy efficiency. DNN quantization is an active area of research (Wu
et al., 2018; Jacob et al., 2018; Choi et al., 2018b; Banner
et al., 2018) and sees deployment in commercial systems
such as Google’s TPU (Jouppi et al., 2017), NVIDIA’s TensorRT (Migacz, 2017), and Microsoft’s Brainwave (Chung
et al., 2018).
The majority of literature on DNN quantization involves
training — either from scratch (Courbariaux et al., 2015;
Wu et al., 2018; Jacob et al., 2018) or retraining/fine-tuning
from a floating-point model (Han et al., 2016; Zhou et al.,
2017). Although such techniques are valuable, there are
important real-world scenarios in which (re)training is not
applicable. Consider an ML service provider (e.g. Amazon, Microsoft, Google) which wants to run a black-box
floating-point client model in low-precision. The service
provider does not have the training data, and the client may
not be able to train for quantization because: (1) it lacks
the expertise or manpower; (2) it is using an off-the-shelf
or legacy model for which training data is not available.
The importance of post-training quantization can be seen
from NVIDIA’s TensorRT, a product specifically designed
to perform 8-bit integer quantization without (re)training.
This paper focuses on post-training DNN quantization.
DNN weights and activations follow a bell-shaped distribution after training. However, commodity hardware uses a
linear number representation with evenly-spaced grid points.
The naı̈ve approach is to linearly map the entire range of
the distribution to the range of the quantization grid (Figure 1(a)). Here the grid points extend to the maximum value
in the distribution (Hubara et al., 2017). Clearly, this method
over-provisions grid points for the rarely-occurring outliers.
A better approach is to make the grid narrower than the
distribution — this is known as clipping, as it is equivalent
to thresholding the outliers before applying linear quantization (Figure 1(b)). Empirically, clipping can improve
the accuracy of quantized DNNs, and many techniques exist to choose the optimal clip threshold (Sung et al., 2015;

