Competing Against Equilibria in Zero-Sum Games with Evolving Payoffs

Adrian Rivera Cardoso 1 Jacob Abernethy 2 He Wang 1 Huan Xu 1

Abstract
We study the problem of repeated play in a zerosum game in which the payoff matrix may change,
in a possibly adversarial fashion, on each round;
we call these Online Matrix Games. Finding the
Nash Equilibrium (NE) of a two player zero-sum
game is core to many problems in statistics, optimization, and economics, and for a fixed game
matrix this can be easily reduced to solving a linear program. But when the payoff matrix evolves
over time our goal is to find a sequential algorithm that can compete with, in a certain sense,
the NE of the long-term-averaged payoff matrix.
We design an algorithm with small NE regret–that
is, we ensure that the long-term payoff of both
players is close to minimax optimum in hindsight.
Our algorithm achieves near-optimal dependence
with respect to the number of rounds and depends
poly-logarithmically on the number of available
actions of the players. Additionally, we show
that the naive reduction, where each player simply minimizes its own regret, fails to achieve the
stated objective regardless of which algorithm is
used. Lastly, we consider the so-called bandit setting, where the feedback is significantly limited,
and we provide an algorithm with small NE regret
using one-point estimates of each payoff matrix.

1. Introduction
We consider a problem in which two players interact in a
zero-sum game repeatedly. The payoff matrix of the game is
unknown to the players a priori, and may change arbitrarily
on each round. Our objective is to find competitive strategies
that can achieve the Nash equilibrium of the game with
the average payoffs in the long term. This problem is a
significant extension of the classical learning setting in zero-

sum games, where the underlying payoff matrix is often
assumed to be fixed or i.i.d. In contrast, we allow the payoff
matrix to evolve arbitrarily in each round, and can even be
selected in a possibly adversarial fashion.
Zero-sum games (Von Neumann, 1928; Morgenstern &
Von Neumann, 1953) are ubiquitous in economics and central to understanding Linear Programming duality (Hazan,
2016; Adler, 2013), convex optimization (Abernethy &
Wang, 2017; Abernethy et al., 2018), robust optimization
(Ben-Tal et al., 2009), and Differential Privacy (Dwork et al.,
2014). The task of finding the Nash equilibrium of a zerosum game is also connected to several machine learning
problems such as: Markov Games (Littman, 1994), Boosting (Freund & Schapire, 1996), Multiarmed Bandits with
Knapsacks (Badanidiyuru et al., 2013; Immorlica et al.,
2018) and dynamic pricing problems (Ferreira et al., 2018).
We formally define the problem setting in Section 1.1. We
then highlight the main contributions of this paper in Section 1.2 and discuss related works in Section 1.3.
1.1. Problem Formulation: Online Matrix Games
We start by reviewing the definition of classical two-player
zero-sum games. Suppose player 1 has d1 possible actions
and player 2 has d2 possible actions. The payoffs for both
players are determined by a matrix A ∈ Rd1 ×d2 , with Ai,j
corresponding to the loss of player 1 and the reward of player
2 when they choose to play actions (i, j) ∈ [d1 ] × [d2 ].1
We allow the players to use mixed strategies – each mixed
strategy is represented by a probability distribution over
their actions. More specifically, when Player 1 uses a mixed
strategy x ∈ ∆d1 and Player 2 uses a mixed strategy y ∈
∆d2 , the expected payoff is x> Ay.2 Throughout the paper,
we refer to the static zero-sum game as a matrix game (MG),
because the players’ payoffs are a bilinear function encoded
by the matrix A. A Nash equilibrium of this game is defined
as any pair of (possibly) mixed strategies (x∗ , y ∗ ) such that
(x∗ )> Ay ≤ (x∗ )> Ay ∗ ≤ x> Ay ∗

1

Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia
Institute of Technology, GA, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, Georgia Institute of Technology, GA, USA. Correspondence
to: Adrian Rivera Cardoso <adrian.riv(at)gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

for any x ∈ ∆d1 , y ∈ ∆d2 . It is well known that every MG
has at least one Nash equilibrium (Morgenstern & Von Neu1

Throughout, [n] , {1, ..., n} for any positive integer n.
Here, ∆d represents the unit simplex in dimension d: ∆d ,
{v ∈ Rd : kvk1 = 1, v ≥ 0}.
2

