Coresets for Ordered Weighted Clustering

Vladimir Braverman 1 Shaofeng H.-C. Jiang 2 Robert Krauthgamer 2 Xuan Wu 1

Abstract
We design coresets for O RDERED k-M EDIAN,
a generalization of classical clustering problems
such as k-M EDIAN and k-C ENTER. Its objective
function is defined via the Ordered Weighted Averaging (OWA) paradigm of Yager (1988), where
data points are weighted according to a predefined
weight vector, but in order of their contribution to
the objective (distance from the centers). A powerful data-reduction technique, called a coreset,
is to summarize a point set X in Rd into a small
(weighted) point set X 0 , such that for every set of
k potential centers, the objective value of the coreset X 0 approximates that of X within factor 1 ± .
When there are multiple objectives (weights), the
above standard coreset might have limited usefulness, whereas in a simultaneous coreset, the above
approximation holds for all weights (in addition
to all centers). Our main result is a construction of
a simultaneous coreset of size O,d (k 2 log2 |X|)
for O RDERED k-M EDIAN. We validate our algorithm on a real geographical data set, and we
find our coreset leads to a massive speedup of
clustering computations, while maintaining high
accuracy for a range of weights.

1. Introduction
We study data reduction (namely, coresets) for a class of
clustering problems, called ordered weighted clustering,
which generalizes the classical k-C ENTER and k-M EDIAN
problems. In these clustering problems, the objective function is computed by ordering the n data points by their
distance to their closest center, then taking a weighted sum

of these distances, using predefined weights v1 ≥ · · · ≥
vn ≥ 0. These clustering problems can interpolate between
k-C ENTER (the special case where v1 = 1 is the only nonzero weight) and k-M EDIAN (unit weights vi = 1 for all
i), and therefore offer flexibility in prioritizing points with
large service cost, which may be important for applications
like Pareto (multi-objective) optimization and fair clustering.
In general, fairness in machine learning is seeing a surge
in interest, and is well-known to have many facets. In the
context of clustering, previous work such as the fairlets approach of Chierichetti et al. (2017), has addressed protected
classes, which must be identified in advance. In contrast,
ordered weighted clustering addresses fairness towards remote points (which can be underprivileged communities),
without specifying them in advance. This is starkly different
from many application domains, where remote points are
considered as outliers (to be ignored) or anomalies (to be
detected), see e.g., the well-known survey by Chandola et al.
(2009).
Formally, we study two clustering problems in Euclidean
space Rd . In both of them, the input is n data points X ⊂
Rd (and k ∈ [n]), and the goal is to find k centers C ⊂ Rd
that minimize a certain objective cost(X, C). In O RDERED
k-M EDIAN, there is a predefined non-decreasing weight
vector v ∈ Rn+ , and the data points X = {x1 , . . . , xn } are
ordered by their distance to the centers, i.e., d(x1 , C) ≥
· · · ≥ d(xn , C), to define the objective
n
X
costv (X, C) :=
vi · d(xi , C),
(1)
i=1

Authors are listed in alphabetical order.
Full ver1
sion: (Braverman et al., 2019).
Johns Hopkins University, USA. 2 Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel.
Correspondence to: Vladimir Braverman <vova@cs.jhu.edu>,
Shaofeng H.-C. Jiang <shaofeng.jiang@weizmann.ac.il>, Robert
Krauthgamer <robert.krauthgamer@weizmann.ac.il>, Xuan Wu
<xwu71@jhu.edu>.

where throughout d(·, ·) refers to `2 distance, extended to sets by the usual convention dist(x, C) :=
minc∈C dist(x, c). This objective follows the Ordered
Weighted Averaging (OWA) paradigm of Yager (1988), in
which data points are weighted according to a predefined
weight vector, but in order of their contribution to the objective. The p-C ENTRUM problem is the special case where
the first p weights equal 1 and the rest are 0, denoting its objective function by costp (X, C). Observe that this problem
already includes both k-C ENTER (as p = 1) and k-M EDIAN
(as p = n).

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

A powerful data-reduction technique, called a coreset, is to
summarize a large point set X into a (small) multiset X 0 ,
that approximates well a given cost function (our clustering

