On the Universality of Invariant Networks

Haggai Maron 1 Ethan Fetaya 2 3 Nimrod Segol 1 Yaron Lipman 1

Abstract
Constraining linear layers in neural networks to
respect symmetry transformations from a group
G is a common design principle for invariant networks that has found many applications in machine learning. In this paper, we consider a fundamental question that has received little attention to date: Can these networks approximate any
(continuous) invariant function? We tackle the
rather general case where G ≤ Sn (an arbitrary
subgroup of the symmetric group) that acts on
Rn by permuting coordinates. This setting includes several recent popular invariant networks.
We present two main results: First, G-invariant
networks are universal if high-order tensors are
allowed. Second, there are groups G for which
higher-order tensors are unavoidable for obtaining
universality. G-invariant networks consisting of
only first-order tensors are of special interest due
to their practical value. We conclude the paper by
proving a necessary condition for the universality of G-invariant networks that incorporate only
first-order tensors.

1. Introduction
The basic paradigm of deep neural networks is repeatedly
composing ”layers” of linear functions with non-linear, entrywise activation functions to create effective predictive
models for learning tasks of interest.
When trying to learn a function (task) f that is known to be
invariant to some group of symmetries G (i.e., G-invariant
function) it is common to use linear layers that respect
this symmetry, namely, invariant and/or equivariant linear
layers. Networks with invariant/equivariant linear layers
1

Department of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel 2 Department
of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
3
Vector Institute. Correspondence to: Haggai Maron <haggai.maron@weizmann.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

with respect to some group G will be referred here as Ginvariant networks.
A fundamental question in learning theory is that of approximation or universality (Cybenko, 1989; Hornik, 1991). In
the invariant case: Can a G-invariant network approximate
an arbitrary continuous G-invariant function?
The goal of this paper is to address this question for all finite
permutation groups G ≤ Sn , where Sn is the symmetric
group acting on [n] = {1, 2, . . . , n}. Note that this is a
fairly general setting that contains many useful examples
(detailed below).
The archetypal example of G-invariant networks is Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) (LeCun et al., 1989;
Krizhevsky et al., 2012) that restrict their linear layers to
convolutions in order to learn image tasks that are translation
invariant or equivariant 1 .
In recent years researchers are considering other types of
data and/or symmetries and consequently new G-invariant
networks have emerged. Tasks involving point clouds or
sets are in general invariant to the order of the input and
therefore permutation invariance/equivariance was developed (Qi et al., 2017; Zaheer et al., 2017). Learning tasks
involving interaction between different sets, where the input
data is tabular, require dealing with different permutations
acting independently on each set (Hartford et al., 2018).
Tasks involving graphs and hyper-graphs lead to symmetries defined by tensor products of permutations (Kondor
et al., 2018; Maron et al., 2019). A general treatment of
invariance/equivariance to finite subgroups of the symmetric
group is discussed in (Ravanbakhsh et al., 2017); infinite
symmetries are discussed in general in (Kondor & Trivedi,
2018) as well as in (Cohen & Welling, 2016a;b; Cohen et al.,
2018; Weiler et al., 2018).
Among these examples, universality is known for pointclouds networks and sets networks (Qi et al., 2017; Zaheer
et al., 2017), as well as networks invariant to finite translation groups (e.g., cyclic convolutional neural networks)
(Yarotsky, 2018). However, universality is not known for
tabular and multi-set networks (Hartford et al., 2018), graph
1
It is common to use convolutional layers without cyclic
padding which implies that these networks are not precisely translation invariant.

