SWALP: Stochastic Weight Averaging in Low-Precision Training

Guandao Yang 1 Tianyi Zhang 1 Polina Kirichenko 1 Junwen Bai 1
Andrew Gordon Wilson 1 Christopher De Sa 1

Abstract
Low precision operations can provide scalability, memory savings, portability, and energy efficiency. This paper proposes SWALP, an approach to low precision training that averages lowprecision SGD iterates with a modified learning
rate schedule. SWALP is easy to implement and
can match the performance of full-precision SGD
even with all numbers quantized down to 8 bits,
including the gradient accumulators. Additionally,
we show that SWALP converges arbitrarily close
to the optimal solution for quadratic objectives,
and to a noise ball asymptotically smaller than
low precision SGD in strongly convex settings.

1. Introduction
Training deep neural networks (DNNs) usually requires a
large amount of computational time and power. As model
sizes grow larger, training DNNs more efficiently and with
less memory becomes increasingly important. This is especially the case when training on a special-purpose hardware
accelerator; such ML accelerators are in development and
used in industry (Jouppi et al., 2017; Burger, 2017). Many
ML accelerators have limited on-chip memory, and many
ML applications are memory bounded (Jouppi et al., 2017).
It is desirable to fit numbers that are frequently used during
the training process into the on-chip memory. One of the
useful techniques for doing this is low-precision computation, since using fewer bits to represent numbers reduces
both memory consumption and computational cost.
Training a DNN in low-precision usually results in worse
performance compared to training in full precision. Many
techniques have been proposed to reduce this performance
gap (Zhou et al., 2016; Wu et al., 2018; Banner et al., 2018;
Wang et al., 2018). One useful method is to compute forward and backward propagation with low-precision weights
1
Cornell University. Correspondence to: Guandao Yang
<gy46@cornell.edu>, Tianyi Zhang <tz58@cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

and accumulate gradient information in higher precision
gradient accumulators (Courbariaux et al., 2015; Wu et al.,
2018; Wang et al., 2018). Recently, Wang et al. (2018)
showed that one could eliminate the performance gap between low-precision and high-precision training by quantizing all numbers except the gradient accumulator to 8 bits
without changing the network structure, establishing the
state-of-the-art result in low-precision training. Since gradient accumulators are frequently updated during training,
it would be desirable to also represent and store them in
low-precision (e.g. 8 bits). In this paper, we will focus on
the setting where all numbers including the gradient accumulators are represented in low precision during training.
Independently from low-precision computation, stochastic
weight averaging (SWA) (Izmailov et al., 2018a) has been
recently proposed for improved generalization in deep learning. SWA takes an average of SGD iterates with a modified
learning rate schedule and has been shown to lead to wider
optima (Izmailov et al., 2018a). Keskar et al. (2016) also
connect the width of the optimum and generalization performance. A wider optimum is especially relevant in the
context of low-precision training as it is more likely to contain high-accuracy low-precision solutions. Izmailov et al.
(2018a) also observed that SWA works well with a relatively
high learning rate and can tolerate additional noise during
training. Low-precision training, on the other hand, produces extra quantization noise during training and tends to
underperform when the learning rate is low. Moreover, by
averaging, one can combine weights that have been rounded
up with those that been rounded down during quantization.
For these reasons, we hypothesize that SWA can boost the
performance of low-precision training and that performance
improvement is more significant than in the case of SWA
applied to full-precision training.
In this paper, we propose a principled approach using
stochastic weight averaging while quantizing all numbers
including the gradient accumulator and the velocity vectors during training. We prove that for quadratic objectives
SWALP can converge to the optimal solution as well as to a
smaller asymptotic noise ball than low-precision SGD for
strongly convex objectives. Figure 1 illustrates the intuition
behind SWALP. A quantized grid is only able to represent
certain suboptimal solutions. By averaging we find centred

