The Information-Theoretic Value of Unlabeled Data in Semi-Supervised
Learning

Alexander Golovnev 1 Dávid Pál 2 Balázs Szörényi 2

Abstract
We quantify the separation between the numbers
of labeled examples required to learn in two settings: Settings with and without the knowledge
of the distribution of the unlabeled data. More
specifically, we prove a separation by Θ(log n)
multiplicative factor for the class of projections
over the Boolean hypercube of dimension n. We
prove that there is no separation for the class
of all functions on domain of any size. Learning with the knowledge of the distribution (a.k.a.
fixed-distribution learning) can be viewed as an
idealized scenario of semi-supervised learning
where the number of unlabeled data points is so
great that the unlabeled distribution is known exactly. For this reason, we call the separation the
value of unlabeled data.

1. Introduction
Hanneke (2016) showed that for any class C of VapnikChervonenkis dimension d there exists an algorithm that
-learns anytarget function
from C under any distribu
d+log(1/δ)
labeled examples with probabiltion from O

ity at least 1 − δ. For this paper, it is important to stress
that Hanneke’s algorithm does not receive the distribution
of unlabeled data as input. On the other hand, Benedek
& Itai (1991) showed that for any class C and any distribution there exists an algorithm that
 -learns any tarlog N/2 +log(1/δ)
get from C from O
labeled examples

with probability at least 1 − δ where N/2 is the size of
an 2 -cover of C with respect to the disagreement metric
d(f, g) = Pr[f (x) 6= g(x)]. Here, it is important to note
that Benedek and Itai construct for each distribution a separate algorithm. In other words, they construct a family
1

Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 Yahoo Research, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Dávid Pál
<davidko.pal@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

of algorithms indexed by the (uncountably many) distributions over the domain. Alternatively, we can think of
Benedek-Itai’s family of algorithms as a single algorithm
that receives the distribution as an input. It is known that
N = O(1/)O(d) ; see Dudley (1978). Thus, ignoring
log(1/) factor, Benedek-Itai bound is never worse than
Hanneke’s bound.
As we already mentioned, Benedek-Itai’s algorithm receives as input the distribution of unlabeled data. The algorithm uses it to construct an 2 -cover. Unsurprisingly,
there exist distributions which have a small 2 -cover and
thus sample complexity of Benedek-Itai’s algorithm on
such distributions is significantly lower then the Hanneke’s
bound. For instance, a distribution concentrated on a single
point has an 2 -cover of size 2 for any positive .
However, an algorithm does not need to receive the unlabeled distribution in order to enjoy low sample complexity.
For example, empirical risk minimization (ERM) algorithm
needs significantly less labeled examples to learn any target under some unlabeled distributions. For instance, if the
distribution is concentrated on a single point, ERM needs
only one labeled example to learn any target. One could
be lead to believe that there exists an algorithm that does
not receive the unlabeled distribution as input and achieves
Benedek-Itai bound (or a slightly worse bound) for every
distribution. In fact, one could think that ERM or Hanneke’s algorithm could be such algorithms. If ERM, Hanneke’s algorithm, or some other distribution-independent
algorithm had sample complexity that matches (or nearly
matches) the optimal distribution-specific sample complexity for every distribution, we could conclude that the knowledge of unlabeled data distribution is completely useless.
As Darnstädt et al. (2013) showed this is not the case. They
showed that any algorithm for learning projections over
{0, 1}n that does not receive the unlabeled distribution as
input, requires, for some data unlabeled distributions, more
labeled examples than the Benedek-Itai bound. However,
they did not quantify this gap beside stating that it grows
without bound as n goes to infinity.
In this paper, we quantify the gap by showing that any
distribution-independent algorithm for learning the class

