Target-Based Temporal-Difference Learning

Donghwan Lee 1 Niao He 2

Abstract
The use of target networks has been a popular
and key component of recent deep Q-learning algorithms for reinforcement learning, yet little is
known from the theory side. In this work, we
introduce a new family of target-based temporal
difference (TD) learning algorithms that maintain two separate learning parameters – the target
variable and online variable. We propose three
members in the family, the averaging TD, double
TD, and periodic TD, where the target variable is
updated through an averaging, symmetric, or periodic fashion, respectively, mirroring those techniques used in deep Q-learning practice. We establish asymptotic convergence analyses for both
averaging TD and double TD and a finite sample
analysis for periodic TD. In addition, we provide
some simulation results showing potentially superior convergence of these target-based TD algorithms compared to the standard TD-learning.
While this work focuses on linear function approximation and policy evaluation setting, we consider
this as a meaningful step towards the theoretical
understanding of deep Q-learning variants with
target networks.

1. Introduction
Deep Q-learning (Mnih et al., 2015) has recently captured
significant attentions in the reinforcement learning (RL)
community for outperforming human in several challenging
tasks. Besides the effective use of deep neural networks
as function approximators, the success of deep Q-learning
is also indispensable to the utilization of a separate target
network for calculating target values at each iteration. In
practice, using target networks is proven to substantially
1

Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, USA 2 Department of Industrial and Enterprise Systems Engineering, University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, USA. Correspondence to: Donghwan Lee <donghwan@illinois.edu>, Niao He <niaohe@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

improve the performance of Q-learning algorithms, and
is gradually adopted as a standard technique in modern
implementations of Q-learning.
To be more specific, the update of Q-learning with target
network can be viewed as follows:
θt+1 = θt + α(yt − Q(st , at ; θt ))∇θ Q(st , at ; θt )
where yt = r(st , at ) + γ maxa Q(st+1 , a; θt0 ), θt is the
online variable, and θt0 is the target variable. Here the stateaction value function Q(s, a; θ) is parameterized by θ. The
update of the online variable θt resembles the stochastic
gradient descent step. The term r(st , at ) stands for the intermediate reward of taking action at in state st , and yt stands
for the target value under the target variable, θt0 . When the
target variable is set to be the same as the online variable
at each iteration, this reduces to the standard Q-learning
algorithm (Watkins & Dayan, 1992), and is known to be
unstable with nonlinear function approximations. Several
choices of target networks are proposed in the literature to
overcome such instability: (i) periodic update, i.e., the target
variable is copied from the online variable every τ > 0 steps,
as used for deep Q-learning (Gu et al., 2016; Mnih et al.,
2015; 2016; Wang et al., 2016); (ii) symmetric update, i.e.,
the target variable is updated symetrically as the online variable; this is first introduced in double Q-learning (Hasselt,
2010; Van Hasselt et al., 2016); and (iii) Polyak averaging
update, i.e., the target variable takes weighted average over
the past values of the online variable; this is used in deep
deterministic policy gradient (Heess et al., 2015; Lillicrap
et al., 2015) as an example. In the following, we simply
refer these as target-based Q-learning algorithms.
While the integration of Q-learning with target networks
turns out to be successful in practice, its theoretical convergence analysis remains largely an open yet challenging
question. As an intermediate step towards the answer, in this
work, we first study target-based temporal difference (TD)
learning algorithms and establish their convergence analysis.
TD algorithms (Sutton, 1988; Sutton et al., 2009a;b) are
designed to evaluate a given policy and are the fundamental
building blocks of many RL algorithms. Comprehensive surveys and comparisons among TD-based policy evaluation
algorithms can be found in (Dann et al., 2014). Motivated by
the target-based Q-learning algorithms (Mnih et al., 2015;
Wang et al., 2016), we introduce a target variable into the

