TensorFuzz: Debugging Neural Networks with Coverage-Guided Fuzzing

Augustus Odena 1 Catherine Olsson 2 David G. Andersen 1 Ian Goodfellow 3

Abstract
Neural networks are difficult to interpret and debug. We introduce testing techniques for neural networks that
can discover errors occurring only for rare inputs. Specifically, we develop coverage-guided fuzzing (CGF)
methods for neural networks. In CGF, random mutations of inputs are guided by a coverage metric toward the
goal of satisfying user-specified constraints. We describe how approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) algorithms
can provide this coverage metric for neural networks. We then combine these methods with techniques for
property-based testing (PBT). In PBT, one asserts properties that a function should satisfy and the system
automatically generates tests exercising those properties. We then apply this system to practical goals including
(but not limited to) surfacing broken loss functions in popular GitHub repositories and making performance
improvements to TensorFlow. Finally, we release an open source library called TensorFuzz that implements the
described techniques.

1. Introduction
Machine learning is gradually becoming used in more contexts that affect human lives, including for medical diagnosis (Gulshan et al., 2016), in autonomous vehicles (Huval
et al., 2015; Angelova et al.; Bojarski et al., 2016), as input
into corporate and judicial decision making processes (Scarborough & Somers, 2006; Berk et al., 2017), in air traffic
control (Katz et al., 2017), and in power grid control (Siano
et al., 2012).
Machine learning models are notoriously difficult to debug
or interpret (Lipton, 2016) for a variety of reasons, ranging
from the conceptual difficulty of specifying what the user
wishes to know about the model in formal terms to statistical and computational difficulties in obtaining answers to
formally specified questions. This property has arguably
contributed to the recent “reproducibility crisis” in machine
learning (Ke et al., 2017; Henderson et al., 2018; Fedus et al.,
2018; Lucic et al., 2017; Melis et al., 2018; Oliver et al.,
2018) – it’s tricky to make robust experimental conclusions
about techniques that are hard to debug.
Neural networks can be particularly difficult to debug because even relatively straightforward formal questions about
them can be computationally expensive to answer and because software implementations of neural networks can
1
Google Brain 2 Open Philanthropy Project (work done while at
Google Brain) 3 Work done while at Google Brain. Correspondence
to: Augustus Odena <augustusodena@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

deviate significantly from theoretical models. For example, Reluplex (Katz et al., 2017) can formally verify some
properties of neural networks but is too computationally
expensive to scale to model sizes used in practice.
Moreover, Reluplex works by analyzing the description of
a ReLU network as a piecewise linear function, using a
theoretical model in which all of the matrix multiplication
operations are truly linear. In practice, matrix multiplication on a digital computer is not linear due to floating point
arithmetic, and machine learning algorithms can learn to
exploit this property to perform significantly nonlinear computation (Foerster, 2017). This is not to criticize Reluplex,
but to illustrate the need for additional testing methods that
interact directly with software as it actually exists in order
to correctly test even software that deviates from theoretical
models.
In this work, we adapt an existing technique from traditional software testing —coverage-guided fuzzing (CGF)
(Zalewski, 2007; Serebryany, 2016) — to be applicable to
testing neural networks. We then combine this technique
with property-based testing (PBT) (Claessen & Hughes,
2011) and use the resulting system on a wide variety of
neural network testing problems. In particular, this work
makes the following contributions:
• First, we introduce the notion of CGF for neural networks and describe how approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) algorithms can be used to check for coverage
in a general way.
• Second, we describe how PBT techniques can be combined with CGF techniques into a general system that

