Improved Dynamic Graph Learning through Fault-Tolerant Sparsification

Chun Jiang Zhu 1 Sabine Storandt 2 Kam-Yiu Lam 3 Song Han 1 Jinbo Bi 1

Abstract
Graph sparsification has been used to improve the
computational cost of learning over graphs, e.g.,
Laplacian-regularized estimation, graph semisupervised learning (SSL) and spectral clustering
(SC). However, when graphs vary over time, repeated sparsification requires polynomial order
computational cost per update. We propose a new
type of graph sparsification namely fault-tolerant
(FT) sparsification to significantly reduce the cost
to only a constant. Then the computational cost
of subsequent graph learning tasks can be significantly improved with limited loss in their accuracy. In particular, we give theoretical analysis to
upper bound the loss in the accuracy of the subsequent Laplacian-regularized estimation, graph
SSL and SC, due to the FT sparsification. In addition, FT spectral sparsification can be generalized to FT cut sparsification, for cut-based graph
learning. Extensive experiments have confirmed
the computational efficiencies and accuracies of
the proposed methods for learning on dynamic
graphs.

1. Introduction
For statistical estimation problems over graphs, an effective regularization term can be based on the underlying
graph structures, specifically, the graph Laplacian (Calandriello et al., 2018; Sadhanala et al., 2016). Consider a
graph G(V, E, W ) with n vertices and m edges, its Laplacian matrix LG is DG − AG , where AG and DG are the
adjacency and degree matrices of G, respectively. 1 Suppose y = (y1 , · · · , yn ) are observations over vertices in G.
They are independently drawed from a model parameter
University of Connecticut 2 University of Konstanz 3 City
University of Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Jinbo Bi
<jinbo.bi@uconn.edu>.

β ∗ = (β1∗ , · · · , βn∗ ) with Gaussian noises, i.e., for every
i ∈ [1, n], E(yi ) = βi∗ . Then Laplacian-regularized estimation is to solve
min ||y − β||2 + λβLG β T ,

β∈Rn

(1)

where λ is a regularizationP
parameter. Note that the regularization term βLG β T = (i,j)∈E W (i, j)(βi − βj ). So,
the intuition is to find a vector β̂ such that it will have
components that vary smoothly over adjacent vertices in G,
while λ controls the degree of smoothness. 2 Other spectral
methods (those with a loss function based on the Laplacian)
include graph Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) (Zhu et al.,
2003), Logistic Smoothing (Sadhanala et al., 2016), graphregularized least squares (Belkin et al., 2005) and spectral
clustering (SC) (Ng et al., 2001). There also exists another
type of graph-based learning based on graph cuts and using
cut-based algorithms directly, instead of spectral methods,
for enhancement, e.g., Min-Cut for SSL (Blum & Chawla,
2001), Max-Cut for SSL (Wang et al., 2013), Sparsest-Cut
for hierarchical learning (Moses & Vaggos, 2017) and MaxFlow for SSL (Rustamov & Klosowski, 2018).
However, all these methods suffer from the scalability
problem. E.g., Equation (1) has a closed-form solution
β̂ = (I + λLG )−1 y. As the matrix I + λLG is Strongly
Diagonally Dominant (SDD), one can use an optimal solver
for SDD matrices, which requires Õ(m) time (the notation
Õ hides a polylogarithmic factor) (Spielman & Teng, 2004).
Nonetheless, even for mildly large, dense graphs with millions of edges, e.g., social networks, protein interaction
networks and communication networks, the above methods
are not feasible. Recently, (Calandriello et al., 2018; Sadhanala et al., 2016) proposed to preprocess G into a sparse
yet spectrally similar graph, called a sparsifier H of size
Õ(n) for subsequent graph learning. By using H instead of
G in the Laplacian-regularized term as below,

1

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).
1
AG and DG are defined as (AG )u,v = W P
(u, v) if (u, v) ∈ E
and (AG )u,v = 0 otherwise, (DG )u,v =
w∈V W (u, w) if
u = v, and (DG )u,v = 0 otherwise, respectively.

min ||y − β||2 + λ0 βLH β T ,

β∈Rn

(2)

one can solve β̃ = (I + λ0 LH )−1 in only Õ(n) time, and
it has been shown in the papers that the accuracy of the
estimation is not affected significantly by using H.
2
Here we implicitly assume that the underlying signal β ∗ is
smooth over G.

