Analyzing Federated Learning through an Adversarial Lens

Arjun Nitin Bhagoji * 1 Supriyo Chakraborty 2 Prateek Mittal 1 Seraphin Calo 2

Abstract
Federated learning distributes model training
among a multitude of agents, who, guided by privacy concerns, perform training using their local data but share only model parameter updates,
for iterative aggregation at the server to train an
overall global model. In this work, we explore
how the federated learning setting gives rise to
a new threat, namely model poisoning, different from traditional data poisoning. Model poisoning is carried out by an adversary controlling
a small number of malicious agents (usually 1)
with the aim of causing the global model to misclassify a set of chosen inputs with high confidence. We explore a number of attack strategies for deep neural networks, starting with targeted model poisoning using boosting of the malicious agent’s update to overcome the effects of
other agents. We also propose two critical notions of stealth to detect malicious updates. We
bypass these by including them in the adversarial objective to carry out stealthy model poisoning. We improve attack stealth with the use of
an alternating minimization strategy which alternately optimizes for stealth and the adversarial
objective. We also empirically demonstrate that
Byzantine-resilient aggregation strategies are not
robust to our attacks. Our results show that effective and stealthy model poisoning attacks are
possible, highlighting vulnerabilities in the federated learning setting.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (McMahan et al., 2017) has recently
emerged as a popular implementation of distributed
stochastic optimization for large-scale deep neural network
training. It is formulated as a multi-round strategy in which
*

Work done at I.B.M. Research 1 Princeton University 2 I.B.M.
T.J. Watson Research Center. Correspondence to: Arjun Nitin
Bhagoji <abhagoji@princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

the training of a neural network model is distributed between multiple agents. In each round, a random subset
of agents, with local data and computational resources, is
selected for training. The selected agents perform model
training and share only the parameter updates with a centralized parameter server, that facilitates aggregation of the
updates. Motivated by privacy concerns, the server is designed to have no visibility into an agents’ local data and
training process.
In this work, we exploit this lack of transparency in the
agent updates, and explore the possibility of an adversary
controlling a small number of malicious agents (usually
just 1) performing a model poisoning attack. The adversary’s objective is to cause the jointly trained global model
to misclassify a set of chosen inputs with high confidence,
i.e., it seeks to poison the global model in a targeted manner. Since the attack is targeted, the adversary also attempts
to ensure that the global model converges to a point with
good performance on the test or validation data We note
that these inputs are not modified to induce misclassification as in the phenomenon of adversarial examples (Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Szegedy et al., 2013). Rather, their
misclassification is a product of the adversarial manipulations of the training process. We focus on an adversary
which directly performs model poisoning instead of data
poisoning (Biggio et al., 2012; Rubinstein et al., 2009; Mei
& Zhu, 2015; Xiao et al., 2015; Mei & Zhu, 2015; Koh
& Liang, 2017; Chen et al., 2017a; Jagielski et al., 2018)
as the agents’ data is never shared with the server. In fact,
model poisoning subsumes dirty-label data poisoning in the
federated learning setting (see Section 5.1 for a detailed
quantitative comparison).
Model poisoning also has a connection to a line of work
on defending against Byzantine adversaries which consider a threat model where the malicious agents can send
arbitrary gradient updates (Blanchard et al., 2017; Chen
et al., 2017b; Mhamdi et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2018; Yin
et al., 2018) to the server. However, the adversarial goal in
these cases is to ensure a distributed implementation of the
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) algorithm converges to
‘sub-optimal to utterly ineffective models’(Mhamdi et al.,
2018) while the aim of the defenses is to ensure convergence. On the other hand, we consider adversaries aiming to only cause targeted poisoning. In fact, we show

