An Investigation into Neural Net Optimization via Hessian Eigenvalue Density

Behrooz Ghorbani 1 2 Shankar Krishnan 2 Ying Xiao 2

Abstract
To understand the dynamics of optimization in
deep neural networks, we develop a tool to study
the evolution of the entire Hessian spectrum
throughout the optimization process. Using this,
we study a number of hypotheses concerning
smoothness, curvature, and sharpness in the deep
learning literature. We then thoroughly analyze
a crucial structural feature of the spectra: in nonbatch normalized networks, we observe the rapid
appearance of large isolated eigenvalues in the
spectrum, along with a surprising concentration
of the gradient in the corresponding eigenspaces.
In batch normalized networks, these two effects
are almost absent. We characterize these effects,
and explain how they affect optimization speed
through both theory and experiments. As part of
this work, we adapt advanced tools from numerical linear algebra that allow scalable and accurate estimation of the entire Hessian spectrum of
ImageNet-scale neural networks; this technique
may be of independent interest in other applications.

1. Introduction
The Hessian of the training loss (with respect to the parameters) is crucial in determining many behaviors of neural
networks. The eigenvalues of the Hessian characterize the
local curvature of the loss which, for example, determine
how fast models can be optimized via first-order methods
(at least for convex problems), and is also conjectured to
influence the generalization properties. Unfortunately, even
for moderate sized models, exact computation of the Hessian eigenvalues is computationally impossible. Previous
studies on the Hessian have focused on small models, or
are limited to computing only a few eigenvalues (Sagun
1
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University.
Work was done while author was an intern at Google. 2 Machine
Perception, Google Inc.. Correspondence to: Behrooz Ghorbani
<ghorbani@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

et al., 2016; 2017; Yao et al., 2018). In the absence of such
concrete information about the eigenvalue spectrum, many
researchers have developed clever ad hoc methods to understand notions of smoothness, curvature, sharpness, and poor
conditioning in the landscape of the loss surface. Examples
of such work, where some surrogate is defined for the curvature, include the debate on flat vs sharp minima (Keskar
et al., 2016; Dinh et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2017; Jastrz˛ebski
et al., 2017), explanations of the efficacy of residual connections (Li et al., 2018b; Orhan & Pitkow, 2017) and batch
normalization (Santurkar et al., 2018), the construction of
low-energy paths between different local minima (Draxler
et al., 2018), qualitative studies and visualizations of the
loss surface (Goodfellow et al., 2014), and characterization
of the intrinsic dimensionality of the loss (Li et al., 2018a;
Fort & Scherlis, 2018). In each of these cases, detailed
knowledge of the entire Hessian spectrum would surely be
informative, if not decisive, in explaining the phenomena at
hand.
In this paper, we develop a tool that allows us access to
the entire spectrum of a deep neural network. The tool is
both highly accurate (we validate it to a double-precision
accuracy of 10−14 for a 15000 parameter model), and highly
scalable (we are able to generate the spectra of Resnets (He
et al., 2016) and Inception V3 (Szegedy et al., 2016) on
ImageNet in a small multiple of the time it takes to train
the model). The underlying algorithm is extremely elegant,
and has been known in the numerical analysis literature for
decades (Bai et al., 1996) (based on foundational work by
Golub and Welsch (1969)); here we introduce it to the machine learning community, and build (and release) a system
to run it at modern deep learning scale.
This algorithm allows us to peer into the optimization process with unprecedented clarity. By generating Hessian
spectra with fine time resolution, we are able to study all
phases of training, and are able to comment fruitfully on a
number of hypotheses in the literature about the geometry
of the loss surface. Our main experimental result focuses on
the role of outlier eigenvalues, we analyze how the outlier
eigenvalues affect the speed of optimization; this in turn provides significant insight into how batch normalization (Ioffe
& Szegedy, 2015), one of the most popular innovations in
training deep neural nets, speeds up optimization.

