Adaptive Monte Carlo Multiple Testing via Multi-Armed Bandits

Martin J. Zhang 1 James Zou 1 2 3 David Tse 1

Abstract
Monte Carlo (MC) permutation test is considered
the gold standard for statistical hypothesis testing,
especially when standard parametric assumptions
are not clear or likely to fail. However, in modern data science settings where a large number
of hypothesis tests need to be performed simultaneously, it is rarely used due to its prohibitive
computational cost. In genome-wide association
studies, for example, the number of hypothesis
tests m is around 106 while the number of MC
samples n for each test could be greater than 108 ,
totaling more than nm=1014 samples. In this paper, we propose Adaptive MC multiple Testing
(AMT) to estimate MC p-values and control false
discovery rate in multiple testing. The algorithm
outputs the same result as the standard full MC
approach
√with high probability while requiring
only Õ( nm) samples. This sample complexity
is shown to be optimal. On a Parkinson GWAS
dataset, the algorithm reduces the running time
from 2 months for full MC to an hour. The AMT
algorithm is derived based on the theory of multiarmed bandits.

whose goal is to identify associations between the genotypes (single nucleotide polymorphisms or SNPs) and the
phenotypes (traits) (Visscher et al., 2017). For testing the
association between a SNP and the phenotype, the p-value
is often derived via closed-form methods like the analysis
of variance (ANOVA) or the Pearson’s Chi-squared test
(Purcell et al., 2007). However, these methods rely on certain assumptions on the null distribution, the violation of
which can lead to a large number of false positives (Yang
et al., 2014; Che et al., 2014). MC permutation test does
not require distributional assumption and is preferable in
such cases from a statistical consideration (Gao et al., 2010).
However, the main challenge of applying MC permutation
test to GWAS is computational.
MC permutation test is a special type of MC test where
the p-values are estimated by MC sampling from the null
distribution — permutation test computes such MC samples
by evaluating the test statistic on the data points but with
the responses (labels) randomly permuted. Let T obs be the
observed test statistic and T1null , T2null , · · · , Tnnull be n independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.) test statistics
randomly generated under the null hypothesis. The MC
p-value is written as

def

P MC(n) =

1. Introduction
Monte Carlo (MC) permutation testing is considered
the gold standard for statistical hypothesis testing. It
has the broad advantage of estimating significance nonparametrically, thereby safeguarding against inflated false
positives (Dwass, 1957; Davison et al., 1997; Boos & Zhang,
2000; Lehmann & Romano, 2006; Phipson & Smyth, 2010).
It is especially useful in cases where the distributional assumption of the data is not apparent or likely to be violated.
A good example is genome-wide association study (GWAS),
1
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University
Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University
3
Chan-Zuckerberg Biohub. Correspondence to: James Zou
<jamesyzou@gmail.com>, David Tse <dntse@stanford.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

n
X



1 
I{Tjnull ≥ T obs } ,
1+
n+1
j=1

(1)

def

which conservatively estimates the ideal p-value P ∞ =
P(T null ≥ T obs ). In addition, P MC(n) converges to the ideal
p-value P ∞ as the number of MC samples n → ∞.

GWAS is an example of large-scale multiple testing: each
SNP is tested for association with the phenotype, and there
are many SNPs to test. For performing m such tests simultaneously, the data is collected and each of the m null
hypotheses is associated with an ideal p-value (Fig.1a). A
common practice, as visualized in Fig.1b, is to first compute
an MC p-value for each test using n MC samples and then
apply a multiple testing procedure to the set of MC p-values
MC(n)
{Pi
} to control the false positives, e.g., using the Bonferroni procedure (Dunn, 1961) or the Benjamini-Hochberg
procedure (BH) (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995). Here, as
folklore, the number of MC samples n is usually chosen to

