On the Convergence and Robustness of Adversarial Training

Yisen Wang * 1 Xingjun Ma * 2 James Bailey 2 Jinfeng Yi 1 Bowen Zhou 1 Quanquan Gu 3

Abstract
Improving the robustness of deep neural networks
(DNNs) to adversarial examples is an important
yet challenging problem for secure deep learning.
Across existing defense techniques, adversarial
training with Projected Gradient Decent (PGD) is
amongst the most effective. Adversarial training
solves a min-max optimization problem, with the
inner maximization generating adversarial examples by maximizing the classification loss, and the
outer minimization finding model parameters by
minimizing the loss on adversarial examples generated from the inner maximization. A criterion
that measures how well the inner maximization is
solved is therefore crucial for adversarial training.
In this paper, we propose such a criterion, namely
First-Order Stationary Condition for constrained
optimization (FOSC), to quantitatively evaluate
the convergence quality of adversarial examples
found in the inner maximization. With FOSC, we
find that to ensure better robustness, it is essential
to use adversarial examples with better convergence quality at the later stages of training. Yet at
the early stages, high convergence quality adversarial examples are not necessary and may even
lead to poor robustness. Based on these observations, we propose a dynamic training strategy
to gradually increase the convergence quality of
the generated adversarial examples, which significantly improves the robustness of adversarial
training. Our theoretical and empirical results
show the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Although deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved great
success in a number of fields such as computer vision (He
et al., 2016) and natural language processing (Devlin et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 JD.com 2 The University of Melbourne
The University of California, Los Angeles. Correspondence to:
Quanquan Gu <qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

2018), they are vulnerable to adversarial examples crafted
by adding small, human imperceptible adversarial perturbations to normal examples (Szegedy et al., 2013; Goodfellow
et al., 2015). Such vulnerability of DNNs raises security
concerns about their practicability in security-sensitive applications such as face recognition (Kurakin et al., 2016) and
autonomous driving (Chen et al., 2015). Defense techniques
that can improve DNN robustness to adversarial examples
have thus become crucial for secure deep learning.
There exist several defense techniques (i.e., “defense models”), such as input denoising (Guo et al., 2018), gradient
regularization (Papernot et al., 2017), and adversarial training (Madry et al., 2018). However, many of these defense
models provide either only marginal robustness or have
been evaded by new attacks (Athalye et al., 2018). One
defense model that demonstrates moderate robustness, and
has thus far not been comprehensively attacked, is adversarial training (Athalye et al., 2018). Given a C-class dataset
S = {(x0i , yi )}ni=1 with x0i ∈ Rd as a normal example in
the d-dimensional input space and yi ∈ {1, · · · , C} as its
associated label, the objective of adversarial training is to
solve the following min-max optimization problem:
n

min
θ

1X
max
`(hθ (xi ), yi ),
n i=1 kxi −x0i k∞ ≤

(1)

where hθ : Rd → RC is the DNN function, xi is the adversarial example of x0i , `(hθ (xi ), yi ) is the loss function
on the adversarial example (xi , yi ), and  is the maximum
perturbation constraint1 . The inner maximization problem
is to find an adversarial example xi within the -ball around
a given normal example x0i (i.e., kxi − x0i k∞ ≤ ) that
maximizes the classification loss `. It is typically nonconcave with respect to the adversarial example. On the other
hand, the outer minimization problem is to find model parameters that minimize the loss ` on adversarial examples
{xi }ni=1 that generated from the inner maximization. This
is the problem of training a robust classifier on adversarial examples. Therefore, how well the inner maximization
problem is solved directly affects the performance of the
outer minimization, i.e., the robustness of the classifier.
Several attack methods have been used to solve the inner
1
We only focus on the infinity norm constraint in this paper,
but our algorithms and theory apply to other norms as well.

