A Tail-Index Analysis of Stochastic Gradient Noise in Deep Neural Networks

Umut Şimşekli 1 Levent Sagun 2 Mert Gürbüzbalaban 3

Abstract
The gradient noise (GN) in the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm is often considered to be Gaussian in the large data regime by
assuming that the classical central limit theorem (CLT) kicks in. This assumption is often
made for mathematical convenience, since it enables SGD to be analyzed as a stochastic differential equation (SDE) driven by a Brownian motion. We argue that the Gaussianity assumption
might fail to hold in deep learning settings and
hence render the Brownian motion-based analyses inappropriate. Inspired by non-Gaussian natural phenomena, we consider the GN in a more
general context and invoke the generalized CLT
(GCLT), which suggests that the GN converges
to a heavy-tailed α-stable random variable. Accordingly, we propose to analyze SGD as an SDE
driven by a Lévy motion. Such SDEs can incur ‘jumps’, which force the SDE transition from
narrow minima to wider minima, as proven by
existing metastability theory. To validate the αstable assumption, we conduct experiments on
common deep learning scenarios and show that
in all settings, the GN is highly non-Gaussian and
admits heavy-tails. We investigate the tail behavior in varying network architectures and sizes,
loss functions, and datasets. Our results open up
a different perspective and shed more light on the
belief that SGD prefers wide minima.

1. Introduction
Context and motivation: Deep neural networks have revolutionized machine learning and have ubiquitous use in
1
LTCI, Télécom ParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay, 75013,
Paris, France 2 Institute of Physics, École Polytechnique Fédérale
de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland 3 Department of Management Science and Information Systems, Rutgers Business
School, NJ 08854, USA. Correspondence to: Umut Şimşekli
<umut.simsekli@telecom-paristech.fr>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

many application domains (LeCun et al., 2015; Krizhevsky
et al., 2012; Hinton et al., 2012). In full generality, many
key tasks in deep learning reduces to solving the following
optimization problem:
o
n
1 Xn
w? = arg min f (w) ,
f (i) (w)
(1)
i=1
n
w∈Rp
where w ∈ Rp denotes the weights of the neural network, f : Rp → R denotes the loss function that is typically non-convex in w, each f (i) denotes the (instantaneous) loss function that is contributed by the data point
i ∈ {1, . . . , n}, and n denotes the total number of data
points. Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is one the most
popular approaches for attacking this problem in practice
and is based on the following iterative updates:
wk+1 = wk − η∇f˜k (wk )

(2)

where k ∈ {1, . . . , K} denotes the iteration number, η is
the step-size, and ∇f˜k denotes the stochastic gradient at
iteration k, that is defined as follows:
1X
∇f˜k (w) , ∇f˜Ωk (w) ,
∇f (i) (w). (3)
i∈Ωk
b
Here, Ωk ⊂ {1, . . . , n} is a random subset that is drawn
with or without replacement at iteration k, and b = |Ωk |
denotes the number of elements in Ωk .
SGD is widely used in deep learning with a great success
in its computational efficiency (Bottou, 2010; Bottou &
Bousquet, 2008; Daneshmand et al., 2018). Beyond efficiency, understanding how SGD performs better than its
full batch counterpart in terms of test accuracy remains a
major challenge. Even though SGD seems to find zero
loss solutions on the training landscape (at least in certain
regimes (Zhang et al., 2017a; Sagun et al., 2015; Keskar
et al., 2016; Geiger et al., 2018)), it appears that the algorithm finds solutions with different properties depending
on how it is tuned (Sutskever et al., 2013; Keskar et al.,
2016; Jastrzebski et al., 2017; Hoffer et al., 2017; Masters
& Luschi, 2018; Smith et al., 2017). Despite the fact that
the impact of SGD on generalization has been studied (Advani & Saxe, 2017; Wu et al., 2018; Neyshabur et al., 2017),
a satisfactory theory that can explain its success in a way
that encompasses such peculiar empirical properties is still
lacking.

