Fairness Risk Measures
Robert C. Williamson 1 Aditya Krishna Menon 2

Abstract
Ensuring that classifiers are non-discriminatory
or fair with respect to a sensitive feature (e.g.,
race or gender) is a topical problem. Progress in
this task requires fixing a definition of fairness,
and there have been several proposals in this regard over the past few years. Several of these,
however, assume either binary sensitive features
(thus precluding categorical or real-valued sensitive groups), or result in non-convex objectives
(thus adversely affecting the optimisation landscape). In this paper, we propose a new definition
of fairness that generalises some existing proposals, while allowing for generic sensitive features
and resulting in a convex objective. The key idea
is to enforce that the expected losses (or risks)
across each subgroup induced by the sensitive feature are commensurate. We show how this relates
to the rich literature on risk measures from mathematical finance. As a special case, this leads to
a new convex fairness-aware objective based on
minimising the conditional value at risk (CVaR).

1. Introduction
Ensuring that learned classifiers are non-discriminatory or
fair with respect to some sensitive feature (e.g., race or
gender) is a topical problem (Pedreshi et al., 2008; Žliobaitė,
2017; Chouldechova et al., 2018). Progress on this problem
requires that one agrees upon some pre-defined notion of
fairness; to this end, there have been several definitions of
fairness at both the individual (Dwork et al., 2012; Kusner
et al., 2017; Speicher et al., 2018) and group level (Calders
& Verwer, 2010; Feldman et al., 2015; Hardt et al., 2016;
Zafar et al., 2017a; Heidari et al., 2019).
Recently, several works (Zafar et al., 2017a; Dwork et al.,
2018; Hashimoto et al., 2018; Alabi et al., 2018; Speicher
et al., 2018; Donini et al., 2018; Heidari et al., 2019) have
1
Australian National University 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Robert C. Williamson <bob.williamson@anu.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

abstracted earlier definitions of fairness by framing the problem in terms of subgroup losses. Intuitively, these works
posit that a fair predictor incurs similar losses for each sensitive feature subgroup (e.g., men and women). One encourages fairness by minimising specific notions of disparity of
subgroup losses. For specific choices of loss, this leads to a
convex objective (Zafar et al., 2017c; Donini et al., 2018).
In this paper, we propose a new definition of fairness that
follows this theme, but abstracts the notion of subgroup loss
disparity. Our resulting framework is applicable for generic
base losses, complex sensitive features (e.g., multi-valued),
and results in a convex objective when using convex losses.
In detail, our contributions are as follows:
(C1) building on notions of fairness in terms of subgroup
errors (Zafar et al., 2017a; Dwork et al., 2018; Donini
et al., 2018), we provide a new definition of fairness
(Definition 3) requiring the average losses (or risks) for
each sensitive feature subgroup have low deviation.
(C2) we draw a connection (Corollary 12) between our
proposed definition of fairness and the rich literature
on risk measures from mathematical finance (Artzner
et al., 1999; Föllmer & Schied, 2011), thus allowing
one to leverage tools and analyses from the latter.
(C3) we propose a new convex fairness-aware objective
(Equation 26) based on minimising the conditional
value at risk (CVaR) (Rockafellar & Uryasev, 2000),
and relate it to existing learning objectives.
In a nutshell, our proposal is to break up the standard risk
into risks on each subgroup defined by the sensitive feature.
We combine these via an aggregator which measures the
mean and deviation of the subgroup risks. By defining some
axioms an aggregator should satisfy, we obtain a connection
to risk measures from finance and operations research.
We remark that much of the work in the paper is in setting
up the problem to easily exploit a wide body of existing
results on risk measures; however, to our knowledge, the
application of such tools to fairness is novel. The end result
is a simple, powerful framework to learn fair classifiers.
In the sequel, after reviewing existing work (§2), we introduce our new definition of fairness (§3), and relate it to
financial risk measures (§4). We detail a special case employing the conditional value at risk (§5), further develop
our approach (§6), and confirm its empirical viability (§7).

