Probabilistic Neural-symbolic Models for
Interpretable Visual Question Answering

Ramakrishna Vedantam * 1 Karan Desai 2 Stefan Lee 2 Marcus Rohrbach 1 Dhruv Batra 1 2 Devi Parikh 1 2

Abstract
We propose a new class of probabilistic neuralsymbolic models, that have symbolic functional
programs as a latent, stochastic variable. Instantiated in the context of visual question answering, our probabilistic formulation offers two key
conceptual advantages over prior neural-symbolic
models for VQA. Firstly, the programs generated
by our model are more understandable while requiring less number of teaching examples. Secondly, we show that one can pose counterfactual
scenarios to the model, to probe its beliefs on the
programs that could lead to a specified answer
given an image. Our results on the CLEVR and
SHAPES datasets verify our hypotheses, showing
that the model gets better program (and answer)
prediction accuracy even in the low data regime,
and allows one to probe the coherence and consistency of reasoning performed.

1. Introduction
Building flexible learning and reasoning machines is a central challenge in Artificial Intelligence (AI). Deep representation learning (LeCun et al., 2015) provides us powerful,
flexible function approximations that have resulted in stateof-the-art performance across multiple AI tasks such as
recognition (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He et al., 2016), machine translation (Sutskever et al., 2014), visual question
answering (Agrawal et al., 2015), speech modeling (van den
Oord et al., 2016), and reinforcement learning (Mnih et al.,
2015). However, many aspects of human cognition such as
systematic compositional generalization (e.g., understanding that “John loves Mary” could imply that “Mary loves
John”) (Lake et al., 2017; Lake & Baroni, 2018) have proved
harder to model.
*

Part of this work was done when R.V. was at Georgia Tech.
Facebook AI Research 2 Georgia Tech. Correspondence to: Ramakrishna Vedantam <ramav@fb.com>.

1

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Symbol manipulation (Newell & Simon, 1976), on the other
hand lacks flexible learning capabilities but supports strong
generalization and systematicity (Lake & Baroni, 2018).
Consequently, many works have focused on building neuralsymbolic models with the aim of combining the best of
representation learning and symbolic reasoning (Bader &
Hitzler, 2005; Evans et al., 2018; Valiant, 2003; Yi et al.,
2018; Yin et al., 2018).
As we scale machine learning to machine reasoning (Andreas et al., 2017; 2016; Bottou, 2011; Weston et al., 2016)
a natural desire is to provide guidance to the model in the
form of instructions. In such a context, symbols are more
intuitive to specify than say the parameters of a neural network. Thus, a promising method for interpretable reasoning
models is to specify the reasoning plan symbolically and
learn to execute it using deep learning.
This neural-symbolic methodology has been extensively
used to model reasoning capabilities in visual question answering (VQA) (Andreas et al., 2016; Hu et al., 2017; Mao
et al., 2019; Mascharka et al., 2018; Johnson et al., 2017;
Yi et al., 2018) and to some extent in reinforcement learning (Andreas et al., 2017; Das et al., 2018). Concretely,
in the VQA task one is given an image i, a question x
(“Is there a cylinder left of a cube?”), for which we would
like to provide an answer a (yes). In addition, one may
also optionally be provided a program z for the question
that specifies a reasoning plan. For e.g., one might ask a
model to apply the filter[cube] operator, follwed by
relate[left], and then And the result together with
filter[cylinder] to predict the answer, where each
operator is parameterized as a neural network (Figure 1).
The scope of this current work is to provide a probabilistic
framework for such neural-symbolic models. This provides
two benefits: firstly, given a limited number of teaching
examples of plans / programs for a given question / context,
we show one can better capture the association between the
question and programs to provide more understandable and
legible program explanations for novel questions. Inspired
by Dragan et al. (2013), we call this notion data-efficient
legibility, since the model’s program (actions) in this case
need to be legible, i.e. clearly convey the question (goal
specification) the model has been given.

