Hyperbolic Disk Embeddings for Directed Acyclic Graphs

Ryota Suzuki 1 Ryusuke Takahama 1 Shun Onoda 1

Abstract
Obtaining continuous representations of structural data such as directed acyclic graphs (DAGs)
has gained attention in machine learning and artificial intelligence. However, embedding complex
DAGs in which both ancestors and descendants
of nodes are exponentially increasing is difficult.
Tackling in this problem, we develop Disk
Embeddings, which is a framework for embedding DAGs into quasi-metric spaces. Existing
state-of-the-art methods, Order Embeddings and
Hyperbolic Entailment Cones, are instances of
Disk Embedding in Euclidean space and spheres
respectively. Furthermore, we propose a novel
method Hyperbolic Disk Embeddings to handle
exponential growth of relations. The results of
our experiments show that our Disk Embedding
models outperform existing methods especially
in complex DAGs other than trees.

1. Introduction
Methods for obtaining appropriate feature representations
of a symbolic objects are currently a major concern in machine learning and artificial intelligence. Studies exploiting
embedding for highly diverse domains or tasks have
recently been reported for graphs (Grover & Leskovec,
2016; Goyal & Ferrara, 2018; Cai et al., 2018), knowledge
bases (Nickel et al., 2011; Bordes et al., 2013; Wang et al.,
2017), and social networks (Hoff et al., 2002; Cui et al.,
2018).
In particular, studies aiming to embed linguistic instances into geometric spaces have led to substantial innovations in natural language processing (NLP)
(Mikolov et al., 2013; Pennington et al., 2014; Kiros et al.,
2015; Vilnis & McCallum, 2015).
Currently, word
embedding methods are indispensable for NLP tasks,
because it has been shown that the use of pre-learned word
1
LAPRAS Inc., Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Ryota
Suzuki <suzuki@lapras.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

embeddings for model initialization leads to improvements
in various of tasks (Kim, 2014). In these methods, symbolic objects are embedded in low-dimensional Euclidean
vector spaces such that the symmetric distances between
semantically similar concepts are small.
In this paper, we focus on modeling asymmetric transitive
relations and directed acyclic graphs (DAGs). Hierarchies
are well-studied asymmetric transitive relations that can be
expressed using a tree structure. The tree structure has
a single root node, and the number of children increases
exponentially according to the distance from the root.
Asymmetric relations that do not exhibit such properties
cannot be expressed as a tree structure, but they can be
represented as DAGs, which are used extensively to model
dependencies between objects and information flow. For
example, in genealogy, a family tree can be interpreted as a
DAG, where an edge represents a parent child relationship
and a node denotes a family member (Kirkpatrick, 2011).
Similarly, the commit objects of a distributed revision
system (e.g., Git) also form a DAG1 . In citation networks,
citation graphs can be regarded as DAGs, with a document
as a node and the citation relationship between documents
as an edge (Price, 1965). In causality, DAGs have
been used to control confounding in epidemiological
studies (Robins, 1987; Merchant & Pitiphat, 2002) and as
a means to study the formal understanding of causation
(Spirtes et al., 2000; Pearl, 2003; Dawid, 2010).
Recently, a few methods for embedding asymmetric
transitive relations have been proposed. Nickel & Kiela
reported pioneering research on embedding symbolic
objects in hyperbolic spaces rather than Euclidean spaces
and proposed Poincaré Embedding (Nickel & Kiela, 2017;
2018). This approach is based on the fact that hyperbolic
spaces can embed any weighted tree while primarily
preserving their metric (Gromov, 1987; Bowditch, 2005;
Sarkar, 2011). Vendrov et al. developed Order Embedding,
which attempts to embed the partially ordered structure
of a hierarchy in Euclidean spaces (Vendrov et al., 2016).
This method embeds relations among symbolic objects
in reserved product orders in Euclidean spaces, which
is a type of partial ordering. Objects are represented
as inclusive relations of orthants in Euclidean spaces.
1

https://git-scm.com/docs/user-manual

