Parameter Efficient Training of Deep Convolutional
Neural Networks by Dynamic Sparse Reparameterization

Hesham Mostafa 1 Xin Wang 1 2

Abstract
Modern deep neural networks are typically highly
overparameterized. Pruning techniques are able
to remove a significant fraction of network parameters with little loss in accuracy. Recently,
techniques based on dynamic reallocation of nonzero parameters have emerged, allowing direct
training of sparse networks without having to pretrain a large dense model. Here we present a novel
dynamic sparse reparameterization method that
addresses the limitations of previous techniques
such as high computational cost and the need for
manual configuration of the number of free parameters allocated to each layer. We evaluate
the performance of dynamic reallocation methods in training deep convolutional networks and
show that our method outperforms previous static
and dynamic reparameterization methods, yielding the best accuracy for a fixed parameter budget, on par with accuracies obtained by iteratively
pruning a pre-trained dense model. We further
investigated the mechanisms underlying the superior generalization performance of the resultant sparse networks. We found that neither the
structure, nor the initialization of the non-zero
parameters were sufficient to explain the superior
performance. Rather, effective learning crucially
depended on the continuous exploration of the
sparse network structure space during training.
Our work suggests that exploring structural degrees of freedom during training is more effective
than adding extra parameters to the network.

1
Artificial Intelligence Products Group, Intel Corporation, San
Diego, CA, USA. 2 Currently with Cerebras Systems, Los Altos,
CA, USA, work done while at Intel Corporation. Correspondence
to: Xin Wang <xin@cerebras.net>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks’ success in a wide range of application domains, ranging from computer vision to machine
translation to automatic speech recognition, stems from
their ability to learn complex transformations by data examples while achieving superior generalization performance.
Though they generalize well, deep networks learn more effectively when they are highly overparameterized (Brutzkus
et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2016). Emerging evidence has
attributed this need for overparameterization to the geometry of the high-dimensional loss landscapes (Dauphin et al.,
2014; Choromanska et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2014; Im
et al., 2016; Wu et al., 2017; Liao & Poggio, 2017; Cooper,
2018; Novak et al., 2018), and to the implicit regularization
properties of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Brutzkus
et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2018a; Poggio et al., 2017), though
a thorough theoretical understanding is not yet complete.
In practice, multiple techniques are able to compress large
trained models, including distillation (Bucilua et al., 2006;
Hinton et al., 2015), weight precision reduction (Hubara
et al., 2016; McDonnell, 2018), low-rank decomposition (Jaderberg et al., 2014; Denil et al., 2013), and pruning (Han et al., 2015a; Zhang et al., 2018b). While these
methods are highly effective in reducing the size of network
parameters with little degradation in accuracy, they either
operate on a pre-trained model or require the full overparameterized model to be stored and updated during, or at
least at a certain stage of, training. Thus, training remains
memory-inefficient despite the compact size of the resultant
network produced by compression. The effectiveness of
these compression methods, however, indicates the existence of compact network parameter configurations that are
able to generalize on par with large networks. This raises
a tantalizing hypothesis that overparameterization during
training might not be a strict necessity and alternative training or reparameterization methods might exist to discover
and train compact networks directly.
The problem of achieving training-time parameter efficiency
is being approached in a number of ways. Most straightforward is to search for more parameter efficient network architectures. Innovations in this direction for deep convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) include adoption of skip connec-

