On the Impact of the Activation Function on Deep Neural Networks Training

Soufiane Hayou 1 Arnaud Doucet 1 Judith Rousseau 1

Abstract
The weight initialization and the activation function of deep neural networks have a crucial impact
on the performance of the training procedure. An
inappropriate selection can lead to the loss of information of the input during forward propagation
and the exponential vanishing/exploding of gradients during back-propagation. Understanding
the theoretical properties of untrained random networks is key to identifying which deep networks
may be trained successfully as recently demonstrated by (Schoenholz et al., 2017) who showed
that for deep feedforward neural networks only a
specific choice of hyperparameters known as the
‘Edge of Chaos’ can lead to good performance.
While the work by (Schoenholz et al., 2017) discuss trainability issues, we focus here on training
acceleration and overall performance. We give a
comprehensive theoretical analysis of the Edge of
Chaos and show that we can indeed tune the initialization parameters and the activation function
in order to accelerate the training and improve
performance.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have become extremely popular as
they achieve state-of-the-art performance on a variety of
important applications including language processing and
computer vision; see, e.g., (Goodfellow et al., 2016). The
success of these models has motivated the use of increasingly deep networks and stimulated a large body of work to
understand their theoretical properties. It is impossible to
provide here a comprehensive summary of the large number of contributions within this field. To cite a few results
relevant to our contributions, (Montufar et al., 2014) have
shown that neural networks have exponential expressive
power with respect to the depth while (Poole et al., 2016)

obtained similar results using a topological measure of expressiveness.
Since the training of deep neural networks is a non-convex
optimization problem, the weight initialization and the activation function will essentially determine the functional
subspace that the optimization algorithm will explore. We
follow here the approach of (Poole et al., 2016) and (Schoenholz et al., 2017) by investigating the behaviour of random networks in the infinite-width and finite-variance i.i.d.
weights context where they can be approximated by a Gaussian process as established by (Neal, 1995), (Matthews et al.,
2018) and (Lee et al., 2018).
In this paper, our contribution is three-fold. Firstly, we
provide a comprehensive analysis of the so-called Edge of
Chaos (EOC) curve and show that initializing a network on
this curve leads to a deeper propagation of the information
through the network and accelerates the training. In particular, we show that a feedforward ReLU network initialized
on the EOC acts as a simple residual ReLU network in
terms of information propagation. Secondly, we introduce a
class of smooth activation functions which allow for deeper
signal propagation (Proposition 3) than ReLU. In particular, this analysis sheds light on why smooth versions of
ReLU (such as SiLU or ELU) perform better experimentally
for deep neural networks; see, e.g., (Clevert et al., 2016),
(Pedamonti, 2018), (Ramachandran et al., 2017) and (Milletarí et al., 2018). Lastly, we show the existence of optimal
points on the EOC curve and we provide guidelines for the
choice of such point and we demonstrate numerically the
consistence of this approach. We also complement previous
empirical results by illustrating the benefits of an initialization on the EOC in this context. All proofs are given in the
Supplementary Material.

2. On Gaussian process approximations of
neural networks and their stability
2.1. Setup and notations

1

Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford,
United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Soufiane Hayou <soufiane.hayou@stats.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

We use similar notations to those of (Poole et al., 2016)
and (Lee et al., 2018). Consider a fully connected feedforward random neural network of depth L, widths (Nl )1≤l≤L ,
iid

σ2

iid

w
weights Wijl ∼ N (0, Nl−1
) and bias Bil ∼ N (0, σb2 ),
where N (µ, σ 2 ) denotes the normal distribution of mean µ

