Semi-Cyclic Stochastic Gradient Descent

Hubert Eichner 1 Tomer Koren 1 H. Brendan McMahan 1 Nathan Srebro 2 Kunal Talwar 1

Abstract
We consider convex SGD updates with a blockcyclic structure, i.e., where each cycle consists
of a small number of blocks, each with many
samples from a possibly different, block-specific,
distribution. This situation arises, e.g., in Federated Learning where the mobile devices available for updates at different times during the day
have different characteristics. We show that such
block-cyclic structure can significantly deteriorate
the performance of SGD, but propose a simple
approach that allows prediction with the same
guarantees as for i.i.d., non-cyclic, sampling.

1. Introduction
When using Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), it is important that samples are drawn at random. In contrast, cycling
over a specific permutation of data points (e.g., sorting data
by label, or even alphabetically or by time of collection)
can be detrimental to the performance of SGD. But in some
applications, such as in Federated Learning (Konečný et al.,
2016; McMahan et al., 2017) or when running SGD in “real
time”, some cyclic patterns in the data samples are hard to
avoid. In this paper we investigate how such cyclic structure hurts the effectiveness of SGD, and how this can be
corrected. We model this semi-cyclicity through a “blockcyclic” structure, where during the course of training, we
cycle over blocks in a fixed order and samples for each block
are drawn from a block-specific distribution.
Our primary motivation is Federated Learning. In this setting, mobile devices collaborate in the training of a shared
model while keeping the training data decentralized. Devices communicate updates (e.g., gradients) to a coordinating server, which aggregates the updates and applies them to
the global model. In each iteration (or round) of Federated
1

2
Google.
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago.
Part of this work was done while NS was visiting
Google.
Authors are listed alphabetically.
Correspondence to:
<{huberte,tkoren,mcmahan,kunal}@google.com,
nati@ttic.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

SGD, typically a few hundred devices are chosen randomly
by the server to participate; critically, however, only devices
that are idle, charging, and on a free wireless connection
are selected (McMahan & Ramage, 2017; Bonawitz et al.,
2019). This ensures Federated Learning does not impact
the user’s experience when using their phone, but also can
produce significant diurnal variation in the devices available,
since devices are more likely to meet the training eligibility requirements at night local time. For example, for a
language model (Hard et al., 2018), devices from English
speakers in India and America are likely available at different times of day.
When the number of blocks in each cycle is high and the
number of samples per block is low, the setting approaches
fully-cyclic SGD, which is known to be problematic. But
what happens when the number of blocks is fairly small and
each blocks consists of a large number of samples? E.g.,
if there are only two blocks corresponding to “day” and
“night”, with possibly millions of samples per block. An
optimist would hope that this “slightly cyclic” case is much
easier than the fully cyclic case, and the performance of
SGD degrades gracefully as the number of blocks increases.
Unfortunately, in Section 3 we show that even with only two
blocks, the block-cyclic sampling can cause an arbitrarily
bad slowdown. One might ask whether alternative forms
of updates, instead of standard stochastic gradient updates,
can alleviate this degradation in performance. We show that
such a slowdown is unavoidable for any iterative method
based on semi-cyclic samples.
Instead, the solution we suggest is to embrace the heterogeneity in the data and resort to a pluralistic solution, allowing a potentially different model for each block in the
cycle (e.g., a “daytime” model and a “nighttime” model).
A naive pluralistic approach would still suffer a significant
slowdown as it would not integrate information between
blocks (Section 4). In Section 5 we show a remarkably
simple and practical pluralistic approach that allows us to
obtain exactly the same guarantees as with i.i.d. non-cyclic
sampling, thus entirely alleviating the problem introduced
by such data heterogeneity—as we also demonstrate empirically in Section 8. In Section 6 we go even further and
show how we can maintain the same guarantee without any
deterioration while also being competitive with separately

