Stable-Predictive Optimistic Counterfactual Regret Minimization

Gabriele Farina 1 Christian Kroer 2 Noam Brown 1 Tuomas Sandholm 1 3 4 5

Abstract
The CFR framework has been a powerful tool
for solving large-scale extensive-form games in
practice. However, the theoretical rate at which
past CFR-based algorithms converge to the Nash
equilibrium is on the order of O(T −1/2 ), where T
is the number of iterations. In contrast, first-order
methods can be used to achieve a O(T −1 ) dependence on iterations, yet these methods have been
less successful in practice. In this work we present
the first CFR variant that breaks the square-root
dependence on iterations. By combining and extending recent advances on predictive and stable
regret minimizers for the matrix-game setting we
show that it is possible to leverage “optimistic”
regret minimizers to achieve a O(T −3/4 ) convergence rate within CFR. This is achieved by introducing a new notion of stable-predictivity, and by
setting the stability of each counterfactual regret
minimizer relative to its location in the decision
tree. Experiments show that this method is faster
than the original CFR algorithm, although not as
fast as newer variants, in spite of their worst-case
O(T −1/2 ) dependence on iterations.

1. Introduction
Counterfactual regret minimization (CFR) (Zinkevich et al.,
2007) and later variants such as Monte-Carlo CFR (Lanctot
et al., 2009), CFR+ (Tammelin et al., 2015), and Discounted
CFR (Brown & Sandholm, 2019), have been the practical
state-of-the-art in solving large-scale zero-sum extensiveform games (EFGs) for the last decade. These algorithms
1
Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA 15213 2 IEOR Department, Columbia
University, New York NY 10027 3 Strategic Machine, Inc.
4
Strategy Robot, Inc. 5 Optimized Markets, Inc.. Correspondence to:
Gabriele Farina <gfarina@cs.cmu.edu>,
Christian Kroer <christian.kroer@columbia.edu>, Noam
Brown <noamb@cs.cmu.edu>, Tuomas Sandholm <sandholm@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

were used as an essential ingredient for all recent milestones
in the benchmark domain of poker (Bowling et al., 2015;
Moravčı́k et al., 2017; Brown & Sandholm, 2017b). Despite
this practical success all known CFR variants have a significant theoretical drawback: their worst-case convergence
rate is on the order of O(T −1/2 ), where T is the number of
iterations. In contrast to this, there exist first-order methods
that converge at a rate of O(T −1 ) (Hoda et al., 2010; Kroer
et al., 2015; 2018b). However, these methods have been
found to perform worse than newer CFR algorithms such as
CFR+ , in spite of their theoretical advantage (Kroer et al.,
2018b;a).
In this paper we present the first CFR variant which breaks
the square-root dependence on the number of iterations. By
leveraging recent theoretical breakthroughs on “optimistic”
regret minimizers for the matrix-game setting, we show how
to set up optimistic counterfactual regret minimizers at each
information set such that the overall algorithm retains the
properties needed in order to accelerate convergence. In
particular, this leads to a predictive and stable variant of
CFR that converges at a rate of O(T −3/4 ).
Typical analysis of regret-minimization leads to a convergence rate of O(T −1/2 ) for solving zero-sum matrix games.
However, by leveraging the idea of optimistic learning (Chiang et al., 2012; Rakhlin & Sridharan, 2013a;b; Syrgkanis et al., 2015; Wang & Abernethy, 2018), Rakhlin and
Sridharan show in a series of papers that it is possible to
converge at a rate of O(T −1 ) when leveraging cancellations
that occur due to the optimistic mirror descent (OMD) algorithm (Rakhlin & Sridharan, 2013a;b). Syrgkanis et al.
(2015) build on this idea, and introduce the optimistic followthe-regularized-leader (OFTRL) algorithm; they show that
even when the players do not employ the same algorithm, a
rate of O(T −3/4 ) can be achieved as long as each algorithm
belongs to a class of algorithms that satisfy a stability criterion and leverage predictability of loss inputs. We build on
this latter generalization. Because we can only perform the
optimistic updates locally with respect to counterfactual regrets we cannot achieve the cancellations that leads to a rate
of O(T −1 ); instead we show that by carefully instantiating
each counterfactual regret minimizer it is possible to maintain predictability and stability with respect to the overall
decision-tree structure, thus leading to a convergence rate of
O(T −3/4 ). In order to achieve these results we introduce a

