Stein Point Markov Chain Monte Carlo
Wilson Ye Chen * 1 Alessandro Barp * 2 3 François-Xavier Briol 4 3 Jackson Gorham 5 Mark Girolami 4 3
Lester Mackey * 6 Chris. J. Oates 7 3

Abstract
An important task in machine learning and statistics is the approximation of a probability measure
by an empirical measure supported on a discrete
point set. Stein Points are a class of algorithms
for this task, which proceed by sequentially minimising a Stein discrepancy between the empirical measure and the target and, hence, require
the solution of a non-convex optimisation problem to obtain each new point. This paper removes the need to solve this optimisation problem by, instead, selecting each new point based
on a Markov chain sample path. This significantly reduces the computational cost of Stein
Points and leads to a suite of algorithms that
are straightforward to implement. The new algorithms are illustrated on a set of challenging
Bayesian inference problems, and rigorous theoretical guarantees of consistency are established.

1. Introduction
The task that we consider in this paper is to approximate a
Borel probability measure P on an open and convex set
X ⊆ Rd , d ∈ N, with an empirical measure P̂ supported on a discrete point set {xi }ni=1 ⊂ X . To limit
scope we restrict attention
Pn to uniformly-weighted empirical
measures; P̂ = n1 i=1 δxi where δx is a Dirac measure
on x. The quantisation (Graf & Luschgy, 2007) of P by
P̂ is an important task in computational statistics and machine learning. For example,
R quantisation facilitates the approximation of integrals X f dP of measurable functions
Pn
f : X → R using cubature rules f 7→ n1 i=1 f (xi ).
More generally, quantisation underlies a broad spectrum
*
1
Equal contribution
Institute of Statistical Mathematics 2 Imperial College London 3 Alan Turing Institute
4
University of Cambridge 5 OpenDoor 6 Microsoft Research 7 Newcastle University.
Correspondence to: Lester
Mackey <lmackey@microsoft.com>, Chris.
J. Oates
<chris.oates@ncl.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

of algorithms for uncertainty quantification that must operate subject to a finite computational budget. Motivated
by applications in Bayesian statistics, our focus is on the
situation where P admits a density p with respect to the
Lebesgue measure on X but this density can only be evaluated up to an (unknown) normalisation constant. Specifically, we assume that p = Cp̃ where p̃ is an un-normalised
density and C > 0, such that both p̃ and ∇ log p̃, where
∂
∂
∇ = ( ∂x
1 , . . . , ∂xd ), can be (pointwise) evaluated at finite
computational cost.
A popular approach to this task is Markov chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC; Robert & Casella, 2004), where the sample path of an ergodic Markov chain with invariant distribution P constitutes a point set {xi }ni=1 . MCMC algorithms exploit a range of techniques to construct Markov
transition kernels which leave P invariant, based (in general) on pointwise evaluation of p̃ (Metropolis et al., 1953)
or (sometimes) on pointwise evaluation of ∇ log p̃ and
higher-order derivative information (Girolami & Calderhead, 2011). In a favourable situation, the MCMC output
will be approximately independent draws from P . However, in this case the {xi }ni=1 will typically not be a low
discrepancy point set (Dick & Pillichshammer, 2010) and
as such the quantisation of P performed by MCMC will
be sub-optimal. In recent years several attempts have been
made to deveop improved algorithms for quantisation in the
Bayesian statistical context as an alternative to MCMC:
• Minimum Energy Designs (MED) In (Roshan
Joseph et al., 2015; Joseph et al., 2018) it was proposed to obtain a point set {xi }ni=1 by using a numerical optimisation method to approximately minimise
an energy functional Ep̃ ({xi }ni=1 ) that depends on P
only through p̃ rather than through p itself. Though
appealing in its simplicity, MED has yet to receive a
theoretical treatment that accounts for the imperfect
performance of the numerical optimisation method.
• Support Points The method of (Mak & Joseph, 2018)
first generates a large MCMC output {x̃i }N
i=1 and
from this a subset {xi }ni=1 is selected in such a way
that a low-discrepancy point set is obtained. (This can
be contrasted with classical thinning in which an arithmetic subsequence of the MCMC output is selected.)

