Breaking the Softmax Bottleneck via Learnable Monotonic Pointwise
Non-linearities
Octavian-Eugen Ganea 1 * Sylvain Gelly 2 Gary Bécigneul 1 Aliaksei Severyn 3

Abstract
The Softmax function on top of a final linear layer
is the de facto method to output probability distributions in neural networks. In many applications
such as language models or text generation, this
model has to produce distributions over large output vocabularies. Recently, this has been shown
to have limited representational capacity due to
its connection with the rank bottleneck in matrix
factorization. However, little is known about the
limitations of Linear-Softmax for quantities of
practical interest such as cross entropy or mode
estimation, a direction that we explore here. As
an efficient and effective solution to alleviate this
issue, we propose to learn parametric monotonic
functions on top of the logits. We theoretically investigate the rank increasing capabilities of such
monotonic functions. Empirically, our method
improves in two different quality metrics over the
traditional Linear-Softmax layer in synthetic and
real language model experiments, adding little
time or memory overhead, while being comparable to the more computationally expensive mixture of Softmaxes.

1. Introduction
Most of nowadays deep learning architectures produce a low
dimensional data representation that is important both from
a computational (parameter reduction) and generalization
(less overfitting) perspective. The underlying assumption
is that data lies on a small dimensional manifold. These
compressed representations are then used for classification
or generation. In the discrete case, they are usually fed to
a linear layer to produce the so-called "logits", followed
*

Work done in an internship at Google Brain. 1 Department
of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Switzerland 2 Google
Brain 3 Google Research. Correspondence to: Octavian-Eugen
Ganea <octavian.ganea@inf.ethz.ch>, Sylvain Gelly <sylvaingelly@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

by a Softmax function to output a probability distribution
over the desired class labels. We refer to this setup as the
Linear-Softmax layer.
However, there are situations when the output vocabulary or
class label set is (much) larger than the dimension of the data
embedding. Typical examples are text models such as neural
language models (Zaremba et al., 2014) or sequence to
sequence generative models (Sutskever et al., 2014; Graves,
2013; Pascanu et al., 2013) for problems such as machine
translation (Bahdanau et al., 2015; Cho et al., 2014), text
summarization (Chopra et al., 2016; Rush et al., 2015) or
conversational agents (Vinyals & Le, 2015). These models
need to approximate different distributions over the full
large vocabulary of words generally of size Θ(105 ). Recent
work (Yang et al., 2017; Kanai et al., 2018) has revealed
that, in these cases, the Linear-Softmax layer has limited
representational power. They show the connection between
this problem and the classic low-rank matrix factorization
framework, concluding that the rank deficiency prevents
Linear-Softmax from exactly matching in representation
almost all1 probability distributions.
To address the Softmax bottleneck issue, (Yang et al., 2017)
propose to use a mixture of Softmax distributions (MoS)
which achieves state-of-the-art language model perplexity
on PennTreeBank (PTB) and WikiText2 (WT2) datasets.
However, this method has no theoretical guarantees, being also several orders of magnitude more computationally
expensive than Linear-Softmax as we show in section 5.
A different model was proposed by (Kanai et al., 2018) that
replace the exponential in Softmax by a product between
exponential and sigmoid. This model called Sigsoftmax
can be reformulated as applying the pointwise nonlinearity
ss(x) := 2x − log(1 + exp(x)) to the logits before they
are fed to the Softmax function. Unfortunately, there is no
theoretical guarantee that Sigsoftmax can convert low-rank
to full-rank matrices. In addition, this model raises a few
questions that we seek to explore here: i) what other nonlinearities are suitable for breaking the Softmax bottleneck?
ii) can we theoretically understand and guarantee which
pointwise functions will break the Softmax bottleneck by
1

Except a subset of measure 0.

