Dynamic Measurement Scheduling for Event Forecasting Using Deep RL

Chun-Hao Chang * 1 2 3 Mingjie Mai * 1 2 3 Anna Goldenberg 1 2 3

Abstract
Imagine a patient in critical condition. What
and when should be measured to forecast detrimental events, especially under the budget constraints? We answer this question by deep reinforcement learning (RL) that jointly minimizes
the measurement cost and maximizes predictive
gain, by scheduling strategically-timed measurements. We learn our policy to be dynamically
dependent on the patient’s health history. To
scale our framework to exponentially large action
space, we distribute our reward in a sequential
setting that makes the learning easier. In our simulation, our policy outperforms heuristic-based
scheduling with higher predictive gain and lower
cost. In a real-world ICU mortality prediction task
(MIMIC3), our policies reduce the total number
of measurements by 31% or improve predictive
gain by a factor of 3 as compared to physicians,
under the off-policy policy evaluation.

1. Introduction
Redundant and expensive screening procedures and lab measurements have increased the overall health care costs (Feldman, 2009). This phenomenon, either due to commercial
interests or over-concern, has been observed in numerous
clinical practices (Hoffman & Cooper, 2012; Brodersen
et al., 2018). For example, numerous studies (Iosfina et al.,
2013; Pageler et al., 2013) found no evidence that regular
blood testing improves diagnosis; frequent blood tests may
even cause anemia and infection (Salisbury et al., 2011). To
combat the situation, Dewan et al. (2017) devised a simple
rule to reduce the frequency of blood tests by 87% in pediatric ICU. Similarly, Kotecha et al. (2017) showed that
the measurement costs can be significantly reduced without increase in mortality or re-admission rates in cardiac
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada 2 Vector Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada 3 The Hospital
for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. Correspondence to:
Chun-Hao Chang <kingsley@cs.toronto.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

and surgical ICU. These findings point toward the need for
principled data-driven approaches for lab test scheduling to
improve the healthcare system.
Recently developed time-series forecasting models solve the
much needed problem of early detection of adverse events
(e.g. sepsis) based on sparse and irregular measurements
(Ghassemi et al., 2015; Soleimani et al., 2017a; Futoma
et al., 2017). However, the timing of these measurements
varies from doctor to doctor and from one hospital to another,
leading to a drastically different input distribution that may
result in inferior classifier performance. Additionally, these
classifiers are not often built to provide insights into which
measurements help the most to make the prediction given
current patient’s condition.
We propose a scalable and flexible framework that learns
a data-driven and dynamic sampling policy using deep Qlearning. Deep Q-learning, a type of Reinforcement Learning (RL), is a powerful framework that can learn from
large amount of retrospective data even when the data does
not represent optimal behaviors. In addition, it has been
shown to be promising for solving various clinical problems
(Raghu et al., 2017; Futoma et al., 2018).
Our framework is a two-tier system. First, we learn an event
forecasting model to represent the patient’s condition. Then
we train RL to maximize this model’s performance while
minimizing the cost of the needed measurements. Compared
to directly using the event as reward, our approach of using
event probabilities from a learned classifier gives the RL immediate reward for every action, making reward assignment
and training comparably easier. To handle the exponentially
large action space in the measurement scheduling problems,
we use sequential action setting that successfully handle the
number of measurements in an unprecedented scale.
We show that in the simulation setting, when given a nearperfect classifier, our method is able to learn a strategically timed measurement scheduling that outperforms all
the heuristic-based scheduling. We then test it on MIMIC3,
a real ICU temporal dataset. We compare our learned policies, physician’s policy, as well as random policies using
off-policy policy evaluation (OPPE) method, showing that
our learned policies reduce measurement costs by 31% or
increase information gain by a factor of 3 compared to physician’s policy. Our data preprocessing and code are avail-

