Graph Convolutional Gaussian Processes

Ian Walker 1 Ben Glocker 1

Abstract
We propose a novel Bayesian nonparametric
method to learn translation-invariant relationships
on non-Euclidean domains. The resulting graph
convolutional Gaussian processes can be applied
to problems in machine learning for which the
input observations are functions with domains on
general graphs. The structure of these models allows for high dimensional inputs while retaining
expressibility, as is the case with convolutional
neural networks. We present applications of graph
convolutional Gaussian processes to images and
triangular meshes, demonstrating their versatility
and effectiveness, comparing favorably to existing
methods, despite being relatively simple models.

the dimensionality of the input in a principled manner, inspired by recent work in geometric deep learning (Bronstein
et al., 2017). In this way, GP models can be applied to highdimensional inputs that live on non-Euclidean domains. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to propose
spatial graph convolutions with Gaussian processes.
We present applications of GCGPs to graphs which are Euclidean sampling grids (images) and further demonstrate
the GCGP’s performance when learning on non-Euclidean
domains for classification tasks. We apply our method to triangular meshes and to an MNIST superpixel dataset, where
each image is represented as a distinct graph. While graph
convolutional GPs are shallow, though wide, the results are
promising for such relatively terse models, and indicate that
GCGPs can provide a simple and effective foundation for
more complex models in the future.

1. Introduction

2. Background

We present a new Gaussian process (GP) model called the
graph convolutional GP (GCGP) model. This model learns
translation-invariant relationships that mimic the behavior
of a convolutional layer on images, but extends this property to general graphs. Since this is a GP model, the patch
response function learned will be nonlinear and nonparametric, which may aid in expressibility and make more efficient
use of small datasets. Additionally, since this is a Bayesian
technique, it allows for the rigorous treatment of uncertainties for predictions, useful in many application domains, but
difficult for existing convolutional models.

A comprehensive overview of related graph kernel methods
is given by Vishwanathan et al. (2010) with some recent
work by Neumann et al. (2016) proposing kernels for graphs
with node features and other work employing deep learning
(Zhang et al., 2018; Duvenaud et al., 2015).

The main point of attempting to utilize general convolutions
is to reduce the complexity of the model while maintaining expressibility. Indeed, standard GP models can suffer
from the curse of dimensionality, making stable estimation
difficult on high-dimensional inputs (Rasmussen, 2004).
This work seeks to create a convolutional model for general
graphs, such as images, social networks, or 3D meshes, that
focuses attention on local patches to substantially reduce
1

Department of Computing, Imperial College London, United Kingdom.
Correspondence to: Ian Walker
<ian.walker14@imperial.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

We focus on the task of classifying signals that live on general graphs, leaving regression tasks as a straightforward
extension of the methodology. We further constrain our
focus to domains which are the same size for each signal to
be classified. Thus, our datasets will comprise of general
graphs, which are composed of the same number of vertices. However, they do not necessarily have the same edge
structures. This is an important difference to recent Graph
GPs (Ng et al., 2018) and other approaches (Venkitaraman
et al., 2018) operating in the spectral domain using the graph
Laplacian which requires all observations to lie on the same
graph (implying the same edge structure).
The dataset D = {G, Ψ, Y } comprises a collection of signals Ψ with associated labels Y , which live on a corresponding domain in G. Let G ∈ G be one such domain.
This G = hV, Ei is comprised of a set of V vertices and
E ⊆ V × V edges. The corresponding signal ψ ∈ Ψ is some
function ψ : V → Rd on the vertices of the graph.
We wish to learn some function f which accepts ψ as input

