Action Robust Reinforcement Learning and Applications in Continuous
Control
Chen Tessler * 1 Yonathan Efroni * 1 Shie Mannor 1

Abstract
A policy is said to be robust if it maximizes the reward while considering a bad, or even adversarial,
model. In this work we formalize two new criteria
of robustness to action uncertainty. Specifically,
we consider two scenarios in which the agent attempts to perform an action a, and (i) with probability α, an alternative adversarial action ā is
taken, or (ii) an adversary adds a perturbation to
the selected action in the case of continuous action space. We show that our criteria are related to
common forms of uncertainty in robotics domains,
such as the occurrence of abrupt forces, and suggest algorithms in the tabular case. Building on
the suggested algorithms, we generalize our approach to deep reinforcement learning (DRL) and
provide extensive experiments in the various MuJoCo domains. Our experiments show that not
only does our approach produce robust policies,
but it also improves the performance in the absence of perturbations. This generalization indicates that action-robustness can be thought of as
implicit regularization in RL problems.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in Reinforcement Learning (RL) have
demonstrated its potential in real-world deployment. However, since in RL it is normally assumed that the train and
test domains are identical, it is not clear how a learned policy
would generalize under small perturbations. For example,
consider the task of robotic manipulation in which the task
is to navigate towards a goal. As the policy is trained on a
specific parameter set (mass, friction, etc...), it is not clear
what would happen when these parameters change, e.g., if
the robot is slightly lighter/heavier.
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering,
Technion Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to:
Chen Tessler <chen.tessler@campus.technion.ac.il>, Yonathan
Efroni <jonathan.e@campus.technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

The advantage of robust policies is highlighted when considering imperfect models, a common scenario in real world
tasks such as autonomous vehicles. Even if the model is
trained in the real world, certain variables such as traction,
tire pressure, humidity, vehicle mass and road conditions
may vary over time. These changes affect the dynamics of
our model, a property which should be considered during the
optimization process. Robust MDPs (Nilim & El Ghaoui,
2005; Iyengar, 2005; Wiesemann et al., 2013) tackle this
issue by solving a max-min optimization problem over a set
of possible model parameters, an uncertainty set, e.g., the
range of values which the vehicle’s mass may take - the goal
is thus to maximize the reward, with respect to (w.r.t.) the
worst possible outcome.
Previously, Robust MDPs have been analyzed extensively
in the theoretical community, in the tabular case (Nilim &
El Ghaoui, 2005; Iyengar, 2005; Xu & Mannor, 2007; Mannor et al., 2012; Wiesemann et al., 2013) and under linear
function approximation (Tamar et al., 2013). However, as
these works analyze uncertainty in the transition probabilities: (i) it is not clear how to obtain these uncertainty sets,
and (ii) it is not clear if and how these approaches may
be extended to non-linear function approximation schemes,
e.g., neural networks. Recently, this problem has been tackled, empirically, by the Deep RL community (Pinto et al.,
2017; Peng et al., 2018). While these approaches seem to
work well in practice, they require access and control of a
simulator and are not backed by theoretical guarantees - a
well known problem in adversarial training (Barnett, 2018).
Our approach tackles these problems by introducing a natural way to define robustness - robustness w.r.t. action
perturbations - a scenario in which the agent attempts to
perform an action and due to disturbances, such as noise or
model uncertainty, acts differently than expected. In this
work, we consider two distinct robustness criteria: given an
action provided by the policy (i) the Probabilistic Action
Robust MDP (PR-MDP, Section 3) criterion considers the
case in which, with probability α, a different possibly adversarial action is taken; and (ii) the Noisy Action Robust MDP
(NR-MDP, Section 4) criterion, in which a perturbation is
added to the action itself. These two criteria are strongly
correlated to real world uncertainty; the former correlates to
abrupt interruptions such as a sudden push and the latter correlates to a constant interrupting force. For instance, if the

