An Investigation of Model-Free Planning

Arthur Guez * 1 Mehdi Mirza * 1 Karol Gregor * 1 Rishabh Kabra * 1 Sébastien Racanière 1 Théophane Weber 1
David Raposo 1 Adam Santoro 1 Laurent Orseau 1 Tom Eccles 1 Greg Wayne 1 David Silver 1
Timothy Lillicrap 1

Abstract
The field of reinforcement learning (RL) is facing
increasingly challenging domains with combinatorial complexity. For an RL agent to address
these challenges, it is essential that it can plan
effectively. Prior work has typically utilized an
explicit model of the environment, combined with
a specific planning algorithm (such as tree search).
More recently, a new family of methods have been
proposed that learn how to plan, by providing the
structure for planning via an inductive bias in the
function approximator (such as a tree structured
neural network), trained end-to-end by a modelfree RL algorithm. In this paper, we go even further, and demonstrate empirically that an entirely
model-free approach, without special structure beyond standard neural network components such
as convolutional networks and LSTMs, can learn
to exhibit many of the characteristics typically
associated with a model-based planner. We measure our agent’s effectiveness at planning in terms
of its ability to generalize across a combinatorial
and irreversible state space, its data efficiency, and
its ability to utilize additional thinking time. We
find that our agent has many of the characteristics that one might expect to find in a planning
algorithm. Furthermore, it exceeds the state-ofthe-art in challenging combinatorial domains such
as Sokoban and outperforms other model-free approaches that utilize strong inductive biases toward planning.

1. Introduction
One of the aspirations of artificial intelligence is a cognitive agent that can adaptively and dynamically form plans
*
Equal contribution 1 DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence
to: <{aguez, mmirza, rkabra, countzero}@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

to achieve its goal. Traditionally, this role has been filled
by model-based RL approaches, which first learn an explicit model of the environment’s system dynamics or rules,
and then apply a planning algorithm (such as tree search)
to the learned model. Model-based approaches are potentially powerful but have been challenging to scale with
learned models in complex and high-dimensional environments (Talvitie, 2014; Asadi et al., 2018), though there has
been recent progress in that direction (Buesing et al., 2018;
Ebert et al., 2018).
More recently, a variety of approaches have been proposed
that learn to plan implicitly, solely by model-free training.
These model-free planning agents utilize a special neural
architecture that mirrors the structure of a particular planning algorithm. For example the neural network may be
designed to represent search trees (Farquhar et al., 2017;
Oh et al., 2017; Guez et al., 2018), forward simulations
(Racanière et al., 2017; Silver et al., 2016), or dynamic programming (Tamar et al., 2016). The main idea is that, given
the appropriate inductive bias for planning, the function
approximator can learn to leverage these structures to learn
its own planning algorithm. This kind of algorithmic function approximation may be more flexible than an explicit
model-based approach, allowing the agent to customize the
nature of planning to the specific environment.
In this paper we explore the hypothesis that planning may
occur implicitly, even when the function approximator has
no special inductive bias toward planning. Previous work
(Pang & Werbos, 1998; Wang et al., 2018) has supported the
idea that model-based behavior can be learned with general
recurrent architectures, with planning computation amortized over multiple discrete steps (Schmidhuber, 1990), but
comprehensive demonstrations of its effectiveness are still
missing. Inspired by the successes of deep learning and
the universality of neural representations, our main idea
is simply to furnish a neural network with a high capacity
and flexible representation, rather than mirror any particular
planning structure. Given such flexibility, the network can
in principle learn its own algorithm for approximate planning. Specifically, we utilize a family of neural networks
based on a widely used function approximation architecture: the stacked convolutional LSTMs (ConvLSTM by

