Towards a Deep and Unified Understanding of Deep Neural Models in NLP

1

Chaoyu Guan * 2 Xiting Wang * 2 Quanshi Zhang 1 Runjin Chen 1 Di He 3 Xing Xie 2

Abstract
We define a unified information-based measure
to provide quantitative explanations on how intermediate layers of deep Natural Language Processing (NLP) models leverage information of input
words. Our method advances existing explanation
methods by addressing issues in coherency and
generality. Explanations generated by using our
method are consistent and faithful across different
timestamps, layers, and models. We show how
our method can be applied to four widely used
models in NLP and explain their performances on
three real-world benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have demonstrated significant improvements over traditional approaches in many tasks (Socher
et al., 2012). Their high prediction accuracy stems from
their ability to learn discriminative feature representations.
However, in contrast to the high discrimination power, the
interpretability of DNNs has been considered an Achilles’
heel for decades. The black-box representation hampers
end-user trust (Ribeiro et al., 2016) and results in problems
such as the time-consuming trail-and-error optimization process (Bengio et al., 2013; Liu et al., 2017), hindering further
development and application of deep learning.
Recently, quantitatively explaining intermediate layers of a
DNN has attracted increasing attention, especially in computer vision (Bau et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2018a;d; 2019).
A key task in this direction is to associate latent representations with the interpretable input units (e.g., image pixels
or words) by measuring the contribution or saliency of the
inputs. Existing methods can be grouped into three major
categories: gradient-based (Li et al., 2015; Fong & Vedal*

Equal contribution 1 John Hopcroft Center and the MoE Key
Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, at the Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China 3 Peking University, Beijing, China. Correspondence
to: Quanshi Zhang <zqs1022@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

(a) Gradient-based method

(b) Ours

Figure 1. Illustration of coherency: (a) The gradient-based method
highlights the third layer only because the parameters of this layer
have larger absolute values; (b) Our method shows how the network
gradually processes input words through layers.
Methods
Gradient-based
Inversion-based
LRP
Ours

Neuron

×

Coherency
Layer Model
×
×
×
×
×
×

Generality
×
×
×

Table 1. Comparison of different methods in terms of coherency
and generality. Our unified information-based measure can be defined with minimum assumptions (generality) and provides coherent
results across neurons (timestamps in NLP), layers, and models.

di, 2017; Sundararajan et al., 2017), inversion-based (Du
et al., 2018), and methods that utilize layer-wise relevance
propagation (LRP) (Arras et al., 2016). These methods have
demonstrated that quantitative explanations for intermediate
layers can enrich our understanding about the inner working
mechanism of a model, such as, the roles of neurons.
The major issue of aforementioned methods is that their
measures of saliency are usually defined based on heuristic assumptions. This leads to problems with respect to
coherency and generality (Table 1):
Coherency requires that a method generates consistent explanations across different neurons, layers, and models. Existing measures usually fail to meet this criterion because of
their biased assumptions. For example, gradient-based methods assume that saliency can be measured by absolute
values of derivatives. Fig. 1(a) shows gradient-based explanations. Each line in this figure represents a layer. According
to this figure, the input words contribute most to the third
layer (darkest color in L3). However, the third layer stands
out only because the absolute values of their parameters
are large. A desirable measure should quantify word contributions without bias and reveal how the network structure

