Beyond Adaptive Submodularity: Approximation Guarantees of
Greedy Policy with Adaptive Submodularity Ratio

Kaito Fujii 1 Shinsaku Sakaue 2

Abstract
We propose a new concept named adaptive submodularity ratio to study the greedy policy for
sequential decision making. While the greedy
policy is known to perform well for a wide variety
of adaptive stochastic optimization problems in
practice, its theoretical properties have been analyzed only for a limited class of problems. We narrow the gap between theory and practice by using
adaptive submodularity ratio, which enables us
to prove approximation guarantees of the greedy
policy for a substantially wider class of problems.
Examples of newly analyzed problems include
important applications such as adaptive influence
maximization and adaptive feature selection. Our
adaptive submodularity ratio also provides bounds
of adaptivity gaps. Experiments confirm that the
greedy policy performs well with the applications
being considered compared to standard heuristics.

1. Introduction
Sequential decision making plays a crucial role in machine
learning. In various scenarios, we must design an effective
policy that repeatedly decides the next action to be taken by
using the feedback obtained so far. The greedy policy is a
simple but empirically effective approach to sequential decision making. At each step, it myopically makes a decision
that seems the most beneficial among feasible choices.
Adaptive submodularity (Golovin & Krause, 2011) is a
well-established framework for analyzing greedy algorithms
for sequential decision making. It extends submodularity,
which is a diminishing returns property of set functions,
to the setting of adaptive decision making. This framework has successfully provided theoretical guarantees for
greedy algorithms for active learning (Golovin et al., 2010),
1

University of Tokyo 2 NTT Communication Science Laboratories. Correspondence to: Kaito Fujii <kaito_fujii@mist.i.utokyo.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

recommendation (Gabillon et al., 2013), and touch-based
localization in robotics (Javdani et al., 2014).
However, adaptive submodularity is not omnipotent. While
the greedy policy works well for various sequential decision
making problems, many of these problems do not have adaptive submodularity. In fact, even if an objective function is
submodular in the non-adaptive setting, its adaptive version
does not always have adaptive submodularity. Adaptive influence maximization is one such example. In this problem,
a decision maker aims at spreading information about a
product by selecting several advertisements. She repeatedly
alternates between selecting an advertisement and observing
its effect. The objective function of this problem is known
to have adaptive submodularity in the independent cascade
model (Golovin & Krause, 2011), but not in a more general
diffusion model called the triggering model (Kempe et al.,
2003), which is extensively studied as an important class of
diffusion models (Leskovec et al., 2007; Tang et al., 2014).
Note that this objective function satisfies submodularity in
the non-adaptive setting, while it does not satisfy adaptive
submodularity in the adaptive setting. Examples of other
problems lacking adaptive submodularity appear in many
applications such as feature selection and active learning.
Therefore, we are waiting for an analysis framework that
goes beyond adaptive submodularity.
In the non-adaptive setting, submodularity ratio (Das
& Kempe, 2011) is a prevalent tool for handling nonsubmodular functions (Khanna et al., 2017; Elenberg et al.,
2017). Intuitively, it is a parameter of monotone set functions that measures their distance to submodular functions.
An adaptive variant of submodularity ratio would be a
promising approach to handling functions that lack adaptive
submodularity, but how to define it is quite non-trivial since
there is a large discrepancy between the non-adaptive and
adaptive settings as exemplified above. In particular, success in defining an adaptive version of submodularity ratio
involves meeting the following two requirements: it must
yield an approximation guarantee of the greedy policy, and
it must be bounded in various important applications such
as the adaptive influence maximization and adaptive feature
selection. Previous works (Kusner, 2014; Yong et al., 2017)
tried to define similar notions, but none of them meet the

