Adversarial Generation of Time-Frequency Features
with application in audio synthesis

Andrés Marafioti 1 Nicki Holighaus 1 Nathanaël Perraudin 2 Piotr Majdak 1

Abstract
Time-frequency (TF) representations provide
powerful and intuitive features for the analysis
of time series such as audio. But still, generative
modeling of audio in the TF domain is a subtle matter. Consequently, neural audio synthesis
widely relies on directly modeling the waveform
and previous attempts at unconditionally synthesizing audio from neurally generated invertible
TF features still struggle to produce audio at satisfying quality. In this article, focusing on the
short-time Fourier transform, we discuss the challenges that arise in audio synthesis based on generated invertible TF features and how to overcome
them. We demonstrate the potential of deliberate
generative TF modeling by training a generative
adversarial network (GAN) on short-time Fourier
features. We show that by applying our guidelines,
our TF-based network was able to outperform a
state-of-the-art GAN generating waveforms directly, despite the similar architecture in the two
networks.

1. Introduction
Despite the recent advance in machine learning and generative modeling, synthesis of natural sounds by neural networks remains a challenge. Recent solutions rely on, among
others, classic recurrent neural networks (e.g., SampleRNN,
Mehri et al., 2017), dilated convolutions (e.g., WaveNet,
Van Den Oord et al., 2016), and generative adversarial networks (e.g., WaveGAN, Donahue et al., 2019). Especially,
the latter offers a promising approach in terms of flexibility
and quality. Generative adversarial networks (GANs, Goodfellow et al., 2014) rely on two competing neural networks
1
Acoustics Research Institute, Austrian Academy of Sciences,
Wohllebengasse 12–14, 1040 Vienna, Austria. 2 Swiss Data Science Center, ETH Zürich, Universitätstrasse 25, 8006 Zürich. Correspondence to: Andrés Marafioti <amarafioti@kfs.oeaw.ac.at>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

trained simultaneously in a two-player min-max game: The
generator produces new data from samples of a random
variable; The discriminator attempts to distinguish between
these generated and real data. During the training, the generator’s objective is to fool the discriminator, while the
discriminator attempts to learn to better classify real and
generated (fake) data. Since their introduction, GANs have
been improved in various ways (e.g., Arjovsky et al., 2017;
Gulrajani et al., 2017). For images, GANs have been used
to great success (Karras et al., 2018; Brock et al., 2019). For
audio, GANs enable the generation of a signal at once even
for durations in the range of seconds (Donahue et al., 2019).
The neural generation of realistic audio remains a challenge,
because of its complex structure, with dependencies on various temporal scales. In order to address this issue, a network
generating audio is often complemented with another neural network or prior information. For example, the former
may require a system of two parallel neural networks (Van
Den Oord et al., 2018), leading overall to more complex
systems, while the latter can take the form of a separate
conditioning of networks (Shen et al., 2018; Sotelo et al.,
2017; Engel et al., 2017). It is usually beneficial to train
neural networks on a high-level representation of sound,
instead on the time-domain samples. For example, Tacotron
2 (Shen et al., 2018) relies on non-invertible mel-frequency
spectrograms. Generation of a time-domain signal from the
mel coefficients is then achieved by training a conditioned
WaveNet to act as a vocoder.
Time-frequency (TF) domain representations of sound are
successfully used in many applications and rely on wellunderstood theoretical foundations. They have been widely
applied to neural networks, e.g., for solving discriminative
tasks, in which they outperform networks directly trained on
the waveform (Dieleman & Schrauwen, 2014; Pons et al.,
2017). Further, TF representations are used to parameterize neural synthesizers, e.g., Tacotron 2 mentioned above
or Timbretron (Huang et al., 2019), which modifies timbre
by remapping constant-Q TF coefficients of sound, conditioning a WaveNet synthesizer. Despite the success of TF
representations for sound analysis, why, one could ask, has
neural sound generation via invertible TF representations
only seen limited success?

