White-box vs Black-box: Bayes Optimal Strategies for Membership Inference
Alexandre Sablayrolles 1 2 Matthijs Douze 2 Yann Ollivier 2 Cordelia Schmid 1 Hervé Jégou 2

Abstract
Membership inference determines, given a sample and trained parameters of a machine learning model, whether the sample was part of the
training set. In this paper, we derive the optimal
strategy for membership inference with a few assumptions on the distribution of the parameters.
We show that optimal attacks only depend on the
loss function, and thus black-box attacks are as
good as white-box attacks. As the optimal strategy is not tractable, we provide approximations of
it leading to several inference methods, and show
that existing membership inference methods are
coarser approximations of this optimal strategy.
Our membership attacks outperform the state of
the art in various settings, ranging from a simple
logistic regression to more complex architectures
and datasets, such as ResNet-101 and Imagenet.

1. Introduction
Ateniese et al. (2015) state that “it is unsafe to release
trained classifiers since valuable information about the
training set can be extracted from them”. The problem
that we address in this paper, i.e., to determine whether a
sample has been used to train a given model, is related to
the privacy implications of machine learning systems. They
were first discussed in the context of support vector machines (Rubinstein et al., 2009; Biggio et al., 2014). The
problem of “unintended memorization” (Carlini et al., 2018)
appears in most applications of machine learning, such as
natural language processing systems (Carlini et al., 2018)
or image classification (Yeom et al., 2018).
More specifically, we consider the problem of membership
inference, i.e., we aim at determining if a specific image was
used to train a model, given only the (image, label) pair and
the model parameters. This question is important to protect
1

University Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK
Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to: Alexandre Sablayrolles <asablayrolles@fb.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

both the privacy and intellectual property associated with
data. For neural networks, the privacy issue was recently
considered by Yeom et al. (2018) for the MNIST and CIFAR datasets. The authors evidence the close relationship
between overfitting and privacy of training images. This is
reminiscent of prior membership inference attacks, which
employ the output of the classifier associated with a particular sample to determine whether it was used during training
or not (Shokri et al., 2017).
At this stage, it is worth defining the different levels of
information to which the “attacker”, i.e., the membership
inference system, has access to. We assume that the attacker
knows the data distribution and the specifications of the
model (training procedure, architecture of the network, etc),
even though they are not necessarily required for all methods. We refer to the white-box setting as the case where the
attacker knows all the network parameters. On a side note,
the setup commonly adopted in differential privacy (Dwork
et al., 2006) corresponds to the white-box setting, where the
attacker additionally knows all the training samples except
the one to be tested.
The black-box setting is when these parameters are unknown.
For classification models, the attacker has only access to the
output for a given input, in one of the following forms:
(i) the classifier decision;
(ii) the loss of the correct label;
(iii) the full response for all classes.
Prior works on membership inference commonly assume
(i) or (iii). Our paper focuses on the black-box case (ii),
in which we know the loss incurred by the correct label.
The state of the art in this setting are the shadow models
proposed by Shokri et al. (2017).
In our work, we use a probabilistic framework to derive
a formal analysis of the optimal attack. This framework
encompasses both Bayesian learning, and noisy training,
where the noise is injected (Welling & Teh, 2011) or comes
from the stochasticity of SGD. Under mild assumptions on
the distribution of the parameters, we derive the optimal
membership inference strategy. This strategy only depends
on the classifier through evaluation of the loss, thereby showing that black-box attacks will perform as well as white-box
attacks in this optimal asymptotic setting. This result may
explain why, to the best of our knowledge, the literature

