A Gradual, Semi-Discrete Approach to Generative Network Training
via Explicit Wasserstein Minimization

Yucheng Chen 1 Matus Telgarsky 1 Chao Zhang 1 Bolton Bailey 1 Daniel Hsu 2 Jian Peng 1

1. Introduction
A generative network g models a distribution by first sampling x ∼ µ from some simple distribution µ (e.g., a multivariate Gaussian), and thereafter outputting g(x); this sampling procedure defines a pushforward distribution g#µ.
A common training procedure to fit g#µ to a target dis1
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 2 Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New York, NY. Correspondence to:
Yucheng Chen <ychen233@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

FIT

FIT
OT
S

FIT

OT
S

This paper provides a simple procedure to fit generative networks to target distributions, with the
goal of a small Wasserstein distance (or other optimal transport cost). The approach is based on
two principles: (a) if the source randomness of the
network is a continuous distribution (the “semidiscrete” setting), then the Wasserstein distance
is realized by a deterministic optimal transport
mapping; (b) given an optimal transport mapping
between a generator network and a target distribution, the Wasserstein distance may be decreased
via a regression between the generated data and
the mapped target points. The procedure here
therefore alternates these two steps, forming an
optimal transport and regressing against it, gradually adjusting the generator network towards the
target distribution. Mathematically, this approach
is shown to minimize the Wasserstein distance to
both the empirical target distribution, and also its
underlying population counterpart. Empirically,
good performance is demonstrated on the training and testing sets of the MNIST and Thin-8
data. The paper closes with a discussion of the unsuitability of the Wasserstein distance for certain
tasks, as has been identified in prior work (Arora
et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2017).

OT
S

Abstract

FIT

Figure 1. The goal in this example is to fit the initial distribution
(the blue central line) to the target distribution (the red outer ring).
The algorithm alternates OTS and FIT steps, first (OTS) associating input distribution samples with target distribution samples,
and secondly (FIT) shifting input samples towards their targets,
thereafter repeating the process. Thanks to being gradual, and not
merely sticking to the first or second OTS, the process has a hope
of constructing a simple generator which generalizes well.

tribution ν̂ is to minimize a divergence D(g#µ, ν̂) over a
collection of parameters defining g.
The original algorithms for this framework, named generative adversarial networks, alternatively optimized both the
generator network g, as well as a a second discriminator
of adversarial network: first the discriminator was fixed
and the generator was optimized to fool it, and second the
generator was fixed and the discriminator was optimized to
distinguish it from ν̂. This procedure was originally constructed to minimize a Jensen-Shannon Divergence via a
game-theoretic derivation (Goodfellow et al., 2014). Subsequent work derived the adversarial relationship in other
ways, for instance the Wasserstein GAN used duality properties of the Wasserstein distance (Arjovsky et al., 2017).
This paper proposes a simple non-adversarial but still alternating procedure to fit generative networks to target distributions. The procedure explicitly optimizes the Wasserstein-p
distance between the generator g#µ and the target distribution ν̂. As depicted in Figure 1, it alternates two steps: given
a current generator gi , an Optimal Transport Solver (OTS)
associates (or “labels”) gi ’s probability mass with that of
the target distribution ν̂, and then FIT uses this labeling to
find a new generator gi+1 via a standard regression.
The effectiveness of this procedure hinges upon two key

