LR-GLM: High-Dimensional Bayesian Inference Using Low-Rank Data
Approximations
Brian L. Trippe 1 Jonathan H. Huggins 2 Raj Agrawal 1 Tamara Broderick 1

Abstract
Due to the ease of modern data collection, applied
statisticians often have access to a large set of covariates that they wish to relate to some observed
outcome. Generalized linear models (GLMs) offer a particularly interpretable framework for such
an analysis. In these high-dimensional problems,
the number of covariates is often large relative to
the number of observations, so we face non-trivial
inferential uncertainty; a Bayesian approach allows coherent quantification of this uncertainty.
Unfortunately, existing methods for Bayesian inference in GLMs require running times roughly
cubic in parameter dimension, and so are limited
to settings with at most tens of thousand parameters. We propose to reduce time and memory costs
with a low-rank approximation of the data in an
approach we call LR-GLM. When used with the
Laplace approximation or Markov chain Monte
Carlo, LR-GLM provides a full Bayesian posterior approximation and admits running times reduced by a full factor of the parameter dimension.
We rigorously establish the quality of our approximation and show how the choice of rank allows
a tunable computational–statistical trade-off. Experiments support our theory and demonstrate the
efficacy of LR-GLM on real large-scale datasets.

1. Introduction
Scientists, engineers, and social scientists are often interested in characterizing the relationship between an outcome
and a set of covariates, rather than purely optimizing predictive accuracy. For example, a biologist may wish to
understand the effect of natural genetic variation on the
1
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 2 Department
of Biostatistics, Harvard, Cambridge, MA. Correspondence to:
Brian L. Trippe <btrippe@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

presence of a disease or a medical practitioner may wish to
understand the effect of a patient’s history on their future
health. In these applications and countless others, the relative ease of modern data collection methods often yields
particularly large sets of covariates for data analysts to study.
While these rich data should ultimately aid understanding,
they pose a number of practical challenges for data analysis.
One challenge is how to discover interpretable relationships
between the covariates and the outcome. Generalized linear models (GLMs) are widely used in part because they
provide such interpretability – as well as the flexibility to
accommodate a variety of different outcome types (including binary, count, and heavy-tailed responses). A second
challenge is that, unless the number of data points is substantially larger than the number of covariates, there is likely
to be non-trivial uncertainty about these relationships.
A Bayesian approach to GLM inference provides the desired
coherent uncertainty quantification as well as favorable calibration properties (Dawid, 1982, Theorem 1). Bayesian
methods additionally provide the ability to improve inference by incorporating expert information and sharing power
across experiments. Using Bayesian GLMs leads to computational challenges, however. Even when the Bayesian
posterior can be computed exactly, conjugate inference costs
O(N 2 D) in the case of D
N . And most models are sufficiently complex as to require expensive approximations.
In this work, we propose to reduce the effective dimensionality of the feature set as a pre-processing step to speed
up Bayesian inference, while still performing inference in
the original parameter space; in particular, we show that
low-rank descriptions of the data permit fast Markov chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) samplers and Laplace approximations of the Bayesian posterior for the full feature set. We
motivate our proposal with a conjugate linear regression
analysis in the case where the data are exactly low-rank.
When the data are merely approximately low-rank, our proposal is an approximation. Through both theory and experiments, we demonstrate that low-rank data approximations
provide a number of properties that are desirable in an efficient posterior approximation method: (1) soundness: our
approximations admit error bounds directly on the quantities
that practitioners report as well as practical interpretations

