Unreproducible Research is Reproducible

Xavier Bouthillier 1 César Laurent 1 Pascal Vincent 1 2 3

Abstract
The apparent contradiction in the title is a wordplay on the different meanings attributed to the
word reproducible across different scientific fields.
What we imply is that unreproducible findings
can be built upon reproducible methods. Without denying the importance of facilitating the reproduction of methods, we deem important to
reassert that reproduction of findings is a fundamental step of the scientific inquiry. We argue
that the commendable quest towards easy deterministic reproducibility of methods and numerical
results should not have us forget the even more important necessity of ensuring the reproducibility
of empirical findings and conclusions by properly
accounting for essential sources of variations. We
provide experiments to exemplify the brittleness
of current common practice in the evaluation of
models in the field of deep learning, showing that
even if the results could be reproduced, a slightly
different experiment would not support the findings. We hope to help clarify the distinction between exploratory and empirical research in the
field of deep learning and believe more energy
should be devoted to proper empirical research
in our community. This work is an attempt to
promote the use of more rigorous and diversified
methodologies. It is not an attempt to impose a
new methodology and it is not a critique on the
nature of exploratory research.

1. Introduction
Reproducibility has been the center of heated debates in
many scientific disciplines. Psychology in particular has
been the focus of several large reproduction efforts, attempting to reproduce close to a hundred studies (Open Science
Collaboration, 2015; Klein et al., 2018). These were moti1

Mila, Université de Montréal 2 Facebook AI Research
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR). Correspondence to: Xavier Bouthillier <xavier.bouthillier@umontreal.ca>.
3

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

vated by past evidence of lack of scientific rigour, researcher
biases, and fraud (Eisner, 2018).
To help counter these problems, important changes were enacted in the psychology research community in the past few
years. Making data available is becoming more common,
journals are publishing replication reports and preregistration of research specifications is a growing practice.
We see a similar recent trend in machine-learning: the topic
of reproducibility rose to prominence at top conferences
(Henderson et al., 2018), and several workshops are now focusing on that matter. Top conferences have adopted recommendations for code sharing. More tools are made available
to simplify the replication of experiments reported in papers,
building on new technologies such as shareable notebooks
(Kluyver et al., 2016; Forde et al., 2018), containerization
of operation systems, such as Docker (Merkel, 2014) and
Singularity (Kurtzer et al., 2017), and open-sourcing of
frameworks such as Theano (Theano Development Team,
2016), PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2017) and TensorFlow (Abadi
& al., 2015).
While the type of reproduciblity enabled by these tools is
a valuable first step, there has been comparatively much
fewer discussion about the reproducibility of the findings of
studies.
Three recent works (Melis et al., 2018; Henderson et al.,
2018; Lucic et al., 2018) have shown that proper experimental design is capital to assert the relative performances of
models. Beyond mere reproduction, these works shed light
on the fundamental problem of reproducibility that cannot
be addressed solely by sharing resources such as code, data
and containers. The experimental design is at the core of
the concept of reproducibility of findings.
Melis et al. (2018) conducted large scale experiments in Natural Language Processing with hyper-parameter optimization procedures to compare models in an unbiased benchmark, leading to the surprising result that vanilla LSTM
may be as good as recent supposedly state-of-the-art models.
Lucic et al. (2018) analyzed GAN models with various experimental setups including average analysis over different
initialization of models, concluding that current evaluation
methods of GANs can hardly discriminate between model
performances. Henderson et al. (2018) exposed the prob-

