Homomorphic sensing

Manolis C. Tsakiris 1 Liangzu Peng 1

Abstract
A recent line of research termed unlabeled sensing and shuffled linear regression has been exploring under great generality the recovery of
signals from subsampled and permuted measurements; a challenging problem in diverse fields of
data science and machine learning. In this paper we introduce an abstraction of this problem
which we call homomorphic sensing. Given a
linear subspace and a finite set of linear transformations we develop an algebraic theory which
establishes conditions guaranteeing that points in
the subspace are uniquely determined from their
homomorphic image under some transformation
in the set. As a special case, we recover known
conditions for unlabeled sensing, as well as new
results and extensions. On the algorithmic level
we exhibit two dynamic programming based algorithms, which to the best of our knowledge are
the first working solutions for the unlabeled sensing problem for small dimensions. One of them,
additionally based on branch-and-bound, when
applied to image registration under affine transformations, performs on par with or outperforms
state-of-the-art methods on benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
In a recent line of research termed unlabeled sensing, it
has been established that uniquely recovering a signal from
shuffled and subsampled measurements is possible as long
as the number of measurements is at least twice the intrinsic dimension of the signal (Unnikrishnan et al., 2018). The
special case where the signal is fully observed but subject
to a permutation of its values is known as shuffled linear
regression (Hsu et al., 2017; Pananjady et al., 2018; Song
et al., 2018; Abid & Zou, 2018). In its simplest form, it
consists of solving a linear system of equations, with the
1

School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Manolis C. Tsakiris <mtsakiris@shanghaitech.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

entries of the right hand side vector permuted (Unnikrishnan et al., 2015; Tsakiris et al., 2018).
The unlabeled sensing or shuffled linear regression problems and their variations naturally arise in many applications in data science and engineering, such as 1)
record linkage for data integration (Lahiri & Larsen,
2005; Shi et al., 2018), a particularly important problem
in medical data analysis where publicly available health
records are anonymized, 2) image registration (Lian et al.,
2017), multi-target tracking (Poore & Gadaleta, 2006)
and pose/correspondence estimation (David et al., 2004;
Marques et al., 2009), 3) header-free communications in
Internet-Of-Things networks (Pananjady et al., 2017; Song
et al., 2018; Peng et al., 2019) and user de-anonymization
(Narayanan & Shmatikov, 2008; Keller et al., 2009),
4) acoustic wave field reconstruction (Dokmanić, 2019),
5) system identification under asynchronous input/output
samples (Balakrishnan, 1962), and many more, e.g., see
Unnikrishnan et al. 2018; Pananjady et al. 2018.
1.1. Prior-Art
Theory. Suppose that y = Π∗ Ax∗ + ε ∈ Rm is a noisy
and shuffled version of some signal Ax∗ , where x∗ ∈ Rn
is some unknown regression vector, Π∗ is some unknown
permutation, and ε is noise. What can be said about the
estimation of x∗ and Π∗ given y, A and the distribution of
ε? This shuffled linear regression problem has been a classic subject of research in the area of record linkage, where
predominant methods study maximum likelihood estimators under the working hypothesis that an accurate estimate
for the probabilities of transpositions between samples is
available (Fellegi & Sunter, 1969; Lahiri & Larsen, 2005).
However, this is a strong hypothesis that does not extend to
many applications beyond record linkage.
Very recently important theoretical advances have been
made towards understanding this problem in greater generality. Specifically, Slawski & Ben-David 2019; Abid et al.
2017 and Hsu et al. 2017 have demonstrated that in the absence of any further assumptions, the maximum likelihood
estimator x
bML given by
b ML , x
(Π
bML ) = argmin ky − ΠAxk2 ,

(1)

Π,x

where Π ranges over all permutations, is biased. On the

