Scalable Learning in Reproducing Kernel Kreı̆n Spaces

Dino Oglic 1 Thomas Gärtner 2

Abstract
We provide the first mathematically complete
derivation of the Nyström method for low-rank approximation of indefinite kernels and propose an
efficient method for finding an approximate eigendecomposition of such kernel matrices. Building
on this result, we devise highly scalable methods
for learning in reproducing kernel Kreı̆n spaces.
The devised approaches provide a principled and
theoretically well-founded means to tackle large
scale learning problems with indefinite kernels.
The main motivation for our work comes from
problems with structured representations (e.g.,
graphs, strings, time-series), where it is relatively
easy to devise a pairwise (dis)similarity function
based on intuition and/or knowledge of domain
experts. Such functions are typically not positive
definite and it is often well beyond the expertise
of practitioners to verify this condition. The effectiveness of the devised approaches is evaluated
empirically using indefinite kernels defined on
structured and vectorial data representations.

1. Introduction
In learning problems with structured data it is relatively easy
to devise a pairwise similarity/dissimilarity function based
on intuition/knowledge of domain experts. Such functions
are typically not positive definite and it is often the case
that verifying this condition is well beyond the expertise of
practitioners. The learning problems with indefinite similarity/dissimilarity functions are typically modeled via Kreı̆n
spaces (e.g., see Ong et al., 2004; Loosli et al., 2016; Oglic
and Gärtner, 2018), which are vector spaces with an indefinite bilinear form (Azizov and Iokhvidov, 1981; Iokhvidov
et al., 1982). The computational and space complexities of
these approaches are similar to those of the standard kernel
methods that work with positive definite kernels (Schölkopf
1

Department of Informatics, King’s College London, UK
School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, UK.
Correspondence to: Dino Oglic <dino.oglic@uni-bonn.de>.

and Smola, 2001). The Nyström method (Nyström, 1930;
Smola and Schölkopf, 2000; Williams and Seeger, 2001) is
an effective approach for low-rank approximation of positive
definite kernels that can scale kernel methods to problems
with millions of instances (Schölkopf and Smola, 2001). We
provide the first mathematically complete derivation that
extends the Nyström method to low-rank approximation
of indefinite kernels and propose an efficient method for
finding an approximate eigendecomposition of such kernel
matrices. To tackle the computational issues arising in large
scale problems with indefinite kernels, we also devise several novel Nyström-based low-rank approaches tailored for
scalable learning in reproducing kernel Kreı̆n spaces.
We start by showing that the Nyström method can be used
for low-rank approximations of indefinite kernel matrices
and provide means for finding their approximate eigendecompositions (Section 2.2). We then devise two landmark
sampling strategies based on state-of-the-art techniques (Gittens and Mahoney, 2016; Oglic and Gärtner, 2017) used in
Nyström approximations of positive definite kernels (Section 2.3). Having described means for finding low-rank factorizations of indefinite kernel matrices, we formulate lowrank variants of two least squares methods (Tikhonov and
Arsenin, 1977; Rifkin, 2002; Oglic and Gärtner, 2018) for
learning in reproducing kernel Kreı̆n spaces (Section 2.4).
We also derive a novel low-rank variant of the support vector
machine for scalable learning in reproducing kernel Kreı̆n
spaces (Section 2.5), inspired by Oglic and Gärtner (2018).
Having introduced means for scalable learning in reproducing kernel Kreı̆n spaces, we evaluate the effectiveness of
these approaches and the Nyström low-rank approximations
on datasets from standard machine learning repositories
(Section 3). The empirical results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approaches in: i) classification tasks
and ii) problems of finding a low-rank approximation of an
indefinite kernel matrix. The experiments are performed
using 15 representative datasets and a variety of indefinite
kernels. The paper concludes with a discussion where we
contrast ours and other relevant approaches (Section 4).

2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

2. Scalable Learning in Kreı̆n Spaces
In this section, we first provide a novel derivation of the
Nyström method that allows us to extend the approach to

