Submodular Maximization beyond Non-negativity:
Guarantees, Fast Algorithms, and Applications

Christopher Harshaw 1 Moran Feldman 2 Justin Ward 3 Amin Karbasi 4

Abstract
It is generally believed that submodular functions—and the more general class of γ-weakly
submodular functions—may only be optimized
under the non-negativity assumption f (S) ≥ 0.
In this paper, we show that once the function is
expressed as the difference f = g − c, where g is
monotone, non-negative, and γ-weakly submodular and c is non-negative modular, then strong
approximation guarantees may be obtained. We
present an algorithm for maximizing g − c under
a k-cardinality constraint which produces a random feasible set S such that E [g(S)−c(S)] ≥
(1 − e−γ −)g(OPT )−c(OPT ), whose running
time is O( n log2 1 ), independent of k. We extend these results to the unconstrained setting by
describing an algorithm with the same approximation guarantees and faster O( n log 1 ) runtime.
The main techniques underlying our algorithms
are two-fold: the use of a surrogate objective
which varies the relative importance between g
and c throughout the algorithm, and a geometric
sweep over possible γ values. Our algorithmic
guarantees are complemented by a hardness result
showing that no polynomial-time algorithm which
accesses g through a value oracle can do better.
We empirically demonstrate the success of our
algorithms by applying them to experimental design on the Boston Housing dataset and directed
vertex cover on the Email EU dataset.

1

Department of Computer Science, Yale University, New
Haven, USA 2 Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Open University of Israel, Raanana, Israel 3 School of Mathematical Sciences, Queen Mary University of London, London,
UK 4 Department of Electrical Engineering, Yale University, New
Haven, USA. Correspondence to: Christopher Harshaw <christopher.harshaw@yale.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
From summarization and recommendation to clustering and
inference, many machine learning tasks are inherently discrete. Submodularity is an attractive property when designing discrete objective functions, as it encodes a natural
diminishing returns condition and also comes with an extensive literature on optimization techniques. Submodular
optimization techniques have been successfully applied in
a wide variety of machine learning tasks, including sensor placement (Krause & Guestrin, 2005), document summarization (Lin & Bilmes, 2011), speech subset selection
(Wei et al., 2013) influence maximization in social networks
(Kempe et al., 2003), information gathering (Golovin &
Krause, 2011), and graph-cut based image segmentation
(Boykov et al., 2001; Jegelka & Bilmes, 2011), to name a
few. However, in instances when the objective function is
not submodular, existing techniques for submodular optimization many perform arbitrarily poorly, motivating the
need to study broader function classes. While several notions of approximate submodularity have been studied, the
class of γ-weakly submodular functions have (arguably)
enjoyed the most practical success. For example, γ-weakly
submodular optimization techniques have been used in feature selection (Das & Kempe, 2011; Khanna et al., 2017),
anytime linear prediction (Hu et al., 2016), interpretation
of deep neural networks (Elenberg et al., 2017), and high
dimensional sparse regression (Elenberg et al., 2018).
Here, we study the constrained maximization problem
max g(S) − c(S) ,

|S|≤k

(1)

where g is a non-negative monotone γ-weakly submodular
function and c is a non-negative modular function. Problem (1) has various interpretations which may extend the
current submodular framework to apply to more tasks in
machine learning. For instance, the modular cost c may be
added as a penalty to existing submodular maximization
problems to encode a cost for each element. Such a penalty
term may play the role of a regularizer or soft constraint in
a model. When g models the revenue of some collection
of products S and c models the cost of each item, then (1)
corresponds to maximizing profits.

