Learning interpretable continuous-time models
of latent stochastic dynamical systems

Lea Duncker 1 Gergő Bohner 1 Julien Boussard 2 Maneesh Sahani 1

Abstract
We develop an approach to learn an interpretable
semi-parametric model of a latent continuoustime stochastic dynamical system, assuming noisy
high-dimensional outputs sampled at uneven
times. The dynamics are described by a nonlinear
stochastic differential equation (SDE) driven by
a Wiener process, with a drift evolution function
drawn from a Gaussian process (GP) conditioned
on a set of learnt fixed points and corresponding
local Jacobian matrices. This form yields a flexible nonparametric model of the dynamics, with a
representation corresponding directly to the interpretable portraits routinely employed in the study
of nonlinear dynamical systems. The learning algorithm combines inference of continuous latent
paths underlying observed data with a sparse variational description of the dynamical process. We
demonstrate our approach on simulated data from
different nonlinear dynamical systems.

1. Introduction
Many dynamical systems with intrinsic noise may be modelled in continuous time using the framework of stochastic
differential equations (SDE). However identifying a good
SDE model from intermittent observations of the process is
challenging, particularly if the dynamical process is nonlinear and the observations are indirect and noisy. A common
response is to assume a latent process that operates in discretised time, often called a state-space model. This approach
has been applied in contexts ranging from modelling human motion (Wang et al., 2006) to solving control problems
(Eleftheriadis et al., 2017). However, it assumes that observations, and the critical phenomena of the dynamics, can be
1
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, University College London, London, United Kingdom 2 Stanford University,
Palo Alto, California, USA. Correspondence to: Lea Duncker
<duncker@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

accurately modelled using a discrete time grid.
A further challenge when the goal is to gain insight into a
physical or biological system whose parametric description
is unknown, is to obtain an interpretable model of the dynamics from observed data, whether modelled in discrete or
continuous time. State-space models that rely on nonparametric or flexibly parametrised descriptions of dynamics,
for example using Gaussian process (GP) priors or recurrent
neural networks (RNN), may be effective at prediction but
inevitably leave interpretation to a second analytic stage,
posing its own challenges.
In this paper, we consider continuous-time latent SDE models of the form
√
dx = f (x )dt + Σ dw
(1)
Ey|x [y (ti )] = g(C x (ti ) + d ) ,
i = 1, . . . , T ,
where the temporal evolution of a latent variable x ∈ RK
is described by a nonlinear SDE with dynamical evolution
function f : RK 7→ RK and incremental noise covariance
Σ shaping the Wiener noise process w (t). Note that the
nonlinear SDE induces a non-Gaussian prior on x (t) with no
easy access to finite marginal distributions. The latent state
is observed indirectly through noisy measurements y i ∈ RN
at unevenly spaced time points ti . The measurements are
distributed with a known parametric form and generalized
linear dependence; that is the expected value is g(C x + d )
with inverse-link function g and parameters C ∈ RN ×K and
d ∈ RN . We seek to infer latent paths x (t) along with the
dynamical parameters and an interpretable representation of
the dynamical mapping f .
What do we mean by interpretable? The properties of dynamical systems are frequently analyzed by characterizing
dynamical fixed points and local behaviour near these points
(Sussillo & Barak, 2013). When f is a learnt, general function, fixed points must be found numerically (Golub & Sussillo, 2018). This makes it difficult to propagate uncertainty
about f to the number and location of fixed points, and to
the local dynamics around them. Our approach is to develop
a non-parametric Gaussian-process model for f conditioned
on the learnt locations of fixed points and associated local
Jacobians. Thus, we implicitly integrate out the details of

