Analogies Explained: Towards Understanding Word Embeddings

Carl Allen 1 Timothy Hospedales 1

Abstract
Word embeddings generated by neural network
methods such as word2vec (W2V) are well known
to exhibit seemingly linear behaviour, e.g. the
embeddings of analogy “woman is to queen as
man is to king” approximately describe a parallelogram. This property is particularly intriguing
since the embeddings are not trained to achieve
it. Several explanations have been proposed, but
each introduces assumptions that do not hold in
practice. We derive a probabilistically grounded
definition of paraphrasing that we re-interpret
as word transformation, a mathematical description of “wx is to wy ”. From these concepts we
prove existence of linear relationships between
W2V-type embeddings that underlie the analogical phenomenon, identifying explicit error terms.

1. Introduction
The vector representation, or embedding, of words underpins much of modern machine learning for natural language
processing (e.g. Turney & Pantel (2010)). Where, previously, embeddings were generated explicitly from word
statistics, neural network methods are now commonly used
to generate neural embeddings that are of low dimension
relative to the number of words represented, yet achieve
impressive performance on downstream tasks (e.g. Turian
et al. (2010); Socher et al. (2013)). Of these, word2vec2
(W2V) (Mikolov et al., 2013a) and Glove (Pennington et al.,
2014) are amongst the best known and on which we focus.
Interestingly, such embeddings exhibit seemingly linear behaviour (Mikolov et al., 2013b; Levy & Goldberg, 2014a),
e.g. the respective embeddings of analogies, or word relationships of the form “wa is to wa∗ as wb is to wb∗”, often
satisfy wa∗ − wa + wb ≈ wb∗ , where wi is the embedding
1

School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh. Correspondence
to: Carl Allen <carl.allen@ed.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).
2
Throughout, we refer to the more commonly used Skipgram implementation of W2V with negative sampling (SGNS).

of word wi . This enables analogical questions such as “man
is to king as woman is to ..?” to be solved by vector addition and subtraction. Such high order structure is surprising
since word embeddings are trained using only pairwise word
co-occurrence data extracted from a text corpus.
We first show that where embeddings factorise pointwise mutual information (PMI), it is paraphrasing that determines
when a linear combination of embeddings equates to that of
another word. We say king paraphrases man and royal, for
example, if there is a semantic equivalence between king
and {man, royal} combined. We can measure such equivalence with respect to probability distributions over nearby
words, in line with Firth’s maxim “You shall know a word
by the company it keeps” (Firth, 1957). We then show that
paraphrasing can be reinterpreted as word transformation
with additive parameters (e.g. from man to king by adding
royal) and generalise to also allow subtraction. Finally, we
prove that by interpreting an analogy “wa is to wa∗ as wb
is to wb∗ ” as word transformations wa to wa∗ and wb to
wb∗ sharing the same parameters, the linear relationship
observed between word embeddings of analogies follows
(see overview in Fig 4). Our key contributions are:
• to derive a probabilistic definition of paraphrasing and
show that it governs the relationship between one (PMIderived) word embedding and any sum of others;
• to show how paraphrasing can be generalised and interpreted as the transformation from one word to another,
giving a mathematical formulation for “wx is to wx∗”;
• to provide the first rigorous proof of the linear relationship between word embeddings of analogies, including
explicit, interpretable error terms; and
• to show how these relationships materialise between
vectors of PMI values, and so too in word embeddings
that factorise the PMI matrix, or approximate such a
factorisation e.g. W2V and Glove.

2. Previous Work
Intuition for the presence of linear analogical relationships,
or linguistic regularity, amongst word embeddings was first
suggested by Mikolov et al. (2013a;b) and Pennington et al.
(2014), and has been widely discussed since (e.g. Levy &
Goldberg (2014a); Linzen (2016)). More recently, several
theoretical explanations have been proposed:

