Learning What and Where to Transfer

Yunhun Jang * 1 2 Hankook Lee * 1 Sung Ju Hwang 3 4 5 Jinwoo Shin 1 4 5

Abstract

1. Introduction
Learning deep neural networks (DNNs) requires large
datasets, but it is expensive to collect a sufficient amount of
labeled samples for each target task. A popular approach
for handling such lack of data is transfer learning (Pan &
Yang, 2010), whose goal is to transfer knowledge from a
known source task to a new target task. The most widely
used method for transfer learning is pre-training with fine*
Equal contribution 1 School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST,
Korea 2 OMNIOUS, Korea 3 School of Computing, KAIST, Korea 4 Graduate School of AI, KAIST, Korea 5 AITRICS, Korea.
Correspondence to: Jinwoo Shin <jinwoos@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Target

Source

Layer

Feature map
l2 loss

Previous method
Proposed method

As the application of deep learning has expanded
to real-world problems with insufficient volume
of training data, transfer learning recently has
gained much attention as means of improving the
performance in such small-data regime. However,
when existing methods are applied between heterogeneous architectures and tasks, it becomes
more important to manage their detailed configurations and often requires exhaustive tuning on
them for the desired performance. To address
the issue, we propose a novel transfer learning
approach based on meta-learning that can automatically learn what knowledge to transfer from
the source network to where in the target network.
Given source and target networks, we propose an
efficient training scheme to learn meta-networks
that decide (a) which pairs of layers between the
source and target networks should be matched for
knowledge transfer and (b) which features and
how much knowledge from each feature should
be transferred. We validate our meta-transfer approach against recent transfer learning methods
on various datasets and network architectures, on
which our automated scheme significantly outperforms the prior baselines that find “what and
where to transfer” in a hand-crafted manner.

0.2
0.2
1.0

0.2
0.2

1.0

0.2

f, g Meta-networks
<latexit sha1_base64="(null)">(null)</latexit>

l2 loss
0.05

0.5

3.0

0.4

0.4
0.15

Where to Transfer

What to Transfer

Figure 1. Top: Prior approaches. Knowledge transfer between two
networks is done between hand-crafted chosen pairs of layers
without considering importance of channels. Bottom: Our metatransfer method. The meta-networks f, g automatically decide
amounts of knowledge transfer between layers of the two networks
and importance of channels when transfer. Line width indicates an
amount of transfer in pairs of transferring layers and channels.

tuning (Razavian et al., 2014): first train a source DNN
(e.g. ResNet (He et al., 2016)) with a large dataset (e.g.
ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009)) and then, use the learned
weights as an initialization to train a target DNN. Yet, finetuning definitely is not a panacea. If the source and target
tasks are semantically distant, it may provide no benefit.
Cui et al. (2018) suggest to sample from the source dataset
depending on a target task for pre-training, but it is only
possible when the source dataset is available. There is also
no straightforward way to use fine-tuning, if the network
architectures for the source and target tasks largely differ.
Several existing works can be applied to this challenging scenario of knowledge transfer between heterogeneous DNNs
and tasks. Learning without forgetting (LwF) (Li & Hoiem,
2018) proposes to use knowledge distillation, suggested in
Hinton et al. (2015), for transfer learning by introducing an
additional output layer on a target model, and thus it can be
applied to situations where the source and target tasks are
different. FitNet (Romero et al., 2015) proposes a teacherstudent training scheme for transferring the knowledge from
a wider teacher network to a thinner student network, by

