Safe Policy Improvement with Baseline Bootstrapping

Romain Laroche 1 Paul Trichelair 1 Remi Tachet des Combes 1

Abstract
This paper considers Safe Policy Improvement
(SPI) in Batch Reinforcement Learning (Batch
RL): from a fixed dataset and without direct access to the true environment, train a policy that
is guaranteed to perform at least as well as the
baseline policy used to collect the data. Our approach, called SPI with Baseline Bootstrapping
(SPIBB), is inspired by the knows-what-it-knows
paradigm: it bootstraps the trained policy with
the baseline when the uncertainty is high. Our
first algorithm, Πb -SPIBB, comes with SPI theoretical guarantees. We also implement a variant,
Π≤b -SPIBB, that is even more efficient in practice. We apply our algorithms to a motivational
stochastic gridworld domain and further demonstrate on randomly generated MDPs the superiority of SPIBB with respect to existing algorithms, not only in safety but also in mean performance. Finally, we implement a model-free version of SPIBB and show its benefits on a navigation task with deep RL implementation called
SPIBB-DQN, which is, to the best of our knowledge, the first RL algorithm relying on a neural
network representation able to train efficiently
and reliably from batch data, without any interaction with the environment.

1. Introduction
Most real-world Reinforcement Learning agents (Sutton &
Barto, 1998, RL) are to be deployed simultaneously on numerous independent devices and cannot be patched quickly.
In other practical applications, such as crop management
or clinical tests, the outcome of a treatment can only be
assessed after several years. Consequently, a bad update
could be in effect for a long time, potentially hurting the
user’s trust and/or causing irreversible damages. Devising
safe algorithms with guarantees on the policy performance
1
Microsoft Research, Montréal, Canada. Correspondence to:
Romain Laroche <romain.laroche@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

is a key challenge of modern RL that needs to be tackled
before any wide-scale adoption.
Batch RL is an existing approach to such offline settings
and consists in training a policy on a fixed set of observations without access to the true environment (Lange et al.,
2012). It should not be mistaken with the multi-batch setting where the learner trains successive policies from small
batches of interactions with the environment (Duan et al.,
2016). Current Batch RL algorithms are however either unsafe or too costly computationally to be used in real-world
applications. Safety in RL (Garcı́a & Fernández, 2015) is
an overloaded term, as it may be considered with respect to
parametric uncertainty (Thomas et al., 2015a; Petrik et al.,
2016), internal uncertainty (Altman, 1999; Carrara et al.,
2019), interruptibility (Orseau & Armstrong, 2016; Guerraoui et al., 2017), or as exploration in a hazardous environment (Schulman et al., 2015; 2017; Fatemi et al., 2019).
We focus on the former.
In this paper, we develop novel safe and efficient Batch RL
algorithms. Our methodology for Safe Policy Improvement
(SPI), called SPI with Baseline Bootstrapping (SPIBB), is
introduced in Section 2. It consists in bootstrapping the
trained policy with the behavioral policy, called baseline,
in the state-action pair transitions that were not probed
enough in the dataset. It therefore assumes access to the
baseline, an assumption already made in the SPI literature (Petrik et al., 2016). Other SPI algorithms assume
knowledge of the baseline performance instead (Thomas
et al., 2015a;b). We argue that our assumption is more natural since SPI aims to improve an existing policy. This scenario is typically encountered when a policy is trained in a
simulator and then run in its real environment, for instance
in Transfer RL (Taylor & Stone, 2009); or when a system
is designed with expert knowledge and then optimized, for
example in Dialogue applications (Laroche et al., 2010).
Still in Section 2, we implement a computationally efficient
algorithm, Πb -SPIBB, that provably approximately outperforms the baseline with high confidence. At the expense
of theoretical guarantees, we design a variant, Π≤b -SPIBB,
that is even more efficient in practice. Moreover, we implement an equivalent model-free version. Coupled with
a pseudo-count implementation (Bellemare et al., 2016),
it allows applying SPIBB algorithms to tasks requiring a

