Heterogeneous Model Reuse via Optimizing Multiparty Multiclass Margin

Xi-Zhu Wu 1 Song Liu 2 3 Zhi-Hua Zhou 1

Abstract
Nowadays, many problems require learning a
model from data owned by different participants
who are restricted to share their examples due to
privacy concerns, which is referred to as multiparty learning in the literature. In conventional multiparty learning, a global model is usually trained
from scratch via a communication protocol, ignoring the fact that each party may already have
a local model trained on her own dataset. In this
paper, we deﬁne a multiparty multiclass margin to
measure the global behavior of a set of heterogeneous local models, and propose a general learning method called HMR (Heterogeneous Model
Reuse) to optimize the margin. Our method reuses
local models to approximate a global model, even
when data are non-i.i.d distributed among parties,
by exchanging few examples under predeﬁned
budget. Experiments on synthetic and real-world
data covering different multiparty scenarios show
the effectiveness of our proposal.

1. Introduction
In conventional machine learning problems, all the data are
collected from a single user. However, in some medical,
ﬁnancial or biological scenarios, data are separately collected from different participants, who are unwilling to share
their conﬁdential datasets. Despite the concern on privacy,
they want to cooperatively learn a global model from the
union of all the datasets. The above problem is referred to as
multi-party learning problem in the literature (Pathak et al.,
2010).
Existing approaches for multi-party learning usually assume
each party trains a homogeneous local model, that means
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 2 University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom 3 The Alan Turing Institute, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Zhi-Hua Zhou
<zhouzh@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

they learn parameters of the same dimension, like neural network with the same structure (Shokri & Shmatikov, 2015).
Therefore parties can communicate about the local model
parameters under a designed protocol and compute a single global model. The homogeneous model assumption is
reasonable if the local data distribution is identical for all
parties. However, in reality the data are usually biasedly
collected among parties due to temporal/spatial differences,
such that using homogeneous local models is probably unrealistic.
Take the ﬂu detection problem as an example. Doctors want
to build a learning model to detect what type of virus one
patient is affected based on her symptoms, for appropriate
treatment. However, the types of inﬂuenza diverse geographically (Rejmanek et al., 2015), which means the distribution
of patient records collected by a hospital in California may
be different from those in Florida. In an extreme case, some
types are unknown to the other hospital.
Assume there are 4 types of inﬂuenza in the United States.
In California, 2 of 4 are commonly detected, while in Florida
3 of 4 types are often detected. We assume in the two states,
doctors separately trained two models hCA and hFL which
work locally well in California and Florida respectively.
However, a direct ensemble of the two local models may
not work well on all the patients. Let hUS denote the ideal
global model trained on the combination of local datasets.
When we input a patient record x, each model outputs its
prediction as shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Example of ﬂu detection on a patient x affected
with type 2 ﬂu. “−” means this model is not able to predict
the corresponding class. Taking the maximal score as prediction, hFL is consistent with hUS , but the combination of
two local models h{CA,FL} is not since 3/4 > 4/7.
Type

1

2

3

4

hUS (x)
hCA (x)
hFL (x)
h{CA,FL} (x)

2/10
−
2/7
2/7

4/10
−
4/7
4/7

1/10
1/4
1/7
1/4

3/10
3/4
−
3/4

In this example, the output spaces among the two local models (hCA , hFL ) and the global model (hUS ) are all different.

