Model Based Conditional Gradient Method with Armijo-like Line Search

Yura Malitsky * 1 Peter Ochs * 2

Abstract
The Conditional Gradient Method is generalized
to a class of non-smooth non-convex optimization problems with many applications in machine
learning. The proposed algorithm iterates by minimizing so-called model functions over the constraint set. Complemented with an Armijo line
search procedure, we prove that subsequences
converge to a stationary point. The abstract framework of model functions provides great flexibility
for the design of concrete algorithms. As special
cases, for example, we develop an algorithm for
additive composite problems and an algorithm for
non-linear composite problems which leads to a
Gauss–Newton-type algorithm. Both instances
are novel in non-smooth non-convex optimization
and come with numerous applications in machine
learning. Moreover, we obtain a hybrid version
of Conditional Gradient and Proximal Minimization schemes for free, which combines advantages
of both. Our algorithm is shown to perform favorably on a sparse non-linear robust regression
problem and we discuss the flexibility of the proposed framework in several matrix factorization
formulations.

1. Introduction
A prominent algorithm for applications in machine learning
and statistics, such as matrix learning, recommender systems, clustering, etc., is the Conditional Gradient Method
(aka Frank–Wolfe Method). Its success is based on a low
per-iteration complexity in several applications. For example, in low rank approximation (e.g. matrix completion),
the main computational cost per iteration is the minimization of a linear function over a nuclear norm (trace norm or
Schatten 1-norm) constraint, which can be solved efficiently
by approximating the singular vector associated with the
*

largest singular value of the gradient that defines the linear
function. In contrast, related proximal minimization algorithms require a full singular value decomposition, which is
significantly more expensive.
In this paper, we generalize the Conditional Gradient
Method to non-smooth non-convex optimization problems
and unify the convergence analysis for several algorithms.
The classical convergence analysis relies on the Descent
Lemma, in the case the objective f has Lipschitz continuous
gradient. The Descent Lemma states that, for some L > 0,
L
kx−x̄k22 for all x, x̄ .
2
This inequality can also be interpreted as a measure for the
linearization error of f around x̄, i.e., the approximation
quality of f by a linear function. We emphasize the fact
that such a measure for the approximation quality of f ,
rather than smoothness, is key for the convergence of the
algorithm. We generalize the linear approximation to any
model function fx̄ that obeys a certain approximation quality
|f (x)−f (x̄)−h∇f (x̄), x−x̄i| ≤

|f (x) − fx̄ (x)| ≤ ω(kx − x̄k) ,
measured by a growth function ω : R+ → R+ that controls
the approximation error. Note that this inequality does not
imply smoothness, even in the special case ω(t) = L2 t2 . If
f = g + h with a smooth function h and a non-smooth function g, we can define fx̄ (x) = g(x)+h(x̄)+h∇h(x̄), x− x̄i
and observe that the approximation error is only due to the
linearization of the smooth part h of the objective, while fx̄
is non-smooth. There are many other situations of interest.
We choose the properties of the growth function ω such
that fx̄ mimics a first order oracle of f . The freedom to
choose the model function depending on the problem structure at hand makes our approach a flexible and efficient way
to solve structured non-smooth non-convex minimization
problems.
In this model function framework, our generalized Conditional Gradient update step at xk reads
yk ∈ argmin fxk (x)

Equal contribution 1 University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany 2 Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany. Correspondence to: Peter Ochs <ochs@math.uni-sb.de>.

xk+1 = γk yk + (1 − γk )xk ,

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

where γk ∈ [0, 1] and C is a compact and convex constraint
set. For fxk being the linearization of f around xk , this is
exactly the Conditional Gradient Method.

x∈C

