On Efficient Optimal Transport: An Analysis of Greedy and Accelerated
Mirror Descent Algorithms

Tianyi Lin * 1 Nhat Ho * 2 Michael I. Jordan 3

Abstract
We provide theoretical analyses for two algorithms that solve the regularized optimal transport
(OT) problem between two discrete probability
measures with at most n atoms. We show that
a greedy variant of the classical Sinkhorn algorithm, known as the Greenkhorn
algorithm, can

e n2 /ε2 , improving on the best
be improved to O

e n2 /ε3 . This
known complexity bound of O
matches the best known complexity bound for the
Sinkhorn algorithm and helps explain why the
Greenkhorn algorithm outperforms the Sinkhorn
algorithm in practice. Our proof technique is
based on a primal-dual formulation and provide
a tight upper bound for the dual solution, leading to a class of adaptive primal-dual accelerated mirror descent (APDAMD) algorithms. We
prove that the complexity of these algorithms
e n2 √γ/ε in which γ ∈ (0, n] refers to
is O
some constants in the Bregman divergence. Experimental results on synthetic and real datasets
demonstrate the favorable performance of the
Greenkhorn and APDAMD algorithms in practice.

1. Introduction
Optimal transport—the problem of finding minimal cost
couplings between pairs of probability measures—has a
long history in mathematics and operations research (Villani, 2003). In recent years, it has been the inspiration for
numerous applications in machine learning and statistics,
including posterior contraction of parameter estimation in
Bayesian nonparametrics models (Nguyen, 2013; 2016),
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of IEOR, University of California, Berkeley 2 Department of EECS, University of California, Berkeley 3 Department of Statistics and EECS, University
of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Nhat Ho <minhnhat@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

scalable posterior sampling for large datasets (Srivastava
et al., 2015; 2018), optimization models for clustering complex structured data (Ho et al., 2018), deep generative models and domain adaptation in deep learning (Arjovsky et al.,
2017; Gulrajani et al., 2017; Courty et al., 2017; Tolstikhin
et al., 2018), and other applications (Rolet et al., 2016;
Peyré et al., 2016; Carrière et al., 2017; Lin et al., 2018).
These large-scale applications have placed significant new
demands on the efficiency of algorithms for solving the optimal transport problem, and a new literature has begun to
emerge to provide new algorithms and complexity analyses
for optimal transport.
The computation of the optimal-transport (OT) distance can
be formulated as a linear programming problem and solved
in principle by interior-point methods. The best
 known come n5/2 , achieved by
plexity bound in this formulation is O
an interior-point algorithm due to Lee & Sidford (2014).
However, Lee and Sidford’s method requires as a subroutine a practical implementation of the Laplacian linear system solver, which is not yet available in the literature. Pele
& Werman (2009) proposed an alternative, implementable
interior-point method for OT with a complexity bound is
e 3 ). Another prevalent approach for computing OT disO(n
tance between two discrete probability measures involves
regularizing the objective function by the entropy of the
transportation plan. The resulting problem, referred to as
entropic regularized OT or simply regularized OT (Cuturi,
2013; Benamou et al., 2015), is more readily solved than
the original problem since the objective is strongly convex with respect to k·k1 . The longstanding state-of-the-art
algorithm for solving regularized OT is the Sinkhorn algorithm (Sinkhorn, 1974; Knight, 2008; Kalantari et al., 2008).
Inspired by the growing scope of applications for optimal
transport, several new algorithms have emerged in recent
years that have been shown empirically to have superior
performance when compared to the Sinkhorn algorithm.
An example includes the Greenkhorn algorithm (Altschuler
et al., 2017; Chakrabarty & Khanna, 2018; Abid & Gower,
2018), which is a greedy version of Sinkhorn algorithm.
A variety of standard optimization algorithms have also
been adapted to the OT setting, including accelerated gradient descent (Dvurechensky et al., 2018), quasi-Newton
methods (Cuturi & Peyré, 2016; Blondel et al., 2018) and

