Robust Estimation of Tree Structured Gaussian Graphical Models

Ashish Katiyar 1 Jessica Hoffmann 1 Constantine Caramanis 1

Abstract
Consider jointly Gaussian random variables
whose conditional independence structure is specified by a graphical model. If we observe realizations of the variables, we can compute the covariance matrix, and it is well known that the support
of the inverse covariance matrix corresponds to
the edges of the graphical model. Instead, suppose we only have noisy observations. If the noise
at each node is independent, we can compute the
sum of the covariance matrix and an unknown
diagonal. The inverse of this sum is (in general)
dense. We ask: can the original independence
structure be recovered? We address this question
for tree structured graphical models. We prove
that this problem is unidentifiable, but show that
this unidentifiability is limited to a small class of
candidate trees. We further present additional constraints under which the problem is identifiable.
Finally, we provide an O(n3 ) algorithm to find
this equivalence class of trees.

1. Introduction
Graphical models are a way of efficiently representing the
conditional independence relationships satisfied by a collection of random variables. They form the starting point for
many efficient estimation and inference algorithms. Thus,
learning the graphical model of a collection of random variables is a fundamental, and very well-studied problem.
For jointly Gaussian random variables, the graphical model
is given by the non-zeros in the inverse of the covariance
matrix, also known as the precision matrix. We ask a natural
variant of this fundamental problem: suppose we observe the
random variables with independent additive noise. Thus, in
the infinite sample limit, rather than knowing the covariance
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The
University of Texas at Austin, Texas, USA. Correspondence to:
Ashish Katiyar <a.katiyar@utexas.edu>, Constantine Caramanis
<constantine@utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

matrix, Σ, we have access only to M = Σ + D, the sum
of the covariance matrix and a diagonal matrix. In general,
(Σ + D)−1 does not share the sparsity structure of Σ−1 .
In the language of probability, if two random variables X
and Y are independent conditioned on Z, then we do not
expect that (X + W1 ) and (Y + W2 ) are independent when
conditioned on (Z + W3 ), even when W1 , W2 and W3 are
independent.
We ask: when is it possible to recover the conditional independence structure (graphical model) of the underlying
variables, i.e., when can we recover the sparsity pattern of
Σ−1 ? Despite the voluminous literature on Gaussian graphical models, to the best of our knowledge, there has been no
answer to this question.
Contributions of this paper. We show the following:
• A negative result of unidentifiability (Theorem 1):
Even for a simple Markov chain on three nodes, the
problem is unidentifiable even when an arbitrarily
small amount of independent noise is added. That is,
there are covariance matrices that differ only on their
diagonal entries, and yet whose inverses have different
sparsity patterns.
• A positive result of limited unidentifiability (Theorem
2): While unidentifiable, even for large independent
noise, the ambiguity is highly limited. Specifically,
we show that for tree-structured graphical models, distinguishing leaves from their immediate neighbors is
impossible, but the remaining structure of the graph is
identifiable (see Figure 1 for an illustration).
• Identifiability with Side Information:
– (Theorem 3) We characterize an upper bound
on the noise which, if given as side information,
makes the problem identifiable.
– (Theorem 4) If there is side information that in
the precision matrix, for a leaf node, the diagonal
entry is greater than the absolute value of the other
non-zero entry, the problem is identifiable.
– (Theorems 5, 6) Given a lower bound on the minimum eigenvalue of the true covariance matrix as
side information, we characterize the upper bound
on the noise for which the problem is identifiable.
We also characterize a lower bound on the noise
which makes the problem unidentifiable.

