Online Adaptive Principal Component Analysis and Its extensions

Jianjun Yuan 1 Andrew Lamperski 1

Abstract
We propose algorithms for online principal component analysis (PCA) and variance minimization for adaptive settings. Previous literature has
focused on upper bounding the static adversarial
regret, whose comparator is the optimal fixed action in hindsight. However, static regret is not
an appropriate metric when the underlying environment is changing. Instead, we adopt the adaptive regret metric from the previous literature and
propose online adaptive algorithms for PCA and
variance minimization, that have sub-linear adaptive regret guarantees. We demonstrate both theoretically and experimentally that the proposed
algorithms can adapt to the changing environments.

1. Introduction
In the general formulation of online learning, at each time
step, the decision maker makes decision without knowing
its outcome, and suffers a loss based on the decision and
the observed outcome. Loss functions are chosen from a
fixed class, but the sequence of losses can be generated deterministically, stochastically, or adversarially.
Online learning is a very popular framework with many
variants and applications, such as online convex optimization (Zinkevich, 2003; Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2012), online
convex optimization for cumulative constraints (Yuan &
Lamperski, 2018), online non-convex optimization (Hazan
et al., 2017; Gao et al., 2018), online auctions (Blum et al.,
2004), online controller design (Yuan & Lamperski, 2017),
and online classification and regression (Crammer et al.,
2006). Additionally, recent advances in linear dynamical
system identification (Hazan et al., 2018) and reinforcement learning (Fazel et al., 2018) have been developed
based on the ideas from online learning.
1

University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA. Correspondence to: Jianjun Yuan <yuanx270@umn.edu>, Andrew Lamperski <alampers@umn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

The standard performance metric for online learning measures the difference between the decision maker’s cumulative loss and the cumulative loss of the best fixed decision
in hindsight (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006). We call this
metric static regret, since the comparator is the best fixed
optimum in hindsight. However, when the underlying environment is changing, due to the fixed comparator (Herbster
& Warmuth, 1998), static regret is no longer appropriate.
Alternatively, to capture the changes of the underlying environment, (Hazan & Seshadhri, 2009) introduced the metric called adaptive regret, which is defined as the maximum
static regret over any contiguous time interval.
In this paper, we are mainly concerned with the problem of online Principal Component Analysis (online PCA)
for adaptive settings. Previous online PCA algorithms are
based on either online gradient descent or matrix exponentiated gradient algorithms (Tsuda et al., 2005; Warmuth &
Kuzmin, 2006; 2008; Nie et al., 2016). These works bound
the static regret for online PCA algorithms, but do not address adaptive regret. As argued above, static regret is not
appropriate under changing environments.
This paper gives an efficient algorithm for online PCA and
variance minimization in changing environments. The proposed method mixes the randomized algorithm from (Warmuth & Kuzmin, 2008) with a fixed-share step (Herbster
& Warmuth, 1998). This is inspired by the work of (CesaBianchi et al., 2012b;a), which shows that the Hedge algorithm (Freund & Schapire, 1997) together with a fixedshare step provides low regret under a variety of measures,
including adaptive regret.
Furthermore, we extend the idea of the additional fixedshare step to the online adaptive variance minimization in
two different parameter spaces: the space of unit vectors
and the simplex. In the Section 6 on experiments1 , we also
test our algorithm’s effectiveness. In particular, we show
that our proposed algorithm can adapt to the changing environment faster than the previous online PCA algorithm.
While it is possible to apply the algorithm in (Hazan & Seshadhri, 2009) to solve the online adaptive PCA and variance minimization problems with the similar order of the
1
code available
adaptive-PCA

at

https://github.com/yuanx270/online-

