PAC Identification of Many Good Arms in Stochastic Multi-Armed Bandits

Arghya Roy Chaudhuri 1 Shivaram Kalyanakrishnan 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of identifying any k
out of the best m arms in an n-armed stochastic
multi-armed bandit; framed in the PAC setting,
this particular problem generalises both the problem of “best subset selection” (Kalyanakrishnan &
Stone, 2010) and that of selecting “one out of the
best m” arms (Roy Chaudhuri & Kalyanakrishnan,
2017). We present a lower bound on the worstcase sample complexity for general k, and a fully
sequential PAC algorithm, LUCB-k-m, which is
more sample-efficient on easy instances. Also,
extending our analysis to infinite-armed bandits,
we present a PAC algorithm that is independent
of n, which identifies an arm from the best ρ fraction of arms using at most an additive poly-log
number of samples than compared to the lower
bound, thereby improving over Roy Chaudhuri
& Kalyanakrishnan (2017) and Aziz et al. (2018).
The problem of identifying k > 1 distinct arms
from the best ρ fraction is not always well-defined;
for a special class of this problem, we present
lower and upper bounds. Finally, through a reduction, we establish a relation between upper
bounds for the “one out of the best ρ” problem
for infinite instances and the “one out of the best
m” problem for finite instances. We conjecture
that it is more efficient to solve “small” finite instances using the latter formulation, rather than
going through the former.

1. Introduction
The stochastic multi-armed bandit (Robbins, 1952; Berry
& Fristedt, 1985) is a well-studied abstraction of decision
making under uncertainty. Each arm of a bandit represents
a decision. A pull of an arm represents taking the associated
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian
Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 400076, India. Correspondence to: Arghya Roy Chaudhuri <arghya@cse.iitb.ac.in>,
Shivaram Kalyanakrishnan <shivaram@cse.iitb.ac.in>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

decision, which produces a real-valued reward. The reward
is drawn i.i.d. from a distribution corresponding to the arm,
independent of the pulls of other arms. At each round, the
experimenter may consult the preceding history of pulls and
rewards to decide which arm to pull.
The traditional objective of the experimenter is to maximise
the expected cumulative reward over a horizon of pulls, or
equivalently, to minimise the regret with respect to always
pulling an optimal arm. Achieving this objective requires
a careful balance between exploring (to reduce uncertainty
about the arms’ expected rewards) and exploiting (accruing high rewards). Regret-minimisation algorithms have
been used in a variety of applications, including clinical
trials (Robbins, 1952), adaptive routing (Awerbuch & Kleinberg, 2008), and recommender systems (Li et al., 2010).
Of separate interest is the problem of identifying an arm
with the highest mean reward (Bechhofer, 1958; Paulson,
1964; Even-Dar et al., 2002), under what is called the “pure
exploration” regime. For applications such as product testing (Audibert et al., 2010) and strategy selection (Goschin
et al., 2012), there is a dedicated phase in the experiment
in which the rewards obtained are inconsequential. Rather,
the objective is to identify the best arm either (1) in the
minimum number of trials, for a given confidence threshold (Even-Dar et al., 2002; Kalyanakrishnan & Stone, 2010),
or alternatively, (2) with minimum error, after a given number of trials (Audibert et al., 2010; Carpentier & Valko,
2015). Our investigation falls into the first category, which
is termed the “fixed confidence” setting. Conceived by
Bechhofer (1958), best-arm-identification in the fixed confidence setting has received a significant amount of attention over the years (Even-Dar et al., 2002; Gabillon et al.,
2011; Karnin et al., 2013; Jamieson et al., 2014). The problem has also been generalised to identify the best subset of
arms (Kalyanakrishnan et al., 2012).
More recently, Roy Chaudhuri & Kalyanakrishnan (2017)
have introduced the problem of identifying a single arm
from among the best m in an n-armed bandit. This formulation is particularly useful when the number of arms is large,
and in fact is a viable alternative even when the number of
arms is infinite. In many practical scenarios, however, it
is required to identify more than a single good arm. For
example, imagine that a company needs to complete a task

