A Theoretical Analysis of Contrastive Unsupervised Representation Learning
Sanjeev Arora 1 2 Hrishikesh Khandeparkar 1 Mikhail Khodak 3 Orestis Plevrakis 1 Nikunj Saunshi 1

Abstract
Recent empirical works have successfully used
unlabeled data to learn feature representations
that are broadly useful in downstream classification tasks. Several of these methods are reminiscent of the well-known word2vec embedding
algorithm: leveraging availability of pairs of semantically “similar” data points and “negative
samples,” the learner forces the inner product of
representations of similar pairs with each other to
be higher on average than with negative samples.
The current paper uses the term contrastive learning for such algorithms and presents a theoretical
framework for analyzing them by introducing latent classes and hypothesizing that semantically
similar points are sampled from the same latent
class. This framework allows us to show provable
guarantees on the performance of the learned representations on the average classification task that
is comprised of a subset of the same set of latent
classes. Our generalization bound also shows that
learned representations can reduce (labeled) sample complexity on downstream tasks. We conduct
controlled experiments in both the text and image
domains to support the theory.

1. Introduction
This paper concerns unsupervised representation learning:
using unlabeled data to learn a representation function f
such that replacing data point x by feature vector f (x) in
new classification tasks reduces the requirement for labeled
data. This is distinct from semi-supervised learning, where
learning can leverage unlabeled as well as labeled data.
(Section 7 surveys other prior ideas and models).
1

Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, USA. 2 Institute
for Advanced Study, Princeton, New Jersey, USA. 3 Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. Correspondence to:
Orestis Plevrakis <orestisp@cs.princeton.edu>, Nikunj Saunshi
<nsaunshi@cs.princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

For images, a proof of existence for broadly useful representations is the output of the penultimate layer (the one before
the softmax) of a powerful deep net trained on ImageNet.
In natural language processing (NLP), low-dimensional representations of text – called text embeddings – have been
computed with unlabeled data (Peters et al., 2018; Devlin
et al., 2018). Often the embedding function is trained by
using the embedding of a piece of text to predict the surrounding text (Kiros et al., 2015; Logeswaran & Lee, 2018;
Pagliardini et al., 2018). Similar methods that leverage similarity in nearby frames in a video clip have had some success
for images as well (Wang & Gupta, 2015).
Many of these algorithms are related: they assume access to
pairs or tuples (in the form of co-occurrences) of text/images
that are more semantically similar than randomly sampled
text/images, and their objective forces representations to
respect this similarity on average. For instance, in order to
learn a representation function f for sentences, a simplified
version of what Logeswaran & Lee (2018) minimize is the
following loss function
"
!#
T
+
ef (x) f (x )
log
E
T
T
x,x+ ,x
ef (x) f (x+ ) + ef (x) f (x )
where (x, x+ ) are a similar pair and x is presumably dissimilar to x (often chosen to be a random point) and typically referred to as a negative sample. Though reminiscent
of past ideas – e.g. kernel learning, metric learning, cotraining (Cortes et al., 2010; Bellet et al., 2013; Blum &
Mitchell, 1998) – these algorithms lack a theoretical framework quantifying when and why they work. While it seems
intuitive that minimizing such loss functions should lead
to representations that capture ‘similarity,’ formally it is
unclear why the learned representations should do well on
downstream linear classification tasks – their somewhat
mysterious success is often treated as an obvious consequence. To analyze this success, a framework must connect
‘similarity’ in unlabeled data with the semantic information
that is implicitly present in downstream tasks.
We propose the term Contrastive Learning for such methods
and provide a new conceptual framework with minimal
assumptions1 . Our main contributions are the following:
1
The alternative would be to make assumptions about generative models of data. This is difficult for images and text.

