Categorical Feature Compression via Submodular Optimization

MohammadHossein Bateni * 1 Lin Chen * 1 2 Hossein Esfandiari * 1 Thomas Fu * 1 Vahab S. Mirrokni * 1
Afshin Rostamizadeh * 1

Abstract
In the era of big data, learning from categorical
features with very large vocabularies (e.g., 28
million for the Criteo click prediction dataset)
has become a practical challenge for machine
learning researchers and practitioners. We design
a highly-scalable vocabulary compression algorithm that seeks to maximize the mutual information between the compressed categorical feature
and the target binary labels and we furthermore
show that its solution is guaranteed to be within
a 1 − 1/e ≈ 63% factor of the global optimal
solution. To achieve this, we introduce a novel reparametrization of the mutual information objective, which we prove is submodular, and design a
data structure to query the submodular function in
amortized O(log n) time (where n is the input vocabulary size). Our complete algorithm is shown
to operate in O(n log n) time. Additionally, we
design a distributed implementation in which the
query data structure is decomposed across O(k)
machines such that each machine only requires
O( nk ) space, while still preserving the approximation guarantee and using only logarithmic rounds
of computation. We also provide analysis of simple alternative heuristic compression methods to
demonstrate they cannot achieve any approximation guarantee. Using the large-scale Criteo learning task, we demonstrate better performance in
retaining mutual information and also verify competitive learning performance compared to other
baseline methods.

1. Introduction
In modern large scale machine learning tasks, the presence
of categorical features with extremely large vocabularies
*

Equal contribution 1 Google, New York, NY, USA 2 Department
of Electrical Engineering, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
Correspondence to: Lin Chen <lin.chen@yale.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

is a standard occurrence. For example, in tasks such as
product recommendation and click-through rate prediction,
categorical variables corresponding to inventory id, webpage identifier, or other such high cardinality values, can
easily contain anywhere from hundreds of thousands to tens
of millions of unique values. The size of machine learning
models generally grows at least linearly with the vocabulary
size and, thus, the memory required to serve the model, the
training and inference cost, as well as the risk of overfitting
become an issue with very large vocabularies. In the particular case of neural networks model, one generally uses an
embedding layer to consume categorical inputs. The number of parameters in the embedding layer is O(nh), where
n is the size of the vocabulary and h is the number of units
in the first hidden layer.
To give a concrete example, the Criteo click prediction
benchmark has about 28 million categorical feature values
(CriteoLabs, 2014), thus resulting in an embedding layer
more than 1 billion parameters for a modestly sized first
hidden layer. Note, this number dwarfs the number of parameters found in the remainder of the neural network. Again,
to give a concrete example, even assuming a very deep
fully connected network of depth 102 with hidden layers of
size 103 , we have (103 × 103 )102 = 108 parameters in the
hidden network – still an order of magnitude smaller than
the embedding layer alone. This motivates the problem of
compressing the vocabulary into a smaller size while still
retaining as much information as possible.
In this work, we model the compression task by considering
the problem of maximizing the mutual information between
the compressed version of the categorical features and the
target label. We first observe a connection between this
problem and the quantization problem for discrete memoryless channels, and note a polynomial-time algorithm
for the problem (Kurkoski & Yagi, 2014; Iwata & Ozawa,
2014). The resulting algorithm, however, is based on solving a quadratic-time dynamic program, and is not scalable.
Our main goal in this paper is to develop a scalable and
distributed algorithm with a guaranteed approximation factor. We achieve this goal by developing a novel connection
to submodular optimization. Although in some settings,
entropy-based set functions are known to be submodular,
this is not the case for the mutual information objective

