BayesNAS: A Bayesian Approach for Neural Architecture Search

Hongpeng Zhou 1 * Minghao Yang 1 * Jun Wang 2 Wei Pan 1

Abstract
One-Shot Neural Architecture Search (NAS)
is a promising method to significantly reduce
search time without any separate training. It
can be treated as a Network Compression problem on the architecture parameters from an overparameterized network. However, there are two
issues associated with most one-shot NAS methods. First, dependencies between a node and its
predecessors and successors are often disregarded
which result in improper treatment over zero operations. Second, architecture parameters pruning
based on their magnitude is questionable. In this
paper, we employ the classic Bayesian learning
approach to alleviate these two issues by modeling architecture parameters using hierarchical
automatic relevance determination (HARD) priors. Unlike other NAS methods, we train the overparameterized network for only one epoch then
update the architecture. Impressively, this enabled
us to find the architecture on CIFAR-10 within
only 0.2 GPU days using a single GPU. Competitive performance can be also achieved by transferring to ImageNet. As a byproduct, our approach
can be applied directly to compress convolutional
neural networks by enforcing structural sparsity
which achieves extremely sparse networks without accuracy deterioration.

1. Introduction
Neural Architecture Search (NAS), the process of automating architecture engineering, is thus a logical next step in automating machine learning since (Zoph & Le, 2017). There
are basically three existing frameworks for neural architecture search. Reinforcement learning based NAS (Baker
et al., 2017; Zoph & Le, 2017; Zhong et al., 2018; Zoph
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Cognitive Robotics, Delft
University of Technology, Netherlands 2 Department of Computer
Science, University College London, UK. Correspondence to: Wei
Pan <wei.pan@tudelft.nl>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

et al., 2018; Cai et al., 2018) methods take the generation
of a neural architecture as an agent’s action with the action
space identical to the search space. More recent neuroevolutionary approaches (Real et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2018b;
Real et al., 2019; Miikkulainen et al., 2019; Xie & Yuille,
2017; Elsken et al., 2019a) use gradient-based methods for
optimizing weights and solely use evolutionary algorithms
for optimizing the neural architecture itself. However, these
two frameworks take enormous computational power when
compared to a search using a single GPU. One-Shot based
NAS is a promising approach to significantly reduce search
time without any separate training, which treats all architectures as different subgraphs of a supergraph (the one-shot
model) and shares weights between architectures that have
edges of this super-graph in common (Saxena & Verbeek,
2016; Brock et al., 2018; Pham et al., 2018; Bender et al.,
2018; Liu et al., 2019b; Cai et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2019;
Zhang et al., 2019a;b). A comprehensive survey on Neural
Architecture Search can be found in (Elsken et al., 2019b).
Our approach is a one-shot based NAS solution which treats
NAS as a Network Compression/pruning problem on the
architecture parameters from an over-parameterized network. However, despite it’s remarkable less searching time
compared to reinforcement learning and neuro-evolutionary
approaches, we can identify a number of significant and
practical disadvantages of the current one-shot based NAS.
First, dependencies between a node and its predecessors and
successors are disregarded in the process of identifying the
redundant connections. This is mainly motivated by the improper treatment of zero operations. On one hand, the logit
of zero may dominate some of the edges while the child
network still has other non-zero edges to keep it connected
(Liu et al., 2019b; Xie et al., 2019; Cai et al., 2019; Zhang
et al., 2019b), for example, node 2 in Figure1a. Similarly,
as shown in Figure 1 of (Xie et al., 2019), the probability
511
of invalid/disconnected graph sampled will be 1024
when
there are three non-zero plus one zero operation. Though
post-processing to safely remove isolated nodes is possible,
e.g., for chain-like structure, it demands extensive extra computations to reconstruct the graph for complex search space
with additional layer types and multiple branches and skip
connections. This may prevent the use of modern network
structure as the backbone such as DenseNet (Huang et al.,
2017), newly designed motifs (Liu et al., 2018b) and complex computer vision tasks such as semantic segmentation

