Interpreting Adversarially Trained Convolutional Neural Networks

Tianyuan Zhang 1 Zhanxing Zhu 2 3 4

Abstract
We attempt to interpret how adversarially trained
convolutional neural networks (AT-CNNs) recognize objects. We design systematic approaches to
interpret AT-CNNs in both qualitative and quantitative ways and compare them with normally
trained models. Surprisingly, we find that adversarial training alleviates the texture bias of standard CNNs when trained on object recognition
tasks, and helps CNNs learn a more shape-biased
representation. We validate our hypothesis from
two aspects. First, we compare the salience maps
of AT-CNNs and standard CNNs on clean images
and images under different transformations. The
comparison could visually show that the prediction of the two types of CNNs is sensitive to dramatically different types of features. Second, to
achieve quantitative verification, we construct additional test datasets that destroy either textures or
shapes, such as style-transferred version of clean
data, saturated images and patch-shuffled ones,
and then evaluate the classification accuracy of
AT-CNNs and normal CNNs on these datasets.
Our findings shed some light on why AT-CNNs
are more robust than those normally trained ones
and contribute to a better understanding of adversarial training over CNNs from an interpretation
perspective.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved great
success in a variety of visual recognition tasks (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012; Girshick et al., 2014; Long et al., 2015) with
their stacked local connections. A crucial issue is to understand what is being learned after training over thousands or
even millions of images. This involves interpreting CNNs.
1
School of EECS, Peking University, China 2 School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, China 3 Center for Data Science, Peking University 4 Beijing Institute of Big Data Research.
Correspondence to: Zhanxing Zhu <zhanxing.zhu@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Along this line, some recent works showed that standard
CNNs trained on ImageNet make their predictions rely on
the local textures rather than long-range dependencies encoded in the shape of objects (Geirhos et al., 2019; Brendel
& Bethge, 2019; Ballester & de Araújo, 2016). Consequently, this texture bias prevents the trained CNNs from
generalizing well on those images with distorted textures
but maintained shape information. Geirhos et al. (2019) also
showed that using a combination of Stylized-ImageNet and
ImageNet can alleviate the texture bias of standard CNNs.
It naturally raises an intriguing question:
Are there any other trained CNNs are more biased towards
shapes?
Recently, normally trained neural networks were found to
be easily fooled by maliciously perturbed examples, i.e., adversarial examples (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Kurakin et al.,
2016). To defense the adversarial examples, adversarial
training was proposed; that is, instead of minimizing the
loss function over the clean example, it minimizes almost
worst-case loss over the slightly perturbed examples (Madry
et al., 2018). We name these adversarially trained networks
as AT-CNNs. They were extensively shown to be able to
enhance the robustness, i.e., improving the classification
accuracy over the adversarial examples. Then,
What is learned by adversarially trained CNNs to make it
more robust?
In this work, in order to explore the answer to the above
questions, we systematically design various experiments to
interpret the AT-CNNs and compare them with normally
trained models. We find that AT-CNNs are better at capturing long-range correlations such as shapes, and less biased
towards textures than normally trained CNNs in popular
object recognition datasets. This finding partially explains
why AT-CNNs tends to be more robust than standard CNNs.
We validate our hypothesis from two aspects. First, we
compare the salience maps of AT-CNNs and standard CNNs
on clean images and those under different transformations.
The comparison could visually show that the predictions of
the two CNNs are sensitive to dramatically different types
of features. Second, we construct additional test datasets
that destroy either textures or shapes, such as the styletransferred version of clean data, saturated images and patch-

