Decomposing feature-level variation with
Covariate Gaussian Process Latent Variable Models
Kaspar Märtens 1 Kieran R Campbell 2 3 4 Christopher Yau 5 6

Abstract
The interpretation of complex high-dimensional
data typically requires the use of dimensionality
reduction techniques to extract explanatory lowdimensional representations. However, in many
real-world problems these representations may
not be sufficient to aid interpretation on their own,
and it would be desirable to interpret the model
in terms of the original features themselves. Our
goal is to characterise how feature-level variation depends on latent low-dimensional representations, external covariates, and non-linear interactions between the two. In this paper, we propose
to achieve this through a structured kernel decomposition in a hybrid Gaussian Process model
which we call the Covariate Gaussian Process
Latent Variable Model (c-GPLVM). We demonstrate the utility of our model on simulated examples and applications in disease progression
modelling from high-dimensional gene expression data in the presence of additional phenotypes. In each setting we show how the c-GPLVM
can extract low-dimensional structures from highdimensional data sets whilst allowing a breakdown of feature-level variability that is not present
in other commonly used dimensionality reduction
approaches.

1. Introduction
The identification of low-dimensional structure is crucial
to gaining insight from complex high-dimensional data. In
probabilistic models, this task can be formulated as finding
a low-dimensional latent variable zn ∈ RQ for each data
1
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, UK
Department of Statistics, University of British Columbia, Canada
3
BC Cancer Agency, Canada 4 UBC Data Science Institute, Canada
5
The Alan Turing Institute, UK 6 Institute of Cancer and Genomic
Sciences, University of Birmingham, UK. Correspondence to:
Christopher Yau <c.yau@bham.ac.uk>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

point n = 1, . . . , N and a set of mappings f (j) : z 7→ y(j)
for every feature y(j) , j ∈ {1, . . . , P } so that Q  P .
Obtaining an informative one- or two-dimensional representation of the data is often particularly desirable, allowing us
to visually interpret the patterns and relationships present in
the data.
There are a number of approaches for defining the mapping
functions, ranging from linear models such as the pPCA
(Tipping & Bishop, 1999) to non-linear models provided
by neural networks such as the Variational Autoencoder
(VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2014). The former are classically well-studied, their behaviours widely explored and
can be considered to be “interpretable”, but the linearity
assumptions can often be too restrictive. Non-linear techniques offer more flexibility with the disadvantage that the
non-trivial dependencies that are learnt can be challenging
to characterise, leading to their popular description as “black
box techniques”.
While the derivation of low-dimensional representations represents a powerful means of information extraction from
high-dimensional data, they can be of limited utility without an explicit reference back to the original observed features. For example, in transcriptomics, latent representations of gene expression profiles can help to identify subpopulations of biological samples with similar coordinated
gene behaviour. However, as the underlying biology is
ultimately physically driven by variation at the level of individual genes, we would like to decompose that expression
variability into a number of meaningful sub-components,
in particular, as a function of latent coordinates and other
observed covariates.
In this paper, we focus on dimensionality reduction in the
presence of additional covariate information. This is often available in real-life applications, for example, in transcriptomics, covariate information might include categorical labels (e.g. denoting known disease sub-populations),
continuous-valued measurements (e.g. biomarkers), or censored information (e.g. patient survival times). More formally, suppose that in addition to (zn , yn ), each data point
is also associated with a C-dimensional covariate vector,
xn ∈ RC which may act to modulate the variation in the
data. Our goal is not black-box predictive modelling, i.e.

