Generalized Linear Rule Models
Dennis Wei 1 Sanjeeb Dash 1 Tian Gao 1 Oktay Günlük 1

Abstract
This paper considers generalized linear models
using rule-based features, also referred to as rule
ensembles, for regression and probabilistic classification. Rules facilitate model interpretation
while also capturing nonlinear dependences and
interactions. Our problem formulation accordingly trades off rule set complexity and prediction accuracy. Column generation is used to optimize over an exponentially large space of rules
without pre-generating a large subset of candidates or greedily boosting rules one by one.
The column generation subproblem is solved
using either integer programming or a heuristic optimizing the same objective. In experiments involving logistic and linear regression,
the proposed methods obtain better accuracycomplexity trade-offs than existing rule ensemble algorithms. At one end of the trade-off, the
methods are competitive with less interpretable
benchmark models.

1. Introduction
Decision rules have served as important building blocks
for supervised learning models. They are often combined
via logical operations into decision lists (Rivest, 1987;
Angelino et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2017) and rule sets
(Lakkaraju et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2017), models whose
appeal stems from the human-interpretability of their constituent rules.
In this paper, we consider models that are linear combinations of decision rules, also referred to as rule ensembles,
within the framework of generalized linear models (GLM)
(McCullagh & Nelder, 1989). Rule ensembles retain interpretability while allowing modelling flexibility since rules
are able to capture nonlinear dependences and interactions.
Our problem formulation accordingly trades off predic1
IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Dennis Wei <dwei@us.ibm.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

tive accuracy against the complexity of the rule ensemble,
measured in terms of the number of rules as well as their
lengths, i.e., the number of elementary conditions on individual variables in the conjunction. We make use of GLMs
to address the real-valued prediction tasks of regression
and probabilistic classification, where class probability estimates are desired.
The main challenge in learning rule-based models is due to
the exponential size of the space of rules, corresponding to
all possible conjunctions of the input features. Predominant
approaches include pre-selecting a (often large) subset of
candidate rules and greedy optimization in which rules are
added one by one but not revised. The former includes optimization methods that select from among the candidates
(Friedman & Popescu, 2008; Lakkaraju et al., 2016; Wang
et al., 2017) while the latter includes sequential covering
(Cohen, 1995; Clark & Boswell, 1991; Fürnkranz et al.,
2014) and boosting.
Our main contribution herein is to propose an approach
that avoids both of the above alternatives. The technique
of column generation (CG) is used to intelligently search
the space of rules and produce useful ones as needed, as
opposed to using a large, fixed set of candidates. Instead
of boosting, a GLM is re-fit as rules are generated, which
allows existing rules to be reweighted and even discarded.
The CG subproblem is formulated as an integer program
(not of exponential size) and is solved using either integer
programming or a heuristic that targets the same objective.
We also discuss a non-CG algorithm that uses only firstdegree rules, i.e., those with a single condition, and optionally numerical features as-is. This latter algorithm produces a kind of generalized additive model (GAM) (Hastie
& Tibshirani, 1990).
Experiments are presented involving the two most common cases of GLMs, logistic and linear regression. The
proposed methods are seen to yield better performancecomplexity trade-offs than existing rule ensemble algorithms. At the performance-maximizing end of the tradeoff, the methods are competitive with less interpretable
benchmark models such as tree ensembles and nonlinear
support vector machines (SVM). The trade-off curves also
suggest that substantially simpler models are often available at a relatively small cost in performance.

