Regularization in Directable Environments with Application to Tetris

Jan Malte Lichtenberg 1 Özgür Şimşek 1

Abstract
Learning from small data sets is difficult in the absence of specific domain knowledge. We present a
regularized linear model called STEW, which benefits from a generic and prevalent form of prior
knowledge: feature directions. STEW shrinks
weights toward each other, converging to an equalweights solution in the limit of infinite regularization. We provide theoretical results on the equalweights solution that explains how STEW can
productively trade-off bias and variance. Across
a wide range of learning problems, including
Tetris, STEW outperformed existing linear models, including ridge regression, the Lasso, and
the non-negative Lasso, when feature directions
were known. The model proved to be robust to
unreliable (or absent) feature directions, outperforming alternative models under diverse conditions. Our results in Tetris were obtained by using
a novel approach to learning in sequential decision environments based on multinomial logistic
regression.

1. Introduction
Domain knowledge can be very useful in machine learning,
especially when training data are costly or difficult to obtain. We explore a particular type of domain knowledge in
supervised learning: feature directions. The direction of a
feature indicates whether the feature is associated positively
or negatively with the response variable. In many applications, feature directions are known or can be estimated with
ease. For example, in learning how to play the game of
Tetris, most players would agree that the number of holes is
associated negatively with the game score.
How can such domain knowledge be fruitfully incorporated
into the learning process? We present an approach based
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Bath, Bath,
United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Jan Malte Lichtenberg
<j.m.lichtenberg@bath.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

on regularization. Specifically, we propose a model that
introduces a bias toward giving all features equal weight. We
call this model Shrinkage Toward Equal Weights (STEW).
The ordinary least squares (OLS) solution to linear regression is unbiased but can have high variance when the training
set is small. Regularization reduces variance by introducing
assumptions about the data and anchoring the weights in a
way that reflects these assumptions. For example, Lassotype models (Tibshirani, 1996; Bühlmann & van de Geer,
2011) assume that the features are irrelevant and shrink
weights toward zero with increasing regularization strength.
Rather than shrinking the weights toward zero, STEW
shrinks them toward each other, converging to equal weights
in the limit of infinite regularization. We study properties of
the equal-weights model as a source of intuition regarding
when, and why, STEW can perform well. We provide theoretical evidence that EW has relatively low bias and that this
bias is further reduced when feature directions are known.
Our empirical analysis shows that these properties translate
from the equal-weights model to STEW. When information
on directions is available, STEW routinely outperforms
existing models including the non-negative Lasso, which
also incorporates feature directions. Unlike methods that
are based on non-negativity constraints, we found STEW
to be robust when the underlying assumption of known
feature directions was violated, that is, when the information
about directions was unreliable or absent. Finally, we found
STEW to be remarkably useful when learning to play Tetris.
Our results in Tetris were obtained using a novel approach to
learning in sequential decision environments. This approach,
called M-learning, is built around multinomial logistic regression. Here, we describe M-learning and present results
from when it is used for learning to play Tetris, with or
without regularization. A subsequent article will more fully
explore the properties and behavior of M-learning.

2. Background
We consider the linear regression problem where the objective is to predict a response y ∈ R by
ŷ = β0 +

p
X
j=1

βj x j ,

(1)

