Sublinear Time Nearest Neighbor Search over Generalized Weighted Space

Yifan Lei 1 Qiang Huang 1 Mohan Kankanhalli 1 Anthony K. H. Tung 1

Abstract
Nearest Neighbor Search (NNS) over generalized
weighted space is a fundamental problem which
has many applications in various fields. However,
to the best of our knowledge, there is no sublinear time solution to this problem. Based on the
idea of Asymmetric Locality-Sensitive Hashing
(ALSH), we introduce a novel spherical asymmetric transformation and propose the first two novel
weight-oblivious hashing schemes SL-ALSH and
S2-ALSH accordingly. We further show that both
schemes enjoy a quality guarantee and can answer
the NNS queries in sublinear time. Evaluations
over three real datasets demonstrate the superior
performance of the two proposed schemes.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we study a fundamental problem of Nearest
Neighbor Search (NNS) over the Generalized Weighted
Square Euclidean Distance (GWSED) dw . Given a dataset
D of n data objects and a query object q with a weight
vector w in the Euclidean space Rd , the problem of NNS
over dw is to find the nearest object o∗ ∈ D of q such that
o∗ = arg min dw (o, q).
(1)
o∈D

For any two objects o = (o1 , o2 , . . . , od ) and q =
(q1 , q2 , . . . , qd ) ∈ Rd , the GWSED dw (o, q) between o and
q is computed as follows:
d
X
dw (o, q) =
wi (oi − qi )2 ,
(2)
i=1

where w = (w1 , w2 , . . . , wd ) is a weight vector. Here w
is specified only when q arrives and we consider the generalized setting of w ∈ Rd without any constraints such as
wi ≥ 0, ∀i. Although this generalization makes the distance
dw no longer a metric if wi < 0, it is fundamental and has a
variety of diverse applications.
1
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
Correspondence to: Qiang Huang
<huangq@comp.nus.edu.sg>,
Anthony K. H. Tung
<atung@comp.nus.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

For example, under the specific setting that wi = 1, ∀i,
the problem of NNS over L2 distance (or Euclidean distance) can be reduced to NNS over dw . Similarly, by setting
wi = −1, ∀i, the Furthest Neighbor Search (FNS) over L2
distance can be converted into NNS over dw . In addition, the
problem of Maximum Inner Product Search (MIPS) which
has attracted increasing interests in recent times, as we will
discuss in Sect. 3, can also be reduced to NNS over dw .
Thus, NNS over dw is a very fundamental problem.
There are many scenarios in which the problem of NNS over
dw arises naturally, especially when the negative weight
wi < 0 is allowed. For example, for the Recommendation
systems (Wang et al., 2015; Gu et al., 2016), the weight
vector w makes it possible for users to adjust the importance of different dimensions of retrieved items, and the
negative weights indicate that users do not expect the search
results which are similar to query item in those particular
dimensions. Another popular scenario is the kNN classifier
(Fernandez et al., 2018; Bhattacharya et al., 2017; Liu et al.,
2015). It is common to set different weights for different dimensions. An efficient method for NNS over dw can largely
reduce the tuning time of kNN classifier for the weights of
different dimensions.
The naive solution for NNS over dw is linear scan, which
sequentially compares data objects o ∈ D to the query q
with its corresponding weight vector w. However, the query
time complexity is O(nd), which is not efficient if n or d
is large. Due to the “curse of dimensionality,” the space
and/or query time complexities of traditional space partition
based methods (Guttman, 1984; Bentley, 1990; Katayama
& Satoh, 1997) for exact NNS are exponential in d (Weber
et al., 1998; Beyer et al., 1999). Locality-Sensitive Hashing
(LSH) and its variants (Indyk & Motwani, 1998; Datar et al.,
2004; Andoni & Indyk, 2006; Gan et al., 2012; Sun et al.,
2014; Huang et al., 2015; Zheng et al., 2016; Huang et al.,
2017; Andoni et al., 2018) are the sublinear time methods
for approximate NNS in high-dimensional space, but they
are only suitable for NNS over dw for the specific type of
w with wi = 1, ∀i. For the generalized setting of w, it is
not sufficient for NNS over dw . We are interested in the
methods with a weight-oblivious data structure that knows
no information of w during the preprocessing phase but can
answer the NNS queries over dw for arbitrary w of various
types, which can be seen as “one index for all generalized

