Efficient Optimization of Loops and Limits with Randomized Telescoping Sums

Alex Beatson 1 Ryan P. Adams 1

Abstract
We consider optimization problems in which the
objective requires an inner loop with many steps
or is the limit of a sequence of increasingly costly
approximations. Meta-learning, training recurrent
neural networks, and optimization of the solutions to differential equations are all examples
of optimization problems with this character. In
such problems, it can be expensive to compute
the objective function value and its gradient, but
truncating the loop or using less accurate approximations can induce biases that damage the overall
solution. We propose randomized telescope (RT)
gradient estimators, which represent the objective as the sum of a telescoping series and sample
linear combinations of terms to provide cheap unbiased gradient estimates. We identify conditions
under which RT estimators achieve optimization
convergence rates independent of the length of
the loop or the required accuracy of the approximation. We also derive a method for tuning RT
estimators online to maximize a lower bound on
the expected decrease in loss per unit of computation. We evaluate our adaptive RT estimators on a
range of applications including meta-optimization
of learning rates, variational inference of ODE parameters, and training an LSTM to model long
sequences.

1. Introduction
Many important optimization problems consist of objective
functions that can only be computed iteratively or as the
limit of an approximation. Machine learning and scientific
computing provide many important examples. In metalearning, evaluation of the objective typically requires the
training of a model, a case of bi-level optimization. When
training a model on sequential data or to make decisions
1

Department of Computer Science, Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ, USA. Correspondence to: Alex Beatson <abeatson@cs.princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

over time, each learning step requires looping over time
steps. More broadly, in many scientific and engineering
applications one wishes to optimize an objective that is
defined as the limit of a sequence of approximations with
both fidelity and computational cost increasing according
to a natural number n ≥ 1. Inner-loop examples include:
integration by Monte Carlo or quadrature with n evaluation
points; solving ordinary differential equations (ODEs) with
an Euler or Runge Kutta method with n steps and O( n1 ) step
size; and solving partial differential equations (PDEs) with
a finite element basis with size or order increasing with n.
Whether the task is fitting parameters to data, identifying
the parameters of a natural system, or optimizing the design
of a mechanical part, in this work we seek to more rapidly
solve problems in which the objective function demands
a tradeoff between computational cost and accuracy. We
formalize this by considering parameters θ ∈ RD and a loss
function L(θ) that is the uniform limit of a sequence Ln (θ):
min L(θ) = min lim Ln (θ) .
θ

θ

n→H

(1)

Some problems may involve a finite horizon H, in
other cases H = ∞. We also introduce a cost function C : N+ → R that is nondecreasing in n to represent the
cost of computing Ln and its gradient.
A principal challenge of optimization problems with the
form in Eq. 1 is selecting a finite N such that the minimum
of the surrogate LN is close to that of L, but without LN (or
its gradients) being too expensive. Choosing a large N can
be computationally prohibitive, while choosing a small N
may bias optimization. Meta-optimizing learning rates with
truncated horizons can choose wrong hyperparameters by
orders of magnitude (Wu et al., 2018). Truncating backpropogation through time for recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
favors short term dependencies (Tallec & Ollivier, 2017).
Using too coarse a discretization to solve an ODE or PDE
can cause error in the solution and bias outer-loop optimization. These optimization problems thus experience a sharp
trade-off between efficient computation and bias.
We propose randomized telescope (RT) gradient estimators,
which provide cheap unbiased gradient estimates to allow
efficient optimization of these objectives. RT estimators
represent the objective or its gradients as a telescoping series of differences between intermediate values, and draw

