Escaping Saddle Points with Adaptive Gradient Methods

Matthew Staib 1 2 Sashank Reddi 3 Satyen Kale 3 Sanjiv Kumar 3 Suvrit Sra 1

Abstract
Adaptive methods such as Adam and RMSProp
are widely used in deep learning but are not well
understood. In this paper, we seek a crisp, clean
and precise characterization of their behavior in
nonconvex settings. To this end, we first provide a
novel view of adaptive methods as preconditioned
SGD, where the preconditioner is estimated in an
online manner. By studying the preconditioner on
its own, we elucidate its purpose: it rescales the
stochastic gradient noise to be isotropic near stationary points, which helps escape saddle points.
Furthermore, we show that adaptive methods can
efficiently estimate the aforementioned preconditioner. By gluing together these two components,
we provide the first (to our knowledge) secondorder convergence result for any adaptive method.
The key insight from our analysis is that, compared to SGD, adaptive methods escape saddle
points faster, and can converge faster overall to
second-order stationary points.

1. Introduction
Stochastic first-order methods are the algorithms of choice
for training deep networks, or more generally optimization
problems of the form argminx Ez [f (x, z)]. While vanilla
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is still the most popular
such algorithm, there has been much recent interest in adaptive methods that adaptively change learning rates for each
parameter. This is a very old idea, e.g. (Jacobs, 1988); modern variants such as Adagrad (Duchi et al., 2011; McMahan
& Streeter, 2010) Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) and RMSProp (Tieleman & Hinton, 2012) are widely used in deep
learning due to their good empirical performance.
Adagrad uses the square root of the sum of the outer product
of the past gradients to achieve adaptivity. At time step t,
1

MIT EECS 2 Based on work performed at Google Research
New York 3 Google Research New York. Correspondence to:
Matthew Staib <mstaib@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Adagrad updates the parameters in the following manner:
−1/2

xt+1 = xt − Gt

gt ,

where
Pt gt Tis a noisy stochastic gradient at xt and Gt =
i=1 gi gi . More often, a diagonal version of Adagrad
is used due to practical considerations, which effectively
yields a per parameter learning rate. In the convex setting,
Adagrad achieves provably good performance, especially
when the gradients are sparse. Although Adagrad works
well in sparse convex settings, its performance appears to
deteriorate in (dense) nonconvex settings. This performance
degradation is often attributed to the rapid decay of the
learning rate in Adagrad over time, which is a consequence
of rapid increase in eigenvalues of the matrix Gt .
To tackle this issue, variants of Adagrad such as Adam and
RMSProp have been proposed, which replace the sum of
the outer products
Pt with an exponential moving average i.e.,
Gt = (1 − β) i=1 β t−i gi giT for some constant β ∈ (0, 1).
This connection with Adagrad is often used to justify the
design of Adam and RMSProp (e.g. (Goodfellow et al.,
2016)). Although this connection is simple and appealing,
it is clearly superficial. For instance, while learning rates
in Adagrad decrease monotonically, it is not necessarily the
case with Adam or RMSProp as shown recently in Reddi
et al. (2018b), leading to their non-convergence in even
simple convex settings. Thus, a principled understanding of
these adaptive methods is largely missing.
In this paper, we introduce a much simpler way of thinking about adaptive methods such as Adam and RMSProp.
Roughly, adaptive methods try to precondition SGD by
some matrix A, e.g. when A is diagonal, Aii corresponds to
the effective stepsize for coordinate i. For some choices of
A the algorithms do not have oracle access to A, but instead
form an estimate Â ≈ A. We separate out these two steps,
by 1) giving convergence guarantees for an idealized setting
where we have access to A, then 2) proving bounds on the
quality of the estimate Â. Our approach makes it possible
to effectively intuit about the algorithms, prove convergence
guarantees (including second-order convergence), and give
insights about how to choose algorithm parameters. It also
leads to a number of surprising results, including an understanding of why the Reddi et al. (2018b) counterexample is
hard for adaptive methods, why adaptive methods tend to
escape saddle points faster than SGD (observed empirically

