Bayesian Optimization of Composite Functions

Raul Astudillo 1 Peter I. Frazier 1 2

Abstract
We consider optimization of composite objective functions, i.e., of the form f (x) = g(h(x)),
where h is a black-box derivative-free expensiveto-evaluate function with vector-valued outputs,
and g is a cheap-to-evaluate real-valued function.
While these problems can be solved with standard
Bayesian optimization, we propose a novel approach that exploits the composite structure of the
objective function to substantially improve sampling efficiency. Our approach models h using a
multi-output Gaussian process and chooses where
to sample using the expected improvement evaluated on the implied non-Gaussian posterior on
f , which we call expected improvement for composite functions (EI-CF). Although EI-CF cannot be computed in closed form, we provide a
novel stochastic gradient estimator that allows its
efficient maximization. We also show that our
approach is asymptotically consistent, i.e., that
it recovers a globally optimal solution as sampling effort grows to infinity, generalizing previous convergence results for classical expected
improvement. Numerical experiments show that
our approach dramatically outperforms standard
Bayesian optimization benchmarks, reducing simple regret by several orders of magnitude.

1. Introduction
We consider optimization of composite objective functions,
i.e., of the form f (x) = g(h(x)), where h is a blackbox expensive-to-evaluate vector-valued function, and g
is a real-valued function that can be cheaply evaluated.
We assume evaluations are noise-free. These problems
arise, for example, in calibration of simulators to real-world
data (Vrugt et al., 2001; Cullick et al., 2006; Schultz &
1
School of Operations Research and Information Engineering,
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA 2 Uber, San Francisco, CA,
USA. Correspondence to: Raul Astudillo <ra598@cornell.edu>,
Peter I. Frazier <pf98@cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Sokolov, 2018); in materials and drug design (Kapetanovic,
2008; Frazier & Wang, 2016) when seeking to design a
compound with a particular set of physical or chemical
properties; when finding maximum a posteriori estimators with expensive-to-evaluate likelihoods (Bliznyuk et al.,
2008); and in constrained optimization (Gardner et al., 2014;
Hernández-Lobato et al., 2016) when seeking to maximize
one expensive-to-evaluate quantity subject to constraints
on others (See Section 2 for a more detailed description of
these problems.).
One may ignore the composite structure of the objective
and solve such problems using Bayesian optimization (BO)
(Brochu et al., 2010), which has been shown to perform well
compared with other general-purpose optimization methods
for black-box derivative-free expensive-to-evaluate objectives (Snoek et al., 2012). In the standard BO approach, one
would build a Gaussian process (GP) prior over f based
on past observations of f (x), and then choose points at
which to evaluate f by maximizing an acquisition function
computed from the posterior. This approach would not use
observations of h(x) or knowledge of g.
In this paper, we describe a novel BO approach that leverages the structure of composite objectives to optimize them
more efficiently. This approach builds a multi-output GP on
h, and uses the expected improvement (Jones et al., 1998)
under the implied statistical model on f as its acquisition
function. This implied statistical model is typically nonGaussian when g is non-linear. We refer to the resulting
acquisition function as expected improvement for composite functions (EI-CF) to distinguish it from the classical
expected improvement (EI) acquisition function evaluated
on a GP posterior on f .
Intuitively, the above approach can substantially outperform
standard BO when observations of h(x) provide information
relevant to optimization that is not available from observations of f (x) alone. As one example, suppose x and h(x)
are both one-dimensional and g(y) = y 2 . If h is continuous,
h(0) < 0, and h(1) > 0, then our approach knows that
there is a global minimum in the interval (0, 1), while the
standard approach does not. This informational benefit is
compounded further when h is vector-valued.
While EI-CF is simply the expected improvement under
a different statistical model, unlike the classical EI acqui-

