Formal Privacy for Functional Data with Gaussian Perturbations

Ardalan Mirshani 1 Matthew Reimherr 1 Aleksandra Slavkovic 1

Abstract
Motivated by the rapid rise in statistical tools in
Functional Data Analysis, we consider the Gaussian mechanism for achieving differential privacy
(DP) with parameter estimates taking values in
a, potentially infinite-dimensional, separable Banach space. Using classic results from probability theory, we show how densities over function
spaces can be utilized to achieve the desired DP
bounds. This extends prior results of Hall et al.
(2013) to a much broader class of statistical estimates and summaries, including “path level” summaries, nonlinear functionals, and full function
releases. By focusing on Banach spaces, we provide a deeper picture of the challenges for privacy
with complex data, especially the role regularization plays in balancing utility and privacy. Using
an application to penalized smoothing, we highlight this balance in the context of mean function
estimation. Simulations and an application to diffusion tensor imaging are briefly presented, with
extensive additions included in a supplement.

1. Introduction
New studies, surveys, and technologies are resulting in ever
richer and more informative data sets. Data being collected
as part of the “big data revolution” have dramatically expanded the pace of scientific progress over the last several
decades, but often contain a significant amount of personal
or subject level information. These data and their corresponding analyses present substantial challenges for preserving privacy as researchers attempt to understand what
information can be publicly released without impeding scientific advancement and policy making (Lane et al., 2014).
One type of big data that has been heavily researched in the
statistics community over the last two decades is functional
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, Pennsylvania
State University, State College, PA, USA. Correspondence to:
Matthew Reimherr <mreimherr@psu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

data, with the corresponding branch of statistics called functional data analysis, FDA. FDA is concerned with conducting statistical inference on samples of functions, trajectories, surfaces, and other similar objects. Such tools have
become increasingly necessary as our data gathering technologies become more sophisticated. FDA methods have
proven very useful in a wide variety of fields including economics, finance, genetics, geoscience, anthropology, and
kinesiology, to name only a few (Ramsay & Silverman,
2002; 2005; Ferraty & Romain, 2011; Horváth & Kokoszka,
2012; Kokoszka & Reimherr, 2017). Indeed, nearly any data
rich area of science will eventually come across applications
that are amenable to FDA techniques. However, functional
and other high dimensional data are also a rich source of
potentially personally identifiable information (Kulynych,
2002; Erlich & Narayanan, 2014; Schadt et al., 2012).
Related Work: To date, there has been very little work
concerning FDA and statistical data privacy, in either Statistical Disclosure Limitation, SDL or Differential Privacy, DP.
SDL is the branch of statistics concerned with limiting identifying information in released data and summaries while
maintaining their utility for valid statistical inference, and
has a rich history for both methodological developments
and applications for “safe” release of altered (or masked)
microdata and tabular data (Dalenius, 1977; Rubin, 1993;
Willenborg & De Waal, 1996; Fienberg & Slavković, 2010;
Hundepool et al., 2012). DP has emerged from theoretical
computer science with a goal of designing privacy mechanisms with mathematically provable disclosure risk (Dwork,
2006; Dwork et al., 2006b). Hall et al. (2013) provide the
most substantial contribution to statistical privacy with FDA
to date, working within the DP framework and the Gaussian mechanism for releasing a finite number of point-wise
evaluations, with applications to kernel density estimation
and support vector machines. They provide a limiting argument that establishes DP for certain sets of functions. One
of the major findings of Hall et al. (2013) is the connection between DP and Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces,
which we extend more broadly to Cameron-Martin Spaces.
Recently, Aldà & Rubinstein (2017) extended the work of
Hall et al. (2013) by considering a Laplace (instead of a
Gaussian) mechanism and focused on releasing an approximation based on Bernstein polynomials, exploiting their
close connection to point-wise evaluation on a grid or mesh.

