Transfer of Samples in Policy Search via Multiple Importance Sampling

Andrea Tirinzoni 1 Mattia Salvini 1 Marcello Restelli 1

Abstract
We consider the transfer of experience samples
in reinforcement learning. Most of the previous
works in this context focused on value-based settings, where transferring instances conveniently
reduces to the transfer of (s, a, s0 , r) tuples. In
this paper, we consider the more complex case
of reusing samples in policy search methods, in
which the agent is required to transfer entire trajectories between environments with different transition models. By leveraging ideas from multiple
importance sampling, we propose robust gradient estimators that effectively achieve this goal,
along with several techniques to reduce their variance. In the case where the transition models are
known, we theoretically establish the robustness
to the negative transfer for our estimators. In the
case of unknown models, we propose a method
to efficiently estimate them when the target task
belongs to a finite set of possible tasks and when it
belongs to some reproducing kernel Hilbert space.
We provide empirical results to show the effectiveness of our estimators.

1. Introduction
In many real-world problems, reinforcement learning (RL)
agents (Sutton & Barto, 1998) repeatedly face environments
with similar, but different, dynamics. Consider, for instance,
deploying a policy on a robot with different physical parameters than the ones it was trained for, or adapting from simulation to reality, or learning under non-stationarity. In all
these cases, the agent could potentially exploit knowledge
acquired in the past environments to speed-up the learning
process of new related tasks. How this knowledge reuse can
be achieved is the fundamental problem of transfer in RL.
Knowledge transfer has been widely studied for RL domains
(Taylor & Stone, 2009; Lazaric, 2012). In this context, the
1
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy. Correspondence to: Andrea Tirinzoni <andrea.tirinzoni@polimi.it>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

agent is supposed to reuse knowledge acquired from a set
of source tasks to accelerate the learning process of a new
target task. Designing a transfer algorithm poses three main
questions: what element should be transferred? How should
the transfer be performed? Is this procedure beneficial for
the target task? An answer to the last question is particularly
crucial to prevent negative transfer, the situation in which
reused knowledge harms the learning process.
Among the many kinds of knowledge that have been successfully transferred in RL, we focus on experience samples,
i.e., states, actions, and rewards that the agent collects from
different tasks. Most of the previous approaches in this
setting focused on value-based algorithms, where the agent
attempts to reuse single transition and reward instances from
different decision processes. Taylor et al. (2008) proposed
an algorithm to transfer samples so as to augment the dataset
used by a model-based RL algorithm. Almost simultaneously, Lazaric et al. (2008b) designed a model-free methodology to estimate which source samples are most likely to
benefit the target and used it to transfer into a batch RL
algorithm. The same settings were considered by Laroche
& Barlier (2017), who showed that no measure of similarity
is needed to safely transfer under the restrictive assumption
that tasks do not differ in their dynamics. More recently,
Tirinzoni et al. (2018b) proposed a method to transfer all
given samples without carrying out any explicit selection,
while reweighing their contribution to the learning process
proportionally to their importance for solving the target task.
One of the drawbacks of the above-mentioned approaches
is that they do not easily generalize to policy search, where
the agent is required to transfer long sequences of states
and actions rather than only single-step information. Since
policy search algorithms, despite their recent successes,
typically require large batches in order to reliably estimate
the expected return or its gradient, reusing samples from
different tasks would be practically very useful.
In this paper, we propose a methodology to address this limitation for families of tasks differing only in their transition
models. Similarly to Tirinzoni et al. (2018b), we employ importance sampling (IS) (Owen, 2013) techniques to transfer
all source samples, while correcting the bias introduced by
their different distributions. However, instead of focusing
on single transitions and rewards, we show that it is pos-

