Open Vocabulary Learning on Source Code with a Graph–Structured Cache
Milan Cvitkovic 1 Badal Singh 2 Anima Anandkumar 1

Abstract
Machine learning models that take computer program source code as input typically use Natural
Language Processing (NLP) techniques. However, a major challenge is that code is written
using an open, rapidly changing vocabulary due
to, e.g., the coinage of new variable and method
names. Reasoning over such a vocabulary is not
something for which most NLP methods are designed. We introduce a Graph–Structured Cache
to address this problem; this cache contains a
node for each new word the model encounters
with edges connecting each word to its occurrences in the code. We find that combining
this graph–structured cache strategy with recent
Graph–Neural–Network–based models for supervised learning on code improves the models’ performance on a code completion task and a variable
naming task — with over 100% relative improvement on the latter — at the cost of a moderate
increase in computation time.

1. Introduction
Computer program source code is an abundant and accessible form of data from which machine learning algorithms
could learn to perform many useful software development
tasks, including variable name suggestion, code completion,
bug finding, security vulnerability identification, code quality assessment, or automated test generation. But despite the
similarities between natural language and source code, deep
learning methods for Natural Language Processing (NLP)
have not been straightforward to apply to learning problems
on source code (Allamanis et al., 2017).
There are many reasons for this, but two central ones are:
1. Code’s syntactic structure is unlike natural language.
1
Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California, USA 2 Amazon
Web Services, Seattle, Washington, USA. Correspondence to: Milan Cvitkovic <mcvitkov@caltech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

While code contains natural language words and phrases
in order to be human–readable, code is not meant to be
a read like a natural language text. Code is written in
a rigid syntax with delimiters that may open and close
dozens of lines apart; it consists in great part of references to faraway lines and different files; and it describes
computations that proceed in an order often quite distinct
from its written order.
2. Code is written using an open vocabulary. Natural language is mostly composed of words from a large but
closed (a.k.a. fixed–size and unchanging) vocabulary.
Standard NLP methods can thus perform well by fixing
a large vocabulary of words before training, and labeling
the few words they encounter outside this vocabulary as
“unknown”. But in code every new variable, class, or
method declared requires a name, and this abundance of
names leads to the use of many obscure words: abbreviations, brand names, technical terms, etc.1 A model
must be able to reason about these newly–coined words
to understand code.
The second of these issues is significant. To give one indication: 28% of variable names contain out–of–vocabulary
words in the test set we use in our experiments below. But
more broadly, the open vocabulary issue in code is an acute
example of a fundamental challenge in machine learning:
how to build models that can reason over unbounded domains of entities, sometimes called “open–set” learning.
Despite this, the open vocabulary issue in source code has
received relatively little attention in prior work.
The first issue, however, has been the focus of much prior
work. A common strategy in these works is to represent
source code as an Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) rather than as
linear text. Once in this graph–structured format, code can
be passed as input to models like Recursive Neural Networks
or Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) that can, in principle,
exploit the relational structure of their inputs and avoid the
1
We use the terminology that a name in source code is a sequence of words, split on CamelCase or snake case. E.g. the
method name addItemToList is composed of the words add,
item, to, and list.
We also use the term variable in its slightly broader sense to refer
to any user–named language construct, including function parameter, method, class, and field names, in addition to declared variable
names.

