Bayesian Deconditional Kernel Mean Embeddings
Kelvin Hsu 1 2 Fabio Ramos 1 3

Abstract
Conditional kernel mean embeddings form an attractive nonparametric framework for representing conditional means of functions, describing the
observation processes for many complex models.
However, the recovery of the original underlying
function of interest whose conditional mean was
observed is a challenging inference task. We formalize deconditional kernel mean embeddings as
a solution to this inverse problem, and show that it
can be naturally viewed as a nonparametric Bayes’
rule. Critically, we introduce the notion of task
transformed Gaussian processes and establish deconditional kernel means as their posterior predictive mean. This connection provides Bayesian
interpretations and uncertainty estimates for deconditional kernel mean embeddings, explains
their regularization hyperparameters, and reveals
a marginal likelihood for kernel hyperparameter
learning. These revelations further enable practical applications such as likelihood-free inference
and learning sparse representations for big data.

1. Introduction
Observations of complex phenomena often lead to likelihoods that are described by a conditional mean. A widely
applicable setting where this occurs is collecting observations under uncertain inputs, where the task is to learn a
function f : X → R to model a real-valued response
z as a function of inputs x ∈ X without being able to
query or measure x directly to observe this phenomenon.
Instead, another measured input y ∈ Y relates to x through
p(x|y). Consequently, given y, the response Z has mean
g(y) := E[f (X)|Y = y], where g is called the conditional
mean of f . Furthermore, p(x|y) is often only available as
sample pairs {xi , yi }ni=1 , from simulations, algorithms, or
separate experiments, making recovery of latent functions f
from conditional means g a challenging inference task.
1
University of Sydney 2 CSIRO, Sydney 3 NVIDIA, Seattle.
Correspondence to: Kelvin Hsu <Kelvin.Hsu@sydney.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Our first contribution begins with formulating deconditional
mean embeddings (DMEs) as solutions to this inference
problem by building upon the framework of conditional
mean embeddings (CMEs) (Song et al., 2013). We show
that the DME can be established as a nonparametric Bayes’
rule in the reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) and
used for likelihood-free Bayesian inference. In contrast to
kernel Bayes’ rule (KBR) (Fukumizu et al., 2013) which
uses third order tensors that can result in vanishing priors,
DMEs use second order tensors and avoids this problem.
Together with CMEs and KBR, DMEs form a critical part of
the kernel mean embedding (KME) (Muandet et al., 2017)
framework, where probabilistic rules can be represented
nonparametrically as operators that are linear in the RKHS.
This greatly simplifies probabilistic inference without requiring parametrized distributions and compromising flexibility.
Despite this connection, there are elements unique to the
KME framework that cannot be interpreted or solved via
the parallel between probability rules and RKHS mean operations. Similar to empirical forms for KBR and CMEs,
empirical DMEs are obtained by replacing expectations in
its constituent operators with their empirical means, and introduce regularization for operator inverses to relax RKHS
assumptions, instead of as the optimal solution to a particular loss. Setting regularization hyperparameters is difficult
in practice without an appropriate loss for the inference task.
Furthermore, similar to KBR, the nonparametric Bayes’ rule
provided by DMEs is a statement between observed (or simulated) variables and not on latent functions or quantities.
Consequently, uncertainty estimation in inference of latent
functions f still require a separate Bayesian formulation.
Our second contribution establishes a Bayesian view of
DMEs as posterior predictive means of the task transformed
Gaussian process (TTGP), a novel nonparametric Bayesian
model that recover latent relationships between variables
without observing them jointly. TTGPs are so named because we show that they are a type of transformed Gaussian
process (Murray-Smith & Pearlmutter, 2005) where the
transformations and noise covariances are learned, by transforming one Gaussian process (GP) task to another, rather
than designed from expert knowledge. We use this connection to derive posterior and predictive uncertainty estimates
for DMEs and explain their regularization hyperparameters

