Zero-Shot Knowledge Distillation in Deep Networks

Gaurav Kumar Nayak * 1 Konda Reddy Mopuri * 2 Vaisakh Shaj * 3 R. Venkatesh Babu 1
Anirban Chakraborty 1

Abstract
Knowledge distillation deals with the problem of
training a smaller model (Student) from a high capacity source model (Teacher) so as to retain most
of its performance. Existing approaches use either
the training data or meta-data extracted from it
in order to train the Student. However, accessing
the dataset on which the Teacher has been trained
may not always be feasible if the dataset is very
large or it poses privacy or safety concerns (e.g.,
bio-metric or medical data). Hence, in this paper,
we propose a novel data-free method to train the
Student from the Teacher. Without even using any
meta-data, we synthesize the Data Impressions
from the complex Teacher model and utilize these
as surrogates for the original training data samples
to transfer its learning to Student via knowledge
distillation. We, therefore, dub our method “ZeroShot Knowledge Distillation” and demonstrate
that our framework results in competitive generalization performance as achieved by distillation
using the actual training data samples on multiple
benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Knowledge Distillation (Hinton et al., 2015) enables to
transfer the complex mapping functions learned by cumbersome models to relatively simpler models. The cumbersome
model can be an ensemble of multiple large models or a
single model with large capacity and strong regualrizers
such as Dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014), BatchNorm (Ioffe
& Szegedy, 2015), etc. Typically the complex and small
models are referred to as Teacher (T) and Student (S) models
respectively. Generally the Teacher models deliver excel*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computational and Data
Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India 2 School of
Informatics, University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom 3 University
of Lincoln, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Gaurav Kumar
Nayak <gauravnayak@iisc.ac.in>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

lent performance, but they can be huge and computationally
expensive. Hence, these models can not be deployed in
limited resource environments or when real-time inference
is expected. On the other hand, a Student model has substantially less memory footprint, requires less computation,
and thereby often results in a much faster inference time
than that of the much larger Teacher model.
The latent information hidden in the confidences assigned
by the Teacher to the incorrect categories, referred to as
‘dark knowledge’ is transferred to the Student via the distillation process. It is this knowledge that helps the Teacher
to generalize better and transfers to the Student via matching their soft-labels (output of the soft-max layer) instead
of the one-hot vector encoded labels. Matching the softlabels produced by the Teacher is the natural way to transfer
its generalization ability. For performing the knowledge
distillation, one can use the training data from the target
distribution or an arbitrary data. Typically, the data used
to perform the distillation is called ‘Transfer set’. In order
to maximize the information provided per sample, we can
make the soft targets to have a high entropy (non-peaky).
This is generally achieved by using a high temperature at
the softmax layer (Hinton et al., 2015). Also, because of
non-peaky soft-labels, the training gradients computed on
the loss will have less variance and enable to use higher
learning rates leading to quick convergence.
The existing approaches use natural data either from the
target data distribution or a different transfer set to perform
the distillation. It is found by (Hinton et al., 2015) that using
original training data performs relatively better. They also
suggest to have an additional term in the objective for the
Student to predict correct labels on the training data along
with matching the soft-labels from the Teacher (as shown
in eq. (1)). However, accessing the samples over which the
Teacher had been trained may not always be feasible. Often
the training datasets are too large (e.g., ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015)). However, more importantly, most
datasets are proprietary and not shared publicly due to privacy or confidentiality concerns. Especially while dealing
with biometric data of large population, healthcare data of
patients etc. Also, quite often the corporate would not prefer
its proprietary data to be potentially accessed by its competitors. In summary, data is more precious than anything else

