Estimating Information Flow in Deep Neural Networks

Ziv Goldfeld 1 2 Ewout van den Berg 2 3 Kristjan Greenewald 2 3 Igor Melnyk 2 3 Nam Nguyen 2 3
Brian Kingsbury 2 3 Yury Polyanskiy 1 2

Abstract
We study the estimation of the mutual information
I(X; T` ) between the input X to a deep neural
network (DNN) and the output vector T` of its
`th hidden layer (an “internal representation”).
Focusing on feedforward networks with fixed
weights and noisy internal representations, we
develop a rigorous framework for accurate estimation of I(X; T` ). By relating I(X; T` ) to information transmission over additive white Gaussian
noise channels, we reveal that compression, i.e.
reduction in I(X; T` ) over the course of training, is driven by progressive geometric clustering
of the representations of samples from the same
class. Experimental results verify this connection.
Finally, we shift focus to purely deterministic
DNNs, where I(X; T` ) is provably vacuous, and
show that nevertheless, these models also cluster
inputs belonging to the same class. The binningbased approximation of I(X; T` ) employed in
past works to measure compression is identified as
a measure of clustering, thus clarifying that these
experiments were in fact tracking the same clustering phenomenon. Leveraging the clustering
perspective, we provide new evidence that compression and generalization may not be causally
related and discuss potential future research ideas.

1. Introduction
Measuring the mutual information I(X; T` ) between the
input feature X to a deep neural network (DNN) and the
output T` of its `th layer has long been a topic of research,
with applications to unsupervised feature learning (Linsker,
1988; van den Oord et al., 2018; Hjelm et al., 2019) and
deep learning analysis (Shwartz-Ziv & Tishby, 2017; Saxe
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 MIT-IBM Watson
AI Lab 3 IBM Research. Correspondence to: Ziv Goldfeld
<zivg@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

et al., 2018; Achille & Soatto, 2018). Mutual information is
an appealing measure due to its invariance to smooth, invertible transformations and the fact that it has meaningful units
(bits or nats). But, these benefits come at a price: mutual
information is often impossible to compute analytically, and
its estimation from samples is difficult (Paninski, 2003). A
variety of entropy, and thereby mutual information, estimators have been developed over the years, including k-nearest
neighbors (kNN) (Kozachenko & Leonenko, 1987; Kraskov
et al., 2004), kernel density (Kandasamy et al., 2015; Han
et al., 2017), and trainable neural estimators (Belghazi et al.,
2018). However, most previous information-theoretic studies of deep learning (Shwartz-Ziv & Tishby, 2017; Saxe
et al., 2018) approximate the mutual information by discretizing neurons’ outputs, an operation called ‘binning’.
The binning-based approach is attractive because of its computational efficiency when the number of bins is not too
large; however, even mildly coarse discretizations can yield
inaccurate estimates.1 This fact is illustrated by the empirical mutual information plots from (Shwartz-Ziv & Tishby,
2017; Saxe et al., 2018) where the compression phenomenon
of the Information Bottleneck theory, i.e., a long-term decrease of I(X; T` ) during DNN training, was studied. Both
works plotted the binned mutual information I X; Bin(T` )
for deterministic DNNs (networks that deterministically
map inputs to hidden representations) with Bin(T` ) being a
per-neuron discretization of T` . But, in deterministic DNNs
with strictly monotone nonlinearities (e.g., tanh or sigmoid)
the true mutual information I(X; T` ) is provably either infinite (continuous X) or a constant(discrete X). Therefore,
the fluctuations of I X; Bin(T` ) observed during DNN
training by (Shwartz-Ziv & Tishby, 2017; Saxe et al., 2018)
must be due to estimation errors rather than changes in mutual information. Indeed, Fig. 1 illustrates how
 larger bin
sizes can easily cause errors in I X; Bin(T` ) trajectories.
The degeneracy of I(X; T` ) in deterministic DNNs is a consequence of T` being a deterministic function of X. If the
DNN has continuous nonlinearities and PX is continuous,
then so is T` , and thus I(X; T` ) = ∞ (cf. Theorem 2.4
of Polyanskiy & Wu (2012–2017)). When PX is discrete
1

The binning-based proxy approaches the true value when the
bin sizes are shrunk to zero by definition (Cover & Thomas, 2006).

