Obtaining Fairness using Optimal Transport Theory

Eustasio del Barrio * 1 Fabrice Gamboa * 2 Paula Gordaliza * 2 1 Jean-Michel Loubes * 2

Abstract
In the fair classification setup, we recast the links
between fairness and predictability in terms of
probability metrics. We analyze repair methods
based on mapping conditional distributions to the
Wasserstein barycenter. We propose a Random
Repair which yields a tradeoff between minimal
information loss and a certain amount of fairness.

1. Introduction
Along the last decade, machine learning methods have become more popular to build decision algorithms. Originally
meant for Internet recommendation systems, they are now
widely used in a large number of very sensitive areas such
as medicine, human ressources with hiring policies, banking
and insurance (lending), police and justice with criminal
sentencing, see for instance (Berk et al., 2017), (Pedreschi
et al., 2012) or (Friedler et al., 2018). The decisions made
by what is now referred to as AI have a growing impact on
human life. The whole machinery of these techniques relies
on the fact that a decision rule can be learnt by looking at a
subset of labeled examples, the learning sample, and then is
applied to the whole population which is assumed to follow
the same underlying distribution. So the decision is highly
influenced by the choice of the learning set.
In some cases, this learning sample may present some bias
or discrimination that could possibly be learnt by the algorithm and then propagated to the entire population through
automatic decisions, providing a mathematical legitimacy
for this unfair treatment. When giving algorithms the power
to make automatic decisions, the danger may come that the
reality may be shaped according to their prediction, thus
reinforcing their beliefs in the model which is learnt. Hence,
achieving fair treatment is one of the growing fields of interest in machine learning. For a recent survey on this topic
*
Equal contribution 1 IMUVA, Universidad de Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain 2 Institut de Mathématiques de Toulouse, Université
Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France. Correspondence to: Paula Gordaliza <paula.gordaliza@math.univ-toulouse.fr>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

we refer to (Zafar et al., 2017) or (Friedler et al., 2018).
Classification algorithms are one particular focus of fairness concerns since classifiers map individuals to outcomes.
Some variables, such as sex, age or ethnic origin, are potentially sources of unfair treatment since they enable to create
information that should not be processed out by the algorithm. Such variables are called in the literature protected
variables. An algorithm is said to be fair with respect to
these attributes when its outcome does not allow to make
inference on the information they convey. Of course, the
naive solution of ignoring these attributes when learning the
classifier does not ensure this, since the protected variables
may be closely correlated with other features enabling a
classifier to reconstruct them.
Two solutions have been considered in the fair learning literature. The first one consists in changing the classifier in
order to make it not correlated to the protected attribute. We
refer for instance to (Zafar et al., 2017), (Bechavod & Ligett,
2017) or (Donini et al., 2018). Yet, explaining how the
classifier is chosen may be seen too intrusive for many companies, or some of them may not even be able to change the
way they build their models. Hence, a second solution consists in modifying the input data so that predictability of the
protected attribute is impossible, whatever the classifier we
train. The idea consists in blurring the value of the protected
class trying to obtain a fair treatment. This point of view has
been proposed in (Feldman et al., 2015), (Johndrow & Lum,
2017) and (Hacker & Wiedemann, 2017), for instance.
In this paper, we first provide in Section 2 a statistical analysis of the Disparate Impact definition and recast some of the
ideas developed in (Feldman et al., 2015) to stress the links
between fairness, predictability and the distance between the
distributions of the variables given the protected attribute.
Then, in Section 3 we provide first in 3.1 some theoretical
justifications of the methodology proposed by previous authors (for one-dimensional data) to blur the data using the
barycenter of the conditional distribution with respect to the
Wasserstein distance. These methods are called either total
or partial repair. Then in Section 3.2, we propose another
methodology called random repair to transform the data
in order to achieve a tradeoff between a minimal information loss of the classification task and still a certain level
of fairness. We extend in Section 4 this procedure to the

