Maximum Entropy-Regularized Multi-Goal Reinforcement Learning

Rui Zhao 1 2 Xudong Sun 1 Volker Tresp 1 2

Abstract
In Multi-Goal Reinforcement Learning, an agent
learns to achieve multiple goals with a goalconditioned policy. During learning, the agent
first collects the trajectories into a replay buffer,
and later these trajectories are selected randomly
for replay. However, the achieved goals in the replay buffer are often biased towards the behavior
policies. From a Bayesian perspective, when there
is no prior knowledge about the target goal distribution, the agent should learn uniformly from
diverse achieved goals. Therefore, we first propose a novel multi-goal RL objective based on
weighted entropy. This objective encourages the
agent to maximize the expected return, as well
as to achieve more diverse goals. Secondly, we
developed a maximum entropy-based prioritization framework to optimize the proposed objective. For evaluation of this framework, we combine it with Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient,
both with or without Hindsight Experience Replay. On a set of multi-goal robotic tasks of OpenAI Gym, we compare our method with other
baselines and show promising improvements in
both performance and sample-efficiency.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 1998) combined with Deep Learning (DL) (Goodfellow et al., 2016)
has led to great successes in various tasks, such as playing
video games (Mnih et al., 2015), challenging the World Go
Champion (Silver et al., 2016), and learning autonomously
to accomplish different robotic tasks (Ng et al., 2006; Peters
& Schaal, 2008; Levine et al., 2016; Chebotar et al., 2017;
Andrychowicz et al., 2017).
1
Faculty of Mathematics, Informatics and Statistics, Ludwig
Maximilian University of Munich, Munich, Bavaria, Germany
2
Siemens AG, Munich, Bavaria, Germany. Correspondence to:
Rui Zhao <zhaorui.in.germany@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

One of the biggest challenges in RL is to make the agent
learn efficiently in applications with sparse rewards. To
tackle this challenge, Lillicrap et al. (2015) developed the
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG), which enables
the agent to learn continuous control, such as manipulation
and locomotion. Schaul et al. (2015a) proposed Universal
Value Function Approximators (UVFAs), which generalize not just over states, but also over goals, and extend
value functions to multiple goals. Furthermore, to make
the agent learn faster in sparse reward settings, Andrychowicz et al. (2017) introduced Hindsight Experience Replay
(HER), which encourages the agent to learn from the goalstates it has achieved. The combined use of DDPG and
HER allows the agent to learn to accomplish more complex
robot manipulation tasks. However, there is still a huge gap
between the learning efficiency of humans and RL agents.
In most cases, an RL agent needs millions of samples before
it is able to solve the tasks, while humans only need a few
samples (Mnih et al., 2015).
In previous works, the concept of maximum entropy
has been used to encourage exploration during training
(Williams & Peng, 1991; Mnih et al., 2015; Wu & Tian,
2016). Recently, Haarnoja et al. (2017) introduced SoftQ Learning, which learns a deep energy-based policy by
evaluating the maximum entropy of actions for each state.
Soft-Q Learning encourages the agent to learn all the policies that lead to the optimum (Levine, 2018). Furthermore,
Soft Actor-Critic (Haarnoja et al., 2018c) demonstrated a
better performance while showing compositional ability
and robustness of the maximum entropy policy in locomotion (Haarnoja et al., 2018a) and robot manipulation tasks
(Haarnoja et al., 2018b). The agent aims to maximize the expected reward while also maximizing the entropy to succeed
at the task while acting as randomly as possible. Based on
maximum entropy policies, Eysenbach et al. (2018) showed
that the agent is able to develop diverse skills solely by
maximizing an information theoretic objective without any
reward function. For multi-goal and multi-task learning
(Caruana, 1997), the diversity of training sets helps the
agent transfer skills to unseen goals and tasks (Pan et al.,
2010). The variability of training samples mitigates overfitting and helps the model to better generalize (Goodfellow
This paper is based on our 2018 NeurIPS Deep RL workshop
paper (Zhao & Tresp, 2019).

