DBSCAN++: Towards fast and scalable density clustering

Jennifer Jang 1 Heinrich Jiang 2

Abstract
DBSCAN is a classical density-based clustering
procedure with tremendous practical relevance.
However, DBSCAN implicitly needs to compute
the empirical density for each sample point, leading to a quadratic worst-case time complexity,
which is too slow on large datasets. We propose
DBSCAN++, a simple modification of DBSCAN
which only requires computing the densities for a
chosen subset of points. We show empirically that,
compared to traditional DBSCAN, DBSCAN++
can provide not only competitive performance but
also added robustness in the bandwidth hyperparameter while taking a fraction of the runtime.
We also present statistical consistency guarantees
showing the trade-off between computational cost
and estimation rates. Surprisingly, up to a certain point, we can enjoy the same estimation rates
while lowering computational cost, showing that
DBSCAN++ is a sub-quadratic algorithm that attains minimax optimal rates for level-set estimation, a quality that may be of independent interest.

1. Introduction
Density-based clustering algorithms such as Mean Shift
(Cheng, 1995) and DBSCAN (Ester et al., 1996) have made
a large impact on a wide range of areas in data analysis,
including outlier detection, computer vision, and medical
imaging. As data volumes rise, non-parametric unsupervised procedures are becoming ever more important in understanding large datasets. Thus, there is an increasing need
to establish more efficient versions of these algorithms. In
this paper, we focus on improving the classical DBSCAN
procedure.
It was long believed that DBSCAN had a runtime of
O(n log n) until it was proven to be O(n2 ) in the worst
case by Gan and Tao (2015). They showed that while DB1
Uber 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Jennifer Jang
<j.jang42@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

SCAN can run in O(n log n) when the dimension is at most
2, it quickly starts to exhibit quadratic behavior in high dimensions and/or when n becomes large. In fact, we show in
Figure 1 that even with a simple mixture of 3-dimensional
Gaussians, DBSCAN already starts to show quadratic behavior.
The quadratic runtime for these density-based procedures
can be seen from the fact that they implicitly must compute
density estimates for each data point, which is linear time
in the worst case for each query. In the case of DBSCAN,
such queries are proximity-based. There has been much
work done in using space-partitioning data structures such
as KD-Trees (Bentley, 1975) and Cover Trees (Beygelzimer
et al., 2006) to improve query times, but these structures are
all still linear in the worst-case. Another line of work that
has had practical success is in approximate nearest neighbor methods (e.g. Indyk and Motwani (1998); Datar et al.
(2004)) which have sub-linear queries, but such methods
come with few approximation guarantees.
DBSCAN proceeds by computing the empirical densities
for each sample point and then designating points whose
densities are above a threshold as core-points. Then, a neighborhood graph of the core-points is constructed, and the
clusters are assigned based on the connected components.
In this paper, we present DBSCAN++, a step towards a fast
and scalable DBSCAN. DBSCAN++ is based on the observation that we only need to compute the density estimates
for a subset m of the n data points, where m can be much
smaller than n, in order to cluster properly. To choose these
m points, we provide two simple strategies: uniform and
greedy K-center-based sampling. The resulting procedure
has O(mn) worst-case runtime.
We show that with this modification, we still maintain statistical consistency guarantees. We show the trade-off between
computational cost and estimation rates. Interestingly, up
to a certain point, we can enjoy the same minimax-optimal
estimation rates attained by DBSCAN while making m (instead of the larger n) empirical density queries, thus leading
to a sub-quadratic procedure. In some cases, we saw that
our method of limiting the number of core points can act
as a regularization, thus reducing the sensitivity of classical
DBSCAN to its parameters.

