Global Convergence of Block Coordinate Descent in Deep Learning

Jinshan Zeng 1 2 * Tim Tsz-Kit Lau 3 * Shao-Bo Lin 4 Yuan Yao 2

Abstract
Deep learning has aroused extensive attention due
to its great empirical success. The efficiency of
the block coordinate descent (BCD) methods has
been recently demonstrated in deep neural network (DNN) training. However, theoretical studies on their convergence properties are limited
due to the highly nonconvex nature of DNN training. In this paper, we aim at providing a general
methodology for provable convergence guarantees for this type of methods. In particular, for
most of the commonly used DNN training models
involving both two- and three-splitting schemes,
we establish the global convergence to a critical
point at a rate of O(1/k), where k is the number
of iterations. The results extend to general loss
functions which have Lipschitz continuous gradients and deep residual networks (ResNets). Our
key development adds several new elements to the
Kurdyka-Łojasiewicz inequality framework that
enables us to carry out the global convergence
analysis of BCD in the general scenario of deep
learning.

1. Introduction
Tremendous research activities have been dedicated to deep
learning due to its great success in some real-world applications such as image classification in computer vision
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012), speech recognition (Hinton et al.,
2012; Sainath et al., 2013), statistical machine translation
(Devlin et al., 2014), and especially outperforming human
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Computer and Information Engineering, Jiangxi Normal University, Nanchang 330022, Jiangxi,
China 2 Department of Mathematics, The Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong
3
Department of Statistics, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL
60208, USA 4 Department of Mathematics, City University of
Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong. Part of this work was done
while Tim Tsz-Kit Lau was at Department of Mathematics, The
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. Correspondence to: Yuan Yao <yuany@ust.hk>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

in Go games (Silver et al., 2016).
The practical optimization algorithms for training neural
networks can be mainly divided into three categories in
terms of the amount of first- and second-order information
used, namely, gradient-based, (approximate) second-order
and gradient-free methods. Gradient-based methods make
use of backpropagation (Rumelhart et al., 1986) to compute
gradients of network parameters. Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) method proposed by Robbins & Monro (1951)
serve as the basis. Much of research endeavour is devoted
to adaptive variants of vanilla SGD in recent years, including AdaGrad (Duchi et al., 2011), RMSProp (Tieleman &
Hinton, 2012), Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015) and AMSGrad
(Reddi et al., 2018). (Approximate) second-order methods
mainly include Newton’s method (LeCun et al., 2012), LBFGS and conjugate gradient (Le et al., 2011). Despite
the great success of these gradient-based methods, they
may suffer from the vanishing gradient issue for training
deep networks (Goodfellow et al., 2016). As an alternative to overcome this issue, gradient-free methods have
been recently adapted to the DNN training, including (but
not limited to) block coordinate descent (BCD) methods
(Carreira-Perpiñán & Wang, 2014; Zhang & Brand, 2017;
Lau et al., 2018; Askari et al., 2018; Gu et al., 2018) and alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) (Taylor
et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2016). The main reasons for the
surge of attention of these two algorithms are twofold. One
reason is that they are gradient-free, and thus are able to deal
with non-differentiable nonlinearities and potentially avoid
the vanishing gradient issue (Taylor et al., 2016; Zhang &
Brand, 2017). As shown in Figure 1, it is observed that
vanilla SGD fails to train a ten-hidden-layer MLPs while
BCD still works and achieves a moderate accuracy within a
few epochs. The other reason is that BCD and ADMM can
be easily implemented in a distributed and parallel manner
(Boyd et al., 2011; Mahajan et al., 2017), therefore in favour
of distributed/decentralized scenarios.
The BCD methods currently adopted in DNN training run
into two categories depending on the specific formulations
of the objective functions, namely, the two-splitting formulation and three-splitting formulation (shown in 2.2
and 2.4), respectively. Examples of the two-splitting formulation include Carreira-Perpiñán & Wang (2014); Zhang
& Brand (2017); Askari et al. (2018); Gu et al. (2018),

