Geometry and Symmetry in Short-and-Sparse Deconvolution

Han-Wen Kuo 1 2 Yuqian Zhang 3 Yenson Lau 1 2 John Wright 1 2 4

Abstract
We study the Short-and-Sparse (SaS) deconvolution problem of recovering a short signal a0
and a sparse signal x0 from their convolution.
We propose a method based on nonconvex optimization, which under certain conditions recovers
the target short and sparse signals, up to signed
shift symmetry which is intrinsic to this model.
This symmetry plays a central role in shaping the
optimization landscape for deconvolution. We
give a regional analysis, which characterizes this
landscape geometrically, on a union of subspaces.
Our geometric characterization holds when the
length-p0 short signal a0 has shift coherence µ,
and x0 follows
a randomi sparsity model with
h
c1
c2 √
1
rate θ ∈ p0 , p0 √µ+
p0 · log2 p0 . Based on
this geometry, we give a provable method that
successfully solves SaS deconvolution with high
probability.

1. Introduction
Datasets in a wide range of areas, including neuroscience
(Lewicki, 1998), microscopy (Cheung et al., 2017) and astronomy (Saha, 2007), can be modeled as superpositions
of translations of a basic motif. Data of this nature can
be modeled mathematically as a convolution y = a0 ∗ x0 ,
between a short signal a0 (the motif) and a longer sparse
signal x0 , whose nonzero entries indicate where in the sample the motif is present. A very similar structure arises in
image deblurring (Chan & Wong, 1998), where y is a blurry
image, a0 the blur kernel, and x0 the (edge map) of the
target sharp image.
1

Data Science Institute, Columbia University, New York
City, NY, USA 2 Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia
University, New York City, NY, USA 3 Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA 4 Department
of Applied Math and Applied Physics, Columbia University,
New York City, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Han-Wen Kuo
<hk2673@columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Motivated by these and related problems in imaging and
scientific data analysis, we study the Short-and-Sparse (SaS)
Deconvolution problem of recovering a short signal a0 ∈
Rp0 and a sparse signal x0 ∈ Rn (n  p0 ) from their
length-n cyclic convolution1 y = a0 ∗ x0 ∈ Rn . This
SaS model exhibits a basic scaled shift symmetry: for any
nonzero scalar α and cyclic shift s` [·],




α s` [a0 ] ∗ α1 s−` [x0 ] = y.
(1.1)
Because of this symmetry, we only expect to recover a0
and x0 up to a signed shift (see Figure 1). Our problem of
interest can be stated more formally as:
Problem 1.1 (Short-and-Sparse Deconvolution). Given the
cyclic convolution y = a0 ∗ x0 ∈ Rn of a0 ∈ Rp0 short
(p0  n), and x0 ∈ Rn sparse, recover a0 and x0 , up to a
scaled shift.
Despite a long history and many applications, until recently
very little algorithmic theory was available for SaS deconvolution. Much of this difficulty can be attributed to the
scale-shift symmetry: natural convex relaxations fail, and
nonconvex formulations exhibit a complicated optimization
landscape, with many equivalent global minimizers (scaled
shifts of the ground truth) and additional local minimizers
(scaled shift truncations of the ground truth), and a variety of critical points (Zhang et al., 2017; 2018). Currently
available theory guarantees approximate recovery of a truncation2 of a shift s` [a0 ], rather than guaranteeing recovery
of a0 as a whole, and requires certain (complicated) conditions on the convolution matrix associated with a0 (Zhang
et al., 2018).
In this paper, describe an algorithm which, under simpler conditions, exactly recovers a scaled shift of the pair
(a0 , x0 ). Our algorithm is based on a formulation first introduced in (Zhang et al., 2017), which casts the deconvolution
problem as (nonconvex) optimization over the sphere. We
characterize the geometry of this objective function, and
show that near a certain union of subspaces, every local
minimizer is very close to a signed shift of a0 . Based on
1
Our result applies to direct convolution by zero padding both
a0 and x0 .
2
I.e., the portion of the shifted signal s` [a0 ] that falls in the
window {0, . . . , p0 − 1}.

