Universal Multi-Party Poisoning Attacks

Saeed Mahloujifar 1 Mohammad Mahmoody 1 Ameer Mohammed 2

Abstract
In this work, we demonstrate universal multiparty poisoning attacks that adapt and apply to
any multi-party learning process with arbitrary
interaction pattern between the parties. More generally, we introduce and study (k, p)-poisoning
attacks in which an adversary controls k ∈ [m] of
the parties, and for each corrupted party Pi , the
adversary submits some poisoned data Ti0 on behalf of Pi that is still “(1−p)-close” to the correct
data Ti (e.g., 1 − p fraction of Ti0 is still honestly
generated). We prove that for any “bad” property
B of the final trained hypothesis h (e.g., h failing
on a particular test example or having “large” risk)
that has an arbitrarily small constant probability
of happening without the attack, there always is a
(k, p)-poisoning attack that increases the probability of B from µ to by µ1−p·k/m = µ+Ω(p·k/m).
Our attack only uses clean labels, and it is online,
as it only knows the the data shared so far.

1. Introduction
Learning from a set T = {d1 = (a1 , b1 ), . . . , dn =
(an , bn )} of training examples in a way that the predictions
generalize to instances beyond T is a fundamental problem
in learning theory. The goal here is to produce a hypothesis
h in such a way that h(a), with high probability, predicts the
“correct” label b, where the pair (a, b) = d is sampled from
the target (test) distribution d. In the most natural setting,
the examples in the training data set T are also generated
from the same distribution d, however this is not always the
case (e.g., due to noise in the data).
Poisoning attacks. Many previous works studying noise
in the data allow it to be adversarial and maliciously cho1

sen against the learner (Valiant, 1985; Kearns & Li, 1993;
Bshouty et al., 2002). A tightly related and more recent
approach to the problem of learning under adversarial noise
is the framework of so-called poisoning (aka causative) attacks (Barreno et al., 2006; Biggio et al., 2012; Papernot
et al., 2016), in which the adversary’s goal is not necessarily
to completely prevent the learning, but perhaps it simply
wants to increase the risk of the hypothesis produced by the
learning process or make it more likely to fail on a particular test instance (i.e., getting a targeted poisoning attack
(Barreno et al., 2006; Shen et al., 2016)).
Multi-party poisoning. In the distributed setting (McMahan & Ramage, 2017; McMahan et al., 2016; Bonawitz
et al., 2017; Konečnỳ et al., 2016), the training data T might
be coming from various sources; e.g., it can be generated by
m data providers P1 , . . . , Pm in an online way, while at the
end a fixed algorithm, called the aggregator G, generates
the hypothesis h based on T . The goal of P1 , . . . , Pm is to
eventually help G construct a hypothesis h that does well
(e.g. in the case of classification) in predicting the label b
of a given instance a, where (a, b) ← d is sampled from
the final test distribution. The data provided by each party
Pi might even be of “different type”, so we cannot simply
assume that the data provided by Pi is necessarily sampled
from the same distribution d. To model this more general
setting, we let di model the distribution from which the
training data Ti (of Pi ) is sampled. Poisoning attacks can
naturally be defined in the distributed setting as well (Fung
et al., 2018; Bagdasaryan et al., 2018; Blanchard et al., 2017;
Hayes & Ohrimenko, 2018) to model adversaries who partially control the training data T . These works, however,
focus on attacking and defending specific learning tasks.
This leads us to the central question of this work.
What is the inherent provable power of poisoning
attacks in the multi-party setting?

University of Virginia. Supported by NSF CAREER award
CCF-1350939, and University of Virginia’s SEAS Research
Innovation Award. {saeed, mohammad}@virginia.edu
2
University of Kuwait. ameer.mohammed@ku.edu.kw. Correspondence to: Saeed Mahloujifar <saeed@virginia.edu>.

Answering the above question is critical for understanding
the limits of provable security against multi-party poisoning.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

We first formalize a new general model multi-party poisoning. We then prove the existence of universal data poisoning
attacks in the multi-party setting that apply to any task.

1.1. Our Contribution

