A Deep Reinforcement Learning Perspective on Internet Congestion Control

Nathan Jay * 1 Noga H. Rotman * 2 P. Brighten Godfrey 1 Michael Schapira 2 Aviv Tamar 3

Abstract
We present and investigate a novel and timely
application domain for deep reinforcement learning (RL): Internet congestion control. Congestion
control is the core networking task of modulating traffic sources’ data-transmission rates to efficiently utilize network capacity, and is the subject
of extensive attention in light of the advent of
Internet services such as live video, virtual reality, Internet-of-Things, and more. We show that
casting congestion control as RL enables training
deep network policies that capture intricate patterns in data traffic and network conditions, and
leverage this to outperform the state-of-the-art.
We also highlight significant challenges facing
real-world adoption of RL-based congestion control, including fairness, safety, and generalization,
which are not trivial to address within conventional RL formalism. To facilitate further research
and reproducibility of our results, we present a
test suite for RL-guided congestion control based
on the OpenAI Gym interface.

1. Introduction
Deep RL has gained substantial popularity in light of its
applicability to real-world decision making, generating
headlines by facilitating complex tasks like protein folding (R.Evans, 2018) and beating human experts in challenging contexts such as Go (Silver et al., 2016). We wish to
capitalize on these advancements to tackle the crucial and
timely challenge of Internet congestion control.
1.1. Internet Congestion Control
In today’s Internet, multiple network users contend over
scarce communication resources. Consequently, the data*
Equal contribution 1 University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign 2 Hebrew University of Jerusalem 3 Technion. Correspondence to: Nathan Jay <njay2@illinois.edu>, Noga H. Rotman
<nogar02@cs.huji.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Figure 1: Multiple traffic flows sharing a link

transmission rates of different traffic sources must be modulated dynamically to efficiently utilize network resources
and provide good user experience. This challenge is termed
“congestion control” and is fundamental to computer networking research and practice. Indeed, congestion control
has a crucial impact on user experience for Internet services
such as video streaming and voice-over-IP, as well as emerging Internet services such as augmented and virtual reality,
Internet of Things, edge computing, and more.
Consider the illustrative example in Figure 1, which depicts
multiple connections (also referred to as “flows”) sharing a
single communication link. Each connection consists of a
traffic sender and a traffic receiver. The sender streams data
packets to the receiver and constantly experiences feedback
from the receiver for sent packets in the form of packet
acknowledgements (ACKs). The sender adjusts its transmission rate in response to this feedback. The manner in which
the sending rate is adjusted is determined by the congestion
control protocol employed by the connection’s two endpoints. The interaction of different connections gives rise to
network dynamics, derived from the connections’ congestion control protocols, the link’s capacity (bandwidth), and
also the link’s buffer size and packet-queueing policy, which
determine how (and whose) excess traffic is discarded.
Even this simple single-link scenario illustrates the complexity of congestion control, in which different connections
select rates in an uncoordinated, decentralized manner, typically with no explicit information about competing connections (number, times of entry/exit, employed congestion control protocols), or the network (link’s bandwidth, buffer size,
and packet-queuing policy). Naturally, these challenges are

