Learning a Compressed Sensing Measurement Matrix via Gradient Unrolling

Shanshan Wu 1 Alexandros G. Dimakis 1 Sujay Sanghavi 1 Felix X. Yu 2 Daniel Holtmann-Rice 2
Dmitry Storcheus 2 Afshin Rostamizadeh 2 Sanjiv Kumar 2

Abstract
Linear encoding of sparse vectors is widely popular, but is commonly data-independent – missing
any possible extra (but a priori unknown) structure
beyond sparsity. In this paper we present a new
method to learn linear encoders that adapt to data,
while still performing well with the widely used
`1 decoder. The convex `1 decoder prevents gradient propagation as needed in standard gradientbased training. Our method is based on the insight that unrolling the convex decoder into T
projected subgradient steps can address this issue.
Our method can be seen as a data-driven way to
learn a compressed sensing measurement matrix.
We compare the empirical performance of 10 algorithms over 6 sparse datasets (3 synthetic and
3 real). Our experiments show that there is indeed additional structure beyond sparsity in the
real datasets; our method is able to discover it and
exploit it to create excellent reconstructions with
fewer measurements (by a factor of 1.1-3x) compared to the previous state-of-the-art methods. We
illustrate an application of our method in learning
label embeddings for extreme multi-label classification, and empirically show that our method is
able to match or outperform the precision scores
of SLEEC, which is one of the state-of-the-art
embedding-based approaches.

1. Introduction
Assume we have some unknown data vector x ∈ Rd . We
can observe only a few (m < d) linear equations of its
entries and we would like to design these projections by
creating a measurement matrix A ∈ Rm×d such that the
projections y = Ax allow exact (or near-exact) recovery of
the original vector x ∈ Rd .
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Texas at Austin, USA 2 Google Research, New York, USA.
Correspondence to: Shanshan Wu <shanshan@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

If d > m, this is an ill-posed problem in general: we are observing m linear equations with d unknowns, so any vector
x0 on the subspace Ax0 = y satisfies our observed measurements. In this high-dimensional regime, the only hope
is to make a structural assumption on x, so that unique reconstruction is possible. A natural approach is to assume
that the data vector is sparse. The problem of designing
measurement matrices and reconstruction algorithms that
recover sparse vectors from linear observations is called
Compressed Sensing (CS), Sparse Approximation or Sparse
Recovery Theory (Donoho, 2006; Candès et al., 2006).
A natural way to recover is to search for the sparsest solution
that satisfies the linear measurements:
arg min kx0 k0
x0 ∈Rd

s.t. Ax0 = y.

(1)

Unfortunately this problem is NP-hard and for that reason
the `0 norm is relaxed into an `1 -norm minimization1
D(A, y) := arg min kx0 k1
x0 ∈Rd

s.t. Ax0 = y.

(2)

Remarkably, if the measurement matrix A satisfies some
properties, e.g. Restricted Isometry Property (RIP) (Candès,
2008) or the nullspace condition (NSP) (Rauhut, 2010), it is
possible to prove that the `1 minimization in (2) produces
the same output as the intractable `0 minimization in (1).
However, it is NP-hard to test whether a matrix satisfies
RIP (Bandeira et al., 2013).
In this paper we are interested in vectors that are not only
sparse but have additional structure in their support. This extra structure may not be known or a-priori specified. We propose a data-driven algorithm that learns a good linear measurement matrix A from data samples. Our linear measurements are subsequently decoded with the `1 -minimization
in (2) to estimate the unknown vector x.
Many real-world sparse datasets have additional structures
beyond simple sparsity. For example, in a demographic
dataset with (one-hot encoded) categorical features, a person’s income level may be related to his/her education. Similarly, in a text dataset with bag-of-words representation, it
is much more likely for two related words (e.g., football and
1

Other examples are greedy (Tropp & Gilbert, 2007), and iterative algorithms, e.g., CoSaMP (Needell & Tropp, 2009), IHT (Blumensath & Davies, 2009), and AMP (Donoho et al., 2009).

