Random Walks on Hypergraphs with Edge-Dependent Vertex Weights

Uthsav Chitra 1 Benjamin J Raphael 1

Abstract
Hypergraphs are used in machine learning to
model higher-order relationships in data. While
spectral methods for graphs are well-established,
spectral theory for hypergraphs remains an active area of research. In this paper, we use random walks to develop a spectral theory for hypergraphs with edge-dependent vertex weights:
hypergraphs where every vertex v has a weight
γe (v) for each incident hyperedge e that describes
the contribution of v to the hyperedge e. We derive a random walk-based hypergraph Laplacian,
and bound the mixing time of random walks on
such hypergraphs. Moreover, we give conditions
under which random walks on such hypergraphs
are equivalent to random walks on graphs. As a
corollary, we show that current machine learning
methods that rely on Laplacians derived from random walks on hypergraphs with edge-independent
vertex weights do not utilize higher-order relationships in the data. Finally, we demonstrate the
advantages of hypergraphs with edge-dependent
vertex weights on ranking applications using realworld datasets.

1. Introduction
Graphs are ubiquitous in machine learning, where they are
used to represent pairwise relationships between objects.
For example, social networks, protein-protein interaction
(PPI) networks, and the internet are modeled with graphs.
One limitation of graph models, however, is that they do not
encode higher-order relationships between objects. A social
network can represent a community of users (e.g. a friend
group) as a collection of edges between each user, but this
pairwise representation loses information about the overall
group structure (Yang et al., 2017). In biology, protein
interactions are not only between pairs of proteins, but also
1

Department of Computer Science, Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ, USA. Correspondence to: Benjamin Raphael
<braphael@cs.princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

between groups of proteins in protein complexes (Ramadan
et al., 2004; Ritz et al., 2014).
Such higher-order interactions can be modeled using a hypergraph: a generalization of a graph containing hyperedges
that can be incident to more than two nodes. A hypergraph
representation of a social network can model a community
of friends with a single hyperedge. In contrast, the corresponding representation of a community in a graph requires
many edges that connect pairs of individuals within the community; conversely, it may not be clear which collection of
edges in a graph represents a community (e.g. a clique, an
edge-dense subnetwork, etc). Hypergraphs have been used
in a variety of machine learning tasks, including clustering
(Agarwal et al., 2005; Zhou et al., 2006; Li & Milenkovic,
2017; 2018), ranking keywords in a collection of documents
(Bellaachia & Al-Dhelaan, 2013), predicting customer behavior in e-commerce (Li et al., 2018), object classification
(Zhang et al., 2018a;b), and image segmentation (Kim et al.,
2011).
A common approach to incorporate graph information in a
machine learning algorithm is to utilize properties of random walks or diffusion processes on the graph. For example,
random walks on graphs underlie algorithms for recommendation systems (Jamali & Ester, 2009), clustering (Harel &
Koren, 2001; Ng et al., 2001), information retrieval (Brin
& Page, 1998), and other applications. In many machine
learning applications, the graph is represented through the
graph Laplacian. Spectral theory includes many key results
regarding the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the graph
Laplacian, and these results form the foundation of spectral
learning algorithms.
Spectral theory on hypergraphs is much less developed than
on graphs. In seminal work, Zhou et al. (2006) developed
learning algorithms on hypergraphs based on random walks
on graphs. However, at nearly the same time, Agarwal et al.
(2006) showed that the hypergraph Laplacian matrix used
by Zhou et al. is equal to the Laplacian matrix of a closely
related graph, the star graph. A consequence of this equivalence is that the methods introduced by Zhou et al. utilize
only pairwise relationships between objects, rather than the
higher-order relationships encoded in the hypergraph. More
recently, Chan et al. (2018) and Li & Milenkovic (2017;
2018) developed nonlinear Laplacian operators for hyper-

