Online Learning with Sleeping Experts and Feedback Graphs
Corinna Cortes 1 Giulia DeSalvo 1 Claudio Gentile 1 Mehryar Mohri 1 2 Scott Yang 3

Abstract
We consider the scenario of online learning with
sleeping experts, where not all experts are available at each round, and analyze the general framework of learning with feedback graphs, where the
loss observations associated with each expert are
characterized by a graph. A critical assumption in
this framework is that the loss observations and
the set of sleeping experts at each round are independent. We first extend the classical sleeping
experts algorithm of Kleinberg et al. (2008) to
the feedback graphs scenario, and prove matching
upper and lower bounds for the sleeping regret of
the resulting algorithm under the independence
assumption. Our main contribution is then to relax this assumption, present a more general notion
of sleeping regret, and derive a general algorithm
with strong theoretical guarantees. We apply this
new framework to the important scenario of online learning with abstention, where a learner can
elect to abstain from making a prediction at the
price of a certain cost. We empirically validate
our algorithm against multiple online abstention
algorithms on several real-world datasets, showing substantial performance improvements.

1. Introduction
Sequential decision making under uncertainty is an important and widely studied area of machine learning. In the
standard online learning framework (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006), at each round, the learner selects an action out
of a finite set and incurs some loss associated with that action. The learner’s goal is to minimize her regret over a
finite number of rounds, that is the difference between her
cumulative loss and that of the best static action in hindsight.
Online learning with feedback graphs is a general frame1

Google Research, New York, NY; 2 Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York, NY; 3 D. E. Shaw & Co., New York,
NY. Correspondence to: Giulia DeSalvo <giuliad@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

work for online learning where the action losses that are
observable to the learner are modelled by graphs. This
framework was first introduced by Mannor & Shamir (2011)
and later analyzed by several other authors (Caron et al.
(2012); Buccapatnam et al. (2014); Wu et al. (2015)Alon
et al. (2013); Kocák et al. (2014) Alon et al. (2015); Cohen et al. (2016); Kocák et al. (2016); Tossou et al. (2017);
Liu et al. (2018); Yun et al. (2018)). Given a directed feedback graph, an edge from i to j indicates that the loss of j
is observed if expert i is selected by the algorithm. Such
partial observability setups cover a variety of applications
(e.g. in web advertising, a user who clicks on an ad reveals
information about related ads). The classical settings of
full information (Littlestone & Warmuth, 1994) and bandit
(Auer et al., 2002) online learning are special instances corresponding to a fully connected graph and a graph admitting
only self-loops, respectively. In general, these graphs can
be either fixed or time-varying, and they can also even be
stochastic.
Distinct from the feedback graph framework, online learning has also been studied in a setting in which the actions
available to the learner can change at different rounds. This
scenario is called the sleeping experts setting. It was analyzed first by (Kleinberg et al., 2008) and subsequently
by (Kanade et al., 2009; Kanade & Steinke, 2014). In this
framework, at each round the environment determines a set
of available actions either stochastically or adversarially.
This model of online learning can arise, e.g., in routing network problems, where some routes may be unavailable due
to either random router crashes (stochastic case) or an illicit
agent (adversarial case).
Restricted feedback and restricted action sets are two closely
related ideas, and many applications can actually be formalized as a combination of both sleeping experts and feedback
graphs. For instance, consider again the scenario of web
advertising described above, where a learner has to decide
which ads to display. Some ads may not be available at each
round, implying that the experts are sleeping, and at the
same time, related ads may have similar rewards, so that the
feedback between some of the ads should be shared. Similarly, in e-commerce from the seller’s perspective, some
items may be out of stock (sleeping experts), and the rewards for one item may be similar to the rewards of others
(feedback graph). As a third example, sensor networks are

