Structured agents for physical construction

Victor Bapst * 1 Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez * 1 Carl Doersch 1 Kimberly L. Stachenfeld 1 Pushmeet Kohli 1
Peter W. Battaglia 1 Jessica B. Hamrick 1

Abstract
Physical construction—the ability to compose objects, subject to physical dynamics, to serve some
function—is fundamental to human intelligence.
We introduce a suite of challenging physical construction tasks inspired by how children play with
blocks, such as matching a target configuration,
stacking blocks to connect objects together, and
creating shelter-like structures over target objects.
We examine how a range of deep reinforcement
learning agents fare on these challenges, and introduce several new approaches which provide superior performance. Our results show that agents
which use structured representations (e.g., objects
and scene graphs) and structured policies (e.g.,
object-centric actions) outperform those which
use less structured representations, and generalize better beyond their training when asked to
reason about larger scenes. Model-based agents
which use Monte-Carlo Tree Search also outperform strictly model-free agents in our most challenging construction problems. We conclude that
approaches which combine structured representations and reasoning with powerful learning are a
key path toward agents that possess rich intuitive
physics, scene understanding, and planning.

1. Introduction
Humans are a “construction species”—we build forts out
of couch cushions as children, pyramids in our deserts, and
space stations that orbit hundreds of kilometers above our
heads. What abilities do artificial intelligence (AI) agents
need to possess to perform such achievements? This question frames the high-level purpose of this paper: to explore
a range of tasks more complex than those typically studied
in AI, and to develop approaches for learning to solve them.
*
Equal contribution 1 DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence
to: Jessica Hamrick <jhamrick@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Physical construction involves composing multiple elements
under physical dynamics and constraints to achieve rich
functional objectives. We introduce a suite of simulated
physical construction tasks (Fig. 1), similar in spirit to how
children play with toy blocks, which involve stacking and
attaching together multiple blocks in configurations that satisfy functional objectives. For example, one task requires
stacking blocks around obstacles to connect target locations to the ground. Another task requires building shelters
to cover up target blocks and keep them dry in the rain.
These tasks are representative of real-world construction
challenges: they emphasize problem-solving and functionality rather than simply replicating a given target configuration, reflecting the way human construction involves
forethought and purpose.
Real-world physical construction assumes many forms and
degrees of complexity, but a few basic skills are typically
involved: spatial reasoning (e.g. concepts like “empty” vs
“occupied”), relational reasoning (e.g. concepts like “next
to” or “on top of”), knowledge of physics (e.g., predicting
physical interactions among objects), and planning the allocation of resources to different parts of the structure. Our
simulated task environment (Fig. 1) is designed to exercise
these skills, while still being simple enough to allow careful
experimental control and tractable agent training.
While classic AI studied physical reasoning extensively
(Chen, 1990; Pfalzgraf, 1997), construction has not been
well-explored using modern learning-based approaches. We
draw on a number of techniques from modern AI, combining and extending them in novel ways to make them more
applicable and effective for construction. Our family of deep
reinforcement learning (RL) agents can support: (1) vector, sequence, image, and graph-structured representations
of scenes; (2) continuous and discrete actions, in absolute
or object-centric coordinates; (3) model-free learning via
deep Q-learning (Mnih et al., 2015), or actor-critic methods
(Heess et al., 2015; Munos et al., 2016); and (4) planning
via Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) (Coulom, 2006).
We find that graph-structured representations and reasoning, object-centric policies, and model-based planning are
crucial for solving our most difficult tasks, outperforming
standard approaches which combine unstructured represen-

