Fast Algorithm for Generalized Multinomial Models
with Ranking Data

Jiaqi Gu 1 Guosheng Yin 1

Abstract
We develop a framework of generalized multinomial models, which includes both the popular
Plackett–Luce model and Bradley–Terry model
as special cases. From a theoretical perspective,
we prove that the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) under generalized multinomial models
corresponds to the stationary distribution of an inhomogeneous Markov chain uniquely. Based on
this property, we propose an iterative algorithm
that is easy to implement and interpret, and is
guaranteed to converge. Numerical experiments
on synthetic data and real data demonstrate the
advantages of our Markov chain based algorithm
over existing ones. Our algorithm converges to
the MLE with fewer iterations and at a faster convergence rate. The new algorithm is readily applicable to problems such as page ranking or sports
ranking data.

1. Introduction
Aggregating pairwise comparison data, ranking data, rating data and discrete choice data is an important problem in many fields, including sports ranking (Elo, 1978;
Deng et al., 2014), marketing research (McFadden, 1974;
Kamishima, 2003; Kamishima & Akaho, 2006), election
(Murphy & Martin, 2003; Moors & Vermunt, 2007), classification (Hastie & Tibshirani, 1998) and so on. Various
models have been proposed to carry out such tasks, for
example, the multinomial model for discrete choices, the
Plackett–Luce model for rankings (Luce, 1959; Plackett,
1975) and the Bradley–Terry model for pairwise comparisons (Bradley & Terry, 1952; Huang et al., 2006).
Our work unifies all the aforementioned models in the framework of generalized multinomial models owning to their

shared structures in the log-likelihood function. We theoretically show that the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE)
under generalized multinomial models corresponds to the
probability vector of the stationary distribution of an inhomogeneous Markov chain whose transition matrix is a
function of the MLE itself. Motivated by Maystre & Grossglauser (2015), we develop a consistent, computationally
efficient and easy-to-implement Markov chain based algorithm for MLE calculation. Our algorithm uniquely converges to the MLE under generalized multinomial models
with fewer iterations than existing methods. Extensive experiments on synthetic data and real data reveal that our algorithm outperforms existing ones, such as the minorization–
maximization (MM) algorithm (Hunter, 2004; Hunter &
Lange, 2004) and the Bayesian weaver algorithm (Dong &
Yin, 2018), in terms of the level of robustness, computational efficiency as well as statistical properties.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2,
the framework of generalized multinomial models is established and existing methods for inference are reviewed. The
details of our Markov chain based algorithm are provided in
Section 3. Experiments on synthetic data and real data are
conducted in Section 4 to compare our algorithm with existing ones in terms of computational efficiency and statistical
properties. Section 5 concludes with discussions.

2. Generalized Multinomial Models
2.1. Framework
Consider d basic cells c1 , . . . , cd , where ci is assigned with
Pd
cell probability pi ( i=1 pi = 1). Suppose the counts of d
basic cells are a1 , . . . , ad respectively, then the likelihood
function is
d
Y
L(p) =
pai i ,
(1)
i=1
T

Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science, University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China. Correspondence to: Jiaqi
Gu <u3005743@hku.hk>, Guosheng Yin <gyin@hku.hk>.

where p = (p1 , . . . , pd ) . Model (1) is known as the complete multinomial model. The completeness of model (1)
originates from two conditions:

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

1. Union of disjoint candidate sets for each multinomial
choice is fixed as C = {c1 , . . . , cd }.

1

