Classification from Positive, Unlabeled and Biased Negative Data

Yu-Guan Hsieh ∗ 1 Gang Niu 2 Masashi Sugiyama 2 3

Abstract
In binary classification, there are situations where
negative (N) data are too diverse to be fully labeled and we often resort to positive-unlabeled
(PU) learning in these scenarios. However, collecting a non-representative N set that contains
only a small portion of all possible N data can often be much easier in practice. This paper studies
a novel classification framework which incorporates such biased N (bN) data in PU learning. We
provide a method based on empirical risk minimization to address this PUbN classification problem. Our approach can be regarded as a novel
example-weighting algorithm, with the weight of
each example computed through a preliminary
step that draws inspiration from PU learning. We
also derive an estimation error bound for the proposed method. Experimental results demonstrate
the effectiveness of our algorithm in not only
PUbN learning scenarios but also ordinary PU
learning scenarios on several benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
In conventional binary classification, examples are labeled
as either positive (P) or negative (N), and we train a classifier on these labeled examples. On the contrary, positiveunlabeled (PU) learning addresses the problem of learning
a classifier from P and unlabeled (U) data, without the need
of explicitly identifying N data (Elkan & Noto, 2008; Ward
et al., 2009).
PU learning finds its usefulness in many real-world problems. For example, in one-class remote sensing classification (Li et al., 2011), we seek to extract a specific land-cover
class from an image. While it is easy to label examples
of this specific land-cover class of interest, examples not
1

École Normale Supérieure, Paris, France 2 RIKEN, Tokyo,
Japan 3 The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence
to: Yu-Guan Hsieh <yu-guan.hsieh@ens.fr>.
∗
Most of the work done during internship at RIKEN.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

belonging to this class are too diverse to be exhaustively
annotated. The same problem arises in text classification,
as it is difficult or even impossible to compile a set of N
samples that provides a comprehensive characterization of
everything that is not in the P class (Liu et al., 2003; Fung
et al., 2006). Besides, PU learning has also been applied to
other domains such as outlier detection (Hido et al., 2008;
Scott & Blanchard, 2009), medical diagnosis (Zuluaga et al.,
2011), or time series classification (Nguyen et al., 2011).
By carefully examining the above examples, we find out that
the most difficult step is often to collect a fully representative
N set, whereas only labeling a small portion of all possible N
data is relatively easy. Therefore, in this paper, we propose
to study the problem of learning from P, U and biased N
(bN) data, which we name PUbN learning hereinafter. We
suppose that in addition to P and U data, we also gather a
set of bN samples, governed by a distribution distinct from
the true N distribution. As described previously, this can
be viewed as an extension of PU learning, but such bias
may also occur naturally in some real-world scenarios. For
instance, let us presume that we would like to judge whether
a subject is affected by a particular disease based on the
result of a physical examination. While the data collected
from the patients represent rather well the P distribution,
healthy subjects that request the examination are in general
biased with respect to the whole healthy subject population.
We are not the first to be interested in learning with bN
data. In fact, both Li et al. (2010) and Fei & Liu (2015)
attempted to solve similar problems in the context of text
classification. Li et al. (2010) simply discarded N samples
and performed ordinary PU classification. It was also mentioned in the paper that bN data could be harmful. Fei & Liu
(2015) adopted another strategy. The authors considered
even gathering unbiased U data is difficult and learned the
classifier from only P and bN data. However, their method
is specific to text classification because it relies on the use
of effective similarity measures to evaluate similarity between documents (refer to Supplementary Material D.5 for
a deeper discussion and an empirical comparison with our
method). Therefore, our work differs from these two in
that the classifier is trained simultaneously on P, U and bN
data, without resorting to domain-specific knowledge. The
presence of U data allows us to address the problem from a
statistical viewpoint, and thus the proposed method can be

