Deep Generative Learning via Variational Gradient Flow

Yuan Gao 1 Yuling Jiao 2 Yang Wang 3 Yao Wang 4 Can Yang 3 Shunkang Zhang 3

Abstract

We propose a framework to learn deep generative
models via Variational Gradient Flow (VGrow)
on probability spaces. The evolving distribution
that asymptotically converges to the target distribution is governed by a vector field, which is
the negative gradient of the first variation of the
f -divergence between them. We prove that the
evolving distribution coincides with the pushforward distribution through the infinitesimal time
composition of residual maps that are perturbations of the identity map along the vector field.
The vector field depends on the density ratio of
the pushforward distribution and the target distribution, which can be consistently learned from a
binary classification problem. Connections of our
proposed VGrow method with other popular methods, such as VAE, GAN and flow-based methods,
have been established in this framework, gaining
new insights of deep generative learning. We also
evaluated several commonly used divergences, including Kullback-Leibler, Jensen-Shannon, Jeffreys divergences as well as our newly discovered
“logD” divergence which serves as the objective
function of the logD-trick GAN. Experimental
results on benchmark datasets demonstrate that
VGrow can generate high-fidelity images in a stable and efficient manner, achieving competitive
performance with state-of-the-art GANs.

1
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China 2 School of Statistics and Mathematics, Zhongnan University of Economics and Law, China and KLATASDSMOE, School of Statistics, East China Normal University, China
3
Department of Mathematics, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong 4 School of Management, Xi’an
Jiaotong University, China. Correspondence to: Yuling Jiao <yulingjiaomath@whu.edu.cn>, Can Yang <macyang@ust.hk>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Learning the generative model, i.e., the underlying data generating distribution, based on large amounts of data is a fundamental task in machine learning and statistics (Salakhutdinov, 2015). Recent advances in deep generative models
have provided novel techniques for unsupervised and semisupervised learning, with broad applications varying from
image synthesis (Reed et al., 2016), semantic image editing
(Zhu et al., 2016), image-to-image translation (Zhu et al.,
2017) to low-level image processing (Ledig et al., 2017).
Implicit deep generative models are extremely powerful
and flexible to approximate the target distribution by learning deep samplers (Mohamed & Lakshminarayanan, 2016)
including generative adversarial networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) and likelihood-based models, such as
variational auto-encoders (VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2014)
and flow-based methods (Dinh et al., 2015), as the representatives. The above-mentioned implicit deep generative
models focus on learning a deterministic or stochastic nonlinear mapping that try to transform low-dimensional latent
samples from a simple reference distribution to samples that
closely match the target distribution.
GAN builds a minmax two player game between the generator and the discriminator. During training, the generator
transforms samples from a simple reference distribution
into samples that would hopefully deceive the discriminator,
while the discriminator conducts a differential two-sample
test to distinguish the generated samples from the observed
samples. The objective of vanilla GAN amounts to the
Jensen-Shannon (JS) divergence between the learned distribution and the target distribution. Vanilla GAN generates
sharp image samples but suffers from the instability issue
(Arjovsky et al., 2017). A myriad of extensions to vanilla
GAN have been investigated, either theoretically or empirically, in order to achieve a stable training and high-quality
sample generation. Existing work includes but is not limited
to designing new learning procedures or network architectures (Denton et al., 2015; Radford et al., 2015; Zhang et al.,
2017; Zhao et al., 2017; Arora et al., 2017; Tao et al., 2018;
Brock et al., 2018), seeking alternative distribution discrepancy measures as loss criteria in the feature or data space (Li
et al., 2015; Dziugaite et al., 2015; Li et al., 2017; Sutherland et al., 2017; Bińkowski et al., 2018; Arjovsky et al.,
2017; Mao et al., 2017; Mroueh & Sercu, 2017), exploiting

