LGM-Net: Learning to Generate Matching Networks for Few-Shot Learning

Huaiyu Li 1 2 Weiming Dong 1 Xing Mei 3 Chongyang Ma 4 Feiyue Huang 5 Bao-Gang Hu 1

Abstract
In this work, we propose a novel meta-learning
approach for few-shot classification, which learns
transferable prior knowledge across tasks and
directly produces network parameters for similar
unseen tasks with training samples. Our approach,
called LGM-Net, includes two key modules,
namely, TargetNet and MetaNet. The TargetNet
module is a neural network for solving a
specific task and the MetaNet module aims
at learning to generate functional weights for
TargetNet by observing training samples. We also
present an intertask normalization strategy for the
training process to leverage common information
shared across different tasks. The experimental
results on Omniglot and miniImageNet datasets
demonstrate that LGM-Net can effectively adapt
to similar unseen tasks and achieve competitive
performance, and the results on synthetic datasets
show that transferable prior knowledge is learned
by the MetaNet module via mapping training
data to functional weights. LGM-Net enables
fast learning and adaptation since no further
tuning steps are required compared to other metalearning approaches.

1. Introduction
The ability to rapidly learn and generalize from a
small number of examples is a critical characteristic
of human intelligence, because humans can leverage
the prior knowledge obtained from previous learning
experience (Lake et al., 2017). Although current deep
learning approaches have achieved significant success in
many tasks (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Ren et al., 2015; Long
et al., 2015), massive labeled data and excessive training
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of
Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190,
China 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
100049, China 3 Snap Inc. 4 Kwai Inc. 5 Youtu Lab, Tencent.
Correspondence to: Weiming Dong <weiming.dong@ia.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

time are still required, because each task is independently
considered and the model parameters are learned from
scratch without incorporating task-specific prior knowledge.
How to extract prior knowledge and transfer them to unseen
tasks with limited data has become active research areas
in machine learning, such as transfer learning (Weiss et al.,
2016), metric learning (Koch et al., 2015), and domain
adaptation (Motiian et al., 2017).
In this work, we focus on few-shot learning, which
aims at learning to recognize unseen categories from few
labeled samples. Recently, meta-learning (Thrun & Pratt,
2012) has emerged as a kind of promising approach to
solve this problem. A generic meta-learning framework
usually contains a meta-level learner and a base-level
learner (Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Munkhdalai & Yu,
2017). The base-level learner is designed for specific
tasks, such as classification, regression, and neural network
policy (Finn et al., 2017). The meta-level learner aims
to learn prior knowledge across different tasks. The prior
knowledge can be transferred to the base-level learner to
help quickly adapt to similar unseen tasks. For instance,
(Ravi & Larochelle, 2017) proposed to train the meta-level
learner as the weight optimizer of a base-level learner. The
prior knowledge was embedded in how to update the baselevel learner on a new task. (Finn et al., 2017) proposed to
learn a good initialization that can be quickly adapted to
new tasks with a few updates. The prior knowledge was
learned and embedded in the good initialization.
In this work, we propose a novel meta-learning approach
for few-shot learning. In contrast to previous methods
(Munkhdalai & Yu, 2017; Ravi & Larochelle, 2017;
Andrychowicz et al., 2016), our approach directly generates
the functional weights of a network with limited training
samples. Our approach contains two key modules, namely,
a TargetNet module (the base-level learner) and a MetaNet
module 1 (the meta-level learner). The TargetNet module
is designed for specific tasks. Traditionally, the parameters
of this network are randomly initialized and adjusted
by stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithms applied
on training data. However, the parameters in TargetNet
are generated by the MetaNet module conditioned on
1

Our MetaNet module has the same abbreviation with, but is
different from, Meta Networks (Munkhdalai & Yu, 2017) method.

