Parameter-Efficient Transfer Learning for NLP

Neil Houlsby 1 Andrei Giurgiu 1 * Stanisław Jastrzȩbski 2 * Bruna Morrone 1 Quentin de Laroussilhe 1
Andrea Gesmundo 1 Mona Attariyan 1 Sylvain Gelly 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Transfer from pre-trained models yields strong performance
on many NLP tasks (Dai & Le, 2015; Howard & Ruder,
2018; Radford et al., 2018). BERT, a Transformer network
trained on large text corpora with an unsupervised loss,
attained state-of-the-art performance on text classification
and extractive question answering (Devlin et al., 2018).
In this paper we address the online setting, where tasks
arrive in a stream. The goal is to build a system that performs well on all of them, but without training an entire new
model for every new task. A high degree of sharing between
tasks is particularly useful for applications such as cloud
services, where models need to be trained to solve many
*
Equal contribution 1 Google Research 2 Jagiellonian University.
Correspondence to: Neil Houlsby <neilhoulsby@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

5
0
Accuracy delta (%)

Fine-tuning large pre-trained models is an effective transfer mechanism in NLP. However, in the
presence of many downstream tasks, fine-tuning
is parameter inefficient: an entire new model is
required for every task. As an alternative, we
propose transfer with adapter modules. Adapter
modules yield a compact and extensible model;
they add only a few trainable parameters per task,
and new tasks can be added without revisiting
previous ones. The parameters of the original
network remain fixed, yielding a high degree of
parameter sharing. To demonstrate adapter’s effectiveness, we transfer the recently proposed
BERT Transformer model to 26 diverse text classification tasks, including the GLUE benchmark.
Adapters attain near state-of-the-art performance,
whilst adding only a few parameters per task. On
GLUE, we attain within 0.4% of the performance
of full fine-tuning, adding only 3.6% parameters
per task. By contrast, fine-tuning trains 100% of
the parameters per task.

−5
−10
−15
−20
−25
10 5

Adapters (ours)
Fine-tune top layers
10 7
10 6
10 8
Num trainable parameters / task

10 9

Figure 1. Trade-off between accuracy and number of trained taskspecific parameters, for adapter tuning and fine-tuning. The y-axis
is normalized by the performance of full fine-tuning, details in
Section 3. The curves show the 20th, 50th, and 80th performance
percentiles across nine tasks from the GLUE benchmark. Adapterbased tuning attains a similar performance to full fine-tuning with
two orders of magnitude fewer trained parameters.

tasks that arrive from customers in sequence. For this, we
propose a transfer learning strategy that yields compact and
extensible downstream models. Compact models are those
that solve many tasks using a small number of additional
parameters per task. Extensible models can be trained incrementally to solve new tasks, without forgetting previous
ones. Our method yields a such models without sacrificing
performance.
The two most common transfer learning techniques in NLP
are feature-based transfer and fine-tuning. Instead, we
present an alternative transfer method based on adapter
modules (Rebuffi et al., 2017). Features-based transfer involves pre-training real-valued embeddings vectors. These
embeddings may be at the word (Mikolov et al., 2013), sentence (Cer et al., 2019), or paragraph level (Le & Mikolov,
2014). The embeddings are then fed to custom downstream
models. Fine-tuning involves copying the weights from a
pre-trained network and tuning them on the downstream
task. Recent work shows that fine-tuning often enjoys better
performance than feature-based transfer (Howard & Ruder,
2018).

