A Large-Scale Study on Regularization and Normalization in GANs
Karol Kurach * 1 Mario Lucic * 1 Xiaohua Zhai 1 Marcin Michalski 1 Sylvain Gelly 1

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are a
class of deep generative models which aim to
learn a target distribution in an unsupervised fashion. While they were successfully applied to many
problems, training a GAN is a notoriously challenging task and requires a significant number
of hyperparameter tuning, neural architecture engineering, and a non-trivial amount of “tricks”.
The success in many practical applications coupled with the lack of a measure to quantify the
failure modes of GANs resulted in a plethora of
proposed losses, regularization and normalization
schemes, as well as neural architectures. In this
work we take a sober view of the current state of
GANs from a practical perspective. We discuss
and evaluate common pitfalls and reproducibility issues, open-source our code on Github, and
provide pre-trained models on TensorFlow Hub.

1. Introduction
Deep generative models are a powerful class of (mostly)
unsupervised machine learning models. These models were
recently applied to great effect in a variety of applications,
including image generation, learned compression, and domain adaptation (Brock et al., 2019; Menick & Kalchbrenner, 2019; Karras et al., 2019; Lucic et al., 2019; Isola et al.,
2017; Tschannen et al., 2018).
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.,
2014) are one of the main approaches to learning such models in a fully unsupervised fashion. The GAN framework
can be viewed as a two-player game where the first player,
the generator, is learning to transform some simple input
distribution to a complex high-dimensional distribution (e.g.
over natural images), such that the second player, the discriminator, cannot tell whether the samples were drawn
*

Equal contribution 1 Google Research, Brain Team. Correspondence to: Karol Kurach <kkurach@google.com>, Mario
Lucic <lucic@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

from the true distribution or were synthesized by the generator. The solution to the classic minimax formulation (Goodfellow et al., 2014) is the Nash equilibrium where neither
player can improve unilaterally. As the generator and discriminator are usually parameterized as deep neural networks, this minimax problem is notoriously hard to solve.
In practice, the training is performed using stochastic
gradient-based optimization methods. Apart from inheriting the optimization challenges associated with training
deep neural networks, GAN training is also sensitive to the
choice of the loss function optimized by each player, neural
network architectures, and the specifics of regularization
and normalization schemes applied. This has resulted in a
flurry of research focused on addressing these challenges
(Goodfellow et al., 2014; Salimans et al., 2016; Miyato
et al., 2018; Gulrajani et al., 2017; Arjovsky et al., 2017;
Mao et al., 2017).
Our Contributions In this work we provide a thorough
empirical analysis of these competing approaches, and help
the researchers and practitioners navigate this space. We
first define the GAN landscape – the set of loss functions,
normalization and regularization schemes, and the most
commonly used architectures. We explore this search space
on several modern large-scale datasets by means of hyperparameter optimization, considering both “good” sets of
hyperparameters reported in the literature, as well as those
obtained by sequential Bayesian optimization.
We first decompose the effect of various normalization
and regularization schemes. We show that both gradient
penalty (Gulrajani et al., 2017) as well as spectral normalization (Miyato et al., 2018) are useful in the context of
high-capacity architectures. Then, by analyzing the impact
of the loss function, we conclude that the non-saturating
loss (Goodfellow et al., 2014) is sufficiently stable across
datasets and hyperparameters. Finally, show that similar
conclusions hold for both popular types of neural architectures used in state-of-the-art models. We then discuss
some common pitfalls, reproducibility issues, and practical considerations. We provide reference implementations,
including training and evaluation code on Github1 , and provide pre-trained models on TensorFlow Hub2 .
1
2

www.github.com/google/compare_gan
www.tensorflow.org/hub

