Training CNNs with Selective Allocation of Channels

Jongheon Jeong 1 Jinwoo Shin 1 2 3

Abstract
Recent progress in deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have enabled a simple paradigm
of architecture design: larger models typically
achieve better accuracy. Due to this, in modern
CNN architectures, it becomes more important to
design models that generalize well under certain
resource constraints, e.g. the number of parameters. In this paper, we propose a simple way to
improve the capacity of any CNN model having
large-scale features, without adding more parameters. In particular, we modify a standard convolutional layer to have a new functionality of
channel-selectivity, so that the layer is trained to
select important channels to re-distribute their parameters. Our experimental results under various
CNN architectures and datasets demonstrate that
the proposed new convolutional layer allows new
optima that generalize better via efficient resource
utilization, compared to the baseline.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have become one of
the most effective approaches for various tasks of machine
learning. With a growing interest, there has been a lot of
works on designing advanced CNN architectures (Szegedy
et al., 2015; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014; Ioffe & Szegedy,
2015; He et al., 2016a). Although modern CNNs are capable to scale over a thousand of layers (He et al., 2016b)
or channels (Huang et al., 2017), deploying them in the
real-world becomes increasingly difficult due to computing
resource constraints. This has motivated the recent literature
such as resource-efficient architectures (Huang et al., 2018b;
Sandler et al., 2018; Ma et al., 2018), low-rank factorization
(Jaderberg et al., 2014; Novikov et al., 2015), weight quantization (Rastegari et al., 2016; Courbariaux & Bengio, 2016;
1
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, South
Korea 2 Graduate School of AI, KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea
3
AITRICS, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: Jinwoo Shin
<jinwoos@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Chen et al., 2018) and anytime/adaptive networks (Figurnov
et al., 2017; Bolukbasi et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2018a).
In order to design a resource-efficient CNN architecture, it is
important to process succinct representations of large-scale
features. At this point of view, there have been continuous attempts to find an efficient layer for handling such extremely
large number of features (Iandola et al., 2016; Ioannou et al.,
2017; Sun et al., 2018; Sandler et al., 2018; Ma et al., 2018).
However, most prior works assume that the layer is static,
i.e., the structure in weight connectivity is unchanged during
training. Such static layers inevitably have to allocate too
many parameters across homogeneous features, since it is
hard to get prior knowledge on the features before training
the network. For instance, one of state-of-the-art models,
DenseNet-BC-190 (Huang et al., 2017), devotes 70% of the
parameters for just performing dimensionality reduction of
pointwise convolutional layers. Such an architectural inefficiency may harm the generalization ability of the model,
given a fixed number of parameters.
To alleviate the issue of inefficient allocation of parameters,
one can attempt to utilize the posterior information after
training, e.g. network pruning (Han et al., 2015; He et al.,
2017; Liu et al., 2017), or neural architecture search (Zoph
et al., 2018; Real et al., 2018; Luo et al., 2018). A shortcoming of this direction, however, is that it typically requires a
time-consuming repetition of training cycles.
Contribution. In this paper, we propose a new way of
training CNNs so that each convolutional layer can select
channels of importance dynamically during training. As
the training progresses, some input channels of a convolutional layer may have almost no contribution to the output,
wasting the resources allocated to the channels for the rest
of the training. Our method detects such channels, and
re-distribute the resources from those channels to another
top-K selected channels of importance. Consequently, our
training scheme is a process that increases the efficiency of
CNN by dynamically pruning or re-wiring its parameters
on-the-fly along with learning them. In a sense, our method
“imitates” how hippocampus in brain learns, where new neurons are generated and rewired daily under maintenance via
neuronal apoptosis or pruning (Sahay et al., 2011a;b).
Our CNN-training method consists of two building blocks.
First, we propose the expected channel damage matrix

