Faster Stochastic Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers
for Nonconvex Optimization

Feihu Huang 1 Songcan Chen 2 3 Heng Huang 1 4

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a faster stochastic alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM)
for nonconvex optimization by using a new
stochastic path-integrated differential estimator
(SPIDER), called as SPIDER-ADMM. Moreover, we prove that the SPIDER-ADMM achieves
a record-breaking incremental first-order oracle
(IFO) complexity of O(n + n1/2 −1 ) for finding
an -approximate solution, which improves the
deterministic ADMM by a factor O(n1/2 ), where
n denotes the sample size. As one of major contribution of this paper, we provide a new theoretical analysis framework for nonconvex stochastic
ADMM methods with providing the optimal IFO
complexity. Based on this new analysis framework, we study the unsolved optimal IFO complexity of the existing non-convex SVRG-ADMM
and SAGA-ADMM methods, and prove they have
the optimal IFO complexity of O(n + n2/3 −1 ).
Thus, the SPIDER-ADMM improves the existing stochastic ADMM methods by a factor of
O(n1/6 ). Moreover, we extend SPIDER-ADMM
to the online setting, and propose a faster online
SPIDER-ADMM. Our theoretical analysis shows
that the online SPIDER-ADMM has the IFO com3
plexity of O(− 2 ), which improves the existing
1
best results by a factor of O( 2 ). Finally, the experimental results on benchmark datasets validate
that the proposed algorithms have faster convergence rate than the existing ADMM algorithms
for nonconvex optimization.
1
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University
of Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA 2 College of Computer Science &
Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
Nanjing 211106, China 3 MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis & Machine Intelligence 4 JD Finance America Corporation.
Correspondence to: Heng Huang <heng.huang@pitt.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM)
(Gabay & Mercier, 1976; Boyd et al., 2011) is a powerful
optimization tool for the composite or constrained problems
in machine learning. In general, it considers the following
optimization problem:
min f (x) + g(y),
x,y

s.t. Ax + By = c,

where f (x) : Rd → R and g(y) : Rp → R are convex functions. For example, in machine learning, f (x) can be used
for the empirical loss, g(y) for the structure regularizer, and
the constraint for encoding the structure pattern of model
parameters. Due to the flexibility in splitting the objective
function into loss f (x) and regularizer g(y), the ADMM can
relatively easily solve some complicated structure problems
in machine learning, such as the graph-guided fused lasso
(Kim et al., 2009) and the overlapping group lasso, which
are too complicated for the other popular optimization methods such as proximal gradient methods (Nesterov, 2005;
Beck & Teboulle, 2009). Thus, the ADMM has been extensively studied in recent years (Boyd et al., 2011; Nishihara
et al., 2015; Xu et al., 2017).
The above deterministic ADMM generally needs to compute
the gradients of empirical loss function on all examples at
each iteration, which makes it unsuitable for solving big
data problems. Thus, the online and stochastic versions of
ADMM (Wang & Banerjee, 2012; Suzuki, 2013; Ouyang
et al., 2013) are developed. However, due to large variance
of stochastic gradients, these stochastic methods suffer from
a slow convergence rate. Recently, some fast stochastic
ADMM methods (Zhong & Kwok, 2014; Suzuki, 2014;
Zheng & Kwok, 2016a) have been proposed by using the
variance reduced (VR) techniques.
So far, the above discussed ADMM methods build on the
convexity of objective functions. In fact, ADMM is also
highly successful in solving various nonconvex problems
such as tensor decomposition (Kolda & Bader, 2009) and
training neural networks (Taylor et al., 2016). Thus, some
works (Li & Pong, 2015; Wang et al., 2015a;b; Hong et al.,
2016; Jiang et al., 2019) have devoted to studying the nonconvex ADMM methods. More recently, for solving the big
data problems, the nonconvex stochastic ADMMs (Huang
et al., 2016; Zheng & Kwok, 2016b) have been proposed

