Gauge Equivariant Convolutional Networks and the Icosahedral CNN

Taco S. Cohen * 1 Maurice Weiler * 2 Berkay Kicanaoglu * 2 Max Welling 1

Abstract
The principle of equivariance to symmetry transformations enables a theoretically grounded approach to neural network architecture design.
Equivariant networks have shown excellent performance and data efficiency on vision and medical imaging problems that exhibit symmetries.
Here we show how this principle can be extended
beyond global symmetries to local gauge transformations. This enables the development of a very
general class of convolutional neural networks on
manifolds that depend only on the intrinsic geometry, and which includes many popular methods
from equivariant and geometric deep learning.
We implement gauge equivariant CNNs for signals defined on the surface of the icosahedron,
which provides a reasonable approximation of the
sphere. By choosing to work with this very regular manifold, we are able to implement the gauge
equivariant convolution using a single conv2d call,
making it a highly scalable and practical alternative to Spherical CNNs. Using this method, we
demonstrate substantial improvements over previous methods on the task of segmenting omnidirectional images and global climate patterns.

1. Introduction
By and large, progress in deep learning has been achieved
through intuition-guided experimentation. This approach
is indispensable and has led to many successes, but has not
produced a deep understanding of why and when certain
architectures work well. As a result, every new application
requires an extensive architecture search, which comes at a
significant labor and energy cost.
*

Equal contribution 1 Qualcomm AI Research, Amsterdam,
NL. 2 Qualcomm-University of Amsterdam (QUVA) Lab. Theory co-developed by Cohen & Weiler. Correspondence to:
Taco S. Cohen <taco.cohen@gmail.com>, Maurice Weiler
<m.weiler@uva.nl>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Figure 1. A gauge is a smoothly varying choice of tangent frame
on a subset U of a manifold M . A gauge is needed to represent
geometrical quantities such as convolutional filters and feature
maps (i.e. fields), but the choice of gauge is ultimately arbitrary.
Hence, the network should be equivariant to gauge transformations,
such as the change between red and blue gauge pictured here.

Although a theory that tells us which architecture to use for
any given problem is clearly out of reach, we can nevertheless come up with general principles to guide architecture
search. One such rational design principle that has met with
substantial empirical success (Winkels & Cohen, 2018; Zaheer et al., 2017; Lunter & Brown, 2018) maintains that
network architectures should be equivariant to symmetries.
Besides the ubiquitous translation equivariant CNN, equivariant networks have been developed for sets, graphs, and
homogeneous spaces like the sphere (see Sec. 3). In each
case, the network is made equivariant to the global symmetries of the underlying space. However, manifolds do not
in general have global symmetries, and so it is not obvious
how one might develop equivariant CNNs for them.
General manifolds do however have local gauge symmetries,
and as we will show in this paper, taking these into account
is not just useful but necessary if one wishes to build manifold CNNs that depend only on the intrinsic geometry. To
this end, we define a convolution-like operation on general
manifolds M that is equivariant to local gauge transformations (Fig. 1). This gauge equivariant convolution takes as
input a number of feature fields on M of various types (analogous to matter fields in physics), and produces as output
new feature fields. Each field is represented by a number of
feature maps, whose activations are interpreted as the coefficients of a geometrical object (e.g. scalar, vector, tensor,
etc.) relative to a spatially varying frame (i.e. gauge). The
network is constructed such that if the gauge is changed,

