Approximated Oracle Filter Pruning for Destructive CNN Width Optimization

Xiaohan Ding 1 Guiguang Ding 1 Yuchen Guo 1 Jungong Han 2 Chenggang Yan 3

Abstract
It is not easy to design and run Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) due to: 1) finding the optimal number of filters (i.e., the width) at each layer
is tricky, given an architecture; and 2) the computational intensity of CNNs impedes the deployment on computationally limited devices. Oracle
Pruning is designed to remove the unimportant
filters from a well-trained CNN, which estimates
the filters’ importance by ablating them in turn
and evaluating the model, thus delivers high accuracy but suffers from intolerable time complexity,
and requires a given resulting width but cannot
automatically find it. To address these problems,
we propose Approximated Oracle Filter Pruning
(AOFP), which keeps searching for the least important filters in a binary search manner, makes
pruning attempts by masking out filters randomly,
accumulates the resulting errors, and finetunes
the model via a multi-path framework. As AOFP
enables simultaneous pruning on multiple layers,
we can prune an existing very deep CNN with
acceptable time cost, negligible accuracy drop,
and no heuristic knowledge, or re-design a model
which exerts higher accuracy and faster inference.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have become an
important tool for many real-world applications and related
research areas (Collobert & Weston, 2008; LeCun et al.,
1990a; 1995). Nowadays, designing a CNN usually means
a tiring exploration in a vast design space, which usually
1
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science
and Technology (BNRist); School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Email: dxh17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn.
2
WMG Data Science, University of Warwick, Coventry, United
Kingdom 3 InstituteofInformationandControl, Hangzhou Dianzi
University, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Yuchen
Guo <yuchen.w.guo@gmail.com>, Jungong Han <jungonghan77@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

includes the usage of non-linearities (ReLU, sigmoid or
none), downsampling (max / average pooling or stride-2
convolution), shortcut connections (He et al., 2016), etc.
With so many hyper-parameters in consideration, we still
have to make a hard decision every time we use a convolutional layer: the number of filters, i.e., the width of the
layer. Since an unnecessarily wide conv layer usually leads
to meaningless parameters, heavy computational burdens,
and overfitting, we wish to set a proper width for each layer,
which is inherently tricky. In modern CNN architectures,
some practical guidelines on the number of filters are followed. Taking VGG (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014) for
example, when the feature maps are spatially downsampled
by 2×, the number of filters becomes 2×, so that the computational burdens of each layer are kept roughly the same.
Apparently, such guidelines leave much room to improve
on the layer width for better accuracy and efficiency.
In this paper, destructive CNN width optimization refers to
the process which takes a well-trained tidy CNN as input
and produces an optimized one where some useless filters
are removed. In this context, our method can be categorized
into filter pruning, a.k.a. channel pruning (He et al., 2017)
or network slimming (Liu et al., 2017), a family of CNN
compression techniques, which features three strengths. 1)
Universality: filter pruning can handle any kinds of CNNs,
making no assumptions on the application field, the network
architecture or the deployment platform. 2) Effectiveness:
filter pruning effectively reduces the floating-point operations (FLOPs) of the network, which serve as the main
criterion of computational burdens. When a filter is pruned,
its output channel and the corresponding input channels
of the following layer are removed. That is, when several
conv layers stacked together are pruned respectively, the
total FLOPs are reduced quadratically. 3) Orthogonality:
filter pruning simply produces a thinner network with no
customized structure or extra operation, which is orthogonal
to other model compression and acceleration techniques.
A common paradigm of filter pruning is to evaluate the importance of filters by some means (Polyak & Wolf, 2015; Hu
et al., 2016; Li et al., 2016; Molchanov et al., 2016; AbbasiAsl & Yu, 2017; Anwar et al., 2017; Yu et al., 2018), such
that the accuracy is not damaged severely by the removal of
the less important filters and can be recovered by finetuning.
Apparently, the quality of the filter importance evaluation

