Simple Black-box Adversarial Attacks

Chuan Guo 1 Jacob R. Gardner 2 Yurong You 1 Andrew Gordon Wilson 1 Kilian Q. Weinberger 1

Abstract
We propose an intriguingly simple method for
the construction of adversarial images in the
black-box setting. In constrast to the white-box
scenario, constructing black-box adversarial images has the additional constraint on query budget, and efficient attacks remain an open problem to date. With only the mild assumption of
continuous-valued confidence scores, our highly
query-efficient algorithm utilizes the following
simple iterative principle: we randomly sample a
vector from a predefined orthonormal basis and
either add or subtract it to the target image. Despite its simplicity, the proposed method can be
used for both untargeted and targeted attacks –
resulting in previously unprecedented query efficiency in both settings. We demonstrate the efficacy and efficiency of our algorithm on several
real world settings including the Google Cloud
Vision API. We argue that our proposed algorithm
should serve as a strong baseline for future blackbox attacks, in particular because it is extremely
fast and its implementation requires less than 20
lines of PyTorch code.

1. Introduction
As machine learning systems become prevalent in numerous
application domains, the security of these systems in the
presence of malicious adversaries becomes an important
area of research. Many recent studies have shown that decisions output by machine learning models can be altered
arbitrarily with imperceptible changes to the input (Carlini
& Wagner, 2017b; Szegedy et al., 2014). These attacks
on machine learning models can be categorized by the capabilities of the adversary. White-box attacks require the
adversary to have complete knowledge of the target model,
1

Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca,
New York, USA 2 Uber AI Labs, San Francisco, California, USA.
Correspondence to: Chuan Guo <cg563@cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

whereas black-box attacks require only queries to the target
model that may return complete or partial information.
Seemingly all models for classification of natural images
are susceptible to white-box attacks (Athalye et al., 2018),
which indicates that natural images tend to be close to decision boundaries learned by machine learning classifiers.
Although often misunderstood as a property of neural networks (Szegedy et al., 2014), the vulnerability towards adversarial examples is likely an inevitability of classifiers in
high-dimensional spaces with most data distributions (Fawzi
et al., 2018; Shafahi et al., 2018).
If adversarial examples (almost) always exist, attacking a
classifier turns into a search problem within a small volume
around a target image. In the white-box scenario, this search
can be guided effectively with gradient descent (Szegedy
et al., 2014; Carlini & Wagner, 2017b; Madry et al., 2017).
However, the black-box threat model is more applicable in
many scenarios. Here, queries to the model may incur a
significant cost of both time and money, and the number
of black-box queries made to the model therefore serves as
an important metric of efficiency for the attack algorithm.
Attacks that are too costly, or are easily defeated by query
limiting, pose less of a security risk than efficient attacks.
To date, the average number of queries performed by the
best known black-box attacks remains high despite a large
amount of recent work in this area (Chen et al., 2017; Brendel et al., 2017; Cheng et al., 2018; Guo et al., 2018; Tu
et al., 2018; Ilyas et al., 2018a). The most efficient and
complex attacks still typically require upwards of tens or
hundreds of thousands of queries. A method for query efficient black-box attacks has remained an open problem.
Machine learning services such as Clarifai or Google Cloud
Vision only allow API calls to access the model’s predictions and fall therefore in the black-box category. These
services do not release any internal details such as training data and model parameters; however, their predictions
return continuous-valued confidence scores. In this paper
we propose a simple, yet highly efficient black-box attack
that exploits these confidence scores using a very simple
intuition: if the distance to a decision boundary is small, we
don’t have to be too careful about the exact direction along
which we traverse towards it. Concretely, we repeatedly
pick a random direction among a pre-specified set of orthog-

