Communication Complexity in Locally Private Distribution Estimation and
Heavy Hitters

Jayadev Acharya 1 Ziteng Sun 1

Abstract
We consider the problems of distribution estimation, and heavy hitter (frequency) estimation
under privacy, and communication constraints.
While the constraints have been studied separately,
optimal schemes for one are sub-optimal for the
other. We propose a sample-optimal ε-locally differentially private (LDP) scheme for distribution
estimation, where each user communicates one
bit, and requires no public randomness. We also
show that Hadamard Response, a recently proposed scheme for ε-LDP distribution estimation
is also utility-optimal for heavy hitters estimation.
Our final result shows that unlike distribution estimation, without public randomness, any utilityoptimal heavy hitter estimation algorithm must
require Ω(log n) bits of communication per user.

1. Introduction
Inferring efficiently from available data forms the core of
modern data science. In many applications, being able to
infer information from the available data is perhaps the
most critical step. However, in many cases, these data
samples contain sensitive information about the various
users/players, who would like to protect their information
from being leaked. For example, medical data may contain
sensitive information about individuals’ disease and health
record, which can be inferred without proper design of the
collection scheme, a key issue highly publicized following
the publication of (Sweeney, 2002; Homer et al., 2008).
Private data release and computation has been studied
in various domains, such as statistics, machine learning,
database theory, algorithm design, and cryptography (See
e.g., (Warner, 1965; Dalenius, 1977; Dinur & Nissim, 2003;
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Cornell University. Correspondence to: Ziteng Sun
<zs335@cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Wasserman & Zhou, 2010; Wainwright et al., 2012; Chaudhuri et al., 2011)). Differential Privacy (DP) (Dwork et al.,
2006) has emerged as one of the most popular notions of
privacy (see (Dwork et al., 2006; Wasserman & Zhou, 2010;
Blum et al., 2013; McSherry & Talwar, 2007; Kairouz et al.,
2017), references therein, and the recent book (Dwork &
Roth, 2014)). DP has been adopted by companies including
Google, Apple and Microsoft (Differential Privacy Team,
Apple, 2017; Erlingsson et al., 2014; Ding et al., 2017).
A popular privacy definition is local differential privacy
(LDP), which was perhaps first proposed in (Warner, 1965),
and more recently in (Beimel et al., 2008; Kasiviswanathan
et al., 2011), where users do not trust the data collector,
and privatize their data before releasing. LDP is a stringent privacy constraint that requires a noise to be added at
each sample, and thus provides privacy to all users, even if
the data collector is compromised. Often, LDP guarantees
come at the cost of increased data requirement for various
canonical inference tasks.
Communication, along with privacy has become a valuable
resource in many applications. For example, in mobile devices, and small sensors with a limited power/limited uplink
capacity, the communication budget can overshadow the local computations performed at each of them. This has led to
a growing interest in understanding various inference tasks
under limited communication, where the users do not have
enough communication to even transmit their data (Braverman et al., 2016; Dagan & Shamir, 2018), and recent works
have established optimal bounds, and algorithms for fundamental problems such as distribution estimation (Diakonikolas et al., 2017; Han et al., 2018; Acharya et al., 2018a;b).
In particular, communication constraints have been proven
to increase the data requirements for distribution estimation
and hypothesis testing.
1.1. Notations and Set Up
We consider the following distributed setting. The underlying domain of interest is a known discrete set X of size
k. Without loss of generality, let X = [k] := {1, . . . , k}.
There are n users, where user i observes Xi ∈ [k], and
then sends a message Yi ∈ Y, the output domain, to the
central server (data collector, referee) R, who upon observ-

