Good Initializations of Variational Bayes for Deep Models

Simone Rossi 1 Pietro Michiardi 1 Maurizio Filippone 1

Abstract
Stochastic variational inference is an established
way to carry out approximate Bayesian inference
for deep models flexibly and at scale. While there
have been effective proposals for good initializations for loss minimization in deep learning, far
less attention has been devoted to the issue of
initialization of stochastic variational inference.
We address this by proposing a novel layer-wise
initialization strategy based on Bayesian linear
models. The proposed method is extensively
validated on regression and classification tasks,
including Bayesian Deep Nets and Conv Nets,
showing faster and better convergence compared
to alternatives inspired by the literature on initializations for loss minimization.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have become the preferred choice to
tackle various learning tasks, due to their ability to model
complex problems and the mature development of regularization techniques to control overfitting (LeCun et al.,
2015; Srivastava et al., 2014). There has been a recent
surge of interest in the issues associated with their overconfidence in predictions, and proposals to mitigate these
(Guo et al., 2017; Kendall & Gal, 2017; Lakshminarayanan
et al., 2017). Bayesian techniques offer a natural framework to deal with such issues, but they are characterized by
computational intractability (Bishop, 2006; Ghahramani,
2015).
A popular way to recover tractability is to use variational
inference (Jordan et al., 1999). In variational inference, an
approximate posterior distribution is introduced and its parameters are adapted by optimizing a variational objective,
which is a lower bound to the marginal likelihood. The
variational objective can be written as the sum of an expec1
Department of Data Science, EURECOM, France. Correspondence to: Simone Rossi <simone.rossi@eurecom.fr>.
th

Proceedings of the 36 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

A FTER P OOR I NITIALIZATION

A FTER O UR I NITIALIZATION

2

2

1

1

0

0

−1

−1

−2

−2
−10

−5

0

5

10 −10

−5

0

5

10

Figure 1: Due to poor initialization (left) SVI fails to converge
even after 600+ epochs (RMSE = 0.613, MNLL = 29.4) while
with our I - BLM (right) SVI easily recovers the function after few
epochs (RMSE = 0.315, MNLL = −5.8). The architecture has
three hidden layers with 500 neurons each, and uses the TANH
activation function.

tation of the log-likelihood under the approximate posterior
and a regularization term which is the negative KullbackLeibler (KL) divergence between the approximating distribution and the prior over the parameters. Stochastic Variational Inference (SVI) offers a practical way to carry out
stochastic optimization of the variational objective. In SVI,
stochasticity is introduced with a doubly stochastic approximation of the expectation term, which is unbiasedly approximated using Monte Carlo and by selecting a subset of
the training points (mini-batching) (Graves, 2011; Kingma
& Welling, 2014).
While SVI is an attractive and practical way to perform approximate inference for DNNs, there are limitations. For
example, the form of the approximating distribution can
be too simple to accurately approximate complex posterior distributions (Ha et al., 2016; Ranganath et al., 2015;
Rezende & Mohamed, 2015). Furthermore, SVI increases
the number of optimization parameters compared to optimizing model parameters through, e.g., loss minimization; for example, a fully factorized Gaussian posterior
over model parameters doubles the number of parameters
in the optimization compared to loss minimization. This
has motivated research on other ways to perform approximate Bayesian inference for DNNs by establishing connections between variational inference and dropout (Gal &
Ghahramani, 2016a;b; Gal et al., 2017).
A theoretical understanding of the optimization landscape
of DNNs and CNNs is still in its early stages of development (Dziugaite & Roy, 2017; Garipov et al., 2018), and
most works have focused on the practical aspects charac-

