Policy Consolidation for Continual Reinforcement Learning

Christos Kaplanis 1 2 Murray Shanahan 1 3 Claudia Clopath 2

Abstract
We propose a method for tackling catastrophic
forgetting in deep reinforcement learning that is
agnostic to the timescale of changes in the distribution of experiences, does not require knowledge of task boundaries, and can adapt in continuously changing environments. In our policy
consolidation model, the policy network interacts
with a cascade of hidden networks that simultaneously remember the agent’s policy at a range of
timescales and regularise the current policy by its
own history, thereby improving its ability to learn
without forgetting. We find that the model improves continual learning relative to baselines on a
number of continuous control tasks in single-task,
alternating two-task, and multi-agent competitive
self-play settings.

1. Introduction
An agent that continuously builds on its experiences to develop increasingly complex skills should be able to adapt
quickly while also preserving its previously acquired knowledge. While artificial neural networks excel at learning from
stationary datasets, once the i.i.d. assumption is violated,
they have been shown to suffer from catastrophic forgetting
(McCloskey & Cohen, 1989), whereby training on new data
quickly erases knowledge acquired from older data.
Evaluation of techniques that tackle the catastrophic forgetting problem has largely focused on sequential learning
of distinct tasks. As such, many successful approaches
have relied on the awareness of task boundaries for the consolidation of previous knowledge (Ruvolo & Eaton, 2013;
Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Li & Hoiem, 2017). This can be
problematic because sometimes the data distribution faced
by a neural network during training may evolve in a gradual

way that can not be discretised easily into separate tasks. In
reinforcement learning (RL), for example, the data distribution can change at multiple and unpredictable timescales
within the training of a single task. This can be due to the
fact that (i) states are correlated in time, (ii) the agent’s
policy, which can greatly affect the distribution of its experiences, continuously evolves during training and/or (iii) the
dynamics of the agent’s environment are non-stationary.
In this paper, we develop an approach to mitigate catastrophic forgetting in a deep RL setting by consolidating
the agent’s policy over multiple timescales during training,
which we call policy consolidation (PC). Rather than relying
on task boundaries, consolidation in our model occurs at all
times, with the agent’s policy being continually distilled into
a cascade of hidden networks that evolve over a range of
timescales. The hidden networks, in turn, distill knowledge
back through the cascade into the policy network in order
to ensure that the agent’s policy does not deviate too much
from where it was previously.
The PC model is motivated by previous work showing that
multiple timescale learning at the parameter level helped
task-agnostic continual learning in the context of simple
reinforcement learning tasks (Kaplanis et al., 2018). In particular, for the PC model, we adapt the model of (Kaplanis
et al., 2018) by incorporating concepts from knowledge distillation (Hinton et al., 2015; Rusu et al., 2015) and from
one of the proximal policy optimisation (PPO) algorithms
for RL (Schulman et al., 2017) in order to implement multitimescale learning directly at the policy level.
We evaluate the PC agent’s capability for continual learning
by training it on a number of continuous control tasks in
three non-stationary settings that differ in how the data
distribution changes over time: (i) alternating between two
tasks during training, (ii) training on just one task, and (iii)
in a multi-agent self-play environment. We find that on
average the PC model improves continual learning relative
to baselines in all three scenarios.

1
Department of Computing, Imperial College London
Department of Bioengineering, Imperial College London
3
DeepMind, London. Correspondence to: Christos Kaplanis
<christos.kaplanis14@imperial.ac.uk>.

2. Preliminaries

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

We chose to evaluate our model in a reinforcement learning
setting as it provides a particularly interesting challenge

2

2.1. Reinforcement Learning

