Katalyst: Boosting Convex Katyusha
for Non-Convex Problems with a Large Condition Number

Zaiyi Chen 1 2 Yi Xu 3 Haoyuan Hu 1 Tianbao Yang 3

Abstract

where each fi is a L-smooth function, and ψ(x) is a “simple” closed convex function whose proximal mapping can
be efficiently computed. The above problem covers constrained and non-constrained smooth optimization as special cases when ψ(x) is the indicator function of a convex
set and ψ = 0. This problem has broad applications in
machine learning, and has been studied by numerous papers (Reddi et al., 2016a;b;c; Lan & Yang, 2018; Allen-Zhu,
2018; Allen-Zhu & Hazan, 2016). A number of stochastic
algorithms were proposed by utilizing the finite-sum structure of the problem and smoothness of fi to derive faster
convergence than stochastic gradient methods. These algorithms are based on two well-known variance-reduction techniques, namely the SVRG-type variance reduction (Johnson
& Zhang, 2013) and the SAGA-type variance reduction (Defazio et al., 2014; Roux et al., 2012). The key difference
between these two variance reduction techniques is that
SVRG uses a full gradient that is computed periodically and
SAGA uses a full gradient that is computed from its maintained historical gradients for each component fi . Due to
this difference, SAGA might require much higher memory
than SVRG for many problems, which renders algorithms of
SVRG-type more favorable than algorithms of SAGA-type.

An important class of non-convex objectives that
has wide applications in machine learning consists
of a sum of n smooth functions and a non-smooth
convex function. Tremendous studies have been
devoted to conquering these problems by leveraging one of the two types of variance reduction
techniques, i.e., SVRG-type that computes a full
gradient occasionally and SAGA-type that maintains n stochastic gradients at every iteration. An
interesting question that has been largely ignored
is how to improve the complexity of variance reduction methods for problems with a large condition number that measures the degree to which the
objective is close to a convex function. In this paper, we present a simple but non-trivial boosting
of a state-of-the-art SVRG-type method for convex problems (namely Katyusha) to enjoy an improved complexity for solving non-convex problems with a large condition number (that is close
to a convex function). To the best of our knowledge, its complexity has the best dependence on n
and the degree of non-convexity, and also matches
that of a recent SAGA-type accelerated stochastic
algorithm for a constrained non-convex smooth
optimization problem. Numerical experiments
verify the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm
in comparison with its competitors.

1. Introduction
The problem of interest in this paper belongs to the following class of non-convex optimization problems:
n

min φ(x) :=

x∈Rd

1X
fi (x) + ψ(x),
n i=1

(1)

1

Cainiao AI, China 2 University of Science and Technology of
China, China 3 The University of Iowa, USA. Correspondence to:
Zaiyi Chen <zaiyi.czy@alibaba-inc.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Since the proposal of non-convex SVRG for solving nonconvex problems in the form of (1) or its special case with
ψ = 0 (Reddi et al., 2016a; Allen-Zhu & Hazan, 2016),
several studies have tried to improve its complexity in terms
of the number of components n (Fang et al., 2018; Zhou
et al., 2018). To the best of our knowledge, the state-ofthe-art gradient complexity 1 of SVRG-type methods for
finding a solution x such that
√ E[k∇φ(x)k] ≤ √under the
condition ψ = 0 and  ≤ 1/ n is given by O(L n/2 ). It
was also shown in (Fang et al., 2018) that such a complexity
is a lower bound for the problem (1), hence it cannot be
improved in general.
However, most of previous studies have ignored the degree of non-convexity of each component function with
few exceptions discussed later. A natural way to measure
the degree of non-convexity is by considering a notion of
µ-weak convexity. In particular a function f is said to be
µ-weakly convex if f (x) + µ2 kxk2 is a convex function
1

the number of stochastic gradient computations

