CapsAndRuns: An Improved Method for Approximately Optimal Algorithm
Configuration

Gellért Weisz 1 András György 1 2 Csaba Szepesvári 1 3

Abstract
We consider the problem of configuring generalpurpose solvers to run efficiently on problem instances drawn from an unknown distribution, a
problem of major interest in solver autoconfiguration. Following previous work, we focus on designing algorithms that find a configuration with
near-optimal expected capped runtime while doing the least amount of work, with the cap chosen
in a configuration-specific way so that most instances are solved. In this paper we present a
new algorithm, C APS A ND RUNS, which finds a
near-optimal configuration while using time that
scales (in a problem dependent way) with the
optimal expected capped runtime, significantly
strengthening previous results which could only
guarantee a bound that scaled with the potentially
much larger optimal expected uncapped runtime.
The new algorithm is simpler and more intuitive
than the previous methods: first it estimates the
optimal runtime cap for each configuration, then
it uses a Bernstein race to find a near optimal
configuration given the caps. Experiments verify
that our method can significantly outperform its
competitors.

1. Introduction
For computational problems of major practical interest (satisfiability, planning, etc.) the computing science community
has developed a large number of “solvers”, which tend to
have many configuration parameters. The plethora of solver
parameters is explained by the diversity of applications;
experience suggests that there is much to be gained by se1

DeepMind, London, UK. 2 On leave from Imperial
College London, London, UK. 3 On leave from University
of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. Correspondence to:
Gellért Weisz <gellert@google.com>, András György <agyorgy@google.com>, Csaba Szepesvári <szepi@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

lecting the solver configuration in an application-specific
way. The problem of finding the right configuration can then
be treated as a learning problem, where one can sample
instances from the distribution underlying an application,
the learning algorithm can run any configuration on any
sampled instance until a timeout of its choice, and the goal
is to find a configuration with nearly optimal expected runtime while using the least amount of time during the search.
(Related, but different problems are considered, e.g., by
Luby et al., 1993; Adam, 2001; Mnih et al., 2008; Audibert
& Bubeck, 2010; György & Kocsis, 2011; Li et al., 2016).
There has been much practical success on designing such
black-box configuration search methods, especially in the
context of satisfiability problems. Although there is plenty
of empirical evidence “proving” the utility of methods such
as SMAC (Hutter et al., 2011; 2013), ParamILS (Hutter,
2007; Hutter et al., 2009), GGA (Ansótegui et al., 2009;
2015), and irace (Birattari et al., 2002; López-Ibánez et al.,
2011), little effort went into creating a theory that would explain why and when one should expect one of these methods
to outperform another one.
In their recent paper, Kleinberg et al. (2017) initiated a
line of research with the goal to reach this understanding.
In their work, they suggest to take a step back and consider an unstructured version of the problem which can be
thought to be at the heart of algorithm autoconfiguration.
For this setting, they presented a general-purpose configuration optimizer called S TRUCTURED P ROCRASTINATION,
with guarantees both on how close to the optimal configuration the algorithm’s result is, and how long it takes to find
such a configuration. They also demonstrated that the gap
between worst-case runtimes of existing algorithms (SMAC,
ParamILS, GGA, irace) and their solution can be arbitrarily large; a vivid justification of the need for a theoretical
approach. Their algorithm, S TRUCTURED P ROCRASTI NATION , attempts to refine the runtime guarantee for the
empirically fastest solver and solves tasks in increasing order of difficulty, postponing difficult tasks until all simpler
tasks have been solved.
Another key innovation of Kleinberg et al. (2017) is the
‘proper’ problem formulation. In particular, they suggest
that algorithms should aim to minimize the expected capped

