Robust Learning from Untrusted Sources

Nikola Konstantinov 1 Christoph H. Lampert 1

Abstract
Modern machine learning methods often require
more data for training than a single expert can
provide. Therefore, it has become a standard
procedure to collect data from multiple external
sources, e.g. via crowdsourcing. Unfortunately,
the quality of these sources is not always guaranteed. As further complications, the data might be
stored in a distributed way, or might even have to
remain private. In this work, we address the question of how to learn robustly in such scenarios.
Studying the problem through the lens of statistical learning theory, we derive a procedure that
allows for learning from all available sources, yet
automatically suppresses irrelevant or corrupted
data. We show by extensive experiments that our
method provides significant improvements over
alternative approaches from robust statistics and
distributed optimization.

1. Introduction
Due to the outstanding performance of modern machine
learning algorithms on various real-world tasks, there is an
increasing amount of interest by practitioners in producing
predictive models, specific to their purposes. In many application domains, however, it may be prohibitively expensive
for a single expert to produce a high-quality labeled dataset,
that is large enough for training a good model. Therefore,
it has become a common practice to obtain data from various external data sources. Examples range from the use of
crowdsourcing platforms, through collecting data from different websites and social networks profiles, to collaborating
with other parties working in similar domains.
Naturally, datasets obtained from such sources vary greatly
in quality, reliability and relevance for the learning task.
For instance, genetic data from multiple laboratories may
have been obtained via different measurement devices or
1
Institute of Science and Technology, Klosterneuburg, Austria.
Correspondence to: Nikola Konstantinov <nkonstan@ist.ac.at>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

data preprocessing techniques (Wahlsten et al., 2003). In
the case of crowdsourcing, a typical problem is label bias
and label noise, due to incompetent or malicious workers
(Wais et al., 2010). More generally, statistical and machine
learning models are known to suffer in performance due to
gross errors, contaminations and adversarial modifications
of the data (Tukey, 1960; Biggio et al., 2012). The variety of
possible deviations from the target data distribution, as well
as the large volume and dimensionality of the data in realworld applications, make the assessment of the quality of the
provided data a difficult task. An additional complication is
that the data might have to remain decentralized, because
of high communication costs, or it might not be directly
available for inspection, due to privacy constraints.
In this paper we study the problem of how to learn from
multiple untrusted sources, while being robust to any corruptions of the data provided from each of them. As an
alternative to the naive approaches of simply training on
all data or only on a trusted subset, we propose a method
that automatically assigns weights to the sources. To this
end, we build up on techniques from the domain adaptation literature and prove an upper bound on the expected
loss of a predictor, learned by minimizing any weighted
version of the empirical loss. Based on these theoretical
insights, our algorithm selects the weights for the sources
by approximately minimizing this upper bound.
Intuitively, the weights are assigned to the sources according to the quality and reliability of the data they provide,
quantified by an appropriate measure of trust we introduce.
This is achieved by comparing the data from each source to
a small reference dataset, obtained or trusted by the learner.
The measure can also be computed locally at every source
or by a gradient-based optimization procedure, which allows for the implementation of the algorithm under privacy
constraints, as well as its integration into any standard distributed learning framework.
We perform an extensive experimental evaluation 1 of our
algorithm and demonstrate its ability to learn from all available data, while successfully suppressing the effect of corrupted or irrelevant sources. It consistently outperforms both
naive approaches of learning on all available data directly or
1
Code is available at https://github.com/NikolaKon1994/RobustLearning-from-Untrusted-Sources

