Same, Same But Different: Recovering Neural Network Quantization Error
Through Weight Factorization

Meller Eldad 1 Finkelstein Alexander 1 Almog Uri 1 Grobman Mark 1

Abstract
Quantization of neural networks has become common practice, driven by the need for efficient implementations of deep neural networks on embedded devices. In this paper, we exploit an
oft-overlooked degree of freedom in most networks - for a given layer, individual output channels can be scaled by any factor provided that
the corresponding weights of the next layer are
inversely scaled. Therefore, a given network has
many factorizations which change the weights of
the network without changing its function. We
present a conceptually simple and easy to implement method that uses this property and show
that proper factorizations significantly decrease
the degradation caused by quantization. We show
improvement on a wide variety of networks and
achieve state-of-the-art degradation results for
MobileNets. While our focus is on quantization,
this type of factorization is applicable to other
domains such as network-pruning, neural nets
regularization and network interpretability.

1. Introduction
Early efforts in the field of deep learning have focused
mostly on the training aspect of neural networks. The success of these efforts has led to widespread deployment of
trained neural networks in data-centers (Park et al., 2018;
Jouppi et al., 2017) and on embedded devices (Ignatov et al.,
2018) where they are used for inference which in turn emphasized the need to make the inference phase more efficient.
Quantization, which means conversion of the arithmetic
used within the net from high-precision floating-points to
low-precision integers, is an essential step for efficient deployment, however, quantization degrades network perfor1

Hailo technologies, Tel Aviv, Israel. Correspondence to:
Meller Eldad <eldad.meller@hailotech.com>, Grobman Mark
<mark@hailotech.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

mance. Here, we follow the commonly used quantization
scheme described in Jacob et al. (2017) but note that other
schemes exist (Vanhoucke et al., 2011; Gupta et al., 2015;
Courbariaux et al., 2014) to which our results apply as well.
Briefly, integer quantization consists of approximating real
values with intergers according to xQ = x/scale where
scale = (max(x) − min(x))/2N and N is the number of
bits used in the approximation. Each layer’s weights and
activations are given a different scale according to their
extremum values. The noise introduced by this limited precision approximation encapsulates a fundamental dynamic
range-precision trade-off.
Existing approaches to decreasing induced degradation are
quantization-aware training (Jacob et al., 2017; Banner et al.,
2018a; Zhou et al., 2017; 2018; McKinstry et al., 2018) and
reducing the dynamic range of activations by clipping outliers (Migacz, 2017; Choi et al., 2018; Banner et al., 2018b).
Training is a powerful method but it is time-consuming, hard
to implement, and requires access to the original training
dataset which might not always be available (e.g. when the
user wishes to use an off-the-shelf pre-trained model). Clipping has limited effect since it only addresses noise from
activation quantization.
In this paper, we propose a different approach. Instead of
focusing on improving the quantization process itself, we
explore an equivalent weight arrangement that make the
net less sensitive to quantization. An equivalent weight arrangement is a factorization that changes the weights of the
networks without changing its function - i.e. for a given
input, the network output remains the same. During quantization, the range of each layer is set by the channel with the
largest absolute activation which we term the dominant channel. This single channel determines the noise in all other
channels, many of which have smaller values. Therefore,
amplifying these channels to match the dominant channel
while compensating the change at the next layer can reduce
the effect of the noise.
We begin by analyzing the noise introduced by quantization
of weights and activations in terms of signal-to-quantizationnoise ratio (SQNR). We inspect the effect of channel-scaling
on SQNR and introduce an equalization procedure which,
under some constraints, tries to scale each output channel

