Refined Complexity of PCA with Outliers

Fedor Fomin * 1 Petr Golovach * 1 Fahad Panolan * 1 Kirill Simonov * 1

Abstract
Principal component analysis (PCA) is one of the
most fundamental procedures in exploratory data
analysis and is the basic step in applications ranging from quantitative finance and bioinformatics
to image analysis and neuroscience. However, it
is well-documented that the applicability of PCA
in many real scenarios could be constrained by
an “immune deficiency” to outliers such as corrupted observations. We consider the following
algorithmic question about the PCA with outliers.
For a set of n points in Rd , how to learn a subset
of points, say 1% of the total number of points,
such that the remaining part of the points is best
fit into some unknown r-dimensional subspace?
We provide a rigorous algorithmic analysis of the
problem. We show that the problem is solvable in
2
time nO(d ) . In particular, for constant dimension
the problem is solvable in polynomial time. We
complement the algorithmic result by the lower
bound, showing that unless Exponential Time Hypothesis fails, in time f (d)no(d) , for any function
f of d, it is impossible not only to solve the problem exactly but even to approximate it within a
constant factor.

1. Introduction
Problem statement and motivation. Classical principal
component analysis (PCA) is one of the most popular and
successful techniques used for dimension reduction in data
analysis and machine learning (Pearson, 1901; Hotelling,
1933; Eckart & Young, 1936). In PCA one seeks the best
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Informatics, University of Bergen, Norway. Correspondence to: Fedor Fomin
<fomin@ii.uib.no>, Petr Golovach <pgo041@uib.no>, Fahad Panolan <Fahad.Panolan@uib.no>, Kirill Simonov <Kirill.Simonov@uib.no>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

low-rank approximation of data matrix M by solving

minimize kM − Lk2F
subject to rank(L) ≤ r.

P
2
Here ||A||2F =
i,j aij is the square of the Frobenius
norm of matrix A. By the Eckart-Young theorem (Eckart
& Young, 1936), PCA is efficiently solvable via Singular
Value Decomposition (SVD). PCA is used as a preprocessing step in a great variety of modern applications including
face recognition, data classification, and analysis of social
networks.
In this paper we consider a variant of PCA with outliers,
where we wish to recover a low-rank matrix from large but
sparse errors. Suppose that we have n points (observations)
in d-dimensional space. We know that a part of the points are
arbitrarily located (say, produced by corrupted observations)
while the remaining points are close to an r-dimensional true
subspace. We do not have any information about the true
subspace and about the corrupted observations. Our task is
to learn the true subspace and to identify the outliers. As a
common practice, we collect the points into n × d matrix
M , thus each of the rows of M is a point and the columns
of M are the coordinates. However, it is very likely that
PCA of M will not reveal any reasonable information about
non-corrupted observations—well-documented drawback
of PCA is its vulnerability to even very small number of
outliers, an example is shown in Figure 1.
Matrix formulation suggests the following interpretation:
we seek a low-rank matrix L that, with an exception in few
rows, approximates M best.

