Garbage In, Reward Out: Bootstrapping Exploration in Multi-Armed Bandits
Branislav Kveton 1 Csaba Szepesvári 2 3 Sharan Vaswani 4 Zheng Wen 5 Mohammad Ghavamzadeh 6
Tor Lattimore 2

Abstract
We propose a bandit algorithm that explores by
randomizing its history of rewards. Specifically,
it pulls the arm with the highest mean reward in
a non-parametric bootstrap sample of its history
with pseudo rewards. We design the pseudo rewards such that the bootstrap mean is optimistic
with a sufficiently high probability. We call our
algorithm Giro, which stands for garbage in, reward out. We analyze Giro in a Bernoulli bandit and derive a O(K∆−1 log n) bound on its nround regret, where ∆ is the difference in the expected rewards of the optimal and the best suboptimal arms, and K is the number of arms. The
main advantage of our exploration design is that
it easily generalizes to structured problems. To
show this, we propose contextual Giro with an
arbitrary reward generalization model. We evaluate Giro and its contextual variant on multiple
synthetic and real-world problems, and observe
that it performs well.

1. Introduction
A multi-armed bandit (Lai and Robbins, 1985; Auer et al.,
2002; Lattimore and Szepesvari, 2019) is an online learning problem where actions of the learning agent are represented by arms. The arms can be treatments in a clinical
trial or ads on a website. After the arm is pulled, the agent
receives its stochastic reward. The objective of the agent
is to maximize its expected cumulative reward. The agent
does not know the expected rewards of the arms and thus
faces the so-called exploration-exploitation dilemma: explore, and learn more about arms; or exploit, and pull the
arm with the highest estimated reward thus far.
A contextual bandit (Li et al., 2010; Agrawal and Goyal,
1

Google Research 2 DeepMind 3 University of Alberta 4 Mila,
University of Montreal 5 Adobe Research 6 Facebook AI Research.
Correspondence to: Branislav Kveton <bkveton@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

2013b) is a generalization of a multi-armed bandit where
the learning agent has access to additional context in each
round. The context can encode the medical data of a patient in a clinical trial or the demographic information of
a targeted user on a website. In this case, the expected reward is an unknown function of the arm and context. This
function is often parametric and its parameters are learned.
In linear bandits (Rusmevichientong and Tsitsiklis, 2010;
Dani et al., 2008; Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011), this function is linear; and the expected reward is the dot product of
a known context vector and an unknown parameter vector.
Arguably, the most used and studied exploration strategies in multi-armed and contextual bandits are Thompson
sampling (Thompson, 1933; Agrawal and Goyal, 2013a),
the optimism in the face of uncertainty (Auer et al., 2002;
Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011), and the -greedy policy (Sutton and Barto, 1998; Auer et al., 2002). The -greedy policy is general and thus widely used in practice. However,
it is also statistically suboptimal. Its performance heavily
depends on the value of  and the strategy for annealing it.
Optimism in the face of uncertainty (OFU) relies on highprobability confidence sets. These sets are statistically and
computationally efficient in multi-armed and linear bandits
(Auer et al., 2002; Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011). However,
when the reward function is non-linear in context, we only
know how to construct approximate confidence sets (Filippi et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2016; Li et al., 2017; Jun
et al., 2017). These sets tend to be conservative (Filippi
et al., 2010) and statistically suboptimal.
The key idea in Thompson sampling (TS) is to maintain a
posterior distribution over model parameters and then act
optimistically with respect to samples from it. TS is computationally efficient when the posterior distribution has a
closed form, as in multi-armed bandits with Bernoulli and
Gaussian rewards. If the posterior does not have a closed
form, it has to be approximated. Computationally efficient
approximations exist in multi-armed bandits with [0, 1] rewards (Agrawal and Goyal, 2013a). Such approximations
are costly in general (Gopalan et al., 2014; Kawale et al.,
2015; Lu and Van Roy, 2017; Riquelme et al., 2018).
To address these problems, bootstrapping exploration has
been proposed in both multi-armed and contextual bandits

