Stochastic Deep Networks

Gwendoline de Bie 1 Gabriel Peyré 2 1 Marco Cuturi 3 4

Abstract
Machine learning is increasingly targeting areas
where input data cannot be accurately described
by a single vector, but can be modeled instead using the more flexible concept of random vectors,
namely probability measures or more simply
point clouds of varying cardinality. Using deep
architectures on measures poses, however, many
challenging issues. Indeed, deep architectures
are originally designed to handle fixed-length
vectors, or, using recursive mechanisms, ordered
sequences thereof. In sharp contrast, measures
describe a varying number of weighted observations with no particular order. We propose in
this work a deep framework designed to handle
crucial aspects of measures, namely permutation
invariances, variations in weights and cardinality. Architectures derived from this pipeline can
(i) map measures to measures — using the concept of push-forward operators; (ii) bridge the
gap between measures and Euclidean spaces —
through integration steps. This allows to design
discriminative networks (to classify or reduce the
dimensionality of input measures), generative architectures (to synthesize measures) and recurrent pipelines (to predict measure dynamics). We
provide a theoretical analysis of these building
blocks, review our architectures’ approximation
abilities and robustness w.r.t. perturbation, and
try them on various discriminative and generative
tasks.

1. Introduction
Deep networks can now handle increasingly complex
structured data types, starting historically from images (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and speech (Hinton et al.,
1

École Normale Supérieure, DMA, Paris, France 2 CNRS
3
CREST/ENSAE Paristech 4 Google Brain, Paris, France. Correspondence to: GDB <Gwendoline.De.Bie@ens.fr>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

2012) to deal now with shapes (Wu et al., 2015a),
sounds (Lee et al., 2009), texts (LeCun et al., 1998) or
graphs (Henaff et al., 2015). In each of these applications,
deep networks rely on the composition of several elementary functions, whose tensorized operations stream well on
GPUs, and whose computational graphs can be easily automatically differentiated through back-propagation. Initially designed for vectorial features, their extension to sequences of vectors using recurrent mechanisms (Hochreiter
and Schmidhuber, 1997) had an enormous impact.
Our goal is to devise neural architectures that can handle
probability distributions under any of their usual form: as
discrete measures supported on (possibly weighted) point
clouds, or densities one can sample from. Such probability
distributions are challenging to handle using recurrent networks because no order between observations can be used
to treat them recursively (although some adjustments can
be made, as discussed in Vinyals et al. 2016) and because,
in the discrete case, their size may vary across observations.
There is, however, a strong incentive to define neural architectures that can handle distributions as inputs or outputs.
This is particularly evident in computer vision, where the
naive representation of complex 3D objects as vectors in
spatial grids is often too costly memorywise, leads to a loss
in detail, destroys topology and is blind to relevant invariances such as shape deformations. These issues were successfully tackled in a string of papers well adapted to such
3D settings (Qi et al., 2016; 2017; Fan et al., 2016). In other
cases, ranging from physics (Godin et al., 2007), biology
(Grover et al., 2011), ecology (Tereshko, 2000) to census
data (Guckenheimer et al., 1977), populations cannot be
followed at an individual level due to experimental costs or
privacy concerns. In such settings where only macroscopic
states are available, densities appear as the right object to
perform inference tasks.
1.1. Previous works
Specificities of Probability Distributions. Data described in point clouds or sampled i.i.d. from a density
are given unordered. Therefore architectures dealing with
them are expected to be permutation invariant; they are
also often expected to be equivariant to geometric transformations of input points (translations, rotations) and to
capture local structures of points. Permutation invariance

