Differentially Private Learning of Geometric Concepts

Haim Kaplan 1 2 Yishay Mansour 1 2 Yossi Matias 2 Uri Stemmer 3 4

Abstract
We present differentially private efficient algorithms for learning union of polygons in
the plane (which are not necessarily convex).
Our algorithms achieve (α, β)-PAC learning and
(ε, δ)-differential
 privacy using a sample of size
1
Õ αε
k log d , where the domain is [d] × [d] and
k is the number of edges in the union of polygons.

1. Introduction
Machine learning algorithms have exciting and wide-range
potential. However, as the data frequently contain sensitive
personal information, there are real privacy concerns associated with the development and the deployment of this technology. Motivated by this observation, the line of work on
differentially private learning (initiated by Kasiviswanathan
et al. (2011)) aims to construct learning algorithms that
provide strong (mathematically proven) privacy protections
for the training data. Both government agencies and industrial companies have realized the importance of introducing
strong privacy protection to statistical and machine learning
tasks. A few recent examples include Google (Erlingsson
et al., 2014) and Apple (Thakurta et al., 2017) that are already using differentially private estimation algorithms that
feed into machine learning algorithms, and the US Census Bureau announcement that they will use differentially
private data publication techniques in the next decennial
census (Abowd, 2016). Differential privacy is increasingly
accepted as a standard for rigorous privacy. We refer the
reader to the excellent surveys in (Dwork & Roth, 2014)
and (Vadhan, 2016). The definition of differential privacy
is,
Definition 1.1 (Dwork et al. (2006)). Let A be a randomized algorithm whose input is a sample. Algorithm A is
(ε, δ)-differentially private if for every two samples S, S 0
that differ in one example, and for any event T , we have
1

Tel Aviv University 2 Google research, Israel 3 Ben-Gurion
University 4 Supported by a gift from Google Ltd. Correspondence
to: Uri Stemmer <u@uri.co.il>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Pr[A(S) ∈ T ] ≤ eε · Pr[A(S 0 ) ∈ T ] + δ.
For now, we can think of a (non-private) learner as an algorithm that operates on a set of classified random examples,
and outputs a hypothesis h that misclassifies fresh examples
1
with probability at most (say) 10
. A private learner must
achieve the same goal while guaranteeing that the choice
of h preserves differential privacy of the sample points.
Intuitively this means that the choice of h should not be
significantly affected by any particular sample.
While many learning tasks of interest are compatible with
differential privacy, privacy comes with a cost (in terms of
computational resources and the amount of data needed),
and it is important to understand how efficient can private learning be. Indeed, there has been a significant
amount of work aimed at understanding the sample complexity of private learning (Beimel et al., 2010; Chaudhuri &
Hsu, 2011; Beimel et al., 2013a;b; Feldman & Xiao, 2015;
Bun et al., 2015; Alon et al., 2018; Beimel et al., 2019),
the computational complexity of private learning (Bun &
Zhandry, 2016), and studying variations of the private learning model (Beimel et al., 2015; Bun et al., 2016; Dwork
& Feldman, 2018; Bassily et al., 2018). However, in spite
of the significant progress made in recent years, much remains unknown and answers to fundamental questions are
still missing. In particular, the literature lacks effective constructions of private learners for specific concept classes
of interest, such as halfspaces, polynomials, d-dimensional
balls, and more. We remark that, in principle, every (nonprivate) learner that works in the statistical queries (SQ)
model of Kearns (1998) can be transformed to preserve differential privacy. However, as the transformation is only
tight up to polynomial factors, and as SQ learners are often
much less efficient than their PAC learners counterparts, the
resulting private learners are typically far from practical.
In this work we make an important step towards bringing
differentially private learning closer to practice, and construct an effective algorithm for privately learning simple
geometric shapes, focusing on polygons in the plane. To
motivate our work, consider the task of analyzing GPS navigation data, or the task of learning the shape of a flood or a
fire based on users’ location reports. As user location data
might be sensitive, the ability to privately learn such shapes
in the plane is of significant importance.

