Weakly-Supervised Temporal Localization via Occurrence Count Learning

Julien Schroeter 1 Kirill Sidorov 1 David Marshall 1

Abstract
We propose a novel model for temporal detection
and localization which allows the training of deep
neural networks using only counts of event occurrences as training labels. This powerful weaklysupervised framework alleviates the burden of the
imprecise and time-consuming process of annotating event locations in temporal data. Unlike
existing methods, in which localization is explicitly achieved by design, our model learns localization implicitly as a byproduct of learning to
count instances. This unique feature is a direct
consequence of the model’s theoretical properties.
We validate the effectiveness of our approach in a
number of experiments (drum hit and piano onset
detection in audio, digit detection in images) and
demonstrate performance comparable to that of
fully-supervised state-of-the-art methods, despite
much weaker training requirements.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep learning techniques have demonstrated
outstanding performance on numerous tasks ranging from
object recognition to natural language processing (Schmidhuber, 2015; LeCun et al., 2015). However, this success
comes at a cost: large annotated datasets are typically
needed for training. Alleviating this requirement remains
an important open problem. Indeed, while hand-labeling
can be a very tedious and time-consuming process (Deng
et al., 2009), automated label assignments based on external
sources (Abu-El-Haija et al., 2016) are not always available
nor reliable. Both approaches suffer further from the same
inherent risk of introducing errors and imprecisions into
datasets (Frénay & Verleysen, 2014).

Figure 1. Illustration of loss computation for drum transcription.
Given as input a spectrogram, the model successively estimates:
(a) Event processes pi , (b) Count distributions Yi , (c) Loss L(θ).

have been successfully leveraged for representation learning
(Lee et al., 2009; Doersch et al., 2015; Radford et al., 2015),
dimensionality reduction (Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006)
or clustering of highly structured data (Hastie et al., 2009),
the absence of any annotation limits their versatility and
effectiveness on more complex tasks.
Another angle of attack consists in weakening the annotation requirement. Indeed, weakly-supervised models are
an effective way to mitigate the challenge of accurate and
cost-effective dataset labeling by being able to leverage simplified and more easily accessible labels. Annotations describing only instance classes, but not positions (in space or
time), have been successfully leveraged in computer vision
for object detection (Fergus et al., 2003) or action localization (Duchenne et al., 2009). In recent years, a number of
deep learning approaches have pushed the state-of-the-art
further (Bilen & Vedaldi, 2016; Shou et al., 2018). However,
despite its potential, the weakly-supervised framework has
only recently attracted attention in other domains, such as
audio event localization (Kumar & Raj, 2016).

1
Cardiff University, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Julien Schroeter <SchroeterJ1@cardiff.ac.uk>.

In this paper, we propose a novel weakly-supervised learning approach for localization and detection of events in
sequential data, which requires only the number of event
occurrences as training label. Unlike its fully-supervised
counterparts, our model successfully learns both event representation and detection without any localization prior.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

The need for temporally localizing instantaneous events
using only occurrence counts for training arises in many
different contexts. For example, in music, the number of

In order to address this issue, some approaches attempt to
extract a signal from unlabeled data hence making the training effectively unsupervised. While unsupervised models

