Nearest Neighbor and Kernel Survival Analysis: Nonasymptotic Error Bounds
and Strong Consistency Rates

George H. Chen 1

Abstract
We establish the first nonasymptotic error bounds
for Kaplan-Meier-based nearest neighbor and kernel survival probability estimators where feature
vectors reside in metric spaces. Our bounds imply
rates of strong consistency for these nonparametric estimators and, up to a log factor, match an
existing lower bound for conditional CDF estimation. Our proof strategy also yields nonasymptotic
guarantees for nearest neighbor and kernel variants of the Nelson-Aalen cumulative hazards estimator. We experimentally compare these methods
on four datasets. We find that for the kernel survival estimator, a good choice of kernel is one
learned using random survival forests.

1. Introduction
Survival analysis arises in numerous applications where we
want to reason about the amount of time until some critical
event happens. For example, in health care, we may be
interested in using electronic health records to predict how
long a patient with a particular disease will live (e.g., Botsis
et al. 2010; Ganssauge et al. 2016), or how much time a
patient has before a disease relapses (e.g., Zupan et al. 2000).
In criminology, we may be interested in predicting the time
until a convicted criminal reoffends (Chung et al., 1991).
A fundamental task in survival analysis is estimating the
survival probability over time for a specific subject (for ease
of exposition, we stick to using standard survival analysis
terminology in which the critical event of interest is death).
Formally, suppose a subject has feature vector X (a random
variable that takes on values in a feature space X ) and survival time T (a nonnegative real-valued random variable).
For a given feature vector x ∈ X , our goal is to estimate the
conditional survival function S(t|x) := P(T > t|X = x)
for time t ≥ 0.
1

Heinz College of Information Systems and Public Policy,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspondence
to: George H. Chen <georgechen@cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

To estimate S, we assume that we have access to n training
subjects. For the i-th subject, we have the subject’s feature
vector Xi ∈ X as well as two observations: δi ∈ {0, 1}
indicates whether we observe the survival time for the i-th
subject, and Yi ∈ R+ is the survival time for the i-th subject
if δi = 1 or the “censoring time” if δi = 0. The censoring
time gives a lower bound for the i-th subject’s survival time
(e.g., when we stop collecting training data, the i-th subject
might still be alive, in which case that is when the subject’s
true survival time is “censored” and we only know that the
subject survives beyond the time of censoring).
Many approaches have been devised for estimating the conditional survival function S. Most standard approaches
impose strong structural assumptions on S via constraining
∂
log S(t|x). For example,
the hazard function h(t|x) := − ∂t
the Cox proportional hazards model decouples the effects
of time t ≥ 0 and of feature vector x ∈ Rd by assuming
the factorization h(t|x) = h0 (t) exp(β > x), where positivevalued function h0 and vector β ∈ Rd are parameters (Cox,
1972). After estimating h0 and β from training data, then
for any feature vector x, we can estimate the hazard function h(t|x) by plugging in estimates for h0 and β. Integrating the estimate for h(t|x) thus yields an estimate for
Rt
S(t|x) = exp(− 0 h(s|x)ds). Other standard approaches
such as the Aalen additive model (Aalen, 1989) and accelerated failure time models (Kalbfleisch & Prentice, 2002,
Chapter 7) also impose structure on hazard function h(t|x)
and are typically used with parametric assumptions. More
recent approaches include, for instance, modifying the Cox
proportional hazards model by replacing the inner product
β > x with a nonlinear function of x that is encoded as a deep
net (Katzman et al., 2018), or completely specifying S via a
hierarchical generative model (Ranganath et al., 2016).
Rather than making structural assumptions on S, Beran
(1981) takes a nonparametric approach using nearest neighbors and kernels. The idea is simple: there already is a
nonparametric estimator for the marginal survival function
Smarg (t) := P(T > t) known as the Kaplan-Meier estimator (Kaplan & Meier, 1958). This estimator does not use
feature vectors. We can incorporate feature vectors in a
straightforward manner. For a test subject with feature vector x, we first find training subjects whose feature vectors

