Transfer Learning for Related Reinforcement Learning Tasks via
Image-to-Image Translation

Shani Gamrian 1 Yoav Goldberg 1 2

Abstract
Despite the remarkable success of Deep RL in
learning control policies from raw pixels, the resulting models do not generalize. We demonstrate
that a trained agent fails completely when facing small visual changes, and that fine-tuning—
the common transfer learning paradigm—fails
to adapt to these changes, to the extent that it
is faster to re-train the model from scratch. We
show that by separating the visual transfer task
from the control policy we achieve substantially
better sample efficiency and transfer behavior,
allowing an agent trained on the source task to
transfer well to the target tasks. The visual mapping from the target to the source domain is
performed using unaligned GANs, resulting in
a control policy that can be further improved
using imitation learning from imperfect demonstrations. We demonstrate the approach on synthetic visual variants of the Breakout game, as
well as on transfer between subsequent levels
of Road Fighter, a Nintendo car-driving game.
A visualization of our approach can be seen
in https://youtu.be/4mnkzYyXMn4 and
https://youtu.be/KCGTrQi6Ogo.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning is becoming increasingly popular due to various recent success stories, such as the famous
achievement of learning to play Atari 2600 video games
from pixel-level input (Mnih et al., 2013). However, this
approach depends on interacting with the environment a
substantial number of times during training. Moreover, it
struggles to generalize beyond its experience, the training
1
Computer Science Department, Bar-Ilan University, RamatGan, Israel 2 Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence. Correspondence to: Shani Gamrian <gamrianshani@gmail.com>, Yoav
Goldberg <yoav.goldberg@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

process of a new task has to be performed from scratch
even for a related one. Recent works have tried to overcome
this inefficiency with different approaches such as, learning
universal policies that can generalize between related tasks
(Schaul et al., 2015), as well as other transfer approaches
(Fernando et al., 2017; Rusu et al., 2016).
In this work, we first focus on the Atari game Breakout, in
which the main concept is moving the paddle towards the
ball in order to maximize the score of the game. We modify
the game by introducing visual changes such as adding a
rectangle in the middle of the image or diagonals in the background. From a human perspective, it appears that making
visual changes that are not significant to the game’s dynamics should not influence the score of the game. We show
that the agent fails to transfer. Furthermore, fine-tuning,
the main transfer learning method used today in neural networks, also fails to adapt to the small visual change: the
information learned in the source task does not benefit the
learning process of the very related target task, and can even
decelerate it.
Our second focus is attempting to transfer agent behavior
across different levels of a video game: can an agent trained
on the first level of a game use this knowledge and perform
adequately on subsequent levels? We explore the Nintendo
game Road Fighter, a car racing game where the goal is to
finish the track before the time runs out without crashing.
The levels all share the same dynamics, but differ from each
other visually and in aspects such as road width. Similar
to the Breakout results, an agent trained to play the first
level fails to correctly adapt its past experience, causing the
learned policy to completely fail on the new levels.
To address the generalization problem, we propose to isolate
the visual component and perform zero-shot analogy-based
transfer. Concretely, the agent transfers between the tasks
by learning to visually map images from the target task back
to familiar corresponding images from the source task. Such
mapping is naturally achieved using Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014). In our setup,
it is not realistic to assume paired images in both domains,
calling for the use of Unaligned GANs (Liu et al., 2017;
Zhu et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2017; Yi et al., 2017).

