Rehashing Kernel Evaluation in High Dimensions

Paris Siminelakis * 1 Kexin Rong * 1 Peter Bailis 1 Moses Charikar 1 Philip Levis 1

Abstract
Kernel methods are effective but do not scale well
to large scale data, especially in high dimensions
where the geometric data structures used to accelerate kernel evaluation suffer from the curse of
dimensionality. Recent theoretical advances have
proposed fast kernel evaluation algorithms leveraging hashing techniques with worst-case asymptotic improvements. However, these advances are
largely confined to the theoretical realm due to
concerns such as super-linear preprocessing time
and diminishing gains in non-worst case datasets.
In this paper, we close the gap between theory and
practice by addressing these challenges via provable and practical procedures for adaptive sample
size selection, preprocessing time reduction, and
refined variance bounds that quantify the datadependent performance of random sampling and
hashing-based kernel evaluation methods. Our
experiments show that these new tools offer up to
10× improvement in evaluation time on a range
of synthetic and real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
Kernel methods are a class of non-parametric methods used
for a variety of tasks including density estimation, regression, clustering and distribution testing (Muandet et al.,
2017). They have a long and influential history in statistical learning (Schölkopf et al., 2002) and scientific computing (Buhmann, 2003). However, the scalability challenges
during both training and inference limit their applicability to
large scale high-dimensional datasets: a larger training set
improves accuracy but incurs a quadratic increase in overall
evaluation time.
In this paper, we focus on the problem of fast approximate evaluation of the Kernel Density Estimate. Given
*

1
Equal contribution
Stanford University, Stanford,
California, US. Correspondence to:
Paris Siminelakis
<psimin@stanford.edu>, Kexin Rong <krong@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

(a) kernel

(b) difficult case (c) simple case

Figure 1. (a) For radially decreasing kernels (e.g. Gaussian), points
close to the query have higher kernel values than those that are far.
(b) Random sampling does not perform well when a small number
of close points contribute significantly to the query density. (c)
Random sampling performs well when most points have similar
kernel values (distance from query).

a dataset P = {x1 , . . . , xn } ⊂ Rd , a kernel function
k : Rd ×Rd → [0, 1], and a vector of (non-negative) weights
u ∈ Rn , the weighted Kernel Density P
Estimate (KDE)
n
at q ∈ Rd is given by KDEuP (q) :=
i=1 ui k(q, xi ).
Our goal is to, after some preprocessing, efficiently estimate the KDE at a query point with (1 ± ) multiplicative
accuracy under a small failure probability δ. This problem is well-studied (Greengard & Rokhlin, 1987; Gray &
Moore, 2003; March et al., 2015), but in high dimensions
only recently novel importance sampling algorithms, called
Hashing-Based-Estimators (HBE), demonstrate provable
improvements over random sampling (RS) under worst-case
assumptions (Charikar & Siminelakis, 2017).
HBE at its core uses a hash function h (randomized space
partition) to construct for any q an unbiased estimator of
µ := KDEuP (q)1 . (Charikar & Siminelakis, 2017) showed
that given a hash function with evaluation
p time T and collision probability P[h(x) = h(y)] = Θ( k(x, y)), one can
√
get a (1 ± ) approximation to µ ≥ τ in time Õ(T /2 µ)
√
and space Õ(n/2 τ ), improving over random sampling
that requires time O(1/2 µ) in the worst case.
HBE improves upon RS by being able to better sample
points with larger weights (kernel values). In particular,
RS does not perform well (Figure 1(b)) when a significant
portion of the density comes from a few points with large
weights (close to the query). HBE samples uniformly from
a set of biased samples (hash buckets where the query is
mapped to) that has a higher probability of containing high1
TheP
value µ ∈ (0, 1] can be seen as a margin for the decision
surface n
i=1 ui k(q, xi ) ≥ 0.

