Dropout as a Structured Shrinkage Prior

Eric Nalisnick 1 José Miguel Hernández-Lobato 1 2 3 Padhraic Smyth 4

Abstract
Dropout regularization of deep neural networks
has been a mysterious yet effective tool to prevent
overfitting. Explanations for its success range
from the prevention of "co-adapted" weights to
it being a form of cheap Bayesian inference. We
propose a novel framework for understanding
multiplicative noise in neural networks, considering continuous distributions as well as Bernoulli
noise (i.e. dropout). We show that multiplicative noise induces structured shrinkage priors
on a network’s weights. We derive the equivalence through reparametrization properties of
scale mixtures and without invoking any approximations. Given the equivalence, we then show
that dropout’s Monte Carlo training objective approximates marginal MAP estimation. We leverage these insights to propose a novel shrinkage
framework for resnets, terming the prior automatic depth determination as it is the natural analog of automatic relevance determination for network depth. Lastly, we investigate two inference
strategies that improve upon the aforementioned
MAP approximation in regression benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Dropout regularization (Hinton et al., 2012; Srivastava et al.,
2014) has become an essential tool for fitting large neural
networks. Due to its success, a number of variants have been
proposed (Wan et al., 2013; Wang & Manning, 2013; Huang
et al., 2016; Singh et al., 2016; Achille & Soatto, 2018),
including versions for recurrent (Ji et al., 2016; Krueger
et al., 2017; Gal & Ghahramani, 2016c; Zolna et al., 2018)
and convolutional (Tompson et al., 2015; Gal & Ghahramani, 2016a) architectures. The narratives attempting to
1

Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom 2 Microsoft Research, Cambridge, United
Kingdom 3 Alan Turing Institute 4 Department of Computer Science, University of California, Irvine, United States of America.
Correspondence to: Eric Nalisnick <e.nalisnick@eng.cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

explain dropout’s inner-workings and success are also plentiful. To give a few examples, Srivastava et al. (2014) argue
it prevents "conspiracies" between hidden units, Hinton
et al. (2012) claim it serves a role similar to sex in evolution, Baldi & Sadowski (2013) show it ensembles by taking
the geometric mean of sub-models, Wager et al. (2013) explain it as an adaptive ridge penalty, and Gal & Ghahramani
(2016b) suggest dropout performs quasi-Bayesian uncertainty estimation. While some prior work has shown strict
equivalences for simple models such as linear regression
(Baldi & Sadowski, 2013; Wager et al., 2013; 2014; Helmbold & Long, 2015), the general case of dropout in deep
neural networks is analytically intractable, which is likely
why no one narrative has come to prominence.
In this paper we propose a novel Bayesian interpretation of
regularization via multiplicative noise—with dropout being
the special case of Bernoulli noise. Unlike previous frameworks, our method of analysis works through reparametrizations that are agnostic to network architecture. By assuming
nothing more than a Gaussian prior (which could be diffuse)
on the weights, we show that multiplicative noise induces
(marginally) a Gaussian scale mixture. This result is exact
and has been exploited previously in Bayesian modeling
(Kuo & Mallick, 1998). Not only do we lay bare multiplicative noise’s distributional assumptions, but we also reveal
the structure it induces on the network’s weights. We find
that noise applied to hidden units ties the scale parameters in
the same way as automatic relevance determination (Neal,
1994; MacKay, 1994; Tipping, 2001), a well-studied shrinkage prior. We propose an extension of this prior for residual
networks (He et al., 2016), allowing Bayesian inference to
select the number of layers.
We also address our framework’s implications for posterior
inference. We show that dropout’s Monte Carlo objective is
a lower bound on the scale mixture model’s marginal MAP
objective. Decoupling dropout’s model from inference is a
novel and useful contribution as previous Bayesian interpretations have been grounded in variational inference (Gal &
Ghahramani, 2016b; Kingma et al., 2015) and hence gave
no guidance on how dropout could be used in conjunction
with Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC). We then make
algorithmic contributions of our own, describing a computationally efficient importance weighted objective and EM algorithm. We test these algorithms on benchmark regression

