Exploiting Worker Correlation for Label Aggregation in Crowdsourcing

Yuan Li 1 Benjamin I. P. Rubinstein 1 Trevor Cohn 1

Abstract
Crowdsourcing has emerged as a core component
of data science pipelines. From collected noisy
worker labels, aggregation models that incorporate worker reliability parameters aim to infer a
latent true annotation. In this paper, we argue
that existing crowdsourcing approaches do not
sufficiently model worker correlations observed
in practical settings; we propose in response an enhanced Bayesian classifier combination (EBCC)
model, with inference based on a mean-field variational approach. An introduced mixture of intraclass reliabilities—connected to tensor decomposition and item clustering—induces inter-worker
correlation. EBCC does not suffer the limitations of existing correlation models: intractable
marginalisation of missing labels and poor scaling to large worker cohorts. Extensive empirical
comparison on 17 real-world datasets sees EBCC
achieving the highest mean accuracy across 10
benchmark crowdsourcing methods.

1. Introduction
Production systems for machine learning, natural language
processing, computer vision, and information retrieval are
regularly trained and evaluated on vast annotated datasets
collected by crowdsourcing services (Howe, 2008; CallisonBurch & Dredze, 2010). While crowdsourced annotations
are low cost per label, they can be highly noisy, with few
annotations available per item, and with labels procured
from large cohorts of worker annotators (Difallah et al.,
2012). Consequently, inferring consensus aggregation of
collected annotations is a core crowdsourcing task, with the
simplest technique being majority voting. While simple to
implement, majority voting is deficient in granting workers
1

School of Computing and Information Systems, University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. Correspondence
to: Yuan Li <yuanl4@student.unimelb.edu.au>, Benjamin Rubinstein <benjamin.rubinstein@unimelb.edu.au>, Trevor Cohn
<trevor.cohn@unimelb.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

equal votes towards consensus. Numerous probabilistic
models have emerged that parameterise worker reliability
to improve consensus accuracy (Dawid & Skene, 1979;
Whitehill et al., 2009; Kim & Ghahramani, 2012).
In this paper we argue by carefully worked example (Section 4.1) and experimentation on synthetic data (Section 5.1)
that modeling correlation between worker labels has significant potential to improve truth inference. We propose a
model (Section 4.3) that captures worker correlation by modeling true classes as mixtures of subtypes, with class-level
correlation a consequence of worker behaviour varying by
subtype. Extending a family of Bayesian classifier combination (BCC) models (Kim & Ghahramani, 2012), we term
our model enhanced BCC (EBCC) and develop a variational
approach for inference (Section 4.4).
While many relevant approaches exist for truth inference
(Section 2), very few of them model correlation between
workers. Among models that purely rely on crowdsourced
labels to infer the truth, the only one incorporating worker
correlation, dBCC (Kim & Ghahramani, 2012), has limitations that disqualify it for crowdsourcing (Section 3.1.2): as
the missing annotations cannot be tractably marginalised
out, all workers must annotate all items; and because dBCC
possesses parameters quadratic in the number of workers, it
cannot scale to large worker cohorts. (In its original setting
of classifier combination, where all classifier predictions
are available on only moderately-many classifiers, dBCC’s
shortcomings are unimportant.) Fortunately our proposed
method EBCC suffers no such shortcomings (Section 4.2).
We connect our proposed mixture model for classes to tensor decomposition (Sections 4.1, 4.2) and item clustering
(Section 4.5), to help explain EBCC’s operation.
We conduct extensive experiments on 17 datasets with
sources spanning music genre classification, news named
entities labeling, movie review and tweet sentiment analysis.
Compared to 10 state-of-the-art benchmark methods, EBCC
achieves the highest mean accuracy (Section 5).

2. Related Work
Initiating the area of worker label aggregation, Dawid &
Skene (1979) used a confusion matrix parameter to generatively model worker labels conditioned on the item’s true

