Optimal Continuous DR-Submodular Maximization
and Applications to Provable Mean Field Inference
Yatao A. Bian † 1 Joachim M. Buhmann 1 Andreas Krause 1

Abstract
Mean field inference in probabilistic models is
generally a highly nonconvex problem. Existing
optimization methods, e.g., coordinate ascent algorithms, typically only find local optima.
In this work we propose provable mean field
methods for probabilistic log-submodular models and its posterior agreement (PA) with strong
approximation guarantees. The main algorithmic technique is a new Double Greedy
scheme, termed DR-DoubleGreedy, for continuous DR-submodular maximization with boxconstraints. This one-pass algorithm achieves the
optimal 1/2 approximation ratio, which may be of
independent interest. We validate the superior performance of our algorithms with baseline results
on both synthetic and real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
Consider the following scenario: You want to build a recommender system for n products to sell. Let V contain
all the products. The system is expected to recommend a
subset of products S ✓ V to the user. This recommendation
should reflect relevance and diversity of the user’s choice,
such that it will raise the readiness to buy. The two most
important components in building such a system are (1)
learning a utility function F (S), which measures the utility
of any subset of products, and (2) inference, i.e., finding the
subset ⌦⇤ with the highest utility given the learnt function
F (S). The above task can be achieved using a class of probabilistic graphical models that devise a distribution on all
subsets of V. Such a distribution is known as a point process.
Specifically, it defines p(S) / exp(F (S)), which renders
subsets of products S with high utility to be very likely sug†
Also known as An Bian. ORCID: orcid.org/0000-00022368-4084. 1 Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Yatao A. Bian
<ybian@inf.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

gested. In general, inference in point processes is #P-hard.
One resorts to approximate inference methods via either
variational techniques such as mean field approximations
(Wainwright et al., 2008) or sampling.
In this paper we develop mean field methods with provable guarantees. Both of the two components in the recommender system example above can be achieved via provable
mean field methods since (i) the latter provide approximate
inference given a utility function and, (ii) by using proper
differentiation techniques, the iterative process of mean field
approximation can be unrolled to serve as a differentiable
layer (Zheng et al., 2015), thus enabling the backpropagation of the training error to parameters of F (S). Thereby,
learning F (S) in an end-to-end fashion can utilize modern
deep learning and stochastic optimization techniques.
The most important property which we require on F (S) is
submodularity, which naturally models relevance and diversity. Djolonga & Krause (2014) have used submodular
functions F (S) to define two classes of point processes:
p(S) / exp(F (S)) is termed probabilistic log-submodular
models, while p(S) / exp( F (S)) is called probabilistic
log-supermodular models. They are strict generalizations
of classical point processes, such as DPPs (Kulesza et al.,
2012). The variational techniques from Djolonga & Krause
(2014) and Djolonga et al. (2016) focus on giving tractable
upper bounds of the log-partition functions. Our work provides provable lower bounds through mean field approximation, which also completes the picture of variational
inference for probabilistic submodular models (PSMs).
The most frequently used algorithm for mean field approximation is the CoordinateAscent algorithm1 . It
maximizes the ELBO objective in a coordinate-wise manner. CoordinateAscent has been shown to reach
stationary points/local optima. However, local optima
may be arbitrarily poor, as we demonstrate in § A, and
CoordinateAscent can get stuck in these poor local
optima without extra techniques, which motivates our pursuit to develop provable methods.
We first investigate the properties of mean field approxi1

It is known under various names in the literature, e.g., iterated
conditional modes (ICM), naive mean field algorithm, etc.

