Co-manifold learning with missing data

Gal Mishne 1 Eric C. Chi 2 Ronald R. Coifman 1

Abstract
Representation learning is typically applied to
only one mode of a data matrix, either its rows
or columns. Yet in many applications, there is
an underlying geometry to both the rows and the
columns. We propose utilizing this coupled structure to perform co-manifold learning: uncovering
the underlying geometry of both the rows and the
columns of a given matrix, where we focus on a
missing data setting. Our unsupervised approach
consists of three components. We first solve a
family of optimization problems to estimate a
complete matrix at multiple scales of smoothness. We then use this collection of smooth matrix
estimates to compute pairwise distances on the
rows and columns based on a new multi-scale metric that implicitly introduces a coupling between
the rows and the columns. Finally, we construct
row and column representations from these multiscale metrics. We demonstrate that our approach
outperforms competing methods in both data visualization and clustering.

1. Introduction
Dimension reduction plays a key role in exploratory data
analysis, data visualization, clustering and classification.
Techniques range from the classical PCA and nonlinear
manifold learning to deep autoencoders (Tenenbaum et al.,
2000; Roweis & Saul, 2000; Belkin & Niyogi, 2003; Coifman & Lafon, 2006; Vincent et al., 2008; Rifai et al., 2011;
Kingma & Welling, 2014). These techniques focus on only
one mode of the data, often the observations (columns)
which are measurements in a high-dimensional feature space
(rows), and exploit correlations among the features to reduce the dimension of the feature vectors and obtain the
underlying low-dimensional geometry of the observations.
1
Department of Mathematics, Yale University, New Haven,
CT, USA 2 Department of Statistics, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA. Correspondence to: Gal Mishne
<gal.mishne@yale.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Yet for many data matrices, for example in gene expression studies, recommendation systems, sensor networks,
and word-document analysis, correlations exist among both
observations and features. In these cases, we seek a method
that can exploit the correlations among both the rows and
columns of a data matrix to better learn lower-dimensional
representations of both. Bi-clustering methods, which extract distinct bi-clusters along both rows and columns, give
a partial solution to performing simultaneous dimension
reduction on the rows and columns of a data matrix. In
certain settings, however, assuming a bi-clustering model is
too restrictive and results in breaking up smooth geometries
into artificial disjoint clusters that do not match the actual
structure of the data. This can occur when the true geometry is one of overlapping rather than disjoint clusters, for
example in word-document analysis (Ahn et al., 2010), or
when the underlying structure is not one of clusters at all but
rather a smooth manifold (Gavish & Coifman, 2012). Thus,
we consider a more general viewpoint: data matrices possess geometric relationships between their rows (features)
and columns (observations) such that both modes lie on
low-dimensional manifolds. Furthermore, the relationships
between the rows may be informed by the relationships
between the columns, and vice versa. Several recent papers (Gavish & Coifman, 2012; Ankenman, 2014; Mishne
et al., 2016; Shahid et al., 2016; Mishne et al., 2017; Yair
et al., 2017) exploit this coupled relationship to co-organize
matrices and infer underlying row and column embeddings.
Further complicating the story is that such matrices may
suffer from missing values, due to measurement corruptions and limitations. Missing values can sabotage efforts
to learn the low dimensional manifold underlying the data.
Specifically, kernel-based methods rely on calculating a
similarity matrix between observations, whose eigendecomposition yields a new embedding of the data. As the number
of missing entries grows, the distances between points are
increasingly distorted, resulting in poor representation of
the data in the low-dimensional space (Gilbert & Sonthalia,
2018). Matrix completion algorithms assume the data is
low-rank and fill in the missing values by fitting a global
linear subspace to the data. Yet, this may fail when the data
lies on a nonlinear manifold.
Manifold learning in the missing data scenario has been
addressed by a few recent papers. Non-linear Principle

