Fairness without Harm:
Decoupled Classifiers with Preference Guarantees
Berk Ustun 1 Yang Liu 2 David C. Parkes 1

Abstract
In domains such as medicine, it can be acceptable
for machine learning models to include sensitive
attributes such as gender and ethnicity. In this
work, we argue that when there is this kind of
treatment disparity then it should be in the best
interest of each group. Drawing on ethical principles such as beneficence (“do the best”) and
non-maleficence (“do no harm”), we show how
to use sensitive attributes to train decoupled classifiers that satisfy preference guarantees. These
guarantees ensure the majority of individuals in
each group prefer their assigned classifier to (i) a
pooled model that ignores group membership (rationality), and (ii) the model assigned to any other
group (envy-freeness). We introduce a recursive
procedure that adaptively selects group attributes
for decoupling, and present formal conditions to
ensure preference guarantees in terms of generalization error. We validate the effectiveness of the
procedure on real-world datasets, showing that it
improves accuracy without violating preference
guarantees on test data.

1. Introduction
When machine learning systems are deployed in humanfacing applications (e.g., lending, hiring, medical decision
support), their performance may vary over groups defined
by sensitive attributes such as gender and ethnicity. Such
performance disparities are now regularly reported (Angwin
et al., 2016; Dastin, 2018), eliciting calls for fairness in
machine learning (Crawford, 2013), and prompting the development of technical solutions (Zliobaite, 2015; Barocas
et al., 2018; Corbett-Davies & Goel, 2018).
1

Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 UC Santa
Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Berk Ustun
<berk@seas.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Many of the proposed methods for fair machine learning
have aimed to build models that predict or perform in the
same way across groups (e.g., Hardt et al., 2016; Zafar
et al., 2017a; Feldman et al., 2015; Zafar et al., 2017c;
Agarwal et al., 2018; Narasimhan, 2018). Such methods
can be broadly viewed as methods to achieve fairness by
parity (see Zafar et al., 2017b, for a discussion). Parity is
an appropriate notion of fairness for applications such as
hiring or sentencing, where a model that exhibits disparate
treatment or disparate impact may be viewed as a system
to perpetrate wrongful discrimination (see Arneson, 2006;
Hellman, 2008; Barocas & Selbst, 2016).
In comparison, less work has sought to articulate suitable
notions of fairness for domains with different ethical principles (with some exceptions, see e.g., Chen et al., 2018).
In medical applications, for example, the relevant ethical
principles are beneficence (do the best in one’s ability) and
non-maleficence (do no harm) (see e.g., Beauchamp et al.,
2001). Accordingly, methods for fair machine learning
should be designed to produce the most accurate model
for each group (beneficence) without harming any group
(non-maleficence).
These goals represent new challenges for the fair use of sensitive attributes in machine learning. Consider, for example,
training a medical diagnostic using a dataset with sensitive
attributes such as age, gender and ethnicity. In this case, a
model that ignores group membership may not be beneficent as it may impose inevitable performance trade-offs
between heterogeneous groups (see Figure 1). In practice,
heterogeneity may arise due to intrinsic differences between
groups, or discrepancies in the quality or amount of data.
While these issues motivate the need to build models that
explicitly consider group membership (see Corbett-Davies
et al., 2017; Lipton et al., 2018), it is not clear how to do
this in a way that is fair to each group. As shown in Figure
2, simple approaches such as a “one-hot encoding” may not
recover the most accurate model for each group. Conversely,
one could harm groups by fitting a model from a hypothesis
class that is overly complex (e.g., by overfitting), or that
one that cannot adequately capture the heterogeneity (e.g.,
by “gerrymandering” along intersectional subgroups as discussed in Kearns et al., 2018; Hébert-Johnson et al., 2018).

