Transferability vs. Discriminability:
Batch Spectral Penalization for Adversarial Domain Adaptation

Xinyang Chen 1 Sinan Wang 1 Mingsheng Long 1 Jianmin Wang 1

Abstract

scale datasets can be leveraged (Torralba & Efros, 2011).

Adversarial domain adaptation has made remarkable advances in learning transferable representations for knowledge transfer across domains.
While adversarial learning strengthens the feature
transferability which the community focuses on,
its impact on the feature discriminability has not
been fully explored. In this paper, a series of experiments based on spectral analysis of the feature
representations have been conducted, revealing an
unexpected deterioration of the discriminability
while learning transferable features adversarially.
Our key finding is that the eigenvectors with the
largest singular values will dominate the feature
transferability. As a consequence, the transferability is enhanced at the expense of over penalization
of other eigenvectors that embody rich structures
crucial for discriminability. Towards this problem,
we present Batch Spectral Penalization (BSP), a
general approach to penalizing the largest singular
values so that other eigenvectors can be relatively
strengthened to boost the feature discriminability.
Experiments show that the approach significantly
improves upon representative adversarial domain
adaptation methods to yield state of the art results.

Domain adaptation tackles the problem of learning a model
that reduces the dataset shift between training and testing
distributions (Pan et al., 2010). Early domain adaptation
methods in the shallow regime learn feature representations
invariant across domains (Pan et al., 2011; Gong et al., 2012)
or reweigh source instances based on their relevance to the
target domain (Huang et al., 2007; Gong et al., 2013). Recent domain adaptation methods in the deep regime disentangle the explanatory factors of variations behind data and explore two strategies for aligning feature distributions across
domains. The first strategy is moment matching, bridging
the distributions by matching all their statistics (Long et al.,
2015; Li et al., 2016; Long et al., 2017; Maria Carlucci et al.,
2017). The second strategy is adversarial learning, where
a domain discriminator is trained to distinguish the source
from the target while feature representations are learned to
confuse it simultaneously (Ganin & Lempitsky, 2015; Tzeng
et al., 2015; Ganin et al., 2016; Tzeng et al., 2017; Luo et al.,
2017; Long et al., 2018). These adversarial domain adaptation methods have yielded remarkable performance gains.

1. Introduction
Deep networks have achieved remarkable success in diverse
machine learning areas. On the basis of large-scale labeled
data, transferable features across multiple tasks and domains
can be learned (Yosinski et al., 2014; Oquab et al., 2014;
Donahue et al., 2014). Unfortunately, in many real-world
applications, shortage of labeled data is not uncommon. To
avoid both labeling efforts and overfitting issues, domain
adaptation is extensively studied to overcome the domain
shift or dataset bias such that a learner trained on other large1

School of Software, BNRist, Research Center for Big Data,
Tsinghua University. E-mail: chenxiny17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn.
Correspondence to: M. Long <mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

While it is widely believed by the the community that adversarial learning strengthens the feature transferability, which
part of the features are transferable remains unclear. Further,
how the feature discriminability will change in the process
of learning transferable features has not been fully explored.
From a spectral analysis viewpoint, we can decompose the
feature representations into eigenvectors with importance
quantified by the corresponding singular values. Intuitively,
the feature transferability may mainly reside in the eigenvectors with top singular values, since the eigenvectors with low
singular values may embody domain variations and should
be discouraged. In contrast, the feature discriminability may
depend on more eigenvectors, since the rich discriminative
structures cannot be conveyed by only a few eigenvectors.
As a result, there exists a contradiction when we try to make
the representations both transferable and discriminative. As
the target domain is fully unlabeled, this contradiction will
mainly sacrifice the discriminability of target domain data.
In this paper, we try to address the dilemma of transferability
against discriminability by understanding their behaviors in
adversarial domain adaptation. We apply linear discriminant

