Metropolis-Hastings Generative Adversarial Networks

Ryan Turner 1 Jane Hung 1 Eric Frank 1 Yunus Saatci 1 Jason Yosinski 1

Abstract
We introduce the Metropolis-Hastings generative
adversarial network (MH-GAN), which combines
aspects of Markov chain Monte Carlo and GANs.
The MH-GAN draws samples from the distribution implicitly defined by a GAN’s discriminatorgenerator pair, as opposed to standard GANs
which draw samples from the distribution defined
only by the generator. It uses the discriminator
from GAN training to build a wrapper around
the generator for improved sampling. With a perfect discriminator, this wrapped generator samples from the true distribution on the data exactly
even when the generator is imperfect. We demonstrate the benefits of the improved generator on
multiple benchmark datasets, including CIFAR10 and CelebA, using the DCGAN, WGAN, and
progressive GAN.

1. Introduction
Traditionally, density estimation is done with a model that
can compute the data likelihood. Generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) present a radically
new way to do density estimation: They implicitly represent
the density of the data via a classifier that distinguishes real
from generated data.
GANs iterate between updating a discriminator D and a
generator G, where G generates new (synthetic) samples
of data, and D attempts to distinguish samples of G from
the real data. In the typical setup, D is thrown away at the
end of training, and only G is kept for generating new synthetic data points. In this work, we propose the MetropolisHastings GAN (MH-GAN), a GAN that constructs a new
generator G0 that “wraps” G using the information contained in D. This principle is illustrated in Figure 1.1
1

Uber AI Labs.
Correspondence to:
<ryan.turner@uber.com>.

Ryan Turner

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).
1
Code found at:
github.com/uber-research/metropolis-hastings-gans

The MH-GAN uses Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
methods to sample from the distribution implicitly defined
by the discriminator D learned for the generator G. This
is built upon the notion that the discriminator classifies
between the generator G and a data distribution:
D(x) =

pD (x)
,
pD (x) + pG (x)

(1)

where pG is the (intractable) density of samples from the
generator G, and pD is the data density implied by the discriminator D with respect to G. If GAN training reaches its
global optimum, then this discriminator distribution pD is
equal to the data distribution and the generator distribution
(pD = pdata = pG ) (Goodfellow et al., 2014). Furthermore,
if the discriminator D is optimal for a fixed imperfect generator, G then the implied distribution still equals the data
distribution (pD = pdata 6= pG ).
We use an MCMC independence sampler (Tierney, 1994) to
sample from pD by taking multiple samples from G. Amazingly, using our algorithm, one can show that given a perfect
discriminator D and a decent (but imperfect) generator G,
one can obtain exact samples from the true data distribution
pdata . Standard MCMC implementations require (unnormalized) densities for the target pD and the proposal pG , which
are both unavailable for GANs. However, the MetropolisHastings (MH) algorithm requires only the ratio:
D(x)
pD (x)
=
,
pG (x)
1 − D(x)

(2)

which we can obtain using only evaluation of D(x).
Sampling from an MH-GAN is more computationally expensive than a standard GAN, but the bigger and more
relevant training compute cost remains unchanged. Thus,
the MH-GAN is best suited for applications where sample
quality is more important than compute speed at test time.
The outline of this paper is as follows: Section 2 reviews
diverse areas of relevant prior work. In Sections 3.1 and 3.2
we explain the necessary background on MCMC methods
and GANs. We explain our methodology of combining
these two seemingly disparate areas in Section 4 where
we derive the wrapped generator G0 . Results on real data
(CIFAR-10 and CelebA) and extending common GAN models (DCGAN, WGAN, and progressive GAN) are shown in
Section 5. Section 6 discusses implications and conclusions.

