Multi-Frequency Phase Synchronization

Tingran Gao * 1 Zhizhen Zhao * 2
∆ ∈ Cn×n encodes measurement noise.

Abstract
We propose a novel formulation for phase synchronization—the statistical problem of jointly
estimating alignment angles from noisy pairwise
comparisons—as a nonconvex optimization problem that enforces consistency among the pairwise
comparisons in multiple frequency channels. Inspired by harmonic retrieval in signal processing,
we develop a simple yet efficient two-stage algorithm that leverages the multi-frequency information. We demonstrate in theory and practice that
the proposed algorithm significantly outperforms
state-of-the-art phase synchronization algorithms,
at a mild computational costs incurred by using
the extra frequency channels. We also extend our
algorithmic framework to general synchronization
problems over compact Lie groups.

As a prototypical example of more general synchronization problems arising from many scientific fields concerning
consistent pairwise comparisons within large collections of
objects (e.g., cryogenic electron microscopy (Singer et al.,
2011) and comparative biology (Gao et al., 2019a)), phase
synchronization attracted much attention due to its simple
yet rich mathematical structure. One mathematical formulation is through nonconvex optimization
max x∗ Hx

x∈Cn
1

1. Introduction
Angular or phase synchronization (Singer, 2011; Boumal,
2016) concerns estimating angles θ1 , . . . , θn in [0, 2π) from
a subset of possibly noise-contaminated relative offsets
(θi − θj ) mod 2π. An instance of phase synchronization
can be encoded on an observation graph G = (V, E),
where each angle is assigned to a vertex i ∈ V and relative offsets are measured between θi and θj if and only if
there is an edge in G connecting vertices i and j. Equivalently, the angles can be encoded into a column phase vector
z = (exp ιθ1 , · · · , exp ιθn )> , and measurements constitute
a Hermitian matrix
H = A ◦ [zz ∗ + ∆] ,

(1)

where Cn1 is the Cartesian product of n copies of U(1). Depending on the context of the scientific problem, H may be
assumed to arise from an additive Gaussian noise model
(Boumal, 2016; Bandeira et al., 2017), in which the Hermitian matrix ∆ in (1) is a Wigner matrix with i.i.d. complex
Gaussian entries above the diagonal, or from a random corruption model (Singer, 2011; Chen et al., 2016) that assumes
(
zi z̄j
with prob. r ∈ [0, 1]
Hij =
(3)
w ∼ Unif (U(1)) with prob. 1 − r
for each edge (i, j) ∈ E. Note that the random corruption
model can also be cast in the form (1) after proper shifting
and scaling. In general, the additive Gaussian noise model
is more amenable to analysis, while the random corruption
model is better at capturing the behavior of physical or
imaging models where many outliers exist.
In this paper, we propose to tackle the phase synchronization
problem by solving an alternative nonconvex optimization
problem of “multi-frequency” nature, namely,

where A is the adjacency matrix of the observation graph
G, ◦ is the entrywise product, and the Hermitian matrix
*

Equal contribution 1 Committee on Computational and Applied
Mathematics, Department of Statistics, University of Chicago,
Chicago IL, USA 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana IL, USA. Correspondence
to: Tingran Gao <tingrangao@galton.uchicago.edu>, Zhizhen
Zhao <zhizhenz@illinois.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 36 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

(2)

maxn

x∈C1

kX
max

(xk )∗ H (k) xk

(4)

k=1

where kmax is the number of frequency channels, xk is the
entrywise kth power of x, and H (k) ∈ Cn×n is a Hermitian
matrix containing information of the “true signal” z in the
kth frequency component:
• For the random corruption model (3), we construct
H (k) directly from H by entrywise power:
(k)

k
Hij = Hij
,

k = 1, . . . , kmax ; 1 ≤ i, j ≤ n. (5)

