The Variational Predictive Natural Gradient
Da Tang 1 Rajesh Ranganath 2

Abstract
Variational inference transforms posterior inference into parametric optimization thereby enabling the use of latent variable models where
otherwise impractical. However, variational inference can be finicky when different variational
parameters control variables that are strongly correlated under the model. Traditional natural gradients based on the variational approximation fail to
correct for correlations when the approximation
is not the true posterior. To address this, we construct a new natural gradient called the Variational
Predictive Natural Gradient (VPNG). Unlike traditional natural gradients for variational inference,
this natural gradient accounts for the relationship
between model parameters and variational parameters. We demonstrate the insight with a simple
example as well as the empirical value on a classification task, a deep generative model of images,
and probabilistic matrix factorization for recommendation.

1. Introduction
Variational inference (Jordan et al., 1999) transforms posterior inference in latent variable models into optimization. It
posits a parametric approximating family and tries to find
the distribution in this family that minimizes the KullbackLeibler (KL) divergence to the posterior. Variational inference makes posterior computation practical where it would
not be otherwise. It has powered many applications, including computational biology (Carbonetto et al., 2012; Stegle
et al., 2010), language (Miao et al., 2016), compressive sensing (Shi et al., 2014), neuroscience (Manning et al., 2014;
Harrison & Green, 2010), and medicine (Ranganath et al.,
2016).
Variational inference requires choosing an approximating
1
Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New
York, New York, USA 2 The Courant Institute, New York University, New York, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Da Tang
<datang@cs.columbia.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 36 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

family. The variational family plus the model together define the variational objective. The variational objective can
be optimized with stochastic gradients for a broad range of
models (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Ranganath et al., 2014;
Rezende et al., 2014). When the posterior has correlations,
dimensions of the optimization problem become tied, i.e.,
there is curvature. One way to correct for curvature in optimization is to use natural gradients (Amari, 1998; Ollivier
et al., 2011; Thomas et al., 2016) . Natural gradients for
variational inference (Hoffman et al., 2013) adjust for the
non-Euclidean nature of probability distributions. But they
may not change the gradient direction when the variational
approximation is far from the posterior.
To deal with curvature induced by dependent observation
dimensions in the variational objective, we define a new
type of natural gradient: the variational predictive natural
gradient (VPNG). The VPNG rescales the gradient with the
inverse of the expected Fisher information matrix of the
reparameterized model likelihood. We relate this matrix
to the negative Hessian of the expected log-likelihood part
of the evidence lower bound (ELBO), thereby showing it
captures the curvature of variational inference.
Our new natural gradient captures potential pathological
curvature introduced by the log-likelihood traditional natural
gradient cannot capture. Further, unlike traditional natural
gradients for variational inference, the VPNG corrects for
curvature in the objective between model parameters and
variational parameters. In Section 3, we will design an
illustrate example where the VPNG points almost directly to
the optimum, while both the vanilla gradient and the natural
gradient point in almost an orthogonal direction.
We show our approach outperforms vanilla gradient optimization and the traditional natural gradient optimization on several latent variable models, including Bayesian
logistic regression on synthetic data, variational autoencoders (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014) on
images, and variational probabilistic matrix factorization
(Mnih & Salakhutdinov, 2008; Gopalan et al., 2015; Liang
et al., 2016) on movie recommendation data.
Related work. Variational inference has been transformed by the use of Monte Carlo gradient estimators
(Kingma & Ba, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014; Mnih & Gregor,
2014; Ranganath et al., 2014; Titsias & Lázaro-Gredilla,

