Uniform Convergence Rate of the Kernel Density Estimator
Adaptive to Intrinsic Volume Dimension

Jisu Kim 1 Jaehyeok Shin 2 Alessandro Rinaldo 2 Larry Wasserman 2

Abstract
We derive concentration inequalities for the supremum norm of the difference between a kernel
density estimator (KDE) and its point-wise expectation that hold uniformly over the selection of the
bandwidth and under weaker conditions on the
kernel and the data generating distribution than
previously used in the literature. We first propose
a novel concept, called the volume dimension, to
measure the intrinsic dimension of the support of
a probability distribution based on the rates of decay of the probability of vanishing Euclidean balls.
Our bounds depend on the volume dimension and
generalize the existing bounds derived in the literature. In particular, when the data-generating
distribution has a bounded Lebesgue density or
is supported on a sufficiently well-behaved lowerdimensional manifold, our bound recovers the
same convergence rate depending on the intrinsic
dimension of the support as ones known in the
literature. At the same time, our results apply to
more general cases, such as the ones of distribution with unbounded densities or supported on a
mixture of manifolds with different dimensions.
Analogous bounds are derived for the derivative
of the KDE, of any order. Our results are generally
applicable but are especially useful for problems
in geometric inference and topological data analysis, including level set estimation, density-based
clustering, modal clustering and mode hunting,
ridge estimation and persistent homology.

1. Introduction
Density estimation (see, e.g. Rao, 1983) is a classic and
fundamental problem in non-parametric statistics that, espe1

Inria Saclay – Île-de-France, Palaiseau, France 2 Department
of Statistics and Data Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA. Correspondence to: Jisu Kim <jisu.kim@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

cially in recent years, has also become a key step in many
geometric inferential tasks. Among the numerous existing
methods for density estimation, kernel density estimators
(KDEs) are especially popular because of their conceptual
simplicity and nice theoretical properties. A KDE is simply
the Lebesgue density of the probability distribution obtained
by convolving the empirical measure induced by the sample
with an appropriate function, called kernel, (Parzen, 1962;
Wand & Jones, 1994). Formally, let X1 , . . . , Xn be an independent and identically distributed sample from an unknown
Borel probability distribution P in Rd . For a given kernel
K, where K is an appropriate function on Rd (often a density), and bandwidth h > 0, the corresponding KDE is the
random Lebesgue density function defined as


n
1 X
x − Xi
d
x ∈ R 7→ p̂h (x) :=
K
. (1)
nhd i=1
h
The point-wise expectation of the KDE is the function
x ∈ Rd 7→ ph (x) := E[p̂h (x)],
and can be regarded as a smoothed version of the density
of P , if such a density exists. In fact, interestingly, both p̂h
and ph are Lebesgue probability densities for any choice of
h > 0, regardless of whether P admits a Lebesgue density.
What is more, ph is often times able to capture important
topological properties of the underlying distribution P or of
its support (see, e.g. Fasy et al., 2014, Section 4.4). For instance, if a data-generating distribution consists of two point
masses, it has no Lebesgue density but the pointwise mean
of the KDE with Gaussian kernel is a density of mixtures of
two Gaussian distributions whose mean parameters are the
two point masses. Although P is quite different from the
distribution corresponding to ph , for practical purposes, one
may in fact rely on ph .
Though seemingly contrived, the previous example illustrates a general phenomenon encountered in many geometrical inference problems, namely that using ph as a target
for inference leads to not only well-defined statistical tasks
but also to faster or even dimension independent rates. Results of this form, which require a uniform control over
kp̂h − ph k∞ := supx∈Rd kp̂h (x) − ph (x)k are plentiful in
the literature on density-based clustering (Rinaldo & Wasserman, 2010; Wang et al., 2017), modal clustering and mode

