Learning Hawkes Processes Under Synchronization Noise

William Trouleau 1 Jalal Etesami 2 Matthias Grossglauser 1 Negar Kiyavash 3 4 Patrick Thiran 1

Abstract
Multivariate Hawkes processes (MHP) are widely
used in a variety of fields to model the occurrence
of discrete events. Prior work on learning MHPs
has only focused on inference in the presence
of perfect traces without noise. We address the
problem of learning the causal structure of MHPs
when observations are subject to an unknown delay. In particular, we introduce the so-called synchronization noise, where the stream of events
generated by each dimension is subject to a random and unknown time shift. We characterize the
robustness of the classic maximum likelihood estimator to synchronization noise, and we introduce
a new approach for learning the causal structure
in the presence of noise. Our experimental results show that our approach accurately recovers
the causal structure of MHPs for a wide range of
noise levels, and significantly outperforms classic
estimation methods.

1. Introduction
Multivariate Hawkes processes (MHPs) are a type of temporal point process where an arrival in one dimension can
affect future arrivals in other dimensions. The origin of
MHPs dates back to Hawkes (1971), who used them to
statistically model earthquakes. Because of their ability to
capture mutual excitation between different dimensions of a
multivariate counting process, MHPs have become a popular
model in a plethora of applications such as finance (Bacry
et al., 2012; Hardiman et al., 2013; Linderman & Adams,
2014; Bacry et al., 2015; Etesami et al., 2016), computational biology (Reynaud-Bouret et al., 2010), social network
studies (as an alternative for the contagion model) (Yang &
1
School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL,
Lausanne, Switzerland 2 Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
3
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Eng. (ECE), Georgia Institute
of Technology 4 Dept. of Industrial and Systems Eng. (ISyE),
Georgia Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: William
Trouleau <william.trouleau@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Zha, 2013; Farajtabar et al., 2015), and criminology (Mohler
et al., 2011; Porter & White, 2012; Linderman & Adams,
2014; Shelton et al., 2018).
Learning the excitation matrix of a MHP, which encodes the
causal structure between the processes from a set of observations, has been the focus of recent work (Xu et al., 2016;
Etesami et al., 2016). The main approaches for learning
MHPs are of two flavors. Maximum likelihood-based approaches estimate the parameters from observations (Ozaki,
1979; Zhou et al., 2013b; Yang et al., 2017); and approaches
based on second-order statistics learn the parameters of interest by solving a set of equations obtained from first and
second-order statistics of the MHP (Hawkes, 1971; Bacry
et al., 2012; Etesami et al., 2016). All the aforementioned
work assumes that the observations are noiseless, that is, the
arrival times of the events are recorded accurately without
any delay. To the best of our knowledge, no work to date
has considered learning the causal structure of a noisy MHP.
Recent studies tackled the inference of Hawkes processes
with missing data (Xu et al., 2017; Shelton et al., 2018), but
did not consider noisy (delayed) observations. The inference of temporal point processes in the presence of noisy
observations has been studied for non-parametric estimators
of spatial Poisson processes (Cucala, 2008; Bar-Hen et al.,
2013). However, these studies mostly focus on the special
case of independent and known noise and cannot be applied
to MHPs.
We study the problem of learning MHPs in the presence of
observation noise. More precisely, we consider synchronization noise, where the stream of events generated by each
source – or dimension – is subject to a random and unknown
time shift. This model captures situations where no perfect
clock time synchronization is available at different sources,
or when the observation process itself introduces sourcedependent delays. As an example of the former, consider a
network of sensors that record events such as neural spikes
or earthquake shocks. It is often the case that the sensors
are not perfectly synchronized, because they each rely on a
local clock to time-stamp events. As an example of the latter, consider processes where an event can only be observed
indirectly after a delay, such as through the symptoms of
an infectious disease that manifest themselves some time
after the actual infection. We will show that synchronization noise can severely harm the estimation performance of

