On Scalable and Efficient Computation of Large Scale
Optimal Transport
Yujia Xie 1 Minshuo Chen 1 Haoming Jiang 1 Tuo Zhao 1 Hongyuan Zha 1

Abstract
Optimal Transport (OT) naturally arises in many
machine learning applications, yet the heavy computational burden limits its wide-spread uses. To
address the scalability issue, we propose an implicit generative learning-based framework called
SPOT (Scalable Push-forward of Optimal Transport). Specifically, we approximate the optimal
transport plan by a pushforward of a reference distribution, and cast the optimal transport problem
into a minimax problem. We then can solve OT
problems efficiently using primal dual stochastic
gradient-type algorithms. We also show that we
can recover the density of the optimal transport
plan using neural ordinary differential equations.
Numerical experiments on both synthetic and real
datasets illustrate that SPOT is robust and has favorable convergence behavior. SPOT also allows
us to efficiently sample from the optimal transport plan, which benefits downstream applications
such as domain adaptation.

1. Introduction
The Optimal Transport (OT) problem naturally arises in a
variety of machine learning applications, where we need to
handle data from multiple sources. One example is domain
adaptation: We collect multiple datasets from different domains, and we need to learn a model from a source dataset,
which can be further adapted to target datasets (Ganin &
Lempitsky, 2014; Courty et al., 2017b; Damodaran et al.,
2018). Another example is resource allocation: We want to
assign a set of assets (one data source) to a set of receivers
(another data source) so that an optimal economic benefit
is achieved (Santambrogio, 2010; Galichon, 2017). Recent
literature has shown that both aforementioned applications
can be formulated as optimal transport problems.
The optimal transport problem has a long history, and its
1
Georgia Tech. Correspondence to: Y. Xie, T. Zhao <{xieyujia, tourzhao}@gatech.edu>, H. Zha <zha@cc.gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

earliest literature dates back to Monge (1781). Since then,
it has attracted increasing attention and been widely studied in multiple communities such as applied mathematics,
probability, economy and geography (Villani, 2008; Carlier,
2012; Gross et al., 2016). Specifically, we consider two sets
of d-dimensional data, which are generated from two different distributions denoted by X ⇠ µ and Y ⇠ ⌫.1 We aim
to find an optimal joint distribution of X and Y , which
minimizes the expectation on some cost function c, i.e.,
⇤

= argmin E(X,Y )⇠ [c(X, Y )],

(1)

2⇧(µ,⌫)

The constraint 2 ⇧(µ, ⌫) requires the marginal distribution of X and Y in to be identical to µ and ⌫, respectively.
Existing literature often refers to the optimal expected cost
W ⇤ (µ, ⌫) = E(X,Y )⇠ ⇤ [c(X, Y )] as Wasserstein distance,
and ⇤ as the optimal transport plan. For domain adaptation,
the function c measures the discrepancy between X and Y ,
and the optimal transport plan ⇤ essentially reveals the
transfer of the knowledge from source X to target Y . For
resource allocation, the function c is the cost of assigning
resource X to receiver Y , and the optimal transport plan ⇤
essentially yields the optimal assignment.
Since (1) is an optimization problem over the space of distributions, the problem is infinite dimensional and generally intractable when µ and ⌫ are continuous distributions.
Therefore, existing literature has resorted to finite dimensional approximations. For example, Cuturi (2013) propose to discretize the support using a refined grid, and cast
(1) into a finite dimensional linear programming problem.
However, for complex distributions in high dimensions (e.g.,
images in domain adaptation), the grid size often needs to
be exponentially large (e.g., exponential in dimension) to
ensure a small approximation error (due to discretization).
Under such a regime, conventional linear programming algorithms do not scale well, e.g., the interior point method
in conjunction with the Newton’s method takes O(n3 log n)
time, where n is the grid size. To ease such a scalability issue, Cuturi (2013) propose an entropy regularization-based
Sinkhorn algorithm, which requires the computational cost
of O(n2 ), but still fail to scale to large problems.
1
The optimal transport can also handle more than two distributions. See Section 3 for more details.

