Distributed Weighted Matching via Randomized Composable Coresets

Sepehr Assadi 1 MohammadHossein Bateni 2 Vahab Mirrokni 2

Abstract
Maximum weight matching is one of the most fundamental combinatorial optimization problems
with a wide range of applications in data mining and bioinformatics. Developing distributed
weighted matching algorithms is challenging due
to the sequential nature of efficient algorithms for
this problem. In this paper, we develop a simple
distributed algorithm for the problem on general
graphs with approximation guarantee of 2 +  that
(nearly) matches that of the sequential greedy algorithm. A key advantage of this algorithm is that
it can be easily implemented in only two rounds
of computation in modern parallel computation
frameworks such as MapReduce. We also demonstrate the efficiency of our algorithm in practice on
various graphs (some with half a trillion edges) by
achieving objective values always close to what
is achievable in the centralized setting.

1. Introduction
A matching in a graph is defined as a collection of edges that
do not share any vertices. The problem of finding a matching with a maximum weight in an edge-weighted graph—
henceforth referred to as the maximum weight matching
(MWM) problem—is one of the most fundamental combinatorial optimization problems with a wide range of applications in data mining and bioinformatics. For instance,
maximum weight matchings can improve the quality of
data clustering (Bateni et al., 2017) or partitioning (Karypis
& Kumar, 1998), as well as discovery of subgraphs in
networks in bioinformatics (Langmead & Donald, 2004;
A full version of the paper including the missing proofs and
details is available on arXiv.
1
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, US. Supported in part by the Simons Collaboration on
Algorithms and Geometry. Majority of the work done while this
author was a summer intern at Google Research, New York.
2
Google Research, New York, NY, US.
Correspondence to: Sepehr Assadi <sassadi@princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Berger et al., 2008). Other applications are in trading markets and computational advertising (Penn & Tennenholtz,
2000; Mehta et al., 2007; Charles et al., 2010), kidney exchange (Dickerson et al., 2012; Blum et al., 2015), online
labor markets (Behnezhad & Reyhani, 2017), and semisupervised learning (Jebara et al., 2009) (see (Manshadi
et al., 2013) for other similar examples). Yet another application arise in numerical linear algebra, e.g., in sparse linear solvers (Duff & Koster, 1999; 2001), decomposition of
sparse matrices (Pothen & Fan, 1990), and computing sparse
bases for underdetermined matrices (Pinar et al., 2005).
The study of MWM dates back to the introduction of the
complexity class P as the set of “tractable” problems by (Edmonds, 1965b;a) who designed a poly-time algorithm for
this problem on general graphs. Since then, there have
been numerous attempts in developing faster algorithms
for MWM (see, e.g., (Gabow, 1976; Gabow et al., 1984;
Gabow, 1985; 1990; Gabow & Tarjan, 1991; Cygan
et al.,
e √n)-time1
2012; Duan et al., 2017)) culminating in the O(m
algorithm of (Gabow & Tarjan, 1991). For approximation
algorithms, the greedy algorithm that repeatedly picks the
heaviest edge possible in the matching achieves a two approximation and after a series of work (Preis, 1999; Vinkemeier & Hougardy, 2005; Pettie & Sanders, 2004; Duan
e
& Pettie, 2010), an O(m/ε)-time
algorithm for (1 + ε)approximation was developed by (Duan & Pettie, 2014).
Nowadays, many applications that involve MWM require
processing massive graphs that are typically being stored
and processed in a distributed fashion. Classical algorithmic
approaches to MWM are no longer viable options to cope
with challenges that stem from processing massive graphs
and one should now instead focus on algorithms that can be
implemented efficiently in distributed settings even at the
cost of a (slight) reduction in the quality of the solution.
In this paper, we design a simple and efficient greedy distributed algorithm for the maximum weight matching problem with an approximation ratio that nearly matches that of
the sequential greedy algorithm for MWM. Our algorithm
can also be easily implemented in two rounds of parallel
computation in MapReduce-style computation frameworks,
which is known to be the minimum number of rounds necessary for solving this problem.
1

e ) := O(f ) · polylog(f ).
Throughout the paper, we use O(f

