A Fully Differentiable Beam Search Decoder

Ronan Collobert 1 Awni Hannun 1 Gabriel Synnaeve 1

Abstract
We introduce a new beam search decoder that is
fully differentiable, making it possible to optimize
at training time through the inference procedure.
Our decoder allows us to combine models which
operate at different granularities (e.g. acoustic and
language models). It can be used when target sequences are not aligned to input sequences by considering all possible alignments between the two.
We demonstrate our approach scales by applying
it to speech recognition, jointly training acoustic
and word-level language models. The system is
end-to-end, with gradients flowing through the
whole architecture from the word-level transcriptions. Recent research efforts have shown that
deep neural networks with attention-based mechanisms can successfully train an acoustic model
from the final transcription, while implicitly learning a language model. Instead, we show that it
is possible to discriminatively train an acoustic
model jointly with an explicit and possibly pretrained language model.

1. Introduction
End-to-end models for tasks such as automatic speech
recognition require the use of either structured loss functions like Connectionist Temporal Classification (Graves
et al., 2006) or unstructured models like sequence-tosequence (Sutskever et al., 2014) which leverage an attention mechanism (Bahdanau et al., 2014) to learn an implicit
alignment. Both of these types of models suffer from an
exposure bias and a label bias problem.
Exposure-bias results from the mismatch between how these
models are trained and how they are used at inference (Ranzato et al., 2016; Wiseman & Rush, 2016; Baskar et al.,
2018). While training, the model is never exposed to its
*

Equal contribution 1 Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to: Ronan Collobert <locronan@fb.com>, Awni Hannun
<awni@fb.com>, Gabriel Synnaeve <gab@fb.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

own mistakes since it uses the ground-truth target as guidance. At inference the target is unavailable and a beam
search is typically used, often with the constraints of either
a lexicon, a transition model, or both. The model must rely
on past predictions to inform future decisions and may not
be robust to even minor mistakes.
Label-bias occurs when locally normalized transition scores
are used (LeCun et al., 1998; Lafferty et al., 2001; Bottou
& LeCun, 2005). Local normalization causes outgoing transitions at a given time-step to compete with one another.
A symptom of this is that it can be difficult for the model
to revise its past predictions based on future observations.
As a consequence, globally normalized models are strictly
more powerful than locally normalized models (Andor et al.,
2016).
In this work we build a fully differentiable beam search
decoder (DBD) which can be used to efficiently approximate
a powerful discriminative model without either exposure
bias or label bias. We alleviate exposure bias by performing
a beam search which includes the constraints from a lexicon
and transition models. In fact, DBD can also jointly train
multiple models operating at different granularities (e.g.
token and word-level language models). The DBD avoids
the label bias problem since it uses unnormalized scores
and combines these scores into a global (sequence-level)
normalization term.
Our differentiable decoder can handle unaligned input and
output sequences where multiple alignments exist for a
given output. We do this without the use of an attention mechanism, but rather by approximately marginalizing over the alignments when computing the loss. Also,
unlike sequence-to-sequence models with attention, the
DBD can seamlessly and efficiently train token-level, wordlevel or other granularity transition models on their own
or in conjunction. Connectionist Temporal Classification
(CTC) (Graves et al., 2006) can handle unaligned sequences
and is commonly used in automatic speech recognition
(ASR) (Amodei et al., 2016) and other sequence labeling
tasks (Liwicki et al., 2007; Huang et al., 2016). The Auto
Segmentation criterion (ASG) (Collobert et al., 2016) can
also deal with unaligned sequences. However, neither of
these criteria allow for joint training of arbitrary transition
models.

