Dimension-Wise Importance Sampling Weight Clipping for Sample-Efficient
Reinforcement Learning

Seungyul Han 1 Youngchul Sung 1

Abstract
In importance sampling (IS)-based reinforcement
learning algorithms such as Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO), IS weights are typically clipped
to avoid large variance in learning. However, policy update from clipped statistics induces large
bias in tasks with high action dimensions, and
bias from clipping makes it difficult to reuse old
samples with large IS weights. In this paper, we
consider PPO, a representative on-policy algorithm, and propose its improvement by dimensionwise IS weight clipping which separately clips
the IS weight of each action dimension to avoid
large bias and adaptively controls the IS weight
to bound policy update from the current policy.
This new technique enables efficient learning for
high action-dimensional tasks and reusing of old
samples like in off-policy learning to increase the
sample efficiency. Numerical results show that
the proposed new algorithm outperforms PPO and
other RL algorithms in various Open AI Gym
tasks.

1. Introduction
Many deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms aim to
maximize the discounted return for a given environment by
a parameterized policy (Mnih et al., 2013; 2015; Lillicrap
et al., 2015; Schulman et al., 2015a). For learning continuous action tasks, which is the focus of this paper, many
algorithms are based on policy gradient (PG), which updates
the policy parameter to the direction of gradient decent of an
objective function (Sutton et al., 2000). PG methods can be
classified into on-policy PG and off-policy PG. On-policy
PG updates the target policy from the samples generated by
the target policy only (Schulman et al., 2015a; Peters et al.,
2005), whereas off-policy PG updates the target policy from
1
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea. Correspondence to: Youngchul Sung <ycsung@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

samples generated by the behavior policy which can be different from the target policy. Off-policy PG methods has
the advantage that they can reuse old sample batches and set
the behavior policy to better explore state and action spaces,
and thus many state-of-the-art algorithms are based on offpolicy PG. Current off-policy PG methods can be divided
into several types. Value-based PG methods update the policies to maximize the Q-value statistics estimated by TD
errors (Lillicrap et al., 2015; Fujimoto et al., 2018; Haarnoja
et al., 2017) and IS-based PG methods calibrate the statistics
differences between the target policy and the behavior policy (Degris et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2016; Levine & Koltun,
2013). Due to the advantages of off-policy learning, reusing
off-policy data in on-policy learning is recently considered
(Gu et al., 2016; 2017; Nachum et al., 2017; Han & Sung,
2017).
In this paper, we consider PPO (Schulman et al., 2017),
which is a widely-considered stable and fast-converging onpolicy algorithm, and propose its improvement by adopting
several new features. PPO uses a clipped objective function
to bound policy update from the current policy for stable
learning. However, due to its structure, the gradient of
clipped samples completely vanishes and this causes sample
inefficiency in high action-dimensional tasks. In order to
solve this problem, we propose dimension-wise importance
sampling weight clipping (DISC), which clips the IS weight
of each action dimension instead of clipping the overall likelihood ratio as in PPO. With DISC, the gradient of samples
does not completely vanish for most samples since there
exist unclipped dimensions, and this increases the sample
efficiency. In order to further enhance the sample efficiency,
we propose reusing old samples generated at the previous
iterations like in off-policy learning. PPO uses Generalized
Advantage Estimator (GAE) (Schulman et al., 2015b) to
estimate the advantage of the on-policy n-step trajectory,
but GAE has difficulty in estimating from the old trajectories generated at the previous iterations. To circumvent
this difficulty, we consider V-trace (Espeholt et al., 2018)
that estimates target values from off-policy trajectories and
combine GAE with V-trace to estimate the advantage in
DISC. We evaluate our algorithm on various OpenAI GYM
tasks (Brockman et al., 2016) and numerical results show
that DISC outperforms the PPO baseline and other state-of-

