Contextual Memory Trees
Wen Sun 1 Alina Beygelzimer 2 Hal Daumé III 3 John Langford 3 Paul Mineiro 4

Abstract
We design and study a Contextual Memory Tree
(CMT), a learning memory controller that inserts
new memories into an experience store of unbounded size. It is designed to efficiently query
for memories from that store, supporting logarithmic time insertion and retrieval operations. Hence
CMT can be integrated into existing statistical
learning algorithms as an augmented memory unit
without substantially increasing training and inference computation. Furthermore CMT operates as
a reduction to classification, allowing it to benefit
from advances in representation or architecture.
We demonstrate the efficacy of CMT by augmenting existing multi-class and multi-label classification algorithms with CMT and observe statistical
improvement. We also test CMT learning on several image-captioning tasks to demonstrate that
it performs computationally better than a simple
nearest neighbors memory system while benefitting from reward learning.

1. Introduction
When a human makes a decision or answers a question,
they are able to do so while very quickly drawing upon a
lifetime of remembered experiences. This ability to retrieve
relevant experiences efficiently from a memory store is currently lacking in most machine learning systems (§1.1). We
consider the problem of learning an efficient online data
structure for use as an external memory in a reward-driven
environment. The key functionality of the Contextual Memory Tree (CMT) data structure defined here is the ability to
insert new memories into a learned key-value store, and to
be able to query those memories in the future. The storage
and query functionality in CMT is driven by an optional,
user-specified, external reward signal; it organizes memo1
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, USA 2 Yahoo!
Research, New York, NY, USA 3 Microsoft Research, New York,
NY, USA 4 Microsoft, USA. Correspondence to: Wen Sun <wensun@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

ries so as to maximize the downstream reward of queries.
In order to scale to very large memories, our approach organizes memories in a tree structure, guaranteeing logarithmic
time (in the number of memories) operations throughout
(§3). Because CMT operates as a reduction to classification,
it does not prescribe a representation for the keys and can
leverage future advances in classification techniques.
More formally, we define the data structure CMT (§ 2),
which converts the problem of mapping queries (keys) to
memories (key-value pairs) into a collection of classification
problems. Experimentally (§4), we show this is useful in
three different settings. (a) Few-shot learning in extreme
multiclass classification problems, where CMT is used directly as a classifier (the queries are examples and the values
are class labels). Figure 1 shows that unsupervised CMT can
statistically outperform other supervised logarithmic-time
baselines including LOMTree (Choromanska & Langford,
2015) and Recall Tree (RT) (Daumé et al., 2017) with supervision providing further improvement. (b) Extreme multilabel classification problems where CMT is used to augment
a One-Against-All (OAA) style inference algorithm. (c) Retrieval of images based on captions, where CMT is used
similarly to a nearest-neighbor retrieval system (the queries
are captions and the values are the corresponding images).
External memories that persist across examples are also
potentially useful as inputs to downstream applications; for
instance, in natural language dialog tasks (Bartl & Spanakis,
2017) and in machine translation (Gu et al., 2018), it can
be useful to retrieve similar past contexts (dialogs or documents) and augment the input to the downstream system
with these retrieved examples. Memory-based systems can
also be useful as a component of learned reasoning systems
(Weston et al., 2014; Graves et al., 2016).
A memory z = (x, !) is a pair of query x and value !. CMT
operates in the following generic online manner, repeated
over time:
1. Given a query x, retrieve k associated memories
(u, hz1 , z2 , . . . , zk i) = Q UERY(x) together with an
identifier u.
2. If a reward ri for zi is observed, update the system via
U PDATE((x, zi , ri ), u).
3. If a value ! associated with x is available, I NSERT a
new memory z = (x, !) into the system.

