Graph Element Networks: adaptive, structured computation and memory

Ferran Alet 1 Adarsh K. Jeewajee 1 Maria Bauza 2
Alberto Rodriguez 2 Tomás Lozano-Pérez 1 Leslie Pack Kaelbling 1

Abstract
We explore the use of graph neural networks
(GNNs) to model spatial processes in which there
is no a priori graphical structure. Similar to finite
element analysis, we assign nodes of a GNN to
spatial locations and use a computational process
defined on the graph to model the relationship
between an initial function defined over a space
and a resulting function in the same space. We
use GNNs as a computational substrate, and show
that the locations of the nodes in space as well as
their connectivity can be optimized to focus on the
most complex parts of the space. Moreover, this
representational strategy allows the learned inputoutput relationship to generalize over the size of
the underlying space and run the same model at
different levels of precision, trading computation
for accuracy. We demonstrate this method on a
traditional PDE problem, a physical prediction
problem from robotics, and learning to predict
scene images from novel viewpoints.

1. Introduction
A great deal of success in deep learning has come from
finding appropriate structural inductive biases to impose on
network architectures. For an architectural assumption to
be useful, it has to exploit a structural property that is (approximately) satisfied in a broad set of tasks. For instance,
convolutional neural networks exploit the locality and spatial invariance found in many computer vision problems.
Similarly, graph neural networks (GNNs) exploit underlying relational structure, which makes them a good fit for
tasks consisting of a set of entities with pairwise interactions.
Traditional applications of GNNs assume an a priori notion
1 CSAIL - MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 Mechanical Engineering - MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Ferran Alet
<alet@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

of entity (such as bodies, links or particles) and match every
node in the graph to an entity. We propose to apply GNNs
to the problem of modeling transformations of functions defined on continuous spaces, using a structure we call graph
element networks (GENs). Inspired by finite element methods, we use graph neural networks to mesh a continuous
space and define an iterative computation that propagates
information from some sampled input values in the space to
an output function defined everywhere in the space. GENs
allow us to model systems that have spatial structure but
lack a clear notion of entity, such as the spatial temperature
function in a room or the dynamics of an arbitrarily-shaped
object being pushed by a robot.
Finite element methods (Hughes, 2012) are used to numerically solve partial differential equations (PDEs) by dividing
a space into small subparts (elements) where the PDE can
be approximated. Analogously, in a GEN, we place nodes
of a GNN in the space, allowing each node to model the
local state of the system, and establish a connectivity graph
among the nodes (it may be a regular mesh or any other
arbitrary graph). Then, input values are specified for multiple spatial locations, and used to initialize the states of the
GNN nodes, which are then propagated according to the
GNN’s update functions. Finally, output values may be read
back from any point in the system, by interpolating between
values of nodes in the GNN. A critical aspect of the GEN
is that although the model has a fixed set of weights, it can
be used to model small or large spaces, with coarse, fine
or variable-resolution sampling of the space by reusing the
same weights in different nodes and edges.
Although GENs were originally inspired by finite element
methods that model PDEs, we show that they are much
more widely applicable. We are able to model pushing of
arbitrarily shaped objects, whose discrete dynamics do not
follow a PDE, with the same structure. Furthermore, we
apply GENs to the task of scene representation, where the
system is presented with images of a scene from various
camera poses and is asked to predict the view from an unseen pose. We show that GENs naturally adapt to scenes of
increasing size without further training.
In the following sections, we discuss related work, define
the graph element network model and provide an algorithm

