Invariant-Equivariant Representation Learning for Multi-Class Data
Ilya Feige 1

Abstract
Representations learnt through deep neural networks tend to be highly informative, but opaque
in terms of what information they learn to encode. We introduce an approach to probabilistic
modelling that learns to represent data with two
separate deep representations: an invariant representation that encodes the information of the
class from which the data belongs, and an equivariant representation that encodes the symmetry
transformation defining the particular data point
within the class manifold (equivariant in the sense
that the representation varies naturally with symmetry transformations). This approach is based
primarily on the strategic routing of data through
the two latent variables, and thus is conceptually
transparent, easy to implement, and in-principle
generally applicable to any data comprised of discrete classes of continuous distributions (e.g. objects in images, topics in language, individuals in
behavioural data). We demonstrate qualitatively
compelling representation learning and competitive quantitative performance, in both supervised
and semi-supervised settings, versus comparable
modelling approaches in the literature with little
fine tuning.

1. Introduction
Representation learning (Bengio et al., 2013) is part of the
foundation of deep learning; powerful deep neural network
models appear to derive their performance from sequentially representing data in more-and-more refined structures,
tailored to the training task.
However, representation learning has a broader impact than
just model performance. Transferable representations are
leveraged efficiently for new tasks (Mikolov et al., 2013),
representations are used for human interpretation of ma1
Faculty, 54 Welbeck Street, London. Correspondence to: Ilya
Feige <ilya@faculty.ai>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

chine learning models (Mahendran & Vedaldi, 2015), and
meaningfully structured (disentangled) representations can
be used for model control (e.g. semi-supervised learning
as in Kingma et al. (2014), topic modelling as in Blei et al.
(2003)).
Consequently, it is often preferable to have interpretable
data representations within a model, in the sense that the
information contained in the representation is easily understood and the representation can be used to control the
output of the model (e.g. to generate data of a given class
or with a particular characteristic). Unfortunately, there is
often a tension between optimal model performance and
cleanly disentangled or controllable representations.
To overcome this, some practitioners have proposed modifying their model’s objective functions by inserting parameters
in front of particular terms (Bowman et al., 2016; Higgins
et al., 2017), while others have sought to modify the associated generative models (Mansbridge et al., 2018). Further
still, attempts have been made to build the symmetries of the
data directly into the neural network architecture in order to
force the learning of latent variables that transform meaningfully under those symmetries (Sabour et al., 2017). The
diversity and marginal success of these approaches point to
the importance and difficulty of learning meaningful representations in deep generative modelling.
In this work we present an approach to probabilistic modelling of data comprised of a finite number of distinct classes,
each described by a smooth manifold of instantiations of that
class. For convenience, we call our approach E QUI VAE for
Equivariant Variational Autoencoder. E QUI VAE is a probabilistic model with 2 latent variables: an invariant latent that
represents the global class information, and an equivariant
latent that smoothly interpolates between all of the members
of that class. The E QUI VAE approach is general in that
the symmetry group of the manifold need not be specified
(as in for example Cohen & Welling (2014); Falorsi et al.
(2018)), and it can be used for any number of classes and
any dimensionality of both underlying representations. The
price that must be paid for this level of model control and
flexibility is that some labelled data is needed in order to
provide the concept of class invariance versus equivariance
to the model.
The endeavor to model the content and the style of data

