Differential Inclusions for Modeling Nonsmooth ADMM Variants:
A Continuous Limit Theory

Huizhuo Yuan 1 Yuren Zhou 2 Chris Junchi Li 3 Qingyun Sun 4

Abstract
Recently, there has been a great deal of research
attention on understanding the convergence behavior of first-order methods. One line of this
research focuses on analyzing the convergence behavior of first-order methods using tools from continuous dynamical systems such as ordinary differential equations and differential inclusions. These
research results shed lights on better understanding first-order methods from a non-optimization
point of view. The alternating direction method
of multipliers (ADMM) is a widely used firstorder method for solving optimization problems
arising from machine learning and statistics, and
it is important to investigate its behavior using
these new techniques from dynamical systems.
Existing works along this line have been mainly
focusing on problems with smooth objective functions, which exclude many important applications
that are traditionally solved by ADMM variants.
In this paper, we analyze some well-known and
widely used ADMM variants for nonsmooth optimization problems using tools of differential inclusions. In particular, we analyze the convergence behavior of linearized ADMM, gradientbased ADMM, generalized ADMM and accelerated generalized ADMM for nonsmooth problems
and show their connections with dynamical systems. We anticipate that these results will provide
new insights on understanding ADMM for solving nonsmooth problems.

1. Introduction
Recently, there has been tremendous interests in using
continuous-time dynamical system tools to analyze first*

Equal contribution 1 Peking University 2 Duke University
Tencent AI Lab 4 Stanford University. Correspondence to: Chris
Junchi Li <junchi.li.duke@gmail.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

order optimization algorithms such as Nesterov’s accelerated gradient method (AGM) (Nesterov, 1983) and its variants. In the seminal work Su et al. (2016), the authors
designed a differential equation for modeling AGM, and
analyzed the connection between the solution of the differential equation and the continuous limit of the iterates
of AGM. Their work provided new insights on understanding the convergence behavior of AGM. Later investigations
along this line mainly focused on analyzing AGM and its
variants such as FISTA and heavy ball method using the
tools of ordinary differential equations, differential inclusions, and more generally, continuous dynamical systems
(see, e.g., Shi et al. (2018); Wibisono et al. (2016); Wilson et al. (2016); Krichene et al. (2015); An et al. (2018);
Zhou et al. (2017)). Very recently, França et al. (2018a;b)
made a significant step towards understanding the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) using the
tools from continuous dynamical systems. ADMM is now
a widely used algorithm for solving problems with separable structures, which include a lot of important applications arising from image processing, signal processing,
machine learning, statistics, etc. It has a close connection
with some classical operator-splitting methods in numerical PDEs such as Douglas-Rachford (Douglas & Rachford, 1956) and Peaceman-Rachford (Peaceman & Rachford, 1955) operator-splitting methods that dated back to the
1950s. These operator-splitting methods were later studied
in Gabay & Mercier (1975); Glowinski & Marroco (1975);
Gabay (1983); Fortin & Glowinski (1983); Glowinski &
Le Tallec (1989); Eckstein & Bertsekas (1992). But the renaissance of ADMM was due to several works in 2007-2008
that introduced this algorithm to solving signal processing and image processing problems (Combettes & Pesquet,
2007; Goldstein & Osher, 2009; Wang et al., 2008; Mardani
et al., 2018). Since then, ADMM was successfully used for
solving important applications in many areas in science and
engineering. The popularity and importance of ADMM has
been partly demonstrated by the recognition of the highly
influential survey paper Boyd et al. (2011). As a result,
the works of França et.al. (França et al., 2018a;b) are very
timely and important as they provided new tools for further
understanding the convergence behavior of this influential
algorithm.

