Data Poisoning Attacks on Stochastic Bandits

Fang Liu 1 Ness Shroff 1 2

Abstract
Stochastic multi-armed bandits form a class of online learning problems that have important applications in online recommendation systems, adaptive medical treatment, and many others. Even
though potential attacks against these learning algorithms may hijack their behavior, causing catastrophic loss in real-world applications, little is
known about adversarial attacks on bandit algorithms. In this paper, we propose a framework of
offline attacks on bandit algorithms and study convex optimization based attacks on several popular
bandit algorithms. We show that the attacker can
force the bandit algorithm to pull a target arm with
high probability by a slight manipulation of the rewards in the data. Then we study a form of online
attacks on bandit algorithms and propose an adaptive attack strategy against any bandit algorithm
without the knowledge of the bandit algorithm.
Our adaptive attack strategy can hijack the behavior of the bandit algorithm to suffer a linear regret
with only a logarithmic cost to the attacker. Our
results demonstrate a significant security threat to
stochastic bandits.

1. Introduction
Understanding adversarial attacks on machine learning systems is essential to developing effective defense mechanisms and an important step toward trustworthy artificial
intelligence. A class of adversarial attacks on machine learning that have received much attention is data poisoning (Biggio et al., 2012; Mei & Zhu, 2015; Xiao et al., 2015; Alfeld
et al., 2016; Li et al., 2016; Wang & Chaudhuri, 2018). Here,
the attacker is able to access the leaner’s training data, and
has the power to manipulate a fraction of the training data
in order to make the learner satisfy certain objectives. This
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA. Correspondence to: Fang
Liu <liu.3977@osu.edu>, Ness Shroff <shroff.11@osu.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

is motivated by modern industrial scale applications of machine learning systems, where data collection and policy
updates are done in a distributed way. Attacks can happen
when the learner is not aware of the attacker’s access to the
training data.
While there has been a line of research on adversarial attacks on deep learning (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Huang
et al., 2017; Lin et al., 2017) and supervised learning (Biggio et al., 2012; Mei & Zhu, 2015; Xiao et al., 2015; Alfeld
et al., 2016; Li et al., 2016), little is known on adversarial
attacks on stochastic multi-armed bandits, which is a form
of online learning with limited feedback. This is potentially
hazardous since stochastic MAB are widely used in the
industry to recommend news articles (Li et al., 2010), display advertisements (Chapelle et al., 2015), allocate medical
treatment (Thompson, 1933) among many others. Hence,
understanding the impact of adversarial attacks on bandit
algorithms is an urgent yet open problem.
Recently, there has been an important piece of offline data
poisoning attacks for the contextual bandit algorithm (Ma
et al., 2018). They assume that the bandit algorithm updates
periodically and that the attacker can manipulate the rewards
in the data before the updates in order to hijack the behavior
of the bandit algorithm. Consider the news recommendation
as a running example for this offline attack model. A news
website has K articles (i.e., arms or actions) and runs a bandit algorithm to learn a recommendation policy. Every time
a user visits the website, the bandit algorithm displays an
article based on historical data. Then the website receives
a binary reward indicating whether the user clicks on the
displayed article or not. The website keeps serving the users
throughout the day and updates the bandit algorithm during
the night. An attacker can perform offline data poisoning
attacks before the bandit algorithm is updated. More specifically, the attacker may poison the rewards collected during
the daytime and control the behavior of the bandit algorithm
as it wants. The authors in (Ma et al., 2018) show that the
offline attack strategy on LinUCB-type contextual bandit
algorithm (Li et al., 2010) can be formulated as a convex
optimization problem. However, offline attack strategies for
classical bandit algorithms are still open.
In contrast to offline attacks, an online form of data poisoning attacks against bandit algorithms has also been proposed
by (Jun et al., 2018). They assume that the bandit algorithm

