Decentralized Exploration in Multi-Armed Bandits

Raphaël Féraud 1 Réda Alami 1 Romain Laroche 2

Abstract
We consider the decentralized exploration problem: a set of players collaborate to identify the
best arm by asynchronously interacting with the
same stochastic environment. The objective is to
ensure privacy in the best arm identification problem between asynchronous, collaborative, and
thrifty players. In the context of a digital service, we advocate that this decentralized approach
allows a good balance between conflicting interests: the providers optimize their services, while
protecting privacy of users and saving resources.
We define the privacy level with respect to the
amount of information an adversary could infer
by intercepting all the messages concerning a single user. We provide a generic algorithm D ECEN TRALIZED E LIMINATION , which uses any best
arm identification algorithm as a subroutine. We
prove that this algorithm ensures privacy, with a
low communication cost, and that in comparison
to the lower bound of the best arm identification
problem, its sample complexity suffers from a
penalty depending on the inverse of the probability of the most frequent players. Then, thanks
to the generality of the approach, we extend the
proposed algorithm to the non-stationary bandits.
Finally, experiments illustrate and complete the
analysis.

1. Introduction
1.1. Motivations
We consider a collaborative exploration problem, the decentralized exploration problem. The main motivation of
this new problem setting comes from sequential A/B and
multivariate testing applications. For instance, most digital
applications perform sequential A/B and multivariate testing
in order to optimize the value of their audience. When a de*
Equal contribution 1 Orange Labs 2 Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: Raphaël Féraud <raphael.feraud@orange.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

vice is connecting to the application, the application presents
an option to the user of the device. The aim is to maximize
the clicks of users on the proposed options. Using the standard centralized exploration approach, the click stream of
users is gathered and processed to choose the option which
generates the most clicks. In this paper, we formulate this
standard exploration problem in a decentralized way.
When the event "player n is active" occurs, player n reads
the messages received from other players and then chooses
an arm to play. The reward of the played arm is revealed
to player n. Finally, she may send a message to the other
players for sharing information about the arms.
The decentralized approach presents significant advantages.
First, the clicks of users contain information that may be
embarrassing when revealed, or that can be used by a third
party in an undesirable way. The decentralization of exploration favors privacy since the click stream is not transmitted.
However, it is not sufficient. The messages sent by a user
may still contain private information such as her favorite
topics, and therefore her political views, sexual orientation...
As the players broadcast messages to other players, a malicious adversary can pretend to be a player, and then listening
the exchanged messages. To ensure privacy one must guarantee that no useful information can be inferred from the
messages sent by a single user. Second, the decentralization
of exploration reduces the communication cost. This is a significant requirement for the Internet of Thing applications,
since the smart devices often run on batteries. Third and
finally, for all digital applications and in particular for the
mobile phone applications, the decentralization with a low
communication cost increases the responsiveness of applications by minimizing the number of interactions between
the application server and the devices.
Finally, the objective of the decentralized exploration problem is threefold:
1. sample efficiency: finding a near-optimal arm with
high-probability using a minimal number of interactions with the environment.
2. user privacy: protecting information contained in the
interaction history of a single player.
3. low communication cost: minimizing the number of
exchanged messages.

