Spectral Approximate Inference

Sejun Park 1 Eunho Yang 2 3 4 Se-Young Yun 3 5 Jinwoo Shin 1 3 4

Abstract
Given a graphical model (GM), computing its
partition function is the most essential inference
task, but it is computationally intractable in general. To address the issue, iterative approximation algorithms exploring certain local structure/consistency of GM have been investigated
as popular choices in practice. However, due to
their local/iterative nature, they often output poor
approximations or even do not converge, e.g., in
low-temperature regimes (hard instances of large
parameters). To overcome the limitation, we propose a novel approach utilizing the global spectral
feature of GM. Our contribution is two-fold: (a)
we first propose a fully polynomial-time approximation scheme (FPTAS) for approximating the
partition function of GM associating with a lowrank coupling matrix; (b) for general high-rank
GMs, we design a spectral mean-field scheme utilizing (a) as a subroutine, where it approximates
a high-rank GM into a product of rank-1 GMs for
an efficient approximation of the partition function. The proposed algorithm is more robust in
its running time and accuracy than prior methods,
i.e., neither suffers from the convergence issue nor
depends on hard local structures, as demonstrated
in our experiments.

1. Introduction
Graphical models (GMs) provide a succinct representation
of a joint probability distribution over a set of random variables by encoding their conditional dependencies in graphical structures. GMs have been studied in various fields of
machine learning, including computer vision (Freeman et al.,
2000), speech recognition (Bilmes, 2004) and deep learning
1

School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea 2 School of Computing, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea 3 Graduate
School of AI, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea 4 AITRICS, Seoul, Korea
5
Department of Industrial & System Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon,
Korea. Correspondence to: Jinwoo Shin <jinwoos@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

(Salakhutdinov & Larochelle, 2010). Most inference problems arising in GMs, e.g., obtaining desired samples and
computing marginal distributions, can be easily reduced to
computing their partition function (normalizing constant).
However, computing the partition function is #P-hard in general even to approximate (Jerrum & Sinclair, 1993), which
is thus a fundamental barrier for inference tasks of GM.
Variational inference is one of the most popular heuristics
in practice for estimating the partition function. It is typically achieved via running iterative local message-passing
algorithms, e.g., mean-field approximation (Parisi, 1988;
Jain et al., 2018) and belief propagation (Pearl, 1982; Wainwright et al., 2005). Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
method (Neal, 2001; Efthymiou et al., 2016) is another
popular approach, where it usually samples from GMs via
Markov chains with a local transition, e.g., Gibbs sampler (Geman & Geman, 1984), and estimates a target expectation by averaging over samples. Unfortunately, both
variational and MCMC methods are hard to guarantee the
convergence/mixing under some fixed computation budget and known to output poor approximation in the lowtemperature regime, i.e., large parameters of GM, due to
the non-existence of the so-called correlation decay (Weitz,
2006; Bandyopadhyay & Gamarnik, 2008). On the other
hand, variable elimination (Dechter, 1999; Dechter & Rish,
2003; Liu & Ihler, 2011; Xue et al., 2016; Wrigley et al.,
2017; Ahn et al., 2018a;b) is one of popular ‘convergence
free’ methods for approximating the partition function. At
each step, it sequentially marginalizes a chosen variable
and generates complex high-order factors approximating
the marginalized variable and its associated factors. Hence,
it guarantees to terminate after marginalizing all variables.
However, the performance of variable elimination schemes
is also significantly degraded in the low-temperature regime,
due to its local/iterative nature of processing variables one
by one.
Contribution. In this paper, we propose a completely new
approach by investigating the global information of GM,
to overcome the limitation of prior methods. To this end,
we study the spectral feature of the coupling matrix of GM
and propose a partition function approximation algorithm
utilizing the eigenvectors and eigenvalues. In particular, if
the matrix-rank and parameters of GM are bounded, i.e.,
O(1), then we prove that the proposed algorithm is a fully

