Geometric Losses for Distributional Learning

Arthur Mensch 1 2 Mathieu Blondel 3 Gabriel Peyré 1 2

Abstract
Building upon recent advances in entropyregularized optimal transport, and upon Fenchel
duality between measures and continuous functions, we propose a generalization of the logistic loss that incorporates a metric or cost
between classes. Unlike previous attempts to
use optimal transport distances for learning, our
loss results in unconstrained convex objective
functions, supports infinite (or very large) class
spaces, and naturally defines a geometric generalization of the softmax operator. The geometric
properties of this loss make it suitable for predicting sparse and singular distributions, for instance
supported on curves or hyper-surfaces. We study
the theoretical properties of our loss and showcase its effectiveness on two applications: ordinal regression and drawing generation.

1. Introduction
For probabilistic classification, the most popular loss is arguably the (multinomial) logistic loss. It is smooth, enabling fast convergence rates, and the softmax operator provides a consistent mapping to probability distributions. In
many applications, different costs are associated to misclassification errors between classes. While a cost-aware
generalization of the logistic loss exists (Gimpel & Smith,
2010), it does not provide a cost-aware counterpart of the
softmax. The softmax is pointwise by nature: it is oblivious
to misclassification costs or to the geometry of classes.
Optimal transport (Wasserstein) losses have recently
gained popularity in machine learning, for their ability to
compare probability distributions in a geometrically faithful manner, with applications such as classification (Kusner
et al., 2015), clustering (Cuturi & Doucet, 2014), domain
1
École Normale Supérieure, DMA, Paris, France 2 CNRS,
France 3 NTT Communication Science Laboratories, Kyoto,
Japan. Correspondence to: AM <arthur.mensch@m4x.org>,
MB <mathieu@mblondel.org>, GP <gabriel.peyre@ens.fr>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

adaptation (Courty et al., 2017), dictionary learning (Rolet et al., 2016) and generative models training (Montavon
et al., 2016; Arjovsky et al., 2017). For probabilistic classification, Frogner et al. (2015) proposes to use entropyregularized optimal transport (Cuturi, 2013) in the multilabel setting. Although this approach successfully leverages a cost between classes, it results in a non-convex
loss, when combined with a softmax. A similar regularized Wasserstein loss is used by Luise et al. (2018) in conjunction with a kernel ridge regression procedure (Ciliberto
et al., 2016) in order to obtain a consistency result.
The relation between the logistic loss and the maximum entropy principle is well-known. Building upon a generalization of the Shannon entropy originating from entropy regularized optimal transport (Feydy et al., 2019) and Fenchel
duality between measures and continuous functions, we
propose a generalization of the logistic loss that takes into
account a metric or cost between classes. Unlike previous
attempts to use optimal transport distances for learning, our
loss is convex, and naturally defines a geometric generalization of the softmax operator. Besides providing novel
insights in the logistic loss, our loss is theoretically sound,
even when learning and predicting continuous probability
distributions over a potentially infinite number of classes.
To sum up, our contributions are as follows.
Organization and contributions.
• We introduce the distribution learning setting, review
existings losses leveraging a cost between classes and
point out their shortcomings (§2).
• Building upon entropy-regularized optimal transport,
we present a novel cost-sensitive distributional learning
loss and its corresponding softmax operator. Our proposal is theoretically sound even in continuous measure
spaces (§3).
• We study the theoretical properties of our loss, such as
its Fisher consistency (§4). We derive tractable methods
to compute and minimize it in the discrete distribution
setting. We propose an abstract Frank-Wolfe scheme
for computations in the continuous setting.
• Finally, we demonstrate its effectiveness on two discrete prediction tasks involving a geometric cost: ordinal regression and drawing generation using VAEs (§5).

