Rademacher Complexity for Adversarially Robust Generalization

Dong Yin 1 Kannan Ramchandran 1 Peter Bartlett 1 2

Abstract
Many machine learning models are vulnerable
to adversarial attacks; for example, adding adversarial perturbations that are imperceptible to
humans can often make machine learning models
produce wrong predictions with high confidence;
moreover, although we may obtain robust models
on the training dataset via adversarial training, in
some problems the learned models cannot generalize well to the test data. In this paper, we
focus on `∞ attacks, and study the adversarially
robust generalization problem through the lens of
Rademacher complexity. For binary linear classifiers, we prove tight bounds for the adversarial
Rademacher complexity, and show that the adversarial Rademacher complexity is never smaller
than its natural counterpart, and it has an unavoidable dimension dependence, unless the weight
vector has bounded `1 norm, and our results also
extend to multi-class linear classifiers; in addition, for (nonlinear) neural networks, we show
that the dimension dependence in the adversarial Rademacher complexity also exists. We further consider a surrogate adversarial loss for onehidden layer ReLU network and prove margin
bounds for this setting. Our results indicate that
having `1 norm constraints on the weight matrices
might be a potential way to improve generalization in the adversarial setting. We demonstrate
experimental results that validate our theoretical
findings.

1. Introduction
In recent years, many modern machine learning models, in
particular, deep neural networks, have achieved success in
tasks such as image classification (He et al., 2016), speech
recognition (Graves et al., 2013), machine translation (Bah1
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences,
UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA 2 Department of Statistics, UC
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Dong Yin
<dongyin@eecs.berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

danau et al., 2014), game playing (Silver et al., 2016), etc.
However, although these models achieve the state-of-theart performance in many standard benchmarks or competitions, it has been observed that by adversarially adding
some perturbation to the input of the model (images, audio signals), the machine learning models can make wrong
predictions with high confidence. These adversarial inputs
are often called the adversarial examples. Typical methods
of generating adversarial examples include adding small
perturbations that are imperceptible to humans (Szegedy
et al., 2013), changing surrounding areas of the main objects in images (Gilmer et al., 2018a), and even simple
rotation and translation (Engstrom et al., 2017). This phenomenon was first discovered by Szegedy et al. (2013) in
image classification problems, and similar phenomena have
been observed in other areas (Carlini & Wagner, 2018; Kos
et al., 2018). Adversarial examples bring serious challenges
in many security-critical applications, such as medical diagnosis and autonomous driving—the existence of these
examples shows that many state-of-the-art machine learning
models are actually unreliable in the presence of adversarial
attacks.
Since the discovery of adversarial examples, there has been
a race between designing robust models that can defend
against adversarial attacks and designing attack algorithms
that can generate adversarial examples and fool the machine
learning models (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Gu & Rigazio,
2014; Carlini & Wagner, 2016; 2017). As of now, it seems
that the attackers are winning this game. For example, a
recent work shows that many of the defense algorithms fail
when the attacker uses a carefully designed gradient-based
method (Athalye et al., 2018). Meanwhile, adversarial
training (Huang et al., 2015; Shaham et al., 2015; Madry
et al., 2017) seems to be the most effective defense method.
Adversarial training takes a robust optimization (Ben-Tal
et al., 2009) perspective to the problem, and the basic idea
is to minimize some adversarial loss over the training data.
We elaborate below.
Suppose that data points (x, y) are drawn according to
some unknown distribution D over the feature-label space
X × Y, and X ⊆ Rd . Let F be a hypothesis class (e.g.,
a class of neural networks with a particular architecture),
and `(f (x), y) be the loss associated with f ∈ F. Consider
the `∞ white-box adversarial attack where an adversary is

