Context-Aware Zero-Shot Learning for Object Recognition

Éloi Zablocki * 1 Patrick Bordes * 1 Benjamin Piwowarski 1 Laure Soulier 1 Patrick Gallinari 1 2

Abstract
Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) aims at classifying
unlabeled objects by leveraging auxiliary knowledge, such as semantic representations. A limitation of previous approaches is that only intrinsic
properties of objects, e.g. their visual appearance,
are taken into account while their context, e.g. the
surrounding objects in the image, is ignored. Following the intuitive principle that objects tend to
be found in certain contexts but not others, we
propose a new and challenging approach, contextaware ZSL, that leverages semantic representations in a new way to model the conditional likelihood of an object to appear in a given context.
Finally, through extensive experiments conducted
on Visual Genome, we show that contextual information can substantially improve the standard
ZSL approach and is robust to unbalanced classes.

1. Introduction
Traditional Computer Vision models, such as Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) (Lecun et al., 1998), are designed
to classify images into a set of predefined classes. Their performances have kept improving in the last decade, namely
on object recognition benchmarks such as ImageNet (Deng
et al., 2009a), where state-of-the-art models (Zoph et al.,
2017; Real et al., 2018) have outmatched humans. However,
training such models requires hundreds of manually-labeled
instances for each class, which is a tedious and costly acquisition process. Moreover, these models cannot replicate
humans’ capacity to generalize and to recognize objects they
have never seen before. As a response to these limitations,
Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) has emerged as an important research field in the last decade (Farhadi et al., 2009a; Mensink
et al., 2012; Fu et al., 2015a; Kodirov et al., 2017). In the
object recognition field, ZSL aims at labeling an instance of
*
Equal contribution 1 Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Laboratoire d’Informatique de Paris 6, LIP6, F-75005 Paris, France
2
Criteo AI Lab, Paris. Correspondence to: Éloi Zablocki
<eloi.zablocki@lip6.fr>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

a class for which no supervised data is available, by using
knowledge acquired from another disjoint set of classes, for
which corresponding visual instances are provided. In the
literature, these sets of classes are respectively called target
and source domains — terms borrowed from the transfer
learning community. Generalization from the source to the
target domain is achieved using auxiliary knowledge that
semantically relates classes of both domains, e.g. attributes
or textual representations of the class labels.
Previous ZSL approaches only focus on intrinsic properties of objects, e.g. their visual appearance, by the means
of handcrafted features — e.g. shape, texture, or color —
(Lampert et al., 2014) or distributed representations learned
from text corpora (Akata et al., 2016; Long et al., 2017). The
underlying hypothesis is that the identification of entities
of the target domain is made possible thanks to the implicit
principle of compositionality (a.k.a. Frege’s principle (Pelletier, 2001)) — an object is formed by the composition of
its attributes and characteristics — and the fact that other
entities of the source domain share the same attributes. For
example, if textual resources state that an apple is round
and that it can be red or green, this knowledge can be used
to identify apples in images because these characteristics
(‘round‘, ‘red‘) could be shared by classes of the source
domain (e.g, ‘round‘ like a ball, ‘red‘ like a strawberry. . . ).
We believe that visual context, i.e. the other entities surrounding an object, also explains human’s ability to recognize an object that has never been seen before. This
assumption relies on the fact that scenes are compositional
in the sense that they are formed by the composition of
objects they contain. Some works in Computer Vision have
exploited visual context to refine the predictions of classification (Mensink et al., 2014) or detection (Bell et al.,
2016) models. To the best of our knowledge, context has
not been exploited in ZSL because, for obvious reasons, it
is impossible to directly estimate the likelihood of a context
for objects from the target domain — from visual data only.
However, textual resources can be used to provide insights
on the possible visual context in which an object is expected
to appear. To illustrate this, knowing from language that
an apple is likely to be found hanging on a tree or in the
hand of someone eating it, can be very helpful to identify
apples in images. In this paper, our goal is to leverage visual
context as an additional source of knowledge for ZSL, by

