Stochastic Beams and Where to Find Them:
The Gumbel-Top-k Trick for Sampling Sequences Without Replacement

Wouter Kool 1 2 Herke van Hoof 1 Max Welling 1 3

Abstract
The well-known Gumbel-Max trick for sampling
from a categorical distribution can be extended
to sample k elements without replacement. We
show how to implicitly apply this ‘Gumbel-Top-k’
trick on a factorized distribution over sequences,
allowing to draw exact samples without replacement using a Stochastic Beam Search. Even for
exponentially large domains, the number of model
evaluations grows only linear in k and the maximum sampled sequence length. The algorithm
creates a theoretical connection between sampling and (deterministic) beam search and can be
used as a principled intermediate alternative. In a
translation task, the proposed method compares
favourably against alternatives to obtain diverse
yet good quality translations. We show that sequences sampled without replacement can be used
to construct low-variance estimators for expected
sentence-level BLEU score and model entropy.

1. Introduction
We think the Gumbel-Max trick (Gumbel, 1954; Maddison et al., 2014) is like a magic trick. It allows sampling
from the categorical distribution, simply by perturbing the
log-probability for each category by adding independent
Gumbel distributed noise and returning the category with
maximum perturbed log-probability. This trick has recently
(re-)gained popularity as it allows to derive reparameterizable continous relaxations of the categorical distribution
(Maddison et al., 2016; Jang et al., 2016). However, there is
more: as was noted (in a blog post) by Vieira (2014), taking
the top k largest perturbed log-probabilities (instead of the
maximum, or top 1) yields a sample of size k from the categorical distribution without replacement. We refer to this
1

University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands 2 ORTEC, The
Netherlands 3 CIFAR, Canada. Correspondence to: Wouter Kool
<w.w.m.kool@uva.nl>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

extension of the Gumbel-Max trick as the Gumbel-Top-k
trick.
In this paper, we consider factorized distributions over sequences, represented by (parametric) sequence models. Sequence models are widely used, e.g. in tasks such as neural machine translation (Sutskever et al., 2014; Bahdanau
et al., 2015) and image captioning (Vinyals et al., 2015b).
Many such tasks require obtaining a set of representative sequences from the model. These can be random samples, but
for low-entropy distributions, a set of sequences sampled
using standard sampling (with replacement) may contain
many duplicates. On the other hand, a beam search can find
a set of unique high-probability sequences, but these have
low variability and, being deterministic, cannot be used to
construct statistical estimators.
In this paper, we propose sampling without replacement as
an alternative method to obtain representative sequences
from a sequence model. We show that for a sequence
model, we can draw samples without replacement by applying the Gumbel-Top-k trick implicitly, without instantiating
all sequences in the (typically exponentially large) domain.
This procedure allows us to draw unique sequences using a
number of model evaluations that grows only linear in the
number of samples k and the maximum sampled sequence
length. The algorithm uses the idea of top-down sampling
(Maddison et al., 2014) and performs a beam search over
stochastically perturbed log-probabilities, which is why we
refer to it as Stochastic Beam Search.
Stochastic Beam Search is a novel procedure for sampling
sequences that avoids duplicate samples. Unlike ordinary
beam search, it has a probabilistic interpretation. Thus, it
can e.g. be used in importance sampling. As such, Stochastic Beam Search conceptually connects sampling and beam
search, and combines advantages of both methods. In Section 4 we give two examples of how Stochastic Beam Search
can be used as a principled alternative to sampling or beam
search. In these experiments, Stochastic Beam Search is
used to control the diversity of translation results, as well
as to construct low variance estimators for sentence-level
BLEU score and model entropy.

