Adversarially Learned Representations for Information Obfuscation and
Inference
Martin Bertran * 1 Natalia Martinez * 1 Afroditi Papadaki 2 Qiang Qiu 1 Miguel Rodrigues 2 Galen Reeves 1
Guillermo Sapiro 1

Abstract
Data collection and sharing are pervasive aspects
of modern society. This process can either be
voluntary, as in the case of a person taking a facial image to unlock his/her phone, or incidental, such as traffic cameras collecting videos on
pedestrians. An undesirable side effect of these
processes is that shared data can carry information about attributes that users might consider as
sensitive, even when such information is of limited use for the task. It is therefore desirable for
both data collectors and users to design procedures that minimize sensitive information leakage. Balancing the competing objectives of providing meaningful individualized service levels
and inference while obfuscating sensitive information is still an open problem. In this work,
we take an information theoretic approach that
is implemented as an unconstrained adversarial
game between Deep Neural Networks in a principled, data-driven manner. This approach enables
us to learn domain-preserving stochastic transformations that maintain performance on existing
algorithms while minimizing sensitive information leakage.

1. Introduction
Information sharing and electronic communications permeate every aspect of human life. Shared data can contain
information about many attributes, some of them are of
interest for a particular task, while others can disclose irrelevant, conflicting, or sensitive information. As an example,
a facial image contains information about features such as
gender, emotion, ethnicity, and identity, among others. A
user sharing an image of their face might be interested in
*

Equal contribution 1 Duke University, Durham, North Carolina,
USA. 2 University College London, London, UK. Correspondence
to: Martin Bertran <martin.bertran@duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

a particular inference task (e.g., subject verification), but
may want to remove some sensitive attribute (e.g., emotion
recognition). As an additional use-case, imagine a subset
of users wish to unlock their phone using facial identification, while others opt instead to verify their right to access
the phone using other methods; in this setting, we wish the
face identification service to collect information only on the
consenting subset of users.
Here we address the problem of transactional information
sharing, where a user discloses data about themselves in
order to receive a service (e.g., identity-verification). Minimizing information leakage on a sensitive attribute (e.g.,
their emotion) while still providing a meaningful level of
individualized service is still an open problem. There is significant prior work in related topics such as visual privacy
through image obfuscation (McPherson et al., 2016; Oh
et al., 2016; 2017; Brkic et al., 2017; Raval et al., 2017; Wu
et al., 2018) and inpanting (Sun et al., 2018a;b; Orekondy
et al., 2018), domain adaptation (Tzeng et al., 2017), protecting training data in machine learning (Shokri & Shmatikov,
2015; Zhang, 2018), fairness (Madras et al., 2018) and differential privacy (Dwork, 2008).
We introduce a learning framework based on mutual information to approach this challenge of balancing per-subject
information obfuscation and utility preservation, where the
data is sanitized prior to disclosure. There are theoretical
works on studying utility-privacy tradeoffs using information metrics (Sankar et al., 2013; Basciftci et al., 2016),
but, to our knowledge, none have been applied to highdimensional data (e.g.: images) in a data-driven manner.
The use of mutual information (MI) facilitates the theoretical analysis of performance bounds, which relates to important interpretable performance metrics such as accuracy
(Feder & Merhav, 1994) and generalization error (Bassily
et al., 2018). Unique aspects of the problem addressed here
include: utility is measured per user, not as an aggregate
statistic; no assumptions are made on the structure of the
data, in particular, the utility and sensitive attribute might
be strongly codependent and/or spatially co-localized. This
differentiates us from related works on visual privacy (Sun
et al., 2018a;b; Orekondy et al., 2018) where the utility
is usually perceptual or semantical naturalness. Our sanitization (obfuscation) objective is set up as a constrained

