Shape Constraints for Set Functions

Andrew Cotter 1 Maya R. Gupta 1 Heinrich Jiang 1 Erez Louidor 1 James Muller 1 Taman Narayan 1
Serena Wang 1 Tao Zhu 1

Abstract
Set functions predict a label from a permutationinvariant variable-size collection of feature vectors. We propose making set functions more understandable and regularized by capturing domain
knowledge through shape constraints. We show
how prior work in monotonic constraints can be
adapted to set functions, and then propose two
new shape constraints designed to generalize the
conditioning role of weights in a weighted mean.
We show how one can train standard functions and
set functions that satisfy these shape constraints
with a deep lattice network. We propose a nonlinear estimation strategy we call the semantic
feature engine that uses set functions with the proposed shape constraints to estimate labels for compound sparse categorical features. Experiments
on real-world data show the achieved accuracy is
similar to deep sets or deep neural networks, but
provides guarantees on the model behavior, which
makes it easier to explain and debug.

1. Introduction
Common set functions such as mean, median, min and max
share the satisfying property that they are monotonically
increasing functions: if one of the elements in the set is
increased, the output can only increase. In this paper, we
show that one can machine learn flexible set functions with
this monotonicity guarantee.
Another common and useful set function is the weighted
mean, in which a conditioning feature (the weight input)
specifies how much to trust a primary input. We propose and
investigate new shape constraints that act on pairs of features
that capture this relationship of one feature conditioning the
importance of a second feature.
1
Equal Contribution. Google AI, Mountain View, CA. Correspondence to: Tao Zhu <tzhu@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

For example, suppose one wants to predict how good a
restaurant is based on its customer reviews, where each
restaurant x is described by a set of M (x) reviews, and
each review is described by D features, such as the star
rating and the reviewer’s credibility. We will show how
to train a flexible function that maps the set of reviews
to a prediction for the restaurant, and is guaranteed to be
a monotonically increasing function of each review’s star
rating, and is guaranteed to be more sensitive to a rating if
its reviewer’s credibility is higher.
In general, our proposed new shape constrained set function learning is applicable whenever one is estimating a
measurement from a set of noisy measurements, and has
side information about how noisy each measurement is.
The monotonicity shape constraints can be applied to multiple primary features, and the new conditioning shape constraints can be applied to multiple pairs of features. These
shape constraints provide guarantees on how the model behaves, which improves the ability to summarize the model
(improved interpretability) and makes the model behave
more predictably (improved debuggability).
While we focus here on set functions, our proposed conditioning shape constraints can also be used to capture complementary relationships, and submodularity and supermodularity relationships, for standard machine learned functions
that map RD → R.
We will show that shape-constrained set functions are especially helpful for problems that arise in feature engineering
from sparse compound categorical inputs such as queries.
A common heuristic for such compound inputs is to split
the compound input up into a set of elements (e.g., split a
query into its ngrams), estimate a label for each element,
then combine the set of estimates, usually using a classic set
function like mean or max. We propose such a split-estimatecombine method that we call semantic feature engine (SFE),
where the combine step uses a learned set function with the
proposed shape constraints. SFE is easy to debug and understand, can be re-trained with less churn than deep models,
and we will show it works well in practice.

