Global convergence of neuron birth-death dynamics

Grant M. Rotskoff 1 Samy Jelassi 2 3 Joan Bruna 1 2 Eric Vanden-Eijnden 1

Abstract
Neural networks with a large number of units admit a mean-field description, which has recently
served as a theoretical explanation for the favorable training properties of “overparameterized”
models. In this regime, gradient descent obeys a
deterministic partial differential equation (PDE)
that converges to a globally optimal solution for
networks with a single hidden layer under appropriate assumptions. In this work, we propose a
non-local mass transport dynamics that leads to a
modified PDE with the same minimizer. We implement this non-local dynamics as a stochastic
neuronal birth-death process and we prove that it
accelerates the rate of convergence in the meanfield limit. We subsequently realize this PDE with
two classes of numerical schemes that converge to
the mean-field equation, each of which can easily
be implemented for neural networks with finite
numbers of units. We illustrate our algorithms
with two models to provide intuition for the mechanism through which convergence is accelerated.

1. Introduction
As a consequence of the universal approximation theorems,
sufficiently wide single layer neural networks are expressive enough to accurately represent a broad class of functions (Cybenko, 1989; Barron, 1993; Park & Sandberg,
1991). The existence of a neural network function arbitrarily close to a given target function, however, is not a
guarantee that any particular optimization procedure can
identify the optimal parameters. Recently, using mathematical tools from optimal transport theory and interacting
particle systems, it was shown that gradient descent (Rotskoff & Vanden-Eijnden, 2018; Mei et al., 2018; Sirignano
& Spiliopoulos, 2018; Chizat & Bach, 2018b) and stochas1
Courant Institute, New York University, New York, USA
Center for Data Science, New York University, New York, USA
3
Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, USA. Correspondence to: Grant M. Rotskoff <rotskoff@cims.nyu.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

tic gradient descent converge asymptotically to the target
function in the large data limit.
This analysis relies on taking a “mean-field” limit in which
the number of units n tends to infinity. In this setting, gradient descent optimization dynamics is described by a partial
differential equation (PDE), corresponding to a Wasserstein
gradient flow on a convex energy functional. This PDE
provides a powerful conceptual framework for analyzing
the properties of neural networks evolving under gradient
descent dynamics. In addition, the analysis of this Wasserstein gradient flow motivates the interesting possibility of
altering the dynamics to accelerate convergence.
In this work, we propose a dynamical scheme involving
a birth/death process over the units of the neural network.
It can be defined on systems of interacting (e.g., neural
network optimization) or non-interacting particles, and in
the mean-field limit it amounts to an unbalanced transport
(Chizat et al., 2018) in which mass can be locally ‘teletransported’ with finite cost. We prove that the resulting
modified transport equation converges to the global minimum of the loss in both interacting and non-interacting
regimes (under appropriate assumptions), and we provide
an explicit rate of convergence in the latter case for the
mean-field limit. Interestingly—and unlike the gradient
flow—the only fixed point of the dynamics is the global
minimum of the loss function. We study the fluctuations of
finite particle dynamics around this mean-field convergent
solution, showing that they are of the same order throughout
the dynamics and therefore providing algorithmic guarantees directly applicable to finite single-layer neural network
optimization. Finally, we derive algorithms that converge
to the birth-death PDEs and verify numerically that these
schemes accelerate convergence even for finite numbers of
parameters.
Summarily, we describe:
Global convergence and monotonicity of the energy
with birth-death dynamics — We propose in Section 3
a modification of the original gradient flow that can be
interpreted as a birth-death process with the ability to perform non-local mass transport in the equation governing the
parameter distribution. We prove that the scheme we introduce guarantee global convergence and increase the rate
of contraction of the energy compared to gradient descent

