Bayesian Generative Active Deep Learning

Toan Tran 1 Thanh-Toan Do 2 Ian Reid 1 Gustavo Carneiro 1

Abstract
Deep learning models have demonstrated outstanding performance in several problems, but
their training process tends to require immense
amounts of computational and human resources
for training and labeling, constraining the types
of problems that can be tackled. Therefore, the
design of effective training methods that require
small labeled training sets is an important research
direction that will allow a more effective use of
resources. Among current approaches designed
to address this issue, two are particularly interesting: data augmentation and active learning.
Data augmentation achieves this goal by artificially generating new training points, while active
learning relies on the selection of the “most informative” subset of unlabeled training samples to be
labelled by an oracle. Although successful in practice, data augmentation can waste computational
resources because it indiscriminately generates
samples that are not guaranteed to be informative,
and active learning selects a small subset of informative samples (from a large un-annotated set)
that may be insufficient for the training process.
In this paper, we propose a Bayesian generative
active deep learning approach that combines active learning with data augmentation – we provide theoretical and empirical evidence (MNIST,
CIFAR-{10, 100}, and SVHN) that our approach
has more efficient training and better classification results than data augmentation and active
learning.

1. Introduction
Deep learning is undoubtedly the dominant machine learning methodology (Esteva et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2017;
Kumar et al., 2016; Rajkomar et al., 2018). Part of the reason behind this success lies in its training process that can
1
University of Adelaide, Australia 2 University of Liverpool.
Correspondence to: Toan Tran <toan.m.tran@adelaide.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

be performed with immense and carefully labeled data sets,
where the larger the data set, the more effective the training
process (Sun et al., 2017). However, the labeling of such
large data sets demands significant human effort, and the
large-scale training process requires considerable computational resources (Sun et al., 2017). These training issues
have prevented researchers and practitioners from solving a
wider range of classification problems, where large labeled
data sets are hard to acquire or vast computational resources
are unavailable (Litjens et al., 2017). Addressing these issues is one of the most important problems to be solved in
machine learning (Bengio, 2012; Gal et al., 2017; Kingma
et al., 2014; Settles, 2012; Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Tran
et al., 2017; Zhu & Bento, 2017).
One of the most successful approaches to mitigate the issue
described above relies on the use of a small labeled data set
and a large unlabeled data set, where small subsets from the
unlabeled set are automatically selected using an acquisition
function that assesses how informative those subsets are
for the training process. These selected unlabeled subsets
are then labeled by an oracle (i.e., a human annotator), integrated into the labeled data set, which is then used to re-train
the model in an iterative training process. This algorithm is
known as (pool-based) active learning (Settles, 2012), and
its aim is to reduce the need for large labeled data sets and
the computational requirements for training models because
it tends to rely on smaller training sets. Although effective in
general, active learning may overfit the informative training
sets due to their small sizes.
Alternatively, if the unlabeled data set does not exist, then
a possible idea is to use the samples from the labeled set
to guide the generation of new artificial training points by
sampling from a generative distribution that is assumed to
have a particular shape (e.g., Gaussian noise around rigid
deformation parameters from the labels) (Krizhevsky et al.,
2012) or that have been estimated from a generative adversarial training (Tran et al., 2017). This training process is
known as data augmentation, which targets the reduction of
the need for large labeled training sets. However, given that
the generation of new samples is done without regarding
how informative the new sample is for the training process,
it is likely that a large proportion of the generated samples
will not be important for the training process. Consequently,
data augmentation wastes computational resources, forcing

