Grid-Wise Control for Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning in Video Game AI

Lei Han * 1 Peng Sun * 1 Yali Du * 2 3 Jiechao Xiong 1 Qing Wang 1 Xinghai Sun 1 Han Liu 4 Tong Zhang 5

Abstract
We consider the problem of multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) in video game AI, where
the agents are located in a spatial grid-world environment and the number of agents varies both
within and across episodes. The challenge is to
flexibly control an arbitrary number of agents
while achieving effective collaboration. Existing
MARL methods usually suffer from the trade-off
between these two considerations. To address the
issue, we propose a novel architecture that learns
a spatial joint representation of all the agents and
outputs grid-wise actions. Each agent will be controlled independently by taking the action from
the grid it occupies. By viewing the state information as a grid feature map, we employ a
convolutional encoder-decoder as the policy network. This architecture naturally promotes agent
communication because of the large receptive
field provided by the stacked convolutional layers. Moreover, the spatially shared convolutional
parameters enable fast parallel exploration that
the experiences discovered by one agent can be
immediately transferred to others. The proposed
method can be conveniently integrated with general reinforcement learning algorithms, e.g., PPO
and Q-learning. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed method in extensive challenging
multi-agent tasks in StarCraft II.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has gained great successes
in solving many challenging problems recently, such as
game playing (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016; 2017),
robotics (Kober et al., 2013), resource management (Mao
*

Equal contribution 1 Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
University of Technology Sydney, Australia 3 UBTECH SAIC,
Univ. of Sydney, Australia 4 Northwestern University, IL, USA
5
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong,
China. Correspondence to: Lei Han <leihan.cs@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

et al., 2016), etc. Among these, RL in game AI research
attracts increasing attentions with recent achievement in Go
(Silver et al., 2016), DOTA2 (OpenAI, 2018) and StarCraft
II (Deepmind, 2019), etc. An important application in both
virtual and real worlds is to use RL to build collaborative
multi-agent systems. Examples in virtual games are DOTA
(OpenAI, 2018), StarCraft (Vinyals et al., 2017) and multiplayer ViZDoom (Kempka et al., 2016; Luo et al., 2018),
etc., while real-word examples include multi-robot control
(Matignon et al., 2012; Devin et al., 2017; Foerster et al.,
2018), traffic light control (Wiering, 2000; Arel et al., 2010),
bidding and advertising (Jin et al., 2018).
There have been extensive studies focusing on multi-agent
problems and generally three types of methods are used to
train multiple agents simultaneously: centralized learning,
decentralized learning and a mixture between the two.
Centralized learning method takes input as the global state
information or the union of each agent’s local observation,
performs a joint action and then receives a team reward.
Working in the joint action space, centralized learning naturally handles the problem of coordination among agents
and traditional RL algorithms can be directly applied for
training. Unfortunately, the exponentially expanded joint
action space makes fully centralized learning impractical
even when the number of agents slightly increases (Busoniu
et al., 2008).
On the other side, when the state information is partially
observed by the agents, decentralized learning is a natural
way to learn each agent’s policy based on its own local
observation-action trajectory. For example, independent Qlearning (Tan, 1993) learns the state-action value function
of each agent independently. However, from the perspective
of any individual agent, the algorithm becomes unstable due
to the non-stationarity arising from other simultaneously
acting agents in the environment. Therefore, decentralized
learning usually needs to pay more effort to model the communication among agents. Moreover, fully decentralized
learning requires independent rewarding scheme while in
many scenarios all the agents share a global team reward
and assigning explicit individual scores is impractical.
To address the problems encountered in both centralized
and decentralized learning, a number of mixture methods
have been developed. For example, some approaches learn

