Active Embedding Search via Noisy Paired Comparisons

Gregory H. Canal 1 Andrew K. Massimino 1 Mark A. Davenport 1 Christopher J. Rozell 1

Abstract
Suppose that we wish to estimate a user’s preference vector w from paired comparisons of the
form “does user w prefer item p or item q?,”
where both the user and items are embedded in a
low-dimensional Euclidean space with distances
that reflect user and item similarities. Such observations arise in numerous settings, including psychometrics and psychology experiments, search
tasks, advertising, and recommender systems. In
such tasks, queries can be extremely costly and
subject to varying levels of response noise; thus,
we aim to actively choose pairs that are most informative given the results of previous comparisons. We provide new theoretical insights into
the benefits and challenges of greedy information maximization in this setting, and develop
two novel strategies that maximize lower bounds
on information gain and are simpler to analyze
and compute respectively. We use simulated responses from a real-world dataset to validate our
strategies through their similar performance to
greedy information maximization, and their superior preference estimation over state-of-the-art
selection methods as well as random queries.

1. Introduction
We consider the task of user preference learning, where we
have a set of items (e.g., movies, music, or food) embedded
in a Euclidean space and aim to represent the preferences
of a user as a continuous point in the same space (rather
than simply a rank ordering over the items) so that their
preference point is close to items the user likes and far from
items the user dislikes. To estimate this point, we consider
a system using the method of paired comparisons, where
during a sequence of interactions a user chooses which of
two given items they prefer (David, 1963). For instance,
1

School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, United States. Correspondence to: Gregory Canal <gregory.canal@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

to characterize a person’s taste in food, we might ask them
which one of two dishes they would rather eat for a number
of different pairs of dishes. The recovered preference point
can be used in various tasks, for instance in the recommendation of nearby items, personalized product creation, or
clustering of users with similar preferences. We refer to
the entire process of querying via paired comparisons and
continuous preference point estimation as pairwise search,
and note that this is distinct from the problem of searching
for a single discrete item in the fixed dataset. A key goal
of ours is to actively choose the items in each query and
demonstrate the advantage over non-adaptive selection.
More specifically, given N items, there are O(N 2 ) possible
paired comparisons. Querying all such pairs is not only
prohibitively expensive for large datasets, but also unnecessary since not all queries are informative; some queries are
rendered obvious by the accumulation of evidence about the
user’s preference point, while others are considered ambiguous due to noise in the comparison process. Given these
considerations, the main contribution of this work is the
design and analysis of two new query selection algorithms
for pairwise search that select the most informative pairs by
directly modeling redundancy and noise in user responses.
While previous active algorithms have been designed for
related paired comparison models, none directly account for
probabilistic user behavior as we do here. To the best of
our knowledge our work is the first attempt to search a lowdimensional embedding for a continuous point via paired
comparisons while directly modeling noisy responses.
Our approach builds upon the popular technique in active
learning and Bayesian experimental design of greedily maximizing information gain (Settles, 2012; Lindley, 1956;
MacKay, 1992). In our setting, this corresponds to selecting
pairs that maximize the mutual information between the
user’s response and the unknown location of their preference point. We provide new theoretical and computational
insights into relationships between information gain maximization and estimation error minimization in pairwise
search, and present a lower bound on the estimation error
achievable by any query strategy.
Due to the known difficulty of analyzing greedy information
gain maximization (Chen et al., 2015) and the high computational cost of estimating mutual information for each pair

