Proportionally Fair Clustering

Xingyu Chen 1 Brandon Fain 1 Liang Lyu 1 Kamesh Munagala 1

Abstract
We extend the fair machine learning literature by
considering the problem of proportional centroid
clustering in a metric context. For clustering n
points with k centers, we define fairness as proportionality to mean that any n/k points are entitled
to form their own cluster if there is another center that is closer in distance for all n/k points.
We seek clustering solutions to which there are
no such justified complaints from any subsets of
agents, without assuming any a priori notion of
protected subsets. We present and analyze algorithms to efficiently compute, optimize, and
audit proportional solutions. We conclude with
an empirical examination of the tradeoff between
proportional solutions and the k-means objective.

1. Introduction
The data points in machine learning are often real human
beings. There is legitimate concern that traditional machine learning algorithms that are blind to this fact may
inadvertently exacerbate problems of bias and injustice in
society (Julia Angwin & Lauren Kirchner, 2016). Motivated by concerns ranging from the granting of bail in the
legal system to the quality of recommender systems, researchers have devoted considerable effort to developing
fair algorithms for the canonical supervised learning tasks of
classification and regression (Dwork et al., 2012; Kleinberg
et al., 2016; Hardt et al., 2016; Kleinberg et al., 2017; Zafar
et al., 2017a; Corbett-Davies et al., 2017; Pleiss et al., 2017;
Zafar et al., 2017b; Kearns et al., 2018; Goel et al., 2018;
Hashimoto et al., 2018).
We extend this work to a canonical problem in unsupervised
learning: centroid clustering. In centroid clustering, we
want to partition data into k clusters by choosing k “centers”
and then matching points to one of the centers. This is a clas1

Department of Computer Science, Duke University, Durham,
North Carolina, USA. Correspondence to: Brandon Fain <btfain@cs.duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

sic context for clustering work (Gonzalez, 1985; Shmoys
et al., 1997; Charikar et al., 2002; Arya et al., 2004), and is
perhaps best known as the setting for the celebrated k-means
heuristic (independently discovered many times, see (Jain,
2010) for a brief history). We provide a novel group based
notion of fairness as proportionality, inspired by recent related work on the fair allocation of public resources (Aziz
et al., 2017; Conitzer et al., 2017; Fain et al., 2018; Garg
et al., 2018). We suppose that data points represent the individuals to whom we wish to be fair, and that these agents
prefer to be clustered accurately (that is, they prefer their
cluster center to be representative of their features). A solution is fair if it respects the entitlements of groups of agents,
where we assume that a subset of agents is entitled to choose
a center for themselves if they constitute a sufficiently large
fraction of the population with respect to the total number
of clusters (e.g., 1/k of the population, if we are clustering
into k groups). The guarantee must hold for all subsets
of sufficient size, and therefore does not hinge on any particular a priori knowledge about which points should be
protected. This is in line with other recent observations that
information about which individuals should be protected
may not be available in practice (Hashimoto et al., 2018).
Consider a motivating example where proportional clustering might be preferable to more standard clusterings that try
to minimize the k-means or k-median objective. Suppose
there are 3 spherical clusters in the data: A, B, and C, and
we are computing a 3-clustering. A, B, and C each contain
1/3 of the total data. The radius of A is very large compared
to the radii of B and C, and A is very far away from B and
C compared to the radius of A. The radii of B and C are
very small, and B and C are close relative to the radius of
A. More simply, A is a large sphere very far away from two
small spheres B and C, which are close together.
Simply placing centers at the middle of A, B, and C is
proportional. However, the global k-means or k-median
minimizer places 1 center for B and C to share, and uses the
remaining 2 centers to cover A. Such a solution is arbitrarily
not-proportional as the radii of B and C become arbitrarily
small. Essentially, the global optimum forces B and C to
share a center in order to pay for the high variance in A.
To interpret this example, suppose we are clustering home
locations to decide where to build public parks. B and C are

