Dead-ends and Secure Exploration in Reinforcement Learning

Mehdi Fatemi 1 Shikhar Sharma 1 Harm van Seijen 1 Samira Ebrahimi Kahou 2

Abstract
Many interesting applications of reinforcement
learning (RL) involve MDPs that include numerous “dead-end” states. Upon reaching a dead-end
state, the agent continues to interact with the environment in a dead-end trajectory before reaching
an undesired terminal state, regardless of whatever actions are chosen. The situation is even
worse when existence of many dead-end states is
coupled with distant positive rewards from any
initial state (we term this as Bridge Effect). Hence,
conventional exploration techniques often incur
prohibitively many training steps before convergence. To deal with the bridge effect, we propose
a condition for exploration, called security. We
next establish formal results that translate the security condition into the learning problem of an
auxiliary value function. This new value function is used to cap “any” given exploration policy
and is guaranteed to make it secure. As a special case, we use this theory and introduce secure
random-walk. We next extend our results to the
deep RL settings by identifying and addressing
two main challenges that arise. Finally, we empirically compare secure random-walk with standard
benchmarks in two sets of experiments including
the Atari game of Montezuma’s Revenge.

1. Introduction and Motivation
Theoretically, if a Markov Decision Process (MDP) corresponding to an environment is fully specified, then its
(optimal) value function can be computed without any empirical interaction with the actual environment (Sutton &
Barto, 1998; Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 1996). However, in
many real-world problems, transition probabilities and/or rewarding transitions are not known in advance and the agent
1
Microsoft Research, 2000 McGill College Avenue, Suite 550,
Montréal, QC H3A 3H3, Canada 2 McGill University, 845 Sherbrooke Street West, Montréal, QC H3A 0G4, Canada. Correspondence to: Mehdi Fatemi <mehdi.fatemi@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

has to interact with the environment and learn from its experience. There always exists a (greedy) policy corresponding
to the learned value function, which we call exploitation
policy and is desired to converge to the optimal policy that
maximises the expected return. One main challenge for the
agent is then to decide when to exploit its current knowledge by sticking to the exploitation policy and when/how to
explore other actions to increase its knowledge by following
other policies, which we call exploration policies.
Exploration has always been a core problem in RL. Perhaps
the oldest and still the most widely-used methods are the
ones which perturb the exploitation policy, for example, greedy, Boltzmann, and count-based explorations. In tabular
settings, several techniques have been suggested, mostly on
the basis of regret minimization, which are hardly scalable.
However, methods such as count-based techniques have recently been extended to deep RL settings (Bellemare et al.,
2016). In this paper, we highlight that these existing methods fail to secure basic properties in certain environments,
causing the learning progress to be extremely slow. For example, exploring uninteresting portions of an environment
(uninteresting in the context of achieving the desired task)
may result in wasted training efforts that generate little to
no relevant information. Furthermore, exploring unsafe portions of the environment may be costly and/or raise safety
concerns. Thus, the agent’s needs to generate new information must be balanced with considerations associated with
limited training time, cost, and safety concerns.
In particular, one may note that, in many MDPs of interest,
at many states, a large portion of the available actions are
likely to result in an undesired terminal state. Upon reaching
an undesired terminal state, the environment is forced to
terminate/restart before the goal is achieved. As an example,
consider the Atari game of Montezuma’s Revenge, shown
in Figure 1. A first task to be done is to go all the way to the
key position and capture it. On playing the game, one may
immediately notice that at most of the states many actions
result in an imminent death, which causes the agent to lose
one life and be re-positioned to the initial state. Furthermore,
most of such applications include dead-end states (formally
defined in Section 2). Having reached a dead-end state, the
agent will reach an undesired terminal state with probability
one, but after some —possibly random— number of steps,
regardless of whatever action it chooses. Returning to Mon-

