State-Regularized Recurrent Neural Networks

Cheng Wang 1 Mathias Niepert 1

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks are a widely used class
of neural architectures with two shortcomings.
First, it is difficult to understand what exactly
they learn. Second, they tend to work poorly on
sequences requiring long-term memorization, despite having this capacity in principle. We aim to
address both shortcomings with a class of recurrent networks that use a stochastic state transition
mechanism between cell applications. This mechanism, which we term state-regularization, makes
RNNs transition between a finite set of learnable
states. We evaluate state-regularized RNNs on
(1) regular languages for the purpose of automata
extraction; (2) nonregular languages such as balanced parentheses, palindromes, and the copy task
where external memory is required; and (3) realword sequence learning tasks for sentiment analysis, visual object recognition, and language modeling. We show that state-regularization simplifies
the extraction of finite state automata from the
RNN’s state transition dynamics; forces RNNs to
operate more like automata with external memory and less like finite state machines; and makes
RNNs more interpretable.

training and it remains challenging to determine whether
the extracted DFA faithfully models the RNN’s state transition behavior. Most extraction methods are rather complex,
depend crucially on hyperparameter choices, and tend to
be computationally costly. Second, RNNs tend to work
poorly on input sequences requiring long-term memorization, despite having this ability in principle. Indeed, there
is a growing body of work providing evidence, both empirically (Daniluk et al., 2017; Bai et al., 2018; Trinh et al.,
2018) and theoretically (Arjovsky et al., 2016; Zilly et al.,
2017; Miller & Hardt, 2018), that recurrent networks offer
no benefit on longer sequences, at least under certain conditions. Intuitively, RNNs tend to operate more like DFAs
with a large number of states, attempting to memorize all
the information about the input sequence solely with their
hidden states, and less like automata with external memory.

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have found their way
into numerous applications. Still, RNNs have two shortcomings. First, it is difficult to understand what concretely
RNNs learn. Some applications require a close inspection
of learned models before deployment and RNNs are more
difficult to interpret than rule-based systems. There are a
number of approaches for extracting finite state automata
(DFAs) from trained RNNs (Giles et al., 1991; Wang et al.,
2018b; Weiss et al., 2018b) as a means to analyze their behavior. These methods apply extraction algorithms after

We propose state-regularized RNNs as a possible step towards addressing both of the aforementioned problems.
State-regularized RNNs (SR -RNNs) are a class of recurrent
networks that utilize a stochastic state transition mechanism
between cell applications. The stochastic mechanism models a probabilistic state dynamics that lets the SR -RNNs
transition between a finite number of learnable states. The
parameters of the stochastic mechanism are trained jointly
with the parameters of the base RNNs1 . SR -RNNs have
several advantages over standard RNNs. First, instead of
having to apply post-training DFA extraction, SR -RNNs
determine their (probabilistic and deterministic) state transition behavior more directly. We propose a method that
extracts DFAs truly representing the state transition behavior
of the underlying RNNs. Second, we hypothesize that the
frequently-observed poor extrapolation behavior of RNNs
is caused by memorization with hidden states. It is known
that RNNs – even those with cell states or external memory
– tend to memorize mainly with their hidden states and in an
unstructured manner (Strobelt et al., 2016; Hao et al., 2018).
We show that the state-regularization mechanism shifts representational power to memory components such as the cell
state, resulting in improved extrapolation performance.

1
NEC Laboratories Europe, Heidelberg, Germany. Correspondence to: Cheng Wang <cheng.wang@neclab.eu>.

We support our hypotheses through experiments both on synthetic and real-world datasets. We explore the improvement

1. Introduction

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

1

An implementation of SR -RNNs is available at https://
github.com/deepsemantic/sr-rnns.

