Hybrid Models with Deep and Invertible Features

Eric Nalisnick * 1 Akihiro Matsukawa * 1 Yee Whye Teh 1 Dilan Gorur 1 Balaji Lakshminarayanan 1

Abstract
We propose a neural hybrid model consisting of
a linear model defined on a set of features computed by a deep, invertible transformation (i.e. a
normalizing flow). An attractive property of our
model is that both p(features), the density
of the features, and p(targets|features),
the predictive distribution, can be computed exactly in a single feed-forward pass. We show
that our hybrid model, despite the invertibility
constraints, achieves similar accuracy to purely
predictive models. Yet the generative component
remains a good model of the input features despite
the hybrid optimization objective. This offers additional capabilities such as detection of out-ofdistribution inputs and enabling semi-supervised
learning. The availability of the exact joint density
p(targets, features) also allows us to compute many quantities readily, making our hybrid
model a useful building block for downstream
applications of probabilistic deep learning.

1. Introduction
In the majority of applications, deep neural networks model
conditional distributions of the form p(y|x), where y denotes a label and x features or covariates. However, modeling just the conditional distribution is insufficient in many
cases. For instance, if we believe that the model may be
subjected to inputs unlike those of the training data, a model
for p(x) can possibly detect an outlier before it is passed
to the conditional model for prediction. Thus modeling the
joint distribution p(y, x) provides a richer and more useful
representation of the data. Models defined by combining
a predictive model p(y|x) with a generative one p(x) are
known as hybrid models (Jaakkola & Haussler, 1999; Raina
et al., 2004; Lasserre et al., 2006; Kingma et al., 2014).
Hybrid models have been shown to be useful for novelty
*
Equal contribution 1 DeepMind. Correspondence to: Balaji
Lakshminarayanan <balajiln@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

detection (Bishop, 1994), semi-supervised learning (Druck
et al., 2007), and information regularization (Szummer &
Jaakkola, 2003).
Crafting a hybrid model usually requires training two models, one for p(y|x) and one for p(x), that share a subset
(Raina et al., 2004) or possibly all (McCallum et al., 2006)
of their parameters. Unfortunately, training a high-fidelity
p(x) model alone is difficult, especially in high dimensions,
and good performance requires using a large neural network
(Brock et al., 2019). Yet principled probabilistic inference
is hard to implement with neural networks since they do
not admit closed-form solutions and running Markov chain
Monte Carlo takes prohibitively long. Variational inference
then remains as the final alternative, and this now introduces
a third model, which usually serves as the posterior approximation and/or inference network (Kingma & Welling,
2014; Kingma et al., 2014). To make matters worse, the
p(y|x) model may require a separate approximate inference
scheme, leading to additional computation and parameters.
In this paper, we propose a neural hybrid model that overcomes many of the aforementioned computational challenges. Most crucially, our model supports exact inference
and evaluation of p(x). Furthermore, in the case of regression, Bayesian inference for p(y|x) is exact and available in
closed-form as well. Our model is made possible by leveraging recent advances in deep invertible generative models
(Rezende & Mohamed, 2015; Dinh et al., 2017; Kingma &
Dhariwal, 2018). These models are defined by composing
invertible functions, and therefore the change-of-variables
formula can be used to compute exact densities. Moreover,
these invertible models have been shown to be expressive
enough to perform well on prediction tasks (Gomez et al.,
2017; Jacobsen et al., 2018). We use the invertible function
as a natural feature extractor and define a linear model at the
level of the latent representation, which is memory-efficient
as the bulk of the parameters are shared between p(x) and
p(y|x). Furthermore, with just one feed-forward pass we
can obtain both p(x) and p(y|x), with the only additional
cost being the log-determinant-Jacobian term required by
the change of variables. While this term could be expensive
to compute for general functions, much recent work has
been done on defining expressive invertible neural networks
with easy-to-evaluate volume elements (Dinh et al., 2015;
2017; Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018; Grathwohl et al., 2019).

