Curvature-Exploiting Acceleration of Elastic Net Computations

Vien V. Mai 1 Mikael Johansson 1

Abstract
This paper introduces an efficient second-order
method for solving the elastic net problem. Its
key innovation is a computationally efficient
technique for injecting curvature information in
the optimization process which admits a strong
theoretical performance guarantee. In particular,
we show improved run time over popular firstorder methods and quantify the speed-up in terms
of statistical measures of the data matrix. The
improved time complexity is the result of an extensive exploitation of the problem structure and
a careful combination of second-order information, variance reduction techniques, and momentum acceleration. Beside theoretical speed-up,
experimental results demonstrate great practical
performance benefits of curvature information,
especially for ill-conditioned data sets.

1. Introduction
Lasso, ridge and elastic net regression are fundamental
problems in statistics and machine learning, with countless applications in science and engineering (Zou & Hastie,
2005). Elastic net regression amounts to solving the following convex optimization problem


γ2
1
2
2
kAx − bk2 +
kxk2 + γ1 kxk1 , (1)
minimize
2n
2
x∈Rd
for given data matrices A ∈ Rn×d and b ∈ Rn and regularization parameters γ1 and γ2 . Setting γ1 = 0 results in ridge regression, γ2 = 0 yields lasso and letting γ1 = γ2 = 0 reduces the problem to the classical
least-squares. Lasso promotes sparsity of the optimal solution, which sometimes helps to improve interpretability
of the results. Adding the additional l2 -regularizer helps to
1
Department of Department of Automatic Control, School
of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Royal Institute
of Technology (KTH), Stockholm, Sweden. Correspondence to:
V. V. Mai <maivv@kth.se>, M. Johansson <mikaelj@kth.se>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

improve the performance when features are highly correlated (Tibshirani et al., 2015; Zou & Hastie, 2005).
The convergence rates of iterative methods for solving (1)
are typically governed by the condition number of the Hessian matrix of the ridge loss, C + γ2 I, where C = n1 A> A
is the sample correlation matrix. Real-world data sets often have few dominant features, while the other features
are highly correlated with the stronger ones (Gonen et al.,
2016; Tibshirani et al., 2015). This translates to a rapidly
decaying spectrum of C. In this paper, we demonstrate
how this property can be exploited to reduce the effect of
ill-conditioning and to design faster algorithms for solving
the elastic net regression problem (1).
1.1. Related work
Over the past few years, there has been a great attention to
developing efficient optimization algorithms for minimizing composite objective functions
min F (x) , f (x) + h (x) ,

x∈Rd

(2)

Pn
where f (x) = n1 i=1 fi (x) is a finite sum of smooth and
convex component functions fi (x), and h (x) is a possibly
non-smooth convex regularizer. In machine learning applications, the function f typically models the empirical data
loss and the regularizer h is used to promote desired properties of a solution. For example, the elastic net objective can
2
2
fit to this form with fi (x) = 12 a>
+ γ2 kxk2 ,
i x − bi
and h(x) = γ1 kxk1 .
1.1.1. F IRST-O RDER METHODS
Standard deterministic first-order methods for solving (2),
such as proximal gradient descent, enjoy linear convergence for strongly convex objective functions and are able

to find an -approximate solution in time O dnκ log 1 ,
where κ is the condition
√ number of f . This runtime can
be improved to O dn κ log 1 if it is combined with
Nesterov acceleration (Beck & Teboulle, 2009; Nesterov,
2013). However, the main drawback of these methods is
that they need to access the whole data set in every iteration, which is too costly in many machine learning tasks.
For large-scale problems, methods based on stochastic gradients have become the standard choice for solv-

