Compositional Fairness Constraints for Graph Embeddings

Avishek Joey Bose 1 2 William L. Hamilton 1 2 3

Abstract
Learning high-quality node embeddings is a key
building block for machine learning models that
operate on graph data, such as social networks and
recommender systems. However, existing graph
embedding techniques are unable to cope with
fairness constraints, e.g., ensuring that the learned
representations do not correlate with certain attributes, such as age or gender. Here, we introduce an adversarial framework to enforce fairness
constraints on graph embeddings. Our approach
is compositional—meaning that it can flexibly
accommodate different combinations of fairness
constraints during inference. For instance, in the
context of social recommendations, our framework would allow one user to request that their
recommendations are invariant to both their age
and gender, while also allowing another user to
request invariance to just their age. Experiments
on standard knowledge graph and recommender
system benchmarks highlight the utility of our
proposed framework.

1. Introduction
Learning low-dimensional embeddings of the nodes in a
graph is a fundamental technique underlying state-of-the-art
approaches to link prediction and recommender systems
(Hamilton et al., 2017b). However, in many applications—
especially those involving social graphs—it is desirable
to exercise control over the information contained within
learned node embeddings. For instance, we may want to ensure that recommendations are fair or balanced with respect
to certain attributes (e.g., that they do not depend on a user’s
race or gender) or we may want to ensure privacy by not
exposing certain attributes through learned node representations. In this work we investigate the feasibility of enforcing
such invariance constraints on (social) graph embeddings.

Sensitive
Attributes

Gender

Occupation

Age

Input Graph

Node
Embedding

Filters

D

Gender

D
Occupation

D

Age

Filtered
Embedding Discriminators

Figure 1. Overview of our approach: Our goal is to generate
graph embeddings that are invariant to particular sensitive attributes (e.g., age or gender). We train a set of “filters” to prevent
adversarial discriminators from classifying the sensitive information from the filtered embeddings. After training, these filters can
be composed together in different combinations, allowing the flexible generation of embeddings that are invariant w.r.t. any subset
of the sensitive attributes.

While enforcing invariance constraints on general classification models (Chouldechova, 2017; Gajane & Pechenizkiy,
2017; Kamishima et al., 2012) and collaborative filtering
algorithms (Yao & Huang, 2017) has received considerable
attention in recent years, these techniques have yet to be
considered within the context of graph embeddings—a setting that introduces particular challenges due to the non-i.i.d.
and non-Euclidean nature of relational, graph data.

1
McGill University 2 Mila 3 Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to: Avishek Joey Bose <joey.bose@mail.mcgill.ca>.

Moreover, in the case of social graphs and large-scale recommender systems, it is often the case that there are many
possible sensitive attributes that we may want to enforce
invariance constraints over. Previous work on enforcing
invariance (or “fairness”) in social applications has generally focused on situations that involve one sensitive attribute
(e.g., age in the context of credit or loan decisions; Zemel
et al. (2013)), but in the context of social graph embeddings
there can be an extremely large number of possible sensitive
attributes. In fact, in extreme settings we may even want
to be fair with respect to the existence of individual edges.
For instance, a user on a social networking platform might
want that platform’s recommender system to ignore the fact
that they are friends with a certain other user, or that they
engaged with a particular piece of content.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Our contributions. We introduce an adversarial framework
to enforce compositional fairness constraints on graph embeddings for multiple sensitive attributes. The key idea be-

