CAB: Continuous Adaptive Blending for Policy Evaluation and Learning

Yi Su * 1 Lequn Wang * 1 Michele Santacatterina 2 Thorsten Joachims 1

Abstract
The ability to perform offline A/B-testing and
off-policy learning using logged contextual bandit feedback is highly desirable in a broad range
of applications, including recommender systems,
search engines, ad placement, and personalized
health care. Both offline A/B-testing and offpolicy learning require a counterfactual estimator
that evaluates how some new policy would have
performed, if it had been used instead of the logging policy. In this paper, we present and analyze
a family of counterfactual estimators which subsumes most estimators proposed to date. Most
importantly, this analysis identifies a new estimator – called Continuous Adaptive Blending (CAB)
– which enjoys many advantageous theoretical and
practical properties. In particular, it can be substantially less biased than clipped Inverse Propensity Score (IPS) weighting and the Direct Method,
and it can have less variance than Doubly Robust and IPS estimators. In addition, it is subdifferentiable such that it can be used for learning,
unlike the SWITCH estimator. Experimental results show that CAB provides excellent evaluation
accuracy and outperforms other counterfactual estimators in terms of learning performance.

1. Introduction
Contextual bandit feedback is ubiquitous in a wide range
of intelligent systems that interact with their users through
the following process. The system observes a context, takes
an action, and then observes feedback under the chosen
action. The logs of search engines, recommender systems,
ad-placement systems, and many other systems contain terabytes of this partial-information feedback data, and it is
*

Equal contribution 1 Cornell University, Ithaca, USA 2 Cornell
TRIPODS Center for Data Science, Ithaca, USA. Correspondence to: Yi Su <ys756@cornell.edu>, Lequn Wang
<lw633@cornell.edu>, Michele Santacatterina <santacatterina@cornell.edu>, Thorsten Joachims <tj@cs.cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

highly desirable to use this historic data for offline evaluation and learning. What makes evaluation and learning
challenging, however, is that we only get to see the feedback
for the chosen action, but we do not observe how the user
would have responded if the system had taken a different
action. This means the feedback is both partial (e.g. only
observed for the selected action) and biased (e.g. by the
choices of the policy that logged the data), which makes
batch learning from contextual bandit feedback substantially
different from typical supervised learning, where the correct
label and a loss function provide full-information feedback.
Both learning and evaluation can be viewed as examples
of counterfactual reasoning, where we need to estimate
from the historic log data how well some other policy would
have performed, if we had used it instead of the policy
that logged the data. Three main approaches have been
proposed for this counterfactual or off-policy evaluation
problem. First, the Direct Method (DM) (Schafer, 1997;
Rubin, 2004; Dudı́k et al., 2011; Little & Rubin, 2019) uses
regression to learn a model of the reward and imputes the
missing feedback. Second, inverse propensity score (IPS)
weighting (Horvitz & Thompson, 1952; Strehl et al., 2011)
models the selection bias in the assignment mechanism and
directly provides an unbiased estimate of the quality of a
policy under suitable common support conditions. Both
approaches are complementary and have different strengths
and drawbacks. On the one hand, DM typically has low
variance but can lead to highly biased results due to model
misspecification. On the other hand, since we are typically
controlling the logging policy and can log propensities, IPSbased methods can be provably unbiased but often suffer
from large variance when the IPS weights are large. The
third class is a hybrid of them. The most prominent one
is the Doubly Robust (DR) estimator (Robins & Rotnitzky,
1995; Kang et al., 2007; Dudı́k et al., 2011), which is based
on DM but also uses IPS weighting and an additive control
variate to reduce variance.
Generalizing these existing counterfactual estimators, we
present a parametric family of estimators for off-policy evaluation that covers most of the off-policy estimators proposed to date — including IPS (Horvitz & Thompson, 1952),
clipped IPS (Strehl et al., 2011), DM (Dudı́k et al., 2011),
DR (Dudı́k et al., 2011) and its MRDR variant (Farajtabar
et al., 2018), SWITCH (Wang et al., 2017), and Static Blend-

