Processing Megapixel Images with Deep Attention-Sampling Models

Angelos Katharopoulos 1 2 François Fleuret 1 2

Abstract
Existing deep architectures cannot operate on very
large signals such as megapixel images due to
computational and memory constraints. To tackle
this limitation, we propose a fully differentiable
end-to-end trainable model that samples and processes only a fraction of the full resolution input
image. The locations to process are sampled from
an attention distribution computed from a low resolution view of the input. We refer to our method
as attention sampling and it can process images
of several megapixels with a standard single GPU
setup. We show that sampling from the attention
distribution results in an unbiased estimator of the
full model with minimal variance, and we derive
an unbiased estimator of the gradient that we use
to train our model end-to-end with a normal SGD
procedure. This new method is evaluated on three
classification tasks, where we show that it allows
to reduce computation and memory footprint by
an order of magnitude for the same accuracy as
classical architectures. We also show the consistency of the sampling that indeed focuses on
informative parts of the input images.

1. Introduction
For a variety of computer vision tasks, such as cancer detection, self driving vehicles, and satellite image processing, it
is necessary to develop models that are able to handle high
resolution images. The existing CNN architectures, that
provide state-of-the-art performance in various computer
vision fields such as image classification (He et al., 2016),
object detection (Liu et al., 2016), semantic segmentation
(Wu et al., 2019) etc., cannot operate directly on such images due to computational and memory requirements. To
address this issue, a common practice is to downsample the
original image before passing it to the network. However,
1

Idiap Research Institute, Martigny, Switzerland 2 EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Angelos Katharopoulos
<firstname.lastname@idiap.ch>.
th

Proceedings of the 36 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

(b)

(a)

(c)

Figure 1: Common practice to process megapixel images
with CNNs is to downsample them, however this results in
significant loss of information (b, c).
this leads to loss of significant information possibly critical
for certain tasks.
Another research direction seeks to mitigate this problem by
splitting the original high resolution image into patches and
processing them separately (Hou et al., 2016; Golatkar et al.,
2018; Nazeri et al., 2018). Naturally, these methods either
waste computational resources on uninformative patches or
require ground truth annotations for each patch. However,
per patch labels are typically expensive to acquire and are
not available for the majority of the available datasets.
The aforementioned limitations are addressed by two disjoint lines of work: the recurrent visual attention models
(Mnih et al., 2014; Ba et al., 2014) and the attention based
multiple instance learning (Ilse et al., 2018). The first seeks
to limit the wasteful computations by only processing some
parts of the full image. However, these models result in
hard optimization problems that limit their applicability to
high resolution images. The second line of work shows
that regions of interest can be identified without explicit
patch annotations by aggregating per patch features with an
attention mechanism. Nevertheless, such methods do not
address the computational and memory issues inherent in
all patch based models.
This work aims at combining the benefits of both. Towards
this goal, we propose an end-to-end trainable model able to
handle multi-megapixel images using a single GPU or CPU.
In particular, we sample locations of “informative patches”

