Overcoming Multi-model Forgetting

Yassine Benyahia * † 1 Kaicheng Yu * 2 Kamil Bennani-Smires 3 Martin Jaggi 4 Anthony Davison 1
Mathieu Salzmann 2 Claudiu Musat 3

Abstract
We identify a phenomenon, which we refer to
as multi-model forgetting, that occurs when sequentially training multiple deep networks with
partially-shared parameters; the performance of
previously-trained models degrades as one optimizes a subsequent one, due to the overwriting
of shared parameters. To overcome this, we introduce a statistically-justified weight plasticity loss
that regularizes the learning of a model’s shared
parameters according to their importance for the
previous models, and demonstrate its effectiveness when training two models sequentially and
for neural architecture search. Adding weight
plasticity in neural architecture search preserves
the best models to the end of the search and yields
improved results in both natural language processing and computer vision tasks.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have been very successful for tasks
such as visual recognition (Xie & Yuille, 2017) and natural language processing (Young et al., 2017), and much
recent work has addressed the training of models that can
generalize across multiple tasks (Caruana, 1997). In this
context, when the tasks become available sequentially, a
major challenge is catastrophic forgetting: when a model
initially trained on task A is later trained on task B, its
performance on task A can decline calamitously. Several recent articles have addressed this problem (Kirkpatrick et al.,
2017; Rusu et al., 2016; He & Jaeger, 2017; Li & Hoiem,
2016). In particular, Kirkpatrick et al. (2017) show how
to overcome catastrophic forgetting by approximating the
*
Equal contribution,† Work done while being at Swisscom Digital Lab; 1 Institute of Mathematics, EPFL; 2 Computer Vision
Lab, EPFL; 3 Artificial Intelligence Lab, Swisscom; 4 Machine
Learning and Optimization lab, EPFL. Correspondence to: Yassine Benyahia <yassine.benyahia1@gmail.com>, Kaicheng Yu
<kaicheng.yu@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

posterior probability, p(θ | D1 , D2 ), with θ the network
parameters and D1 , D2 datasets representing the tasks.
In many situations one does not train a single model for
multiple tasks but multiple models for a single task. This
is the scenario we tackle in this paper. When dealing with
many large models, a common strategy to keep training
tractable is to share a subset of the weights across the multiple models and to train them sequentially (Pham et al.,
2018; Xie & Yuille, 2017; Liu et al., 2018a). This strategy
has a major drawback. Figure 1 shows that for two models, A and B, the larger the number of shared weights, the
more the accuracy of A drops when training B; B overwrites
some of the weights of A and this damages the performance
of A. We call this multi-model forgetting. The benefits of
weight-sharing have been emphasized in tasks like neural
architecture search, where the associated speed gains have
been key in making the process practical (Pham et al., 2018;
Liu et al., 2018b), but its downsides remain unexplored.
In this paper we introduce an approach to overcoming
multi-model forgetting. Given a dataset D, we first consider two models f1 (D; θ1 , θs ) and f2 (D; θ2 , θs ) with
shared weights θs and private weights θ1 and θ2 . We
formulate learning as the maximization of the posterior
p(θ1 , θ2 , θs |D). Under mild assumptions we show that this
posterior can be approximated and expressed using a loss,
dubbed Weight Plasticity Loss (WPL), that minimizes multimodel forgetting. Our framework evaluates the importance
of each weight, conditioned on the previously-trained model,
and encourages the update of each shared weight to be inversely proportional to its importance. We then show that
our approach extends to more than two models by exploiting
it for neural architecture search.
Our work is the first to propose a solution to multi-model
forgetting. We establish the merits of our approach when
training two models with partially shared weights and in the
context of neural architecture search. For the former, we
establish the effectiveness of WPL in the strict convergence
case, where each model is trained until convergence, and in
the more realistic loose convergence setting, where training
is stopped early. WPL can reduce the forgetting effect by
99% when model A converges fully, and by 52% in the
loose convergence case.

