Ithemal: Accurate, Portable and Fast Basic Block Throughput Estimation
using Deep Neural Networks

Charith Mendis 1 Alex Renda 1 Saman Amarasinghe 1 Michael Carbin 1

Abstract
Predicting the number of clock cycles a processor
takes to execute a block of assembly instructions
in steady state (the throughput) is important for
both compiler designers and performance engineers. Building an analytical model to do so is
especially complicated in modern x86-64 Complex Instruction Set Computer (CISC) machines
with sophisticated processor microarchitectures
in that it is tedious, error prone, and must be performed from scratch for each processor generation. In this paper we present Ithemal, the first
tool which learns to predict the throughput of
a set of instructions. Ithemal uses a hierarchical LSTM–based approach to predict throughput
based on the opcodes and operands of instructions
in a basic block. We show that Ithemal is more
accurate than state-of-the-art hand-written tools
currently used in compiler backends and static machine code analyzers. In particular, our model has
less than half the error of state-of-the-art analytical models (LLVM’s llvm-mca and Intel’s IACA).
Ithemal is also able to predict these throughput
values just as fast as the aforementioned tools,
and is easily ported across a variety of processor
microarchitectures with minimal developer effort.

1

Introduction

The throughput of a sequence of instructions—the number processor clock cycles taken to execute the sequence
when looped in steady state—determines how fast those
instructions can process data. Accurately predicting the
throughput of a basic block1 is an essential requirement
in many systems, to be able to predict and optimize runtime performance. For instance, constraint–based register
1
MIT CSAIL. Correspondence to:
<charithm@mit.edu>.

Charith Mendis

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).
1
In this work, we focus specifically on basic blocks, sequences
of instructions with no branches or jumps.

allocation and instruction scheduling (Lozano et al., 2012)
relies on accurate throughput estimations, as do learning–
based techniques like genetic algorithm based register allocation (Stephenson et al., 2003) and reinforcement learning
based instruction scheduling (McGovern & Moss, 1999).
The alternative – measuring throughput on demand by executing the basic block – is too expensive for most compilers
and learning–based solutions. In practice, most systems
employ analytical models to predict throughput. For instance, the LLVM compiler team (Lattner & Adve, 2004)
recently merged2 a command-line tool, llvm-mca (Di Biagio & Davis, 2018), that exposes a machine model for
throughput estimation. Intel has also released a closedsource machine code analyzer, IACA (Intel, 2017), which
relies on internal knowledge of Intel’s processor design.
These models are typically an order of magnitude faster
than measuring a basic block’s throughput. However, manually writing an accurate and complete model is tedious,
error-prone, and exceedingly difficult without knowledge of
the exact mechanisms of the processor.
In the hunt for accuracy, developers build complicated models which must make significant tradeoffs with the model’s
portability and speed.
Accuracy. Modern x86-64 Complex Instruction Set Computer (CISC) processors contain many hardware optimizations that significantly complicate building accurate analytical models. In order to implement an instruction set architecture (ISA) like x86-64, processors actually implement
an underlying microarchitecture, a physical implementation
of the ISA specification. Processors translate instructions
from the ISA to instructions in the latent microarchitectural
language (termed micro-ops), then execute those micro-ops.
The micro-ops may undergo optimizations such as micro-op
fusion, in which micro-ops of different instructions may be
combined together; out-of-order execution, in which instructions can be executed in any semantics–preserving order;
register renaming, where false dependencies can be broken
to enable more parallel execution; and many more vendorspecific optimizations. This makes the prediction problem
highly complex and non-linear.
2

lists.llvm.org/pipermail/llvm-dev/2018-March/121490.html

