Cognitive Model Priors for Predicting Human Decisions

David D. Bourgin * 1 Joshua C. Peterson * 2 Daniel Reichman 2 Stuart J. Russell 1 Thomas L. Griffiths 2

Abstract
Human decision-making underlies all economic
behavior. For the past four decades, human
decision-making under uncertainty has continued
to be explained by theoretical models based on
prospect theory, a framework that was awarded
the Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences. However,
theoretical models of this kind have developed
slowly, and robust, high-precision predictive models of human decisions remain a challenge. While
machine learning is a natural candidate for solving these problems, it is currently unclear to what
extent it can improve predictions obtained by current theories. We argue that this is mainly due
to data scarcity, since noisy human behavior requires massive sample sizes to be accurately captured by off-the-shelf machine learning methods.
To solve this problem, what is needed are machine learning models with appropriate inductive
biases for capturing human behavior, and larger
datasets. We offer two contributions towards this
end: first, we construct “cognitive model priors”
by pretraining neural networks with synthetic data
generated by cognitive models (i.e., theoretical
models developed by cognitive psychologists).
We find that fine-tuning these networks on small
datasets of real human decisions results in unprecedented state-of-the-art improvements on two
benchmark datasets. Second, we present the first
large-scale dataset for human decision-making,
containing over 240,000 human judgments across
over 13,000 decision problems. This dataset reveals the circumstances where cognitive model
priors are useful, and provides a new standard
for benchmarking prediction of human decisions
under uncertainty.
*
Equal contribution 1 University of California, Berkeley
Princeton University. Correspondence to: David D. Bourgin <ddbourgin@gmail.com>, Joshua C. Peterson <peterson.c.joshua@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Which gamble would you rather take: a 50/50 chance of
winning/losing $100, or a 100% chance of $0? Although
both gambles have equal expected value (payoff), the majority of people systematically prefer the second (Kahneman
& Tversky, 1979). Predicting the choices that people make
in such situations is of central importance in economics
and relevant to understanding consumer behavior. As suggested above, a recurring empirical finding is that people
reliably deviate from optimal decision-making under various conditions. Extensive research has sought to understand
these deviations and the conditions that elicit them (Edwards
1954; Baron 2000; Gilovich et al. 2002, to name just a few).
A prime example is prospect theory, devised by Kahneman
& Tversky (1979), and a key part of Kahneman’s receipt of
the Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences. Constructing models
of choice behavior based on prospect theory and its descendants (e.g., Tversky & Kahneman 1992; Erev et al. 2017)
remains an active research area in behavioral economics and
cognitive psychology. Good predictive models of human
choice also arise in AI applications as they can be used to
build artificial agents that are better aligned with human
preferences (Rosenfeld & Kraus, 2018; Russell & Norvig,
2016; Chajewska et al., 2001).
Despite these efforts, we are still far from accurate and
robust models of how people make decisions. Theoretical
explanations for deviations from maximizing expected value
are often contradictory, making it difficult to come up with
a single framework that explains the plethora of empirically
observed deviations such as loss aversion, the St. Petersburg
paradox, and many others (Erev et al., 2017). This state
of affairs has motivated several recent choice prediction
competitions (Erev et al., 2010; 2017; Plonsky et al., 2019)
in an attempt to achieve better predictive models of human
decisions.
One approach towards improving prediction has been to
leverage machine learning (ML) (Rosenfeld & Kraus, 2018;
Plonsky et al., 2017; Noti et al., 2017; Plonsky et al., 2019).
However, data scarcity has remained the key limiting factor in leveraging ML to predict human decisions. Cognitive models of human decision-making (e.g., prospect theory) are typically developed by behavioral scientists using
datasets consisting of hundreds or fewer data points. Such

