AUTOVC: Zero-Shot Voice Style Transfer with Only Autoencoder Loss

Kaizhi Qian * 1 Yang Zhang * 2 3 Shiyu Chang 2 3 Xuesong Yang 1 Mark Hasegawa-Johnson 1

Abstract
Non-parallel many-to-many voice conversion, as
well as zero-shot voice conversion, remain underexplored areas. Deep style transfer algorithms,
such as generative adversarial networks (GAN)
and conditional variational autoencoder (CVAE),
are being applied as new solutions in this field.
However, GAN training is sophisticated and difficult, and there is no strong evidence that its generated speech is of good perceptual quality. On
the other hand, CVAE training is simple but does
not come with the distribution-matching property
of a GAN. In this paper, we propose a new style
transfer scheme that involves only an autoencoder
with a carefully designed bottleneck. We formally
show that this scheme can achieve distributionmatching style transfer by training only on a selfreconstruction loss. Based on this scheme, we
proposed AUTOVC, which achieves state-of-theart results in many-to-many voice conversion with
non-parallel data, and which is the first to perform
zero-shot voice conversion.

1. Introduction
The idea of speaking in someone else’s voice never fails
to be a fascinating element in action and fiction movies,
and it also finds its way to many practical applications, e.g.
privacy and identity protection, creative industry etc. In
the speech research community, this task is referred to as
the voice conversion problem, which involves modifying
a given speech from a source speaker to match the vocal
qualities of a target speaker.
Despite the continuing research efforts in voice conversion,
three problems remain under-explored. First, most voice
conversion systems assume the availability of parallel train*
Equal contribution 1 University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, IL, USA 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, Cambridge, MA,
USA 3 IBM Research, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to:
Kaizhi Qian <kqian3@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

ing data, i.e. speech pairs where the two speakers utter the
same sentences. Only a few can be trained on non-parallel
data. Second, among the few existing algorithms that work
on non-parallel data, even fewer can work for many-to-many
conversion, i.e. converting from multiple source speakers to
multiple target speakers. Last but not least, no voice conversion systems are able to perform zero-shot conversion, i.e.
conversion to the voice of an unseen speaker by looking at
only a few of his/her utterances.
With the recent advances in deep style transfer, the traditional voice conversion problem is being recast as a style
transfer problem, where the vocal qualities can be regarded
as styles, and speakers as domains. There are many style
transfer algorithms that do not require parallel data, and are
applicable to multiple domains, so they are readily available
as new solutions to voice conversion. In particular, generative adversarial network (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014)
and conditional variational autoencoder (CVAE) (Kingma &
Welling, 2013; Kingma et al., 2014), are gaining popularity
in voice conversion.
However, neither GAN nor CVAE is perfect. GAN comes
with a nice theoretical justification that the generated data
would match the distribution of the true data, and has
achieved state-of-the-art results, particularly in computer
vision. However, it is widely acknowledged that GAN is
very hard to train, and its convergence property is fragile.
Also, although there is an increasing number of works that
introduce GAN to speech generation (Donahue et al., 2018)
and speech domain transfer (Pascual et al., 2017; Subakan &
Smaragdis, 2018; Fan et al., 2018; Hosseini-Asl et al., 2018),
there is no strong evidence that the generated speech sounds
real. Speech that is able to fool the discriminators has yet
to fool human ears. On the other hand, CVAE is easier to
train. All it needs to do is to perform self-reconstruction and
maximize a variational lower bound of the output probability. The intuition is to infer a hypothetical style-independent
hidden variable, which is then combined with the new style
information to generate the style-transferred output. However, CVAE alone does not guarantee distribution matching,
and often suffers from over-smoothing of the conversion
output (Kameoka et al., 2018b).
Due to the lack of a suitable style transfer algorithm, existing
voice conversion systems have yet to produce satisfactory

