Rotation Invariant Householder Parameterization for Bayesian PCA

Rajbir S. Nirwan 1 Nils Bertschinger 1 2

Abstract
We consider probabilistic PCA and related factor models from a Bayesian perspective. These
models are in general not identifiable as the likelihood has a rotational symmetry. This gives rise
to complicated posterior distributions with continuous subspaces of equal density and thus hinders
efficiency of inference as well as interpretation
of obtained parameters. In particular, posterior
averages over factor loadings become meaningless and only model predictions are unambiguous. Here, we propose a parameterization based
on Householder transformations, which remove
the rotational symmetry of the posterior. Furthermore, by relying on results from random matrix
theory, we establish the parameter distribution
which leaves the model unchanged compared to
the original rotationally symmetric formulation.
In particular, we avoid the need to compute the
Jacobian determinant of the parameter transformation. This allows us to efficiently implement
probabilistic PCA in a rotation invariant fashion
in any state of the art toolbox. Here, we implemented our model in the probabilistic programming language Stan and illustrate it on several
examples.

1. Introduction
Modern algorithms and computational tools have vastly
expanded the scope of Bayesian modeling over the last
decades. In particular, Hamiltonian Monte-Carlo (HMC)
sampling (see Betancourt (2017) for a thorough introduction) and variational inference (Bishop, 2006) allow to approximate high-dimensional posterior distributions. In addition, software tools such as probabilistic programming
1

Department of Computer Science, Goethe University,
Frankfurt, Germany 2 Frankfurt Institute for Advanced Studies, Frankfurt, Germany.
Correspondence to: Rajbir S.
Nirwan <nirwan@fias.uni-frankfurt.de>, Nils Bertschinger
<bertschinger@fias.uni-frankfurt.de>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

languages, e.g. Stan (Carpenter et al., 2017), or libraries
for automatic differentiation, e.g. Tensorflow (Abadi et al.,
2015), simplify the implementation. Thanks to these advances, researchers can focus on the statistical modeling as
model implementation often requires just a few lines of code.
Nevertheless, some models remain challenging. Well known
examples include Probabilistic PCA (PPCA) and related
factor models which are widely used in exploratory and confirmatory data analysis. These models are non-identifiable,
which poses major problems when fitted parameters, e.g.
factor loadings, are being interpreted. In this context, the
non-identifiability arises from a rotational symmetry of the
likelihood model. While identification can be restored by
imposing constraints on the factor loadings (Jöreskog, 1969;
Peeters, 2012), maximum likelihood estimation can be biased by the imposed constraints (Millsap, 2001).
Here, we consider PPCA from a Bayesian perspective. In
this context, the rotational symmetry gives rise to a complicated posterior with continuous subspaces of equal density.
Continuous symmetries can severely reduce sampling efficiency as many samples are required in order to explore
the corresponding subspaces. Furthermore, interpretation
of the sampled parameters becomes impossible as marginal
posterior averages are meaningless when many different
parameter combinations give rise to the same likelihood.
This is akin to the discrete label switching symmetry observed in mixture models. In this case, the parameters of the
individual mixture components cannot be averaged as the
arbitrary component labels between different samples could
be switched. Thus, a major advantage of Bayesian modeling, namely the ability to access estimation uncertainty,
cannot be utilized as posterior means and variances not just
reflect variation within, but also between components.
Therefore, it is desirable to remove the rotational symmetry
of PPCA. Formally, the symmetry arises due to the choice
of coordinate system for the principal components being
arbitrary. In particular, a rotation of the coordinate axes
leaves the model likelihood unchanged. Mathematically,
the rotation symmetry is made explicit by formulating the
model in terms of an orthogonal matrix (transforming into
a fixed coordinate system) and a diagonal matrix containing the explained variances. To this end, we employ the
singular value decomposition (SVD) and parameterize the
Stiefel manifold of orthogonal matrices in terms of non-

