Near optimal finite time identification of arbitrary linear dynamical systems
Tuhin Sarkar 1 Alexander Rakhlin 2

Abstract
We derive finite time error bounds for estimating
general linear time-invariant (LTI) systems from
a single observed trajectory using the method of
least squares. We provide the first analysis of the
general case when eigenvalues of the LTI system
are arbitrarily distributed in three regimes: stable,
marginally stable, and explosive. Our analysis
yields sharp upper bounds for each of these cases
separately. We observe that although the underlying process behaves quite differently in each of
these three regimes, the systematic analysis of a
self–normalized martingale difference term helps
bound identification error up to logarithmic factors of the lower bound. On the other hand, we
demonstrate that the least squares solution may be
statistically inconsistent under certain conditions
even when the signal-to-noise ratio is high.

1 Introduction
Finite time system identification—the problem of estimating the parameters of an unknown dynamical system given
a finite time series of its output—is an important problem
in the context of time-series analysis, control theory, economics and reinforcement learning. In this work we will
focus on obtaining sharp non–asymptotic bounds for linear
dynamical system identification using the ordinary least
squares (OLS) method. Such a system is described by
Xt+1 = AXt + ⌘t+1 where Xt 2 Rd is the state of the
system and ⌘t is the unobserved process noise. The goal
is to learn A by observing only Xt ’s. Our techniques can
easily be extended to the more general case when there is a
control input Ut , i.e., Xt+1 = AXt + BUt + ⌘t+1 . In this
case (A, B) are unknown, and we can choose Ut .
Linear systems are ubiquitous in control theory. For example, proportional-integral-derivative (PID) controller is a
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences,
MIT 2 Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT. Correspondence to: Tuhin Sarkar <tsarkar@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

popular linear feedback control system found in a variety
of devices, from planetary soft landing systems for rockets (see e.g. (Açıkmeşe et al., 2013)) to coffee machines.
Further, linear approximations to many non–linear systems
have been known to work well in practice. Linear systems
also appear as auto–regressive (AR) models in time series
analysis and econometrics. Despite its importance, sharp
non–asymptotic characterization of identification error in
such models was relatively unknown until recently.
In the statistics literature, correlated data is often dealt with
using mixing–time arguments (see e.g. (Yu, 1994)). However, a fundamental limitation of the mixing-time method is
that bounds deteriorate when the underlying process mixes
slowly. For discrete linear systems, this happens when
⇢(A)—the spectral radius of A—approaches 1. As a result
these methods cannot extend to the case when ⇢(A)
1.
More recently there has been renewed effort in obtaining
sharp non–asymptotic error bounds for linear system identification (Faradonbeh et al., 2017; Simchowitz et al., 2018).
Specifically, (Faradonbeh et al., 2017) analyzed the case
when the system is either stable (⇢(A) < 1) or purely explosive (⇢(A) > 1). For the case when ⇢(A) < 1 the
techniques in (Faradonbeh et al., 2017) are similar to the
standard mixing time arguments and, as a result, suffer from
the same limitations. When the system is purely explosive, the authors of (Faradonbeh et al., 2017) show that
finite time identification is only possible if the system is
regular, i.e., if the geometric multiplicity of eigenvalues
greater than unity is one. However, as discussed in (Simchowitz et al., 2018), the bounds obtained in (Faradonbeh
et al., 2017) are suboptimal
PTdue to a decoupled analysis
of the sample covariance, t=1 Xt Xt0 , and the martingale
PT
0
difference term t=1 Xt ⌘t+1
. A second approach, based
on Mendelson’s small–ball method, was studied in (Simchowitz et al., 2018). Such a technique eschewed the need
for mixing-time arguments and sharper error bounds for
1 C/T  ⇢(A)  1 + C/T could be obtained. The authors in (Simchowitz et al., 2018) argue
a larger signalPT that
1
to-noise ratio, measured by min ( t=0 At At0 ), makes it
easier to estimate A. Although this intuition is consistent
for the case when ⇢(A)  1, it does not extend to the
case when
PT eigenvalues are far outside the unit circle. Since
XT = t=1 AT t ⌘t , the behavior of XT is dominated by
{⌘1 , ⌘2 , . . .}, i.e., the past, due to exponential scaling by

