Importance Sampling Policy Evaluation with an Estimated Behavior Policy

Josiah P. Hanna 1 Scott Niekum 1 Peter Stone 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of off-policy evaluation
in Markov decision processes. Off-policy evaluation is the task of evaluating the expected return
of one policy with data generated by a different,
behavior policy. Importance sampling is a technique for off-policy evaluation that re-weights
off-policy returns to account for differences in the
likelihood of the returns between the two policies.
In this paper, we study importance sampling with
an estimated behavior policy where the behavior
policy estimate comes from the same set of data
used to compute the importance sampling estimate. We find that this estimator often lowers
the mean squared error of off-policy evaluation
compared to importance sampling with the true
behavior policy or using a behavior policy that
is estimated from a separate data set. Intuitively,
estimating the behavior policy in this way corrects for error due to sampling in the action-space.
Our empirical results also extend to other popular
variants of importance sampling and show that
estimating a non-Markovian behavior policy can
further lower large-sample mean squared error
even when the true behavior policy is Markovian.

1. Introduction
Sequential decision-making tasks, such as a robot manipulating objects or an autonomous vehicle deciding when to
change lanes, are ubiquitous in artificial intelligence. For
these tasks, reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms provide a promising alternative to hand-coded skills, allowing
sequential decision-making agents to acquire policies autonomously given only a reward function measuring task
performance (Sutton & Barto, 1998). When applying RL to
real world problems, an important problem that often comes
up is policy evaluation. In policy evaluation, the goal is to
1
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, USA. Correspondence to: Josiah P. Hanna <jphanna@cs.utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

determine the expected return – sum of rewards – that an
evaluation policy, πe , will obtain when deployed on the task
of interest.
In off-policy policy evaluation, we are given data (in the
form of state-action-reward trajectories) generated by a second behavior policy, πb . We then use these trajectories to
evaluate πe . Accurate off-policy policy evaluation is especially important when we want to know the value of a
policy before it is deployed in the real world or have many
policies to evaluate and want to avoid running each one
individually. Importance sampling addresses this problem
by re-weighting returns generated by πb such that they are
unbiased estimates of πe (Precup et al., 2000). While the
basic importance sampling estimator is often noted in the literature to suffer from high variance, more recent importance
sampling estimators have lowered this variance (Thomas &
Brunskill, 2016; Jiang & Li, 2016). Regardless of additional
variance reduction techniques, all importance sampling vari(a|s)
ants compute the likelihood ratio ππeb (a|s)
for all state-action
pairs in the off-policy data.
In this paper, we propose to replace πb (a|s) with its empirical estimate – that is, we replace the probability of sampling
an action in a particular state with the frequency at which
that action actually occurred in that state in the data. It is
natural to assume that such an estimator will yield worse
performance since it replaces a known quantity with an
estimated quantity. However, research in the multi-armed
bandit (Li et al., 2015; Narita et al., 2019), causal inference
(Hirano et al., 2003; Rosenbaum, 1987), and Monte Carlo
integration (Henmi et al., 2007; Delyon & Portier, 2016) literature has demonstrated that estimating the behavior policy
can improve the mean squared error of importance sampling
policy evaluation. Motivated by these results, we study the
performance of such methods for policy evaluation in full
Markov decision processes.
Specifically, we study a family of estimators that, given a
dataset, D, of trajectories, use D both to estimate the behavior policy and then to compute the importance sampling estimate. Though related to methods in the statistics literature,
the so-called regression importance sampling methods are
specific to Markov decision processes where actions taken
at one time-step influence the states and rewards at future
time-steps. We show empirically that regression importance

