Bayesian Optimization Meets Bayesian Optimal Stopping
Zhongxiang Dai 1 Haibin Yu 1 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low 1 Patrick Jaillet 2

Abstract
Bayesian optimization (BO) is a popular paradigm
for optimizing the hyperparameters of machine
learning (ML) models due to its sample efficiency.
Many ML models require running an iterative
training procedure (e.g., stochastic gradient descent). This motivates the question whether information available during the training process
(e.g., validation accuracy after each epoch) can be
exploited for improving the epoch efficiency of
BO algorithms by early-stopping model training
under hyperparameter settings that will end up
under-performing and hence eliminating unnecessary training epochs. This paper proposes to unify
BO (specifically, Gaussian process-upper confidence bound (GP-UCB)) with Bayesian optimal
stopping (BO-BOS) to boost the epoch efficiency
of BO. To achieve this, while GP-UCB is sampleefficient in the number of function evaluations,
BOS complements it with epoch efficiency for
each function evaluation by providing a principled
optimal stopping mechanism for early stopping.
BO-BOS preserves the (asymptotic) no-regret performance of GP-UCB using our specified choice
of BOS parameters that is amenable to an elegant interpretation in terms of the explorationexploitation trade-off. We empirically evaluate
the performance of BO-BOS and demonstrate its
generality in hyperparameter optimization of ML
models and two other interesting applications.

1. Introduction
The state-of-the-art machine learning (ML) models have
recently reached an unprecedented level of predictive performance in several applications such as image recognition,
complex board games, among others (LeCun et al., 2015;
1

Department of Computer Science, National University of
Singapore, Republic of Singapore. 2 Department of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, USA. Correspondence to: Bryan Kian Hsiang Low
<lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Silver et al., 2016). However, a major difficulty faced by ML
practitioners is the choice of model hyperparameters which
significantly impacts the predictive performance. This calls
for the need to develop hyperparameter optimization algorithms that have to be sample-efficient since the training
of many modern ML models consumes massive computational resources. To this end, Bayesian optimization (BO)
is a popular paradigm due to its high sample efficiency and
strong theoretical performance guarantee (Shahriari et al.,
2016). In particular, the BO algorithm based on the Gaussian process-upper confidence bound (GP-UCB) acquisition
function has been shown to achieve no regret asymptotically
and perform competitively in practice (Srinivas et al., 2010).
Many ML models require running an iterative training procedure for some number of epochs such as stochastic gradient
descent for neural networks (LeCun et al., 2015) and boosting procedure for gradient boosting machines (Friedman,
2001). During BO, any query of a hyperparameter setting
usually involves training the ML model for a fixed number of
epochs. Information typically available during the training
process (e.g., validation accuracy after each epoch) is rarely
exploited for improving the epoch efficiency of BO algorithms, specifically, by early-stopping model training under
hyperparameter settings that will end up under-performing,
hence eliminating unnecessary training epochs. Note that
this objective is different from that of standard early stopping during the training of neural networks, which is used
to prevent overfitting.
To address this challenging issue, a number of works have
been proposed to make BO more epoch-efficient: Freezethaw BO (Swersky et al., 2014) explores a diverse collection
of hyperparameter settings in the initial stage by training
their ML models with a small number of epochs, and then
gradually focuses on (exploits) a small number of promising
settings. Despite its promising epoch efficiency, its performance is not theoretically guaranteed and its computational
cost can be excessive. Multi-fidelity BO1 (Kandasamy et al.,
2016; 2017), as well as its extensions using predictive entropy search (Zhang et al., 2017) and value of information
for fidelity selection (Wu & Frazier, 2017), reduces the
resource consumption of BO by utilizing low-fidelity func1

A closely related counterpart is multi-fidelity active learning (Zhang et al., 2016).

