Rates of Convergence for Sparse Variational Gaussian Process Regression

David R. Burt 1 Carl Edward Rasmussen 1 2 Mark van der Wilk 2

Abstract
Excellent variational approximations to Gaussian
process posteriors
 have been developed which
avoid the O N 3 scaling with dataset size N .
They reduce the computational cost to O N M 2 ,
with M  N the number of inducing variables,
which summarise the process. While the computational cost seems to be linear in N , the true
complexity of the algorithm depends on how M
must increase to ensure a certain quality of approximation. We show that with high probability
the KL divergence can be made arbitrarily small
by growing M more slowly than N . A particular case is that for regression with normally distributed inputs in D-dimensions with the Squared
Exponential kernel, M = O(logD N ) suffices.
Our results show that as datasets grow, Gaussian
process posteriors can be approximated cheaply,
and provide a concrete rule for how to increase
M in continual learning scenarios.

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes (GPs) [Rasmussen & Williams, 2006]
are distributions over functions that are convenient priors
in Bayesian models. They can be seen as infinitely wide
neural networks [Neal, 1996], and are particularly popular
in regression models, as they produce good uncertainty estimates, and have closed-form expressions for the posterior
and marginal likelihood. The most well known drawback
of GP regression is the computational cost of the exact

calculation of these
quantities, which scales as O N 3 in

time and O N 2 in memory where N is the number of
training examples. Low-rank approximations [Quiñonero
Candela & Rasmussen, 2005] choose M inducing variables
which summarise
the cost to
 the entire posterior, reducing

O N M 2 + M 3 time and O N M + M 2 memory.
1

University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 2 PROWLER.io,
Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to:
David R. Burt
<drb62@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

While the computational cost of adding inducing variables is
well understood, results on how many are needed to achieve
a good approximation are lacking. As the dataset size increases, we cannot expect to keep the capacity of the approximation constant without the quality deteriorating. Taking
into account the rate at which M must increase with N to
achieve a particular approximation accuracy, as well as the
cost of initializing or optimizing the inducing points, determines a more realistic sense of the costs of scaling Gaussian
processes.
Approximate GPs are often trained using variational inference [Titsias, 2009], which minimizes the KL divergence
from an approximate posterior to the full posterior process
[Matthews et al., 2016]. We use this KL divergence as our
metric for the approximate posterior’s quality. We show
that under intuitive assumptions the number of inducing
variables only needs to grow at a sublinear rate for the KL
between the approximation and the posterior to go to zero.
This shows that very sparse approximations can be used for
large datasets, without introducing much bias into hyperparameter selection through evidence lower bound (ELBO)
maximisation, and with approximate posteriors that are accurate in terms of their prediction and uncertainty.
The core idea of our proof is to use upper bounds on the
KL divergence that depend on the quality of a Nyström
approximation to the data covariance matrix. Using existing
results, we show this error can be understood in terms of
the spectrum of an infinite-dimensional integral operator. In
the case of stationary kernels, our main result proves that
priors with smoother sample functions, and datasets with
more concentrated inputs admit sparser approximations.
Main results We assume that training inputs are drawn
i.i.d. from a fixed distribution, and prove bounds of the form






g(M, N )
ckyk22
KL QkP̂ ≤ O
1
+
+
N

σn2 δ
σn2
with probability at least 1 − δ, where P̂ is the posterior
Gaussian process, Q is a variational approximation, and y
are the training targets. The function g(M, N ) depends on
both the kernel and input distribution, and grows linearly in
N and generally decays rapidly in M . The quality of the
initialization determines , which can be made arbitrarily
small (e.g. an inverse power of N ) at some additional com-

