Acceleration of SVRG and Katyusha X by Inexact Preconditioning

Yanli Liu 1 Fei Feng 1 Wotao Yin 1

Abstract
Empirical risk minimization is an important class
of optimization problems with many popular machine learning applications, and stochastic variance reduction methods are popular choices for
solving them. Among these methods, SVRG
and Katyusha X (a Nesterov accelerated SVRG)
achieve fast convergence without substantial
memory requirement. In this paper, we propose
to accelerate these two algorithms by inexact preconditioning, the proposed methods employ fixed
preconditioners, although the subproblem in each
epoch becomes harder, it suffices to apply fixed
number of simple subroutines to solve it inexactly,
without losing the overall convergence. As a result, this inexact preconditioning strategy gives
provably better iteration complexity and gradient
complexity over SVRG and Katyusha X. We also
allow each function in the finite sum to be nonconvex while the sum is strongly convex. In our
numerical experiments, we observe an on average
8× speedup on the number of iterations and 7×
speedup on runtime.

1. Introduction
Empirical risk minimization is an important class of optimization problems that has many applications in machine
learning, especially in the large-scale setting. In this paper, we formulate it as the minimization of the following
objective
n

F (x) = f (x) + ψ(x) =

1X
fi (x) + ψ(x),
n i=1

(1.1)

where the finite sum f (x) is strongly convex, each fi (x) in
the finite sum is smooth1 and can be nonconvex, and the
1

Department of Mathematics, University of California, Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Yanli Liu
<yanli@math.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

regularizer ψ(x) is proper, closed, and convex, but may be
nonsmooth. A nonzero ψ(x) is desirable in many applications, for example, `1 − regularization that induces sparsity
in the solution. Allowing fi to be nonconvex is also necessary in some applications, e.g., shift-and-invert approach to
solve PCA (Saad, 1992).
1.1. Related Work
To obtain a high quality approximate solution x̂ of (1.1),
stochastic variance reduction algorithms are a class of preferable choices in the large scale setting where n is huge. If
each fi is σ−strongly convex and L−smooth, and ψ = 0,
then SVRG (Johnson & Zhang, 2013), SAGA (Defazio et al.,
2014a), SAG (Roux et al., 2012), SARAH (Nguyen et al.,
2017), SDCA (Shalev-Shwartz & Zhang, 2013), SDCA
without duality (Shalev-Shwartz, 2016), and Finito/MISO
(Defazio et al., 2014b; Mairal, 2013) can find such a x̂
1
within O (n + L
σ ) ln( ε ) evaluations of component gradi1
ents ∇fi , while vanilla gradient descent needs O(n L
σ ln ε )
evaluations. Recently, SCSG improves this complexity to
L
1 2
O (n ∧ σε
+L
σ ) ln ε . When ψ 6= 0, many of these algorithms can be extended accordingly and the same gradient
complexity is preserved (Xiao & Zhang, 2014; Defazio et al.,
2014a; Shalev-Shwartz & Zhang, 2016). Among these methods, SVRG has been a popular choice due to its low memory
cost.
When the condition number L
σ is large, the performances of
these variance reduction methods may degenerate considerably. In view of this, there have been many schemes that
incorporate second-order information into the variance reduction schemes. In (Gonen et al., 2016), the problem data
is first transformed by linear sketching in order to decrease
the condition number, then SVRG is applied. However,
the strategy is only proposed for ridge regression and it is
unclear whether it can be applied to other problems.
A larger family of algorithms, called Stochastic QuasiNewton (SQN) methods, apply to more general settings.
The idea is to first sample one or a few Hessian-vector
products, then perform a L-BFGS type update on the approximate Hessian inverse Hk (Byrd et al., 2016; Moritz
1

A function f is said to be smooth if its gradient ∇f is Lipschitz continuous.
2
a ∧ b := min{a, b}.

