Almost surely constrained convex optimization

Olivier Fercoq 1 Ahmet Alacaoglu 2 Ion Necoara 3 Volkan Cevher 2

Abstract

We seek to satisfy the stochastic linear inclusion constraints
in (1) almost surely. Note that this goal is different from
satisfying constraints in expectation, which is studied e.g.
in (Lan and Zhou, 2016). We argue that this change is also
what sets (1) apart from the standard stochastic setting in the
literature. Indeed, we assume that A(ξ) ∈ Rm×d is a matrixvalued random variable and b(ξ) ⊆ Rm is a random convex
set. For the special case when A(ξ) is an identity matrix,
(1) recovers optimization problems where the constraint set
is the intersection of a possibly infinite number of sets.

We propose a stochastic gradient framework for
solving stochastic composite convex optimization problems with (possibly) infinite number of
linear inclusion constraints that need to be satisfied almost surely. We use smoothing and homotopy techniques to handle constraints without the
need for matrix-valued projections. We show√for
our stochastic gradient algorithm O(log(k)/ k)
convergence rate for general convex objectives
and O(log(k)/k) convergence rate for restricted
strongly convex objectives. These rates are known
to be optimal up to logarithmic factor, even without constraints. We conduct numerical experiments on basis pursuit, hard margin support vector machines and portfolio optimization problems
and show that our algorithm achieves state-of-theart practical performance.

Applications of almost surely constrained problems arise in
many fields, such as machine learning, operations research,
and mathematical finance. Interesting cases include semiinfinite linear programming, sparse regression, portfolio
optimization, classification, distributed optimization and
streaming settings, and consensus optimization problems
in standard constrained optimization where the access to
full data is not possible (Sonnenburg et al., 2006; Abdelaziz
et al., 2007; Nedić et al., 2018; Towfic and Sayed, 2015).

1. Introduction
In many machine learning applications, optimization problems involve stochasticity in objective functions or constraint sets. Even though the problems with stochastic objective functions are well-studied in the literature, investigation of stochastic constraints seems to be rather scarce.
In particular, we focus on the following stochastic convex
optimization template:
min {P (x) := F (x) + h(x)}

x∈Rd

(1)

A(ξ)x ∈ b(ξ) ξ-almost surely,
where F (x) = Eξ [f (x, ξ)], with a convex and smooth
f (·, ξ) : Rd → R such that E [∇f (x, ξ)] = ∇F (x); and
h : Rd → R ∪ {+∞} is a nonsmooth, proximable convex
function. Moreover, b(ξ) are projectable closed convex sets.
1

LTCI, Télécom ParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay 2 Laboratory
for Information and Inference Systems, École Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne 3 Department of Automatic Control and Systems Engineering, University Politehnica Bucharest. Correspondence to: Olivier Fercoq <olivier.fercoq@telecom-paristech.fr>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Particular instances of (1) involve primal support vector machines (SVM) classification and sparse regression which are
central in machine learning (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2011;
Garrigues and Ghaoui, 2009). Due to the huge volume of
data that is used for these applications, storing or processing
this data at once is in general not possible. Therefore, using
these data points one by one or in mini batches in learning
algorithms is becoming more important. One direction that
the literature focused so far is solving unconstrained formulations of these problems, successes of which are amenable
to regularization parameters that needs to be tuned. By presenting a method capable of solving (1) directly, we present
a parameter-free approach for solving these problems.
The most popular method for solving constrained stochastic
optimization problems is projected stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Nemirovski et al., 2009). However, in the case
where we have infinite number of constraints, it is not clear
how to apply the projection step. To remedy this issue, many
methods utilize alternating projections to tackle stochastic
constraints by viewing them as an intersection of possibly
infinite sets (Patrascu and Necoara, 2017) (see Section 5
for a detailed discussion). For the special case when A(ξ)
is a vector-valued random variable, or identity matrix, projection methods are efficient. However, in the general case,

