Learning Optimal Fair Policies

Razieh Nabi 1 Daniel Malinsky 1 Ilya Shpitser 1

Abstract
Systematic discriminatory biases present in our
society influence the way data is collected and
stored, the way variables are defined, and the way
scientific findings are put into practice as policy.
Automated decision procedures and learning algorithms applied to such data may serve to perpetuate existing injustice or unfairness in our society.
In this paper, we consider how to make optimal
but fair decisions, which “break the cycle of injustice” by correcting for the unfair dependence of
both decisions and outcomes on sensitive features
(e.g., variables that correspond to gender, race,
disability, or other protected attributes). We use
methods from causal inference and constrained
optimization to learn optimal policies in a way
that addresses multiple potential biases which afflict data analysis in sensitive contexts, extending
the approach of Nabi & Shpitser (2018). Our proposal comes equipped with the theoretical guarantee that the chosen fair policy will induce a joint
distribution for new instances that satisfies given
fairness constraints. We illustrate our approach
with both synthetic data and real criminal justice
data.

1. Introduction
Making optimal and adaptive intervention decisions in the
face of uncertainty is a central task in precision medicine,
computational social science, and artificial intelligence. In
healthcare, the problem of learning optimal policies is
studied under the heading of dynamic treatment regimes
(Chakraborty & Moodie, 2013). The same problem is called
reinforcement learning in artificial intelligence (Sutton &
Barto, 1998), and optimal stochastic control (Bertsekas &
Tsitsiklis, 1996) in engineering and signal processing. In all
of these cases, a policy (a function of historical data to some
1

Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA. Correspondence to: Razieh Nabi <rnabi@jhu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

space of possible actions, or a sequence of such functions)
is chosen to maximize some pre-specified outcome quantity,
which might be abstractly considered a utility (or reward in
reinforcement learning). Increasingly, ideas from optimal
policy learning are being applied in new contexts. In some
areas, particularly socially-impactful settings like criminal
justice, social welfare policy, hiring, and personal finance,
it is essential that automated decisions respect principles
of fairness since the relevant data sets include potentially
sensitive attributes (e.g., race, gender, age, disability status)
and/or features highly correlated with such attributes, so
ignoring fairness considerations may have socially unacceptable consequences. A particular worry in the context of
automated sequential decision making is “perpetuating injustice,” i.e., when maximizing utility maintains, reinforces,
or even introduces unfair dependence between sensitive
features, decisions, and outcomes. Though there has been
growing interest in the issues of fairness in machine learning (Pedreshi et al., 2008; Feldman et al., 2015; Hardt et al.,
2016; Kamiran et al., 2013; Corbett-Davies et al., 2017; Jabbari et al., 2017; Kusner et al., 2017; Zhang & Bareinboim,
2018; Mitchell & Shalden, 2018; Zhang et al., 2017), so
far methods for optimal policy learning subject to fairness
constraints have not been well-explored.
As a motivating example, we consider a simplified model
for a children’s welfare screening program, recently discussed in (Chouldechova et al., 2018; Hurley, 2018). A
hotline for child abuse and neglect receives many thousands
of calls a year, and call screeners must decide on the basis
of calculated risk estimates what action to take in response
to any given call, e.g., whether or not to follow up with
an in-person visit from a caseworker. The idea is that only
cases with substantial potential risk to the child’s welfare
should be prioritized. The information used to determine
the calculated risk level and thereby the agency’s action
includes potentially sensitive features, such as race and gender, as well as a myriad of other factors such as perhaps
whether family members receive public assistance, have an
incarceration history, record of drug use, and so on. Though
many of these factors may be predictive of subsequent negative outcomes for the children, there is a legitimate worry
that both risk calculations and policy choices based on them
may depend on sensitive features in inappropriate ways, and
thereby lead to unfair racial disparities in the distribution

