Empirical Analysis of Beam Search Performance Degradation
in Neural Sequence Models

Eldan Cohen 1 J. Christopher Beck 1

Abstract
Beam search is the most popular inference algorithm for decoding neural sequence models.
Unlike greedy search, beam search allows for
non-greedy local decisions that can potentially
lead to a sequence with a higher overall probability. However, work on a number of applications
has found that the quality of the highest probability hypothesis found by beam search degrades
with large beam widths. We perform an empirical
study of the behavior of beam search across three
sequence synthesis tasks. We find that increasing the beam width leads to sequences that are
disproportionately based on early, very low probability tokens that are followed by a sequence of
tokens with higher (conditional) probability. We
show that, empirically, such sequences are more
likely to have a lower evaluation score than lower
probability sequences without this pattern. Using
the notion of search discrepancies from heuristic
search, we hypothesize that large discrepancies
are the cause of the performance degradation. We
show that this hypothesis generalizes the previous
ones in machine translation and image captioning. To validate our hypothesis, we show that
constraining beam search to avoid large discrepancies eliminates the performance degradation.

1. Introduction
Neural sequence models are among the most popular
tools for modeling sequential data and have been applied
to a range of applications including machine translation
(Gehring et al., 2017), summarization (Chopra et al., 2016),
image captioning (Vinyals et al., 2017), and conversation
modeling (Vinyals & Le, 2015). The most commonly used
1

Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to: Eldan
Cohen <ecohen@mie.utoronto.ca>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

inference algorithm for decoding neural sequence models is
beam search, a search algorithm that generates the sequence
tokens one-by-one while keeping a fixed number of active
candidates (beam size) at each step.
Recently, several works have reported the problem of performance degradation in beam search. In machine translation, Koehn & Knowles (2017) found that beam search
“only improves translation for narrow beams and deteriorates when exposed to a larger search space”. While lengthnormalization can alleviate the problem somewhat, it does
not eliminate it. Koehn & Knowles chose this problem as
one of six central challenges in machine translation.
Ott et al. (2018) proposed the existence of training pairs in
which the target is a copy of the source as an explanation for
the performance degradation in length-normalized machine
translation models. For larger beams, they found that more
predictions can be classified as “copies”1 and that filtering
these copies reduces the performance degradation.
In image captioning, Vinyals et al. (2017) observed performance degradation for wider beams and highlighted the use
of a narrower beam search as one of the most significant
improvements in their model. They hypothesized that the
degradation is either due to overfitting or that the objective used in training (likelihood) is not aligned with human
judgement. Their analysis found that wider beams exhibited
more predictions that repeat training captions and fewer
novel ones. This observation is used to support the hypothesis that the model is overfitted and therefore they propose the
use of smaller beam width as “another way to regularize”.
In this work, we analyze the performance of beam search
across multiple tasks: machine translation, abstractive summarization, and image captioning. We present an explanatory model that is based on the concept of search discrepancies (deviations from greedy choices) and perform an
empirical study of the distribution of such discrepancies.
We make the following contributions:
1. We show that increasing the beam width leads to solutions with more and larger discrepancies early in the
sequence. These sequences often have lower evaluation
1
“Copies” are predictions that share at least 50% of their unigrams with their source (Ott et al., 2018).

