On Medians of (Randomized) Pairwise Means

Pierre Laforgue 1 Stephan Clémençon 1 Patrice Bertail 2

Abstract
Tournament procedures, recently introduced in
Lugosi & Mendelson (2016), offer an appealing
alternative, from a theoretical perspective at least,
to the principle of Empirical Risk Minimization in
machine learning. Statistical learning by Medianof-Means (MoM) basically consists in segmenting
the training data into blocks of equal size and comparing the statistical performance of every pair of
candidate decision rules on each data block: that
with highest performance on the majority of the
blocks is declared as the winner. In the context of
nonparametric regression, functions having won
all their duels have been shown to outperform empirical risk minimizers w.r.t. the mean squared
error under minimal assumptions, while exhibiting robustness properties. It is the purpose of this
paper to extend this approach, in order to address
other learning problems in particular, for which
the performance criterion takes the form of an
expectation over pairs of observations rather than
over one single observation, as may be the case
in pairwise ranking, clustering or metric learning. Precisely, it is proved here that the bounds
achieved by MoM are essentially conserved when
the blocks are built by means of independent sampling without replacement schemes instead of a
simple segmentation. These results are next extended to situations where the risk is related to a
pairwise loss function and its empirical counterpart is of the form of a U -statistic. Beyond theoretical results guaranteeing the performance of the
learning/estimation methods proposed, some numerical experiments provide empirical evidence
of their relevance in practice.

1

LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
Modal’X, UPL, Université Paris-Nanterre. Correspondence to:
Pierre Laforgue <pierre.laforgue@telecom-paristech.fr>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
In Lugosi & Mendelson (2016), the concept of tournament
procedure for statistical learning has been introduced and
analyzed in the context of nonparametric regression, one
of the flagship problems of machine learning. The task is
to predict a real valued random variable (r.v.) Y based on
the observation of a random vector X with marginal distribution µ(dx), taking its values in Rd with d ≥ 1, say
by means of a regression function f : Rd → R with minimum expected quadratic risk R(f ) = E[(Y − f (X))2 ].
Statistical learning usually relies on a training dataset
Sn = {(X1 , Y1 ), . . . , (Xn , Yn )} formed of independent
copies of the generic pair (X, Y ). Following the Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) paradigm, one is encouraged
to build predictive rules by minimizing
an empirical verPn
sion of the risk R̂n (f ) = (1/n) i=1 (yi − f (xi ))2 over
a class F of regression function candidates of controlled
complexity (e.g. of finite VC dimension), while being rich
enough to contain a reasonable approximant of the optimal regression function f ∗ (x) = E[Y | X = x]: for any
f ∈ F, the risk excess R(f ) − R(f ∗ ) is then equal to
||f − f ∗ ||2L2 (µ) = E[(f (X) − f ∗ (X))2 ]. A completely
different learning strategy, recently proposed in Lugosi &
Mendelson (2016), consists in implementing a tournament
procedure based on the Median-of-Means (MoM) method
(see Nemirovsky & Yudin (1983)).
Precisely, the full dataset is first divided into 3 subsamples of
equal size. For every pair of candidate functions (f1 , f2 ) ∈
F 2 , the first step consists in computing the MoM estimator of the quantity kf1 − f2 kL1 (µ) := E[|f1 (X) − f2 (X)|]
based on the first subsample: the latter being segmented into
K ≥ 1 subsets of equal size (approximately), kf1 −f2 kL1 (µ)
is estimated by the median of the collection of estimators
formed by its empirical versions computed from each of the
K sub-datasets. When the MoM estimate is large enough,
the match between f1 and f2 is allowed. The rationale behind this approach is as follows: if one of the candidate, say
f2 , is equal to f ∗ , and the quantity kf1 − f ∗ kL1 (µ) (which
p
is less than kf1 − f ∗ kL2 (µ) = R(f1 ) − R(f ∗ )) is large,
so is its (robust) MoM estimate (much less sensitive to atypical values than sampling averages) with high probability.
Therefore, f ∗ is compared to distant candidates only, against
which it should hopefully win its matches. The second step
consists in computing the MoM estimator of R(f1 ) − R(f2 )

