Understanding Impacts of High-Order Loss Approximations and Features in
Deep Learning Interpretation

Sahil Singla 1 Eric Wallace 1 Shi Feng 1 Soheil Feizi 1

Abstract
Current saliency map interpretations for neural
networks generally rely on two key assumptions.
First, they use first-order approximations of the
loss function, neglecting higher-order terms such
as the loss curvature. Second, they evaluate each
feature’s importance in isolation, ignoring feature
interdependencies. This work studies the effect of
relaxing these two assumptions. First, we characterize a closed-form formula for the input Hessian
matrix of a deep ReLU network. Using this, we
show that, for classification problems with many
classes, if a prediction has high probability then
including the Hessian term has a small impact on
the interpretation. We prove this result by demonstrating that these conditions cause the Hessian
matrix to be approximately rank one and its leading eigenvector to be almost parallel to the gradient of the loss. We empirically validate this theory
by interpreting ImageNet classifiers. Second, we
incorporate feature interdependencies by calculating the importance of group-features using a
sparsity regularization term. We use an L0 − L1
relaxation technique along with proximal gradient
descent to efficiently compute group-feature importance values. Our empirical results show that
our method significantly improves deep learning
interpretations.

1. Introduction
The growing use of deep learning in sensitive applications
such as medicine, autonomous driving, and finance raises
concerns about human trust in machine learning systems.
For trained models, a central question is test-time interpretability: how can humans understand the reasoning be1

Computer Science Department, University of Maryland. Correspondence to: Sahil Singla <ssingla@cs.umd.edu>, Soheil Feizi
<sfeizi@cs.umd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

hind model predictions? A common interpretation approach
is to identify the importance of each input feature for a
model’s prediction. A saliency map can then visualize the
important features, e.g., the pixels of an image (Simonyan
et al., 2014; Sundararajan et al., 2017) or words in a sentence (Li et al., 2016).
Several approaches exist to create saliency maps, largely
based on model gradients. For example, Simonyan et al.
(2014) compute the gradient of the class score with respect
to the input, while Smilkov et al. (2017) average the gradient from several noisy versions of the input. Although
these gradient-based methods can produce visually pleasing results, they often weakly approximate the underlying
model (Feng et al., 2018; Nie et al., 2018). Existing saliency
interpretations mainly rely on two key assumptions:
• Gradient-based loss surrogate: For computational
efficiency, several existing methods, e.g., Simonyan
et al. (2014); Smilkov et al. (2017); Sundararajan et al.
(2017), assume that the loss function is almost linear at
the test sample. Thus, they use variations of the input
gradient to compute feature importance.
• Isolated feature importance: Current methods evaluate the importance of each feature in isolation, assuming all other features are fixed. Features, however, may
have complex interdependencies that can be learned by
the model.
This work studies the impact of relaxing these two assumptions in deep learning interpretation. To relax the first assumption, we use the second-order approximation of the
loss function by keeping the Hessian term in the Taylor
expansion of the loss. For a deep ReLU network and the
cross-entropy loss function, we compute this Hessian term
in closed-form. Using this closed-form formula for the Hessian, we prove the following for ReLU networks:
Theorem 1 (informal version) If the probability of the
predicted class is close to one and the number of classes
is large, first-order and second-order interpretations are
sufficiently close to each other.
We present a formal version of this result in Theorem 5
and also validate it empirically. For instance, in ImageNet

