Training Neural Networks with Local Error Signals

Arild Nøkland * 1 Lars H. Eidnes * 2

Abstract
Supervised training of neural networks for classification is typically performed with a global loss
function. The loss function provides a gradient
for the output layer, and this gradient is backpropagated to hidden layers to dictate an update
direction for the weights. An alternative approach
is to train the network with layer-wise loss functions. In this paper we demonstrate, for the first
time, that layer-wise training can approach the
state-of-the-art on a variety of image datasets. We
use single-layer sub-networks and two different
supervised loss functions to generate local error
signals for the hidden layers, and we show that the
combination of these losses help with optimization in the context of local learning. Using local
errors could be a step towards more biologically
plausible deep learning because the global error
does not have to be transported back to hidden
layers. A completely backprop free variant outperforms previously reported results among methods
aiming for higher biological plausibility. Code is
available.1

1. Introduction
Neural networks for classification are typically trained with
a global cross-entropy loss, with the prediction error being back-propagated layer-by-layer from the output layer to
hidden layers (D. E. Rumelhart, 1986). The hidden layer
weights cannot be updated before the forward and backward
pass has completed. This backward locking prevents parallelization of the weight updates. It also prevents reuse of
the memory used to store hidden layer activations. Several
methods have been proposed to avoid the backward locking
*
Equal contribution 1 Kongsberg Seatex, Trondheim, Norway 2 Trondheim, Norway. Correspondence to: Arild Nøkland <arild.nokland@gmail.com>, Lars H. Eidnes <larseidnes@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).
1
The code for the experiments is available at https://
github.com/anokland/local-loss

and memory reuse problems (Jaderberg et al., 2017; Gomez
et al., 2017).
Back-propagation of global errors is not biologically plausible for a number of reasons (Bengio et al., 2015). Several more realistic alternatives have been proposed (Bengio,
2014; Lee et al., 2015b; Lillicrap et al., 2014; Nøkland,
2016; Scellier & Bengio, 2017). These methods do not
seem to scale to larger and more complicated problems like
CIFAR10 and ImageNet (Bartunov et al., 2018).
In this paper, we demonstrate that the backward-locking
problem can be avoided by layer-wise training of the hidden
layers with locally generated errors. The local loss functions
do not depend on a globally generated error, the gradient is
not backpropagated to previous layers, and the hidden layer
weights can be updated during the forward pass. At the
inference stage, the network behaves as a standard network
trained with global back-prop. When the weights for a hidden layer have been updated, the gradient and the activations
do not have to be kept in memory any more. This alleviates
the memory requirements when training deep networks. Although we train all layers at the same time, locally generated
errors also enables greedily training layers one-at-a-time,
which can reduce the memory footprint even more, and also
reduce the training time.
Using local errors could be a step towards more biologically
plausible deep learning because the global error does not
have to be propagated back to hidden layers. The global
target can be projected back to hidden layers instead.
Despite the promise that local loss functions can make training faster, more memory efficient, more parallel and more
biologically plausible, layer-wise supervised training has
been poorly explored in the literature.

2. Related work
2.1. Local Loss Functions
Local loss functions have been used to pre-train hidden layers independently of the global loss, and this has in certain
cases been shown to improve the performance after finetuning using global back-propagation (Hinton et al., 2006;
Bengio et al., 2007; Salakhutdinov & Hinton, 2009; Erhan
et al., 2010; Vincent et al., 2008; Paine et al., 2014; Dong

