Differentiable Dynamic Normalization for Learning Deep Representation
Ping Luo * 1 2 Zhanglin Peng * 3 Wenqi Shao 2 3 Ruimao Zhang 2 3 Jiamin Ren 3 Lingyun Wu 3

Abstract
This work presents Dynamic Normalization (DN),
which is able to learn arbitrary normalization
operations for different convolutional layers in
a deep ConvNet. Unlike existing normalization
approaches that predefined computations of the
statistics (mean and variance), DN learns to
estimate them. DN has several appealing benefits.
First, it adapts to various networks, tasks, and
batch sizes. Second, it can be easily implemented
and trained in a differentiable end-to-end manner
with merely small number of parameters. Third,
its matrix formulation represents a wide range
of normalization methods, shedding light on
analyzing them theoretically. Extensive studies
show that DN outperforms its counterparts in
CIFAR10 and ImageNet.

1. Introduction
Normalization approaches are indispensable components in
recent deep neural networks (DNNs), such as batch normalization (BN) (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015), layer normalization
(LN) (Ba et al., 2016), instance normalization (IN) (Ulyanov
et al., 2016), and group normalization (GN) (Wu & He,
2018). They are often stacked after each convolutional or
fully-connected layer of a DNN to improve its optimization
and generalization ability.
However, existing normalizers have two issues. First,
they are designed manually for specific networks and
tasks. For example, BN might improve optimization for
convolutional neural networks (ConvNets) (Santurkar et al.,
2018; Luo et al., 2019b), while LN facilitates gradient
propagation in recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Ba et al.,
2016). Second, previous deep networks employed a single
normalizer uniformly, leading to sub-optimal performance.
*

1

Equal contribution Department of Computer Science, The
University of Hong Kong 2 Department of Electronic Engineering,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 3 SenseTime Group Ltd.
Correspondence to: Ping Luo <pluo.lhi@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

For instance, BN is used after every convolutional layer of a
ResNet101 (He et al., 2016), which contains a hundred of
convolutional layers.
To address the above issues, this work presents Dynamic
Normalization (DN), which learns arbitrary normalization
operations for different layers of a DNN. DN has several
appealing benefits. (i) Diversity. It not only represents
existing normalizers including BN, IN, LN and GN, but also
learns a wide range of variants of them from training data.
For example, as shown in Fig.1(b), DN learns to divide a
batch of training samples or a set of convolutional channels
into any numbers of groups. This is contrary to previous
methods that treated the number of groups as a hyperparameter. (ii) Easy to implement and use. Although DN has
rich representation capacity, it is simple to implement and
train in a differentiable end-to-end manner. (iii) Versatility.
DN is applicable in various networks, tasks, and batch sizes.
This work has four main contributions. (1) We study
the problem of learning-to-normalize by Dynamic Normalization (DN), which is the first approach that learns
arbitrary normalization formulations from data, without
using hand-crafted normalization layers. DN pushes the
frontier of normalization in deep learning. (2) Through
careful investigation, DN is formulated in matrix notations
that unify all previous normalizers, facilitating the usage
and understanding of them. For example, DN enables
geometric explanations of various approaches. We believe
that DN opens up new research directions to analyze
normalization methods in a holistic perspective. (3) A
Kronecker decomposition of matrix is proposed, enabling
DN to have low computation, small number of parameters,
and simple implementation as much as possible. (4)
Extensive studies in CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky, 2009) and
ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015) demonstrate that DN
is able to outperform its counterparts.
1.1. Related Work
Normalization. The recent approaches normalize the
first two moments of the hidden representations of DNNs.
They applied Gaussian standardization to subtract mean
of the representation and dividing the centered representation by the standard deviation. Different methods
employ different scopes to estimate the statistics, such

