Learning Fast Algorithms for Linear Transforms Using Butterfly Factorizations

Tri Dao 1 Albert Gu 1 Matthew Eichhorn 2 Atri Rudra 2 Christopher Ré 1

Abstract
Fast linear transforms are ubiquitous in machine
learning, including the discrete Fourier transform,
discrete cosine transform, and other structured
transformations such as convolutions. All of these
transforms can be represented by dense matrixvector multiplication, yet each has a specialized
and highly efficient (subquadratic) algorithm. We
ask to what extent hand-crafting these algorithms
and implementations is necessary, what structural
priors they encode, and how much knowledge is
required to automatically learn a fast algorithm
for a provided structured transform. Motivated
by a characterization of matrices with fast matrixvector multiplication as factoring into products
of sparse matrices, we introduce a parameterization of divide-and-conquer methods that is capable of representing a large class of transforms.
This generic formulation can automatically learn
an efficient algorithm for many important transforms; for example, it recovers the O(N log N )
Cooley-Tukey FFT algorithm to machine precision, for dimensions N up to 1024. Furthermore,
our method can be incorporated as a lightweight
replacement of generic matrices in machine learning pipelines to learn efficient and compressible
transformations. On a standard task of compressing a single hidden-layer network, our method exceeds the classification accuracy of unconstrained
matrices on CIFAR-10 by 3.9 points—the first
time a structured approach has done so—with 4X
faster inference speed and 40X fewer parameters.

1. Introduction
Structured linear transformations, such as the discrete
Fourier transform (DFT), discrete cosine transform (DCT),
and Hadamard transform, are a workhorse of machine learning, with applications ranging from data preprocessing, fea1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, USA
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo, SUNY, USA. Correspondence to: Tri Dao
<trid@cs.stanford.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

ture generation, and kernel approximation, to image and
language modeling (convolutions). To date, these transformations rely on carefully designed algorithms, such as the
famous fast Fourier transform (FFT) algorithm, and on specialized implementations (e.g., FFTW and cuFFT). Moreover, each specific transform requires hand-crafted implementations for every platform (e.g., Tensorflow and PyTorch
lack the fast Hadamard transform), and it can be difficult to
know when they are useful. Ideally, these barriers would be
addressed by automatically learning the most effective transform for a given task and dataset, along with an efficient
implementation of it. Such a method should be capable of
recovering a range of fast transforms with high accuracy
and realistic sizes given limited prior knowledge. It is also
preferably composed of differentiable primitives and basic
operations common to linear algebra/machine learning libraries, that allow it to run on any platform and be integrated
into modern ML frameworks such as PyTorch/Tensorflow.
More fundamentally, this problem ties into the foundational
question of understanding the minimal prior knowledge
needed to learn high-speed systems, in the spirit of modern trends toward relaxing manually imposed structure (i.e.,
AutoML). Recent progress in this vein of learning computational primitives includes addition/multiplication gates
(Trask et al., 2018) and the Strassen 2 × 2 matrix multiplication algorithm (Tschannen et al., 2018).

We propose a method that addresses this problem for a class
of important transforms that includes the aforementioned examples. A key challenge lies in defining or parameterizing
the space of transforms and corresponding fast algorithms,
which requires using a minimal amount of prior knowledge
that captures important and interesting transforms while remaining learnable and efficient. Egner & Püschel (2001;
2004) previously posed this question and a novel combinatorial approach, but their solution only addresses a limited
set of transforms (primarily DFT) and only on limited problem sizes. In particular, these approaches search through an
exponentially large discrete space using a symbolic form
of the matrix (Egner & Püschel, 2001; 2004) and recover
the solution only up to dimensions 8 × 8. We instead draw
two key lessons from the work of De Sa et al. (2018), who
characterize matrices with efficient matrix-vector multiplication algorithms as being factorizable into products of sparse

