BERT and PALs: Projected Attention Layers for
Efficient Adaptation in Multi-Task Learning

Asa Cooper Stickland 1 Iain Murray 1

Abstract
Multi-task learning shares information between
related tasks, sometimes reducing the number
of parameters required. State-of-the-art results
across multiple natural language understanding
tasks in the GLUE benchmark have previously
used transfer from a single large task: unsupervised pre-training with BERT, where a separate
BERT model was fine-tuned for each task. We
explore multi-task approaches that share a single
BERT model with a small number of additional
task-specific parameters. Using new adaptation
modules, PALs or ‘projected attention layers’,
we match the performance of separately finetuned models on the GLUE benchmark with ≈7
times fewer parameters, and obtain state-of-theart results on the Recognizing Textual Entailment
dataset.

1. Introduction
This work explores how to adapt a single large base model
to work with multiple tasks. In particular we focus on
using deep neural networks, pre-trained on large amounts
of English text, for multi-task learning on several natural
language understanding (NLU) tasks.
Some multi-task learning approaches consider learning a
general-purpose model that shares all parameters across
tasks (e.g., the NLP decathlon introduced by McCann et al.,
2018). This setting requires all tasks to have the same input
and output space, and the input indicates the task. Instead,
we consider the setting where we share most parameters
across all tasks, but have a small number of task-specific
parameters which adapt the shared model.
Sharing parameters, and thus a common representation, between tasks can sometimes lead to better generalization.
1
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh. Correspondence to: Asa Cooper Stickland <a.cooper.stickland@ed.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

However, fine-tuning separate models for each task often
works better in practice. Although we are interested in
multi-task methods that give results close to (or better than)
state-of-the-art, there are separate motivations for maintaining shared parameters between tasks:
• On applications like mobile devices we may have constraints on battery life. Applying several different neural networks to the same input costs energy. If only the
‘tops’ of our models are task-specific, we can apply a
shared transformation only once to the input, and use
this transformed representation multiple times, as input
to each task-specific function.
• Again on mobile devices, running several different
neural networks for various tasks can incur a computational and energy overhead due to swapping parameters
on a dedicated integrated circuit (Rebuffi et al., 2018).
• An application with a large number of tasks may have
constraints on the number of parameters that can be
stored. For example, web-scale applications may need
to avoid storing a separate large model for every user.
Given a large number of shared parameters in a base model,
and a small number of task-specific parameters, our key
questions are: where should we be transforming the base
model? What form should these transformations take? We
assume the task is always known, so the model can always
choose the correct adaptation parameters and output space.
We experiment on a set of eight NLU tasks from the GLUE
benchmark (Wang et al., 2018a), which include question
answering, sentiment analysis, and textual entailment. The
number of training examples varies widely across the tasks,
so we explore how to schedule training to not unduly favor
the well-resourced tasks, or overfit the low-resource tasks.
We use the BERT model (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers, Devlin et al., 2018) as our base
pre-trained model. Pre-trained BERT representations can
be fine-tuned with just one additional output layer to create
state-of-the-art models for a wide range of tasks, including
the GLUE benchmark. However, the entire model is finetuned, meaning we need a separate model for each task. The

