Fast Direct Search in an Optimally Compressed Continuous Target Space for
Efficient Multi-Label Active Learning

Weishi Shi 1 Qi Yu 1

Abstract
Active learning for multi-label classification poses
fundamental challenges given the complex label
correlations and a potentially large and sparse label space. We propose a novel CS-BPCA process
that integrates compressed sensing and Bayesian
principal component analysis to perform a twolevel label transformation, resulting in an optimally compressed continuous target space. Besides leveraging correlation and sparsity of a large
label space for effective compression, an optimal
compressing rate and the relative importance of
the resultant targets are automatically determined
through Bayesian inference. Furthermore, the orthogonality of the transformed space completely
decouples the correlations among targets, which
significantly simplifies multi-label sampling in
the target space. We define a novel sampling function that leverages a multi-output Gaussian Process (MOGP). Gradient-free optimization strategies are developed to achieve fast online hyperparameter learning and model retraining for active
learning. Experimental results over multiple realworld datasets and comparison with competitive
multi-label active learning models demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed framework.

1. Introduction
Multi-label classification (ML-C) aims to learn a model that
automatically assigns a set of relevant labels to a data instance (Zhu et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2018; 2017). Multi-label
problems naturally arise in many domains. For example,
social media websites, including Twitter, Facebook, and
Linked-in, assign tags to social media items, such as tweets,
images, and user profiles, which can facilitate information
1
Golisano College of Computing and Information Sciences, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, USA.
Correspondence to: Weishi Shi <ws7586@rit.edu>, Qi Yu
<qi.yu@rit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

retrieval and organization. Users from Q&A websites, such
as stack overflow and Quora, are encouraged to choose
tags from thousands of candidates to increase the exposure
rate of their proposed questions. In bioinformatics, genes
can be associated with multiple functional labels, such as
metabolism and protein synthesis. Similarly, many image
classification and video/audio recognition tasks are also
multi-label problems.
A straightforward way to tackle the ML-C problems is to
extend the single-label classification models by building
binary relevance machines (BRMs) that construct an individual model for each label in a one-versus-the-rest manner (Tsoumakas et al., 2009). Significant effort has also
been devoted by leveraging label correlations using techniques such as label propagation (Bi & Kwok, 2013) and
transformation (Zhou et al., 2012). While ML-C remains
as an active research area, a central component required
by most ML-C models is a high-quality labeled dataset for
model training. This falls under the broader task of active
learning, where the idea is that by carefully choosing the
most informative data instances for labelling, rather than in
a purely random manner, better models can be trained with
less labelling effort (Settles, 2012). There has been a wealth
of work on active learning for single-label problems with
state-of-the-art performance (Guo & Greiner, 2007; Ghani,
2002; Siddiquie & Gupta, 2010).
However, work on active learning for ML-C problems remains rather limited as it faces additional challenges when
compared with single-label problems. In the latter, classes
are assumed to be non-overlapping (i.e., only one label is
assigned to each instance), so a data sample’s overall contribution to all classes is essentially the sum of its contribution
to each individual class, if being labeled. In multi-label
problems, a good informativeness measure that quantifies a
data sample’s overall contribution to a correlated label space
is much harder to design. Furthermore, the label space is
usually highly sparse with many rare labels. Identifying
data samples that help detect rare labels is much more challenging (due to lack of positive instances) but can provide
special values (e.g., diagnosis of rare diseases). It is important to systematically leverage label correlations as they
can provide information complementary to the scarce posi-

