Differentially Private Fair Learning

Matthew Jagielski 1 Michael Kearns 2 Jieming Mao 2 Alina Oprea 1 Aaron Roth 2 Saeed Sharifi-Malvajerdi 2
Jonathan Ullman 1

Abstract
Motivated by settings in which predictive models
may be required to be non-discriminatory with respect to certain attributes (such as race), but even
collecting the sensitive attribute may be forbidden
or restricted, we initiate the study of fair learning under the constraint of differential privacy.
Our first algorithm is a private implementation
of the equalized odds post-processing approach
of (Hardt et al., 2016). This algorithm is appealingly simple, but must be able to use protected
group membership explicitly at test time, which
can be viewed as a form of “disparate treatment”.
Our second algorithm is a differentially private
version of the oracle-efficient in-processing approach of (Agarwal et al., 2018) which is more
complex but need not have access to protected
group membership at test time. We identify new
tradeoffs between fairness, accuracy, and privacy
that emerge only when requiring all three properties, and show that these tradeoffs can be milder if
group membership may be used at test time. We
conclude with a brief experimental evaluation.

1. Introduction
Large-scale algorithmic decision making, often driven by
machine learning on consumer data, has increasingly run
afoul of various social norms, laws and regulations. A
prominent concern is when a learned model exhibits discrimination against some demographic group, perhaps based
on race or gender. Concerns over such algorithmic discrimination have led to a recent flurry of research on fairness in
machine learning, which includes both new tools and methods for designing fair models, and studies of the tradeoffs
between predictive accuracy and fairness (ACM, 2019).
At the same time, both recent and longstanding laws and
Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA 2 University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Saeed
Sharifi-Malvajerdi <saeedsh@wharton.upenn.edu>.

regulations often restrict the use of “sensitive” or protected
attributes in algorithmic decision-making. U.S. law prevents the use of race in the development or deployment
of consumer lending or credit scoring models, and recent
provisions in the E.U. General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) restrict or prevent even the collection of racial data
for consumers. These two developments — the demand for
non-discriminatory algorithms and models on the one hand,
and the restriction on the collection or use of protected attributes on the other — present technical conundrums, since
the most straightforward methods for ensuring fairness generally require knowing or using the attribute being protected.
It seems difficult to guarantee that a trained model is not
discriminating against (say) a racial group if we cannot even
identify members of that group in the data.
A recent line of work (Veale & Binns, 2017; Kilbertus et al.,
2018) made these cogent observations, and proposed an
interesting solution employing the cryptographic tool of secure multiparty computation (commonly abbreviated MPC).
In this model, we imagine a commercial entity with access to consumer data that excludes race, but this entity
would like to build a predictive model for, say, commercial lending, under the constraint that the model be nondiscriminatory by race with respect to some standard fairness notion (e.g. equality of false rejection rates). In order
to do so, the company engages in MPC with a set of regulatory agencies, which are either trusted parties holding
consumers’ race data (Veale & Binns, 2017), or hold among
them a secret sharing of race data, provided by the consumers themselves (Kilbertus et al., 2018). Together the
company and the regulators apply standard fair machine
learning techniques in a distributed fashion. In this way
the company never directly accesses the race data, but still
manages to produce a fair model, which is the output of the
MPC. The guarantee provided by this solution is the standard one of MPC — namely, the company learns nothing
more than whatever is implied by its own consumer data,
and the fair model returned by the protocol.

1

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Our point of departure stems from our assertion that MPC
is the wrong guarantee to give if our motivation is ensuring
that data about an individual’s race does not “leak” to the
company via the model. In particular, MPC implies nothing
about what individual information can already be inferred

