Revisiting Precision and Recall Definition for Generative Model Evaluation

Loı̈c Simon 1 Ryan Webster 1 Julien Rabin 1

Abstract
In this article we revisit the definition of PrecisionRecall (PR) curves for generative models proposed by (Sajjadi et al., 2018). Rather than providing a scalar for generative quality, PR curves
distinguish mode-collapse (poor recall) and bad
quality (poor precision). We first generalize their
formulation to arbitrary measures, hence removing any restriction to finite support. We also expose a bridge between PR curves and type I and
type II error rates of likelihood ratio classifiers on
the task of discriminating between samples of the
two distributions. Building upon this new perspective, we propose a novel algorithm to approximate
precision-recall curves, that shares some interesting methodological properties with the hypothesis testing technique from (Lopez-Paz & Oquab,
2017). We demonstrate the interest of the proposed formulation over the original approach on
controlled multi-modal datasets.

1. Introduction
This work addresses the question of the evaluation of
generative models, such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) or Variational AutoEncoders (Kingma & Welling, 2014), that have attracted a
lot of attention in the last years. These approaches aim at
training a model to generate new samples from an unknown
target distribution P , for which one has only access to a
(sufficiently large) sample set Xi ∼ P . While this class of
methods have given state-of-the-art results in many applications (see e.g. (Brock et al., 2019) for image generation,
(Iizuka et al., 2017) for inpainting, etc), there is still a need
for evaluation techniques than can automatically assess and
compare the quality of generated samples Yi ∼ Q from
different models with the target distribution P , for which
the likelihood P (Yi ) is unknown. Most of the time, such a
1
Normandie Univ, UNICAEN, ENSICAEN, CNRS, GREYC.
Correspondence to: Loı̈c Simon <loic.simon@ensicaen.fr>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Illustration of precision-recall curves for multi-modal
continuous distributions. Left: mode invention (precision is only
partial but full recall). Middle: mode dropping (partial recall) but
do not produce outliers (full precision but partial recall). Right:
mode dropping / invention plus mode reweighting.

comparison is just reduced to a simple visual inspection of
the samples Yi , but very recently several techniques have
been proposed to address this problem that boils down to
the comparison of two empirical distributions in high dimension. While generative models have seen successful
applications far beyond just image data (such as speech enhancement (Pascual et al., 2017), text to image synthesis
(Reed et al., 2016) or text translation (Lample et al., 2018)),
we will focus on image generation, as is popular in the
recent literature.
Previous Work When it comes to evaluating generative
models of images, visual inspection, that is observing how
“realistic” the images appear, remains the most important
decider of the model’s success. Indeed, state of the art methods, such a Progressive GANs (Karras et al., 2018) on face
images or BigGAN (Brock et al., 2019) trained conditionally on ImageNet classes, include large grids of generated
samples wherein the success of the method over previous
approaches is visually obvious. Nonetheless, automatic evaluation of such models is extremely important, for example
when conducting large scale empirical comparisons (Lucic
et al., 2018), in cases where model failure is more subtle
than simply poor image quality (e.g. mode collapse) such as
in (Sajjadi et al., 2018), or presumably in domains in which

