MeanSum : A Neural Model for Unsupervised
Multi-Document Abstractive Summarization
Eric Chu * † 1 Peter J. Liu * 2

Abstract
Abstractive summarization has been studied using neural sequence transduction methods with
datasets of large, paired document-summary examples. However, such datasets are rare and the
models trained from them do not generalize to
other domains. Recently, some progress has been
made in learning sequence-to-sequence mappings
with only unpaired examples. In our work, we
consider the setting where there are only documents (product or business reviews) with no summaries provided, and propose an end-to-end, neural model architecture to perform unsupervised
abstractive summarization. Our proposed model
consists of an auto-encoder where the mean of
the representations of the input reviews decodes
to a reasonable summary-review while not relying on any review-specific features. We consider
variants of the proposed architecture and perform
an ablation study to show the importance of specific components. We show through automated
metrics and human evaluation that the generated
summaries are highly abstractive, fluent, relevant,
and representative of the average sentiment of
the input reviews. Finally, we collect a reference
evaluation dataset and show that our model outperforms a strong extractive baseline.

1. Introduction
Supervised, neural sequence-transduction models have seen
wide success in many language-related tasks such as translation (Wu et al., 2016; Vaswani et al., 2017) and speechrecognition (Chiu et al., 2017). In these two cases, the model
training is typically focused on the translation of sentences
*Equal contribution. †Work done primarily while interning
at Google Brain. 1 MIT Media Lab 2 Google Brain. Correspondence to: Eric Chu <echu@mit.edu>, Peter J. Liu <peterjliu@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

or recognition of short utterances, for which there is an abundance of parallel data. The application of such models to
longer sequences (multi-sentence documents or long audio)
works reasonably well in production systems because the sequences can be naturally decomposed into the shorter ones
the models are trained on and thus sequence-transduction
can be done piece-meal.
Similar neural models have also been applied to abstractive
summarization, where large numbers of document-summary
pairs are used to generate news headlines (Rush et al., 2015)
or bullet-points (Nallapati et al., 2016; See et al., 2017).
Work in this vein has been extended by Liu et al. (2018) to
the multi-document1 case to produce Wikipedia article text
from references documents.
However, unlike translation or speech recognition, adapting
such summarization models to different types of documents
without re-training is much less reasonable; for example, in
general documents do not decompose into parts that look
like news articles, nor can we expect our idea of saliency
or desired writing style to correspond with that of particular news publishers. Re-training or at least fine-tuning
such models on many in-domain document-summary pairs
should be expected to get desirable performance. Unfortunately, it is very expensive to create a large parallel summarization corpus and the most common case in our experience
is that we have many documents to summarize, but have
few or no examples of summaries.
We side-step these difficulties by completely avoiding the
need for example summaries. Although there has been previous work on extractive summarization without supervision,
we describe, to our knowledge, the first end-to-end, neuralabstractive, unsupervised summarization model. Unlike
recent approaches to unsupervised translation (Artetxe et al.,
2017; Lample et al., 2017), we do not only assume there
is no parallel data, but also assume no dataset of output
sequences.
In this paper, we study the problem of abstractively summarizing multiple reviews about a business or product without
any examples and apply our method to publically available
1
Note multi-document here means multiple documents about
the same topic.

