Adaptive Antithetic Sampling for Variance Reduction

Hongyu Ren * 1 Shengjia Zhao * 1 Stefano Ermon 1

Abstract
Variance reduction is crucial in stochastic estimation and optimization problems. Antithetic
sampling reduces the variance of a Monte Carlo
estimator by drawing correlated, rather than independent, samples. However, designing an effective correlation structure is challenging and
application specific, thus limiting the practical
applicability of these methods. In this paper,
we propose a general-purpose adaptive antithetic
sampling framework. We provide gradient-based
and gradient-free methods to train the samplers
such that they reduce variance while ensuring
that the underlying Monte Carlo estimator is
provably unbiased. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on Bayesian inference
and generative model training, where it reduces
variance and improves task performance with little computational overhead.

1. Introduction
The problem of computing expectations that are too complex to be evaluated analytically is ubiquitous in machine
learning. To address this difficulty, Monte Carlo estimation
underlies the majority of modern machine learning algorithms. Instead of computing the exact expectation, Monte
Carlo estimators draw samples from the underlying distribution and use them to compute an empirical mean. When
the number of samples is sufficiently large, this empirical
mean will approach the expectation according to the law of
large numbers. Despite this guarantee, Monte Carlo estimators can still deviate substantially from the true expectation when the sample size is small.
The crux of Monte Carlo estimation is variance. According
to Chebyshev inequality, the estimation error is bounded
*
1
Equal contribution
Stanford University.
Correspondence to:
Hongyu Ren <hyren@cs.stanford.edu>,
Shengjia Zhao <sjzhao@stanford.edu>, Stefano Ermon
<ermon@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

by the variance of the estimator. Thus, with lower variance we could achieve better estimation error guarantees.
Increasing the number of samples is the most direct way to
decrease the variance but at the cost of additional computation. Hence, a variety of variance reduction techniques
have been proposed in the literature. Classic approaches
include baselines (Weaver & Tao, 2001), control variates (Greensmith et al., 2004), importance sampling (Neal,
2001), rejection sampling, Rao-Blackwellization (Grisetti
et al., 2007) etc. These techniques modify the underlying
distribution, but still rely on the basic idea of taking independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) samples and
computing their empirical mean.
However, i.i.d. sampling is neither necessary nor optimal. Antithetic sampling methods (Hammersley & Morton, 1956) forgo the i.i.d. sampling construction. Given a
fixed number of samples, antithetic sampling attempts to
jointly select all of them at once so that they are more representative. An intuitive example is sampling without replacement: drawing k objects without replacement is guaranteed to provide a more complete picture of the underlying space (compared to i.i.d. sampling) because it avoids
redundancy by construction. In fact, sampling without replacement provably reduces variance. The reduction, however, is modest.
Although a more effective, general-purpose antithetic sampling strategy is desirable, it is actually impossible. We will
prove a no-free-lunch result: no antithetic sampling strategy can work better than sampling without replacement for
a natural class of Monte Carlo estimation problems. Therefore, we cannot use a single antithetic sampling strategy
and achieve significant variance reduction for every estimation problem; antithetic sampling must tailor to the specific
problem at hand.
In this paper, we propose a general framework to learn an
antithetic sampling distribution that automatically adapts to
the underlying Monte Carlo estimation problem. The key
idea is to construct a flexible, parametric family of joint
probability distributions over a set of samples that is both
learnable and guarantees the unbiasedness of the resulting
estimator. We then propose learning methods that choose a
joint distribution to minimize the variance of the estimator.
We provide both a gradient-based learning scheme which

