Manifold Mixup: Better Representations by Interpolating Hidden States

Vikas Verma * 1 2 Alex Lamb * 2 Christopher Beckham 2 Amir Najafi 3 Ioannis Mitliagkas 2 David Lopez-Paz 4
Yoshua Bengio 2

Abstract
Deep neural networks excel at learning the training data, but often provide incorrect and confident
predictions when evaluated on slightly different
test examples. This includes distribution shifts,
outliers, and adversarial examples. To address
these issues, we propose Manifold Mixup, a simple regularizer that encourages neural networks to
predict less confidently on interpolations of hidden representations. Manifold Mixup leverages semantic interpolations as additional training signal,
obtaining neural networks with smoother decision
boundaries at multiple levels of representation. As
a result, neural networks trained with Manifold
Mixup learn flatter class-representations, that is,
with fewer directions of variance. We prove theory on why this flattening happens under ideal
conditions, validate it empirically on practical situations, and connect it to the previous works on
information theory and generalization. In spite
of incurring no significant computation and being implemented in a few lines of code, Manifold
Mixup improves strong baselines in supervised
learning, robustness to single-step adversarial attacks, and test log-likelihood.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are the backbone of state-of-the-art
systems for computer vision, speech recognition, and language translation (LeCun et al., 2015). However, these
systems perform well only when evaluated on instances
very similar to those from the training set. When evaluated
on slightly different distributions, neural networks often provide incorrect predictions with strikingly high confidence.
*

Equal contribution 1 Aalto University, Finland 2 Montréal
Institute for Learning Algorithms (MILA) 3 Sharif University of Technology 4 Facebook Research Correspondence
to: Alex Lamb <lambalex@iro.umontreal.ca>, Vikas Verma
<vikasverma.iitm@gmail.com, vikas.verma@aalto.fi>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

This is a worrying prospect, since deep learning systems
are being deployed in settings where data may be subject to
distributional shifts. Adversarial examples (Szegedy et al.,
2014) are one such failure case: deep neural networks with
nearly perfect performance provide incorrect predictions
with very high confidence when evaluated on perturbations
imperceptible to the human eye. Adversarial examples are a
serious hazard when deploying machine learning systems
in security-sensitive applications. More generally, deep
learning systems quickly degrade in performance as the distributions of training and testing data differ slightly from
each other (Ben-David et al., 2010).
In this paper, we realize several troubling properties concerning the hidden representations and decision boundaries
of state-of-the-art neural networks. First, we observe that
the decision boundary is often sharp and close to the data.
Second, we observe that the vast majority of the hidden
representation space corresponds to high confidence predictions, both on and off of the data manifold.
Motivated by these intuitions we propose Manifold Mixup
(Section 2), a simple regularizer that addresses several of
these flaws by training neural networks on linear combinations of hidden representations of training examples. Previous work, including the study of analogies through word
embeddings (e.g. king − man + woman ≈ queen), has
shown that interpolations are an effective way of combining
factors (Mikolov et al., 2013). Since high-level representations are often low-dimensional and useful to linear classifiers, linear interpolations of hidden representations should
explore meaningful regions of the feature space effectively.
To use combinations of hidden representations of data as
novel training signal, we also perform the same linear interpolation in the associated pair of one-hot labels, leading to
mixed examples with soft targets.
To start off with the right intuitions, Figure 1 illustrates the
impact of Manifold Mixup on a simple two-dimensional
classification task with small data. In this example, vanilla
training of a deep neural network leads to an irregular decision boundary (Figure 1a), and a complex arrangement of
hidden representations (Figure 1d). Moreover, every point in
both the raw (Figure 1a) and hidden (Figure 1d) data representations is assigned a prediction with very high confidence.

