Meta-Learning Neural Bloom Filters
Jack W Rae 1 2 Sergey Bartunov 1 Timothy P Lillicrap 1 2

Abstract
There has been a recent trend in training neural
networks to replace data structures that have been
crafted by hand, with an aim for faster execution,
better accuracy, or greater compression. In this
setting, a neural data structure is instantiated by
training a network over many epochs of its inputs
until convergence. In applications where inputs
arrive at high throughput, or are ephemeral, training a network from scratch is not practical. This
motivates the need for few-shot neural data structures. In this paper we explore the learning of
approximate set membership over a set of data in
one-shot via meta-learning. We propose a novel
memory architecture, the Neural Bloom Filter,
which is able to achieve significant compression
gains over classical Bloom Filters and existing
memory-augmented neural networks.

1. Introduction
One of the simplest questions one can ask of a set of data
is whether or not a given query is contained within it. Is q,
our query, a member of S, our chosen set of observations?
This set membership query arises across many computing
domains; from databases, network routing, and firewalls.
One could query set membership by storing S in its entirety
and comparing q against each element. However, more
space-efficient solutions exist.
The original and most widely implemented approximate
set membership data-structure is the Bloom Filter (Bloom,
1970). It works by storing sparse distributed codes, produced from randomized hash functions, within a binary
vector. The Bloom-filter trades off space for an allowed
false positive rate, which arises due to hash collisions. However its error is one-sided; if an element q is contained in S
then it will always be recognized. It never emits false nega1

DeepMind, London, UK 2 CoMPLEX, Computer Science,
University College London, London, UK. Correspondence to: Jack
W Rae <jwrae@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

tives. One can find Bloom Filters embedded within a wide
range of production systems; from network security (Geravand & Ahmadi, 2013), to block malicious IP addresses;
databases, such as Google’s Bigtable (Chang et al., 2008),
to avoid unnecessary disk lookups; cryptocurrency (Hearn
& Corallo, 2012), to allow clients to filter irrelevant transactions; search, such as Facebook’s typeahead search (Adams,
2010), to filter pages which do not contain query prefixes;
and program verification (Dillinger & Manolios, 2004), to
avoid recomputation over previously observed states.
While the main appeal of Bloom Filters is favourable compression, another important quality is the support for dynamic updates. New elements can be inserted in O(1) time.
This is not the case for all approximate set membership
data structures. For example, perfect hashing saves ⇡ 40%
space over Bloom Filters but requires a pre-processing stage
that is polynomial-time in the number of elements to store
(Dietzfelbinger & Pagh, 2008). Whilst the static set membership problem is interesting, it limits the applicability of
the algorithm. For example, in a database application that
is serving a high throughput of write operations, it may be
intractable to regenerate the full data-structure upon each
batch of writes.
We thus focus on the data stream computation model
(Muthukrishnan et al., 2005), where input observations are
assumed to be ephemeral and can only be inspected a constant number of times — usually once. This captures many
real-world applications: network traffic analysis, database
query serving, and reinforcement learning in complex domains. Devising an approximate set membership data structure that is not only more compressive than Bloom Filters,
but can be applied to either dynamic or static sets, could
have a significant performance impact on modern computing
applications. In this paper we investigate this problem using
memory-augmented neural networks and meta-learning.
We build upon the recently growing literature on using neural networks to replace algorithms that are configured by
heuristics, or do not take advantage of the data distribution.
For example, Bloom Filters are indifferent to the data distribution. They have near-optimal space efficiency when
data is drawn uniformly from a universe set (Carter et al.,
1978) (maximal-entropy case) but (as we shall show) are
sub-optimal when there is more structure. Prior studies on

