Faster Algorithms for Binary Matrix Factorization

Ravi Kumar 1 Rina Panigrahy 1 Ali Rahimi 1 David P. Woodruff 2

Abstract
We give faster approximation algorithms for wellstudied variants of Binary Matrix Factorization
(BMF), where we are given a binary m × n matrix
A and would like to find binary rank-k matrices
U, V to minimize the Frobenius norm of U ·V −A.
In the first setting, U · V denotes multiplication over Z, and we give a constantfactor approximation algorithm that runs in
2
2O(k log k) poly(mn) time, improving upon the
k
previous min(22 , 2n )poly(mn) time. Our techniques generalize to minimizing kU · V − Akp
dp/2e+1
log k)
for p ≥ 1, in 2O(k
poly(mn) time.
For p = 1, this has a graph-theoretic con2
sequence, namely, a 2O(k ) poly(mn)-time algorithm to approximate a graph as a union
of disjoint bicliques. In the second setting,
U · V is over GF(2), and we give a bicriteria constant-factor approximation algorithm that
3
runs in 2O(k ) poly(mn) time to find binary rankO(k log m) matrices U , V whose cost is as good
as the best rank-k approximation, improving upon
k
O(1)
min(22 mn, min(m, n)k
poly(mn)) time.

1. Introduction
In the low rank approximation problem, we are given an
m × n matrix A and would like to approximate A as U · V ,
where U is m × k and V is k × n. Here k is the rank parameter, which is typically a small integer. Approximating A by
U ·V has a number of advantages, e.g., it takes only (m+n)k
parameters to store U and V versus mn parameters to store
the original A, and for an arbitrary n-dimensional column
vector x, one can compute U · V x in (m + n)k time as
opposed to mn time to compute Ax. A natural notion of ap1

Google, 1600 Amphitheater Parkway, Mountain View, CA,
US. 2 CMU, 5000 Forbes Ave, Pittsburgh, PA, US. Part of this
work was done while the author was visiting Google, and part
while visiting the Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing.
Correspondence to: David Woodruff <dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

proximation is Frobenius norm error, where one seeks to find
U andP
V so P
as to minimize kA−U V k2F ; the latter is defined
m
n
to be i=1 j=1 (Ai,j −hUi,∗ , V∗,j i)2 , where Ui,∗ denotes
the ith row of U and V∗,j the jth column of V . There are a
number of other notions of
studied, such as entrywisePerror
m Pn
`1 error kA − U V k1 = i=1 j=1 |Ai,j − hUi,∗ , V∗,j i|,
studied in Song et al. (2017).
More generally, entrywisePm P
n
`p error kA − U V kpp = i=1 j=1 |Ai,j − hUi,∗ , V∗,j i|p
and other M -Estimator loss functions have been recently
studied (Chierichetti et al., 2017; Song et al., 2018).
In many applications data is binary or categorical rather than
real-valued. For example, in the UCI repository, nearly half
of the data sets are categorical. In the Binary Matrix Factorization (BMF) problem, the input matrix A ∈ {0, 1}m×n is
binary, and we would like to factorize it into binary matrices
U ∈ {0, 1}m×k , V ∈ {0, 1}k×n . There are many formulations of this problem, depending on what the inner product
hUi,∗ , V∗,j i should mean, and we will focus on two variants.
The first is the standard inner product over the integers. For
this notion, it is helpful to think of A as being the incidence
matrix of a bipartite graph with m vertices on the left, n
vertices on the right, and an edge existing from the jth left
vertex to the j 0 th right vertex if and only if Aj,j 0 = 1. Then,
Pk
noting that U · V = i=1 U∗,i Vi,∗ is the sum of k rank-1
matrices, each being the outer product of a column of U
and the corresponding row of V , the entries of U∗,i Vi,∗ are
exactly the edges in a bipartite clique (biclique) between the
vertices j on the left for which Ui,j = 1 and the vertices
j 0 on the right for which Vj 0 ,i = 1. Thus, in this problem
we seek to represent A as a multi-set union of bicliques.
Determining the minimal k for which there is zero error
is the Bipartite Clique Partition problem, studied in Orlin
(1977); Fleischner et al. (2007); Chalermsook et al. (2014);
Chandran et al. (2016); Neumann (2018). We also present a
novel application of this notion of inner product to OLED
displays, which is a central motivation for this work.
Another natural notion of inner product is when hUi,∗ , V∗,j i
is taken over the binary field GF(2), where arithmetic operations are defined modulo 2. This latter model has been applied to Independent Component Analysis (ICA) over string
data, and has attracted attention from the signal processing community (Yeredor, 2011; Gutch et al., 2012; Painsky
et al., 2015). It serves as an important tool in dimension

