Learning Dependency Structures for Weak Supervision Models

Paroma Varma * 1 Frederic Sala * 2 Ann He 2 Alexander Ratner 2 Christopher Ré 2

Abstract
Labeling training data is a key bottleneck in the
modern machine learning pipeline. Recent weak
supervision approaches combine labels from multiple noisy sources by estimating their accuracies
without access to ground truth labels; however,
estimating the dependencies among these sources
is a critical challenge. We focus on a robust PCAbased algorithm for learning these dependency
structures, establish improved theoretical recovery rates, and outperform existing methods on various real-world tasks. Under certain conditions,
we show that the amount of unlabeled data needed
can scale sublinearly or even logarithmically with
the number of sources m, improving over previous efforts that ignore the sparsity pattern in the
dependency structure and scale linearly in m. We
provide an information-theoretic lower bound on
the minimum sample complexity of the weak supervision setting. Our method outperforms weak
supervision approaches that assume conditionallyindependent sources by up to 4.64 F1 points and
previous structure learning approaches by up to
4.41 F1 points on real-world relation extraction
and image classification tasks.

1. Introduction
Supervised machine learning models have increasingly become dependent on a large amount of labeled training data.
For most real-world applications, however, hand labeling
such a large magnitude of data is a major bottleneck, especially when domain expertise is required. Recently, generative models have been used to combine noisy labels from
weak supervision sources, such as user-defined heuristics
or knowledge bases, to efficiently assign training labels by
*

1
Equal contribution
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University 2 Department of Computer
Science, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Paroma
Varma <paroma@stanford.edu>, Frederic Sala <fredsala@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

treating the true label as a latent variable (Alfonseca et al.,
2012; Takamatsu et al., 2012; Roth & Klakow, 2013; Ratner et al., 2019). Once the labels from the multiple noisy
sources are used to learn the parameters of a generative
model, the distribution over the true labels is inferred and
used to produce probabilistic training labels for the unlabeled data, which can then be used to train a downstream
discriminative model.
Specifying how these weak supervision sources are correlated is essential to correctly estimating their accuracies.
In practice, weak supervision sources often have strongly
correlated outputs due to shared data sources or labeling
strategies; for example, developers might contribute nearduplicate weak supervision sources. Manually enumerating these dependencies is a development bottleneck, while
learning them statistically usually requires ground truth labels (Meinshausen & Bühlmann, 2006; Zhao & Yu, 2006;
Ravikumar et al., 2010; Loh & Wainwright, 2013). Recently,
Bach et al. (2017) proposed a structure learning method for
weak supervision that requires Ω(m log m) samples given
m sources and does not exploit the sparsity of the structure of the associated model. This high sample complexity
may prevent it from identifying dependencies, thus affecting
the downstream quality of training labels assigned by the
generative model.
We propose using a structure learning technique for the weak
supervision setting that exploits the sparsity of the model to
achieve improved theoretical recovery rates. We decompose
the inverse covariance matrix of the observable sources via
robust principal component analysis (Candès et al., 2011;
Chandrasekaran et al., 2011). The decomposition produces
a sparse component encoding the underlying structure and
a low-rank component due to marginalizing over the latent
true label variable. We build on previous approaches using
this technique (Chandrasekaran et al., 2011; Wu et al., 2017),
but improve over their requirement of Ω(m) samples under
common weak supervision conditions.
The key to obtaining tighter complexity estimates is characterizing the effective rank (Vershynin, 2012) of the covariance matrix in terms of the structural information associated
with the weak supervision setting. The effective rank can
be unboundedly smaller than the true rank. We show that
under certain reasonable conditions on the effective rank,

