Population Based Augmentation:
Efficient Learning of Augmentation Policy Schedules

Daniel Ho 1 2 Eric Liang 1 Ion Stoica 1 Pieter Abbeel 1 3 Xi Chen 1 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Data augmentation techniques such as cropping, translation,
and horizontal flipping are commonly used to train large
neural networks (Lin et al., 2013). Augmentation transforms
images to increase the diversity of image data. While deep
neural networks can be trained on enormous numbers of
data examples to exhibit excellent performance on tasks
such as image classification, they contain a likewise enormous number of parameters, which causes overfitting. Data
augmentation acts as a regularizer to combat this. However,
most approaches used in training state-of-the-art networks
only use basic types of augmentation. While neural network
1
EECS, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, California, USA 2 Current
affiliation: X, Mountain View, California, USA 3 covariant.ai,
Berkeley, California, USA. Correspondence to: Daniel Ho
<daniel.ho@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

AutoAugment

Population Based Augmentation

3
Test error (%)

A key challenge in leveraging data augmentation for neural network training is choosing an
effective augmentation policy from a large search
space of candidate operations. Properly chosen
augmentation policies can lead to significant generalization improvements; however, state-of-theart approaches such as AutoAugment are computationally infeasible to run for the ordinary user.
In this paper, we introduce a new data augmentation algorithm, Population Based Augmentation
(PBA), which generates nonstationary augmentation policy schedules instead of a fixed augmentation policy. We show that PBA can match the performance of AutoAugment on CIFAR-10, CIFAR100, and SVHN, with three orders of magnitude
less overall compute. On CIFAR-10 we achieve
a mean test error of 1.46%, which is a slight improvement upon the current state-of-the-art. The
code for PBA is open source and is available at
https://github.com/arcelien/pba.

Baseline
4

2
1
0
WRN-28-10

S-S (26
2x96D)

S-S (26
2x96D)

S-S (26
2x112D)

PyramidNet

Figure 1. PBA matches AutoAugment’s classification accuracy
across a range of different network models on the CIFAR-10
dataset, while requiring 1,000x less GPU hours to run. For the full
set of results, refer to Table 2. Assuming an hourly GPU cost of
$1.5, producing a new augmentation policy costs around $7.5 for
PBA vs $7,500 with AutoAugment. The same scaling holds for
the SVHN dataset as well.

architectures have been investigated in depth (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012; He et al., 2015; Szegedy et al., 2015; Simonyan
& Zisserman, 2014; Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016; Huang
et al., 2016; Han et al., 2016), less focus has been put into
discovering strong types of data augmentation and data augmentation policies that capture data invariances.
A key consideration when applying data augmentation is
picking a good set of augmentation functions, since redundant or overly aggressive augmentation can slow down training and introduce biases into the dataset (Graham, 2014).
Many recent methods learn augmentation policies to apply different functions to image data. Among these, AutoAugment (Cubuk et al., 2018) stands out with state-of-theart results in CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky, 2009), CIFAR-100
(Krizhevsky, 2009), and ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009). Using a method inspired by Neural Architecture Search (Zoph
& Le, 2016), Cubuk et al. learn a distilled list of augmentation functions and associated probability-magnitude values,
resulting in a distribution of possible augmentations which
can be applied to each batch of data. However, the search
technique used in the work is very computationally expensive, and code has not been released to reproduce it. In this
work, we address these issues with a simple and efficient
algorithm for augmentation policy learning.

