Subspace Robust Wasserstein Distances

François-Pierre Paty 1 Marco Cuturi 2 1

Abstract
Making sense of Wasserstein distances between
discrete measures in high-dimensional settings remains a challenge. Recent work has advocated
a two-step approach to improve robustness and
facilitate the computation of optimal transport, using for instance projections on random real lines,
or a preliminary quantization of the measures to
reduce the size of their support. We propose
in this work a “max-min” robust variant of the
Wasserstein distance by considering the maximal
possible distance that can be realized between
two measures, assuming they can be projected orthogonally on a lower k-dimensional subspace.
Alternatively, we show that the corresponding
“min-max” OT problem has a tight convex relaxation which can be cast as that of finding an optimal transport plan with a low transportation cost,
where the cost is alternatively defined as the sum
of the k largest eigenvalues of the second order
moment matrix of the displacements (or matchings) corresponding to that plan (the usual OT definition only considers the trace of that matrix). We
show that both quantities inherit several favorable
properties from the OT geometry. We propose
two algorithms to compute the latter formulation
using entropic regularization, and illustrate the
interest of this approach empirically.

1. Introduction
The optimal transport (OT) toolbox (Villani, 2009) is gaining popularity in machine learning, with several applications
to data science outlined in the recent review paper (Peyré &
Cuturi, 2019). When using OT on high-dimensional data,
practitioners are often confronted to the intrinsic instability
of OT with respect to input measures. A well known result
states for instance that the sample complexity of Wasserstein
1

CREST-ENSAE, Palaiseau, France 2 Google Brain, Paris,
France.
Correspondence to: François-Pierre Paty <francois.pierre.paty@ensae.fr>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

distances can grow exponentially in dimension (Dudley,
1969; Fournier & Guillin, 2015), which means that an irrealistic amount of samples from two continuous measures is
needed to approximate faithfully the true distance between
them. This result can be mitigated when data lives on lower
dimensional manifolds as shown in (Weed & Bach, 2017),
but sample complexity bounds remain pessimistic even in
that case. From a computational point of view, that problem can be interpreted as that of a lack of robustness and
instability of OT metrics with respect to their inputs. This
fact was already a common concern of the community when
these tools were first adopted, as can be seen in the use of
`1 costs (Ling & Okada, 2007) or in the common practice
of thresholding cost matrices (Pele & Werman, 2009).
Regularization The idea to trade off a little optimality
in exchange for more regularity is by now considered a
crucial ingredient to make OT work in data sciences. A
line of work initiated in (Cuturi, 2013) advocates adding an
entropic penalty to the original OT problem, which results
in faster and differentiable quantities, as well as improved
sample complexity bounds (Genevay et al., 2019). Following this, other regularizations (Dessein et al., 2018), notably
quadratic (Blondel et al., 2018), have also been investigated. Sticking to an entropic regularization, one can also
interpret the recent proposal by Altschuler et al. (2018b)
to approximate Gaussian kernel matrices appearing in the
regularized OT problem with Nyström-type factorizations
(or exact features using a Taylor expansion (Cotter et al.,
2011) as in (Altschuler et al., 2018a)), as robust approaches
that are willing to tradeoff yet a little more cost optimality in
exchange for faster Sinkhorn iterations. In a different line of
work, quantizing first the measures to be compared before
carrying out OT on the resulting distriutions of centroids is a
fruitful alternative (Canas & Rosasco, 2012) which has been
recently revisited in (Forrow et al., 2019). Another approach
exploits the fact that the OT problem between two distributions on the real line boils down to the direct comparison of
their generalized quantile functions (Santambrogio, 2015,
§2). Computing quantile functions only requires sorting
values, with a mere log-linear complexity. The sliced approximation of OT (Rabin et al., 2011) consists in projecting
two probability distributions on a given line, compute the
optimal transport cost between these projected values, and
then repeat this procedure to average these distances over

