Transferable Clean-Label Poisoning Attacks on Deep Neural Nets

Chen Zhu * 1 W. Ronny Huang * 1 Ali Shafahi 1 Hengduo Li 1 Gavin Taylor 2 Christoph Studer 3
Tom Goldstein 1

Abstract
Clean-label poisoning attacks inject innocuous
looking (and “correctly” labeled) poison images
into training data, causing a model to misclassify
a targeted image after being trained on this data.
We consider transferable poisoning attacks that
succeed without access to the victim network’s
outputs, architecture, or (in some cases) training
data. To achieve this, we propose a new “polytope attack” in which poison images are designed
to surround the targeted image in feature space.
We also demonstrate that using Dropout during
poison creation helps to enhance transferability of
this attack. We achieve transferable attack success
rates of over 50% while poisoning only 1% of the
training set.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks require large datasets for training and
hyper-parameter tuning. As a result, many practitioners turn
to the web as a source for data, where one can automatically
scrape large datasets with little human oversight. Unfortunately, recent results have demonstrated that these data
acquisition processes can lead to security vulnerabilities.
In particular, retrieving data from untrusted sources makes
models vulnerable to data poisoning attacks wherein an attacker injects maliciously crafted examples into the training
set in order to hijack the model and control its behavior.
This paper is a call for attention to this security concern.
We explore effective and transferable clean-label poisoning
attacks on image classification problems. In general, data
poisoning attacks aim to control the model’s behavior during
inference by modifying its training data (Shafahi et al., 2018;
Suciu et al., 2018; Koh & Liang, 2017; Mahloujifar et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Maryland, College Park
United States Naval Academy 3 Cornell University. Correspondence to: Chen Zhu <chenzhu@cs.umd.edu>, W.
Ronny Huang <wronnyhuang@gmail.com>, Tom Goldstein
<tomg@cs.umd.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

2017). In contrast to evasion attacks (Biggio et al., 2013;
Szegedy et al., 2013; Goodfellow et al., 2015) and recently
proposed backdoor attacks (Liu et al., 2017; Chen et al.,
2017a; Turner et al., 2019), we study the case where the
targeted samples are not modified during inference.
Clean-label poisoning attacks differ from other poisoning
attacks (Biggio et al., 2012; Steinhardt et al., 2017) in a
critical way: they do not require the user to have any control
over the labeling process. Therefore, the poison images need
to maintain their malicious properties even when labeled
correctly by an expert. Such attacks open the door for a
unique threat model in which the attacker poisons datasets
simply by placing malicious images on the web, and waiting
for them to be harvested by web scraping bots, social media
platform operators, or other unsuspecting victims. Poisons
are then properly categorized by human labelers and used
during training. Furthermore, targeted clean label attacks
do not indiscriminately degrade test accuracy but rather
target misclassification of specific examples, rendering the
presence of the attack undetectable by looking at overall
model performance.
Clean-label poisoning attacks have been demonstrated only
in the white-box setting where the attacker has complete
knowledge of the victim model, and uses this knowledge
in the course of crafting poison examples (Shafahi et al.,
2018; Suciu et al., 2018). Black-box attacks of this type
have not been explored; thus, we aim to craft clean-label
poisons which transfer to unknown (black-box) deep image
classifiers.
It has been demonstrated in evasion attacks that with only
query access to the victim model, a substitute model can be
trained to craft adversarial perturbations that fool the victim
to classify the perturbed image into a specified class (Papernot et al., 2017). Compared to these attacks, transferable poisoning attacks remain challenging for two reasons.
First, the victim’s decision boundary trained on the poisoned
dataset is more unpredictable than the unknown but fixed
decision boundary of an evasion attack victim. Second, the
attacker cannot depend on having direct access to the victim model (i.e. through queries) and must thus make the
poisons model-agnostic. The latter also makes the attack
more dangerous since the poisons can be administered in

