Efficient Full-Matrix Adaptive Regularization

Naman Agarwal 1 Brian Bullins 1 2 Xinyi Chen 1 Elad Hazan 1 2 Karan Singh 1 2 Cyril Zhang 1 2 Yi Zhang 1 2

Abstract
Adaptive regularization methods pre-multiply a
descent direction by a preconditioning matrix.
Due to the large number of parameters of machine learning problems, full-matrix preconditioning methods are prohibitively expensive. We
show how to modify full-matrix adaptive regularization in order to make it practical and
effective. We also provide a novel theoretical analysis for adaptive regularization in nonconvex optimization settings. The core of our
algorithm, termed GGT, consists of the efficient computation of the inverse square root of
a low-rank matrix. Our preliminary experiments
show improved iteration-wise convergence rates
across synthetic tasks and standard deep learning benchmarks, and that the more carefullypreconditioned steps sometimes lead to a better
solution.

1. Introduction
Stochastic gradient descent is the workhorse behind the recent deep learning revolution. This simple and age-old algorithm has been supplemented with a variety of enhancements to improve its practical performance, and sometimes
its theoretical guarantees.
Amongst the acceleration methods there are three main categories: momentum, adaptive regularization, and variance
reduction. Momentum (in its various incarnations, like
heavy-ball or Nesterov acceleration) is the oldest enhancement. It has a well-developed theory, and is known to improve practical convergence in a variety of tasks, small and
large. It is also easy to implement. Variance reduction is
the most recent advancement; in theory and practice, it is
mostly applicable to convex optimization, and is thus less
influential in deep learning.
1

Google AI Princeton 2 Department of Computer Science, Princeton University. Correspondence to: Cyril Zhang
<cyril.zhang@cs.princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

This brings us to adaptive regularization: the most sophisticated, hard to implement, and widely-debated acceleration method. While state-of-the-art optimizers such as
Adam and AdaGrad (Kingma & Ba, 2014; Duchi et al.,
2011) do use adaptive regularization, they exclusively restrict the preconditioner to a diagonal matrix; as such, they
often marketed as per-coordinate “adaptive learning-rate”
methods. Despite solid theoretical guarantees, the practical
value of diagonal adaptive regularization as compared to
“vanilla” SGD has been the subject of much debate (Wilson
et al., 2017). However, the efficacy of full-matrix adaptive
regularization has been relatively unexplored. This is due
to the prohibitive computational cost associated with fullmatrix operations: full AdaGrad requires taking the inverse
square root of a large matrix.
In this paper, we present GGT, a practical solution to
the computational problems plaguing full-matrix adaptive
regularization, making this technique scalable for modern
deep models. At the heart of our method is a simple, GPUfriendly way to apply the inverse square root of the lowrank second-moment matrix of recent gradients; see Figure 1. GGT’s running time is comparable to state-of-the-art
optimizers.
We proceed to show that full-matrix preconditioning allows for much better exploitation of anisotropic curvature
in loss landscapes. First, we show synthetic experiments
which demonstate clear benefits of GGT over baselines, especially when the problem is ill-conditioned. Then, we implement GGT at scale, and show that the benefits translate
to faster training on standard deep learning benchmarks.
Our improvement is most salient in complicated landscapes
like RNN training.
Our algorithm comes with theoretical guarantees. We give
the first proof of convergence to first-order critical points
for an algorithm with adaptive regularization in a stochastic
non-convex setting, featuring a rate which is dependent on
an adaptive ratio. We show examples where our bound
is stronger than that for SGD, providing some theoretical
basis for our empirical findings.
1.1. Related work
Since the introduction of AdaGrad (Duchi et al., 2011), diagonal adaptive regularization has been a mainstay in the

