Learning Novel Policies For Tasks

Yunbo Zhang 1 Wenhao Yu 1 Greg Turk 1

Abstract
In this work, we present a reinforcement learning
algorithm that can find a variety of policies (novel
policies) for a task that is given by a task reward
function. Our method does this by creating a second reward function that recognizes previously
seen state sequences and rewards those by novelty,
which is measured using autoencoders that have
been trained on state sequences from previously
discovered policies. We present a two-objective
update technique for policy gradient algorithms in
which each update of the policy is a compromise
between improving the task reward and improving
the novelty reward. Using this method, we end
up with a collection of policies that solves a given
task as well as carrying out action sequences that
are distinct from one another. We demonstrate
this method on maze navigation tasks, a reaching
task for a simulated robot arm, and a locomotion
task for a hopper. We also demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on deceptive tasks in
which policy gradient methods often get stuck.

1. Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has shown great potential in solving problems in various domains such as game
playing, maze navigation, and robotic control. Often times
it is sufficient to find a single policy that solves the given
task. In some cases, however, it may be desirable to find
several different policies that solve the problem in different
ways. If, for instance the goal is to produce a locomotion
policy for a legged robot, there may be several ways in
which the robot may coordinate its limbs, leading to various
styles of walking. Similarly, there might be several ways
in which a robot arm can reach a given target, and some of
these reaching motions may prove more useful than others
1
School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA. Correspondence to:
Yunbo
Zhang <yzhang3027@gatech.edu>, Wenhao Yu <wenhaoyu@gatech.edu>, Greg Turk <turk@cc.gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

in different situations.
The goal of our work is to provide reinforcement learning
framework for finding not just a single policy for a given
task, but instead find a variety of distinct policies, each of
which also solves the task at hand. We will refer to each
of these various policies for a given task as a novel policy.
Our method of finding novel policies draws upon the recent
success of policy gradient approaches to solving continuous
control problems, such as PPO (Schulman et al., 2017),
TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015), and DDPG (Lillicrap et al.,
2015). A given policy gradient algorithm is guided towards
producing a policy by a provided reward function, and the
algorithm seeks a policy that maximizes the cumulative
reward. If a particular policy that has been produced by a
policy gradient algorithm is somehow insufficient for a given
task, or if further variation is desired, there are typically two
alternatives. One possibility is to run the algorithm again
using a different random number seed, and hope that this
will result in a different policy. The second option is to
modify or augment the reward function so that the policy
gradient algorithm is guided towards a different policy. Our
method offers a different approach to finding novel policies
that does not rely on chance or reward tuning.
We formulate the problem of finding novel policies as a
multi-objective optimization problem. First, we create an
autoencoder that recognizes the sequence of states that previous policies typically generate. We use this autoencoder to
create a function that rewards novelty, that is, that rewards
sequences of actions that are significantly different than
those of the previous policies. We then solve a reinforcement learning problem in which there are two objectives: 1)
solve the given task (guided by the task reward function),
and 2) perform sequences of actions that are novel when
compared to previous policies (guided by a novelty reward
function). There are several ways in which a policy gradient
algorithm may solve such a multi-objective problem. One
way is to create a new reward term that is simply a weighted
sum of the task reward and the novelty reward. Another
possibility is to examine the policy gradient with respect
to each of these reward functions, and update the policy in
a way that attempts to follow both these gradients. We explore both these methods, and in particular we demonstrate
that using an angle bisector between the task and novelty
gradients is an effective approach across a variety of tasks.

