Sample-Optimal Parametric Q-Learning Using Linearly Additive Features

Lin F. Yang 1 Mengdi Wang 1

Abstract
Consider a Markov decision process (MDP) that
admits a set of state-action features, which can
linearly express the process’s probabilistic transition model. We propose a parametric Q-learning
algorithm that finds an approximate-optimal policy using a sample size proportional to the feature
dimension K and invariant with respect to the
size of the state space. To further improve its sample efficiency, we exploit the monotonicity property and intrinsic noise structure of the Bellman
operator, provided the existence of anchor stateactions that imply implicit non-negativity in the
feature space. We augment the algorithm using
techniques of variance reduction, monotonicity
preservation, and confidence bounds. It is proved
to find a policy which is -optimal from any initial
state with high probability using e
O(K/2 (1−γ)3 )
sample transitions for arbitrarily large-scale MDP
with a discount factor γ ∈ (0, 1). A matching
information-theoretical lower bound is proved,
confirming the sample optimality of the proposed
method with respect to all parameters (up to polylog factors).

1. Introduction
Markov decision problems (MDP) are known to suffer from
the curse of dimensionality. A basic theoretical question
is: Suppose that one can query sample transitions from
any state of the system using any action, how many samples are needed for learning a good policy? In the tabular
setting where the MDP has S states and A actions, the necessary and sufficient sample size for finding an approximatee SA 3 ) 1 where γ ∈ (0, 1) is a discount
optimal policy is Θ(
(1−γ)
factor (Azar et al., 2013; Sidford et al., 2018a). However,
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Operations Research
and Financial Engineering, Princeton University. Correspondence to: Lin Yang <lin.yang@princeton.edu>, Mengdi Wang
<mengdiw@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).
1g
f (·) ignores poly log f (·) factors.

this theoretical-sharp result does not generalize to practical
problems where S, A can be arbitrarily large or infinite.
Let us consider MDP with structural knowledges. Suppose
that each state-action pair (s, a) admits a feature vector
φ(s, a) ∈ RK that can express the transition dynamics conditioning on (s, a). In practice, the abstract state variable s
can be a sequence of historical records or a raw-pixel image,
containing much information that is not related to the decision process. More general settings of MDP with structural
knowledges have been considered in Azizzadenesheli et al.
(2016); Jiang et al. (2017) and references therein.
In this paper, we focus on an important and very basic
class of structured MDP, where the features can represent
transition distributions P (· | ·) through an unknown linear
additive model. The feature-based linear transition model
is related to the commonly used linear Q-function model.
We show that they are essentially equivalent when there
is zero Bellman error (a notion introduced in Munos &
Szepesvári (2008)). A similar argument has been made in
Parr et al. (2008). It also contains as a special case the soft
state aggregation model (Singh et al., 1995; Duan et al.,
2018). In this setting, we will study the theoretic sample
complexity for learning a good policy by querying statetransition samples. We also aim to develop efficient policy
learning algorithms with provable sample efficiency. We
study the following two questions:
Q1: How many observations of state-action-state transitions
are necessary for finding an -optimal policy?
Q2: How many samples are sufficient for finding an optimal policy with high probability and how to find it?
To answer Q1, an information-theoretic lower bound is
provided (Theorem 1), suggesting that, regardless of the
learning algorithm, the necessary sample size for finding a
K
e
good policy with high probability is Ω
(1−γ)3 ·2 where K
is the dimension of feature space.
To answer Q2, we develop Q-learning-like algorithms that
take as input state-transition samples and output a parameterized policy. A basic parametric Q-learning algorithm performs approximate value-iteration estimates on a few points
of the Q function, so that actual updates happen on the parameters. This idea originates from the phased Q-learning
(Kearns & Singh, 1999) and the fitted value iteration (Munos

