An Instability in Variational Inference for Topic Models

Behrooz Ghorbani 1 Hamid Javadi 2 Andrea Montanari 1 3

Abstract
Naive mean field variational methods are the stateof-the-art approach to inference in topic models.
We show that these methods suffer from an instability that can produce misleading conclusions.
Namely, for certain regimes of the model parameters, variational inference outputs a non-trivial decomposition into topics. However -–for the same
parameter values-– the data contain no actual information about the true topic decomposition, and
the output of the algorithm is uncorrelated with
it. In particular, the estimated posterior mean
is wrong, and estimated credible regions do not
achieve the nominal coverage. We discuss how
this instability is remedied by more accurate mean
field approximations.

1. Introduction
Topic modeling (Blei, 2012) aims at extracting the latent structure from a corpus of documents (images or
texts), that are represented as vectors x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ∈
Rd . The key assumption is that the n documents are
(approximately) convex combinations of a small number
k of topics h̃1 , . . . , h̃k ∈ Rd . Conditional on the topics, documents are generated independently by letting
√
Pk
xa = ( β/d) `=1 wa,` h̃` + z a , where the weights
wa = (wa,` )1≤`≤k and noise vectors z a are i.i.d. across
a ∈ {1, . . . , n}. The coefficient β ≥ 0 can be interpreted
as a signal-to-noise ratio. It is also useful to introduce the
matrix X ∈ Rn×d whose i-th row is xi , and therefore
√
β
X=
W HT + Z ,
(1.1)
d
where W ∈ Rn×k and H ∈ Rd×k . The a-th row of W ,
is the vector of weights wa , while the rows of H will be
denoted by hi ∈ Rk .
1

Note that wa belongs to the simplex P1 (k) = {w ∈ Rk≥0 :
hw, 1k i = 1}. It is common to assume that its prior is
Dirichlet: this class of models is known as Latent Dirichlet Allocations, or LDA (Blei et al., 2003). Here we will
consider a symmetric Dirichlet prior, with all parameters
equal to ν (which we will denote by Dir(ν; k)). As for the
topics H, their prior distribution depends on the specific
application. here we will consider two simple examples:
in the Gaussian case, we assume (h̃i )i≤d ∼iid N(0, I k );
in the Dirichlet case (h̃i )i≤d ∼iid Dir(ν̃; k). Most of our
discussion and explicit formulas will refer for simplicity
to the Gaussian case. However, we derived analogous expressions for the Dirichlet model, and will compare with
numerical simulations carried out under both distributions.
Our methodology is indeed general. Finally, Z will be a
noise matrix with entries (Zij )i∈[n],j∈[d] ∼iid N(0, 1/d).
In fully Bayesian topic models, the parameters of the Dirichlet distribution, as well as the topic distributions are themselves unknown and to be learned from data. Here we will
work in an idealized setting in which they are known. We
will also assume that data are in fact distributed according
to the postulated generative model. Since we are studying
the limitations of current approaches, our main point is only
reinforced by assuming this idealized scenario.
Computing the posterior distribution of H, W given the
data X is computationally challenging. Since the seminal
work of Blei, Ng and Jordan (Blei et al., 2003), variational
inference is the method of choice for addressing this problem within topic models. The term ‘variational inference’
refers to a broad class of methods that aim at approximating the posterior computation by solving an optimization
problem, see (Jordan et al., 1999; Wainwright et al., 2008;
Blei et al., 2017) for background. A popular starting point
is the Gibbs variational principle, namely the fact that the
posterior solves the following convex optimization problem:
pW ,H|X ( · , ·, |X) = arg min KL(qkpW ,H|X ) (1.2)
q∈Pn,d,k

Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University,
CA 2 Digital Signal Processing Group, Rice University, TX
3
Department of Statistics, Stanford University, CA. Correspondence to: Behrooz Ghorbani <ghorbani@stanford.edu>.

where KL( · k · ) denotes the Kullback-Leibler divergence.
Optimization is within the space Pn,d,k of probability measures on H, W .

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Even for W , H discrete, the Gibbs principle has exponentially many decision variables. Variational methods differ
in the way the problem (1.2) is approximated. The main

