Rate Distortion For Model Compression:
From Theory To Practice

Weihao Gao 1 Yu-Han Liu 2 Chong Wang 3 Sewoong Oh 4

Abstract
The enormous size of modern deep neural networks makes it challenging to deploy those models in memory and communication limited scenarios. Thus, compressing a trained model without a
significant loss in performance has become an increasingly important task. Tremendous advances
has been made recently, where the main technical building blocks are pruning, quantization, and
low-rank factorization. In this paper, we propose
principled approaches to improve upon the common heuristics used in those building blocks, by
studying the fundamental limit for model compression via the rate distortion theory. We prove
a lower bound for the rate distortion function for
model compression and prove its achievability
for linear models. Although this achievable compression scheme is intractable in practice, this
analysis motivates a novel objective function for
model compression, which can be used to improve
classes of model compressor such as pruning or
quantization. Theoretically, we prove that the
proposed scheme is optimal for compressing onehidden-layer ReLU neural networks. Empirically,
we show that the proposed scheme improves upon
the baseline in the compression-accuracy tradeoff.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have been successful, for example,
in the application of computer vision (Krizhevsky et al.,
2012), machine translation (Wu et al., 2016) and game playing (Silver et al., 2017). With increasing data and compu1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Work done as an intern in Google. 2 Google, Inc. 3 Bytedance, Inc. 4 Department of
Computer Science, University of Washington. Correspondence
to: Weihao Gao <wgao9@illinois.edu>, Yu-Han Liu <yuhanliu@google.com>, Chong Wang <mr.chongwang@gmail.com>,
Sewoong Oh <sewoong@cs.washington.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

tational power, the number of weights in practical neural
network model also grows rapidly. For example, in the application of image recognition, the LeNet-5 model (LeCun
et al., 1998) only has 400K weights. After two decades,
AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) has more than 60M
weights, and VGG-16 net (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014)
has more than 130M weights. Coates et al. (2013) even
tried a neural network with 11B weights. The huge size of
neural networks brings many challenges, including large
storage, difficulty in training, and large energy consumption.
In particular, deploying such extreme models to embedded
mobile systems is not feasible.
Several approaches have been proposed to reduce the size of
large neural networks while preserving the performance as
much as possible. Most of those approaches fall into one of
the two broad categories. The first category designs novel
network structures with small number of parameters, such as
SqueezeNet (Iandola et al., 2016) and MobileNet (Howard
et al., 2017). The other category directly compresses a
given large neural network using pruning, quantization, and
matrix factorization, including (LeCun et al., 1990; Hassibi
& Stork, 1993; Han et al., 2015b;a; Cheng et al., 2015).
There are also advanced methods to train the neural network
using Bayesian methods to help pruning or quantization at
a later stage, such as (Ullrich et al., 2017; Louizos et al.,
2017; Federici et al., 2017).
As more and more model compression algorithms are proposed and compression ratio becomes larger and larger, it
motivates us to think about the fundamental question —
How well can we do for model compression? The goal of
model compression is to trade off the number of bits used to
describe the model parameters, and the distortion between
the compressed model and original model. We wonder at
least how many bits is needed to achieve certain distortion?
Despite many successful model compression algorithms,
these theoretical questions still remain unclear.
In this paper, we fill in this gap by bringing tools from rate
distortion theory to identify the fundamental limit on how
much a model can be compressed. Specifically, we focus on
compression of a pretrained model, rather than designing
new structures or retraining models. Our approach builds
upon rate-distortion theory introduced by Shannon (1959)

