More Efficient Off-Policy Evaluation through Regularized Targeted Learning

Aurélien F. Bibaut * 1 Ivana Malenica * 1 Nikos Vlassis 2 Mark J. van der Laan 1

Abstract
We study the problem of off-policy evaluation
(OPE) in Reinforcement Learning (RL), where the
aim is to estimate the performance of a new policy
given historical data that may have been generated by a different policy, or policies. In particular,
we introduce a novel doubly-robust estimator for
the OPE problem in RL, based on the Targeted
Maximum Likelihood Estimation principle from
the statistical causal inference literature. We also
introduce several variance reduction techniques
that lead to impressive performance gains in offpolicy evaluation. We show empirically that our
estimator uniformly wins over existing off-policy
evaluation methods across multiple RL environments and various levels of model misspecification. Finally, we further the existing theoretical
analysis of estimators for the RL off-policy
√ estimation problem by showing their OP (1/ n) rate
of convergence and characterizing their asymptotic distribution.

1. Introduction
Off-policy evaluation (OPE) is an increasingly important
problem in reinforcement learning. Works on OPE address
the pressing issue of evaluating the performance of a novel
policy in a setting where actual enforcement might be too
costly, infeasible, or even hazardous. This situation arises
in many fields, including medicine, finance, advertising,
and education, to name a few (Murphy et al., 2001; Petersen et al., 2014; Theocharous et al., 2015; Hoiles & Van
Der Schaar, 2016). The OPE problem can be treated as a
counterfactual quantity estimation problem, as we inquire
about the mean reward we would have accrued, had we,
contrary to fact, implemented the policy πe at the time of
data-collection. Estimating and inferring such counterfactual quantities is a well studied problem in statistical causal
Equal contribution 1 University of California, Berkeley, CA
Netflix, Los Gatos, CA. Correspondence to: Aurélien F. Bibaut
<aurelien.bibaut@berkeley.edu>.

inference, and has led to many methodological developments. One of the things we aim to do in this work is to
further earlier efforts (Dudik et al., 2011) in bridging the
gap between the reinforcement learning and causal inference
fields.
There are roughly two predominant classes of approaches
to off-policy value evaluation in RL (Jiang & Li, 2015).
The first is the direct method (DM), analogous to the Gcomputation procedure in causal inference (Robins et al.,
1999; 2000). The direct method first fits a model of the
system’s dynamics and then uses the learned fit in order to
estimate the mean reward of the target policy (evaluation
policy). The estimators produced by this approach usually
exhibit low variance, but suffer from high bias when the
model fit is misspecified or the sample size is small relative to the complexity of the function class of the model
(Mannor et al., 2007). The second major avenue for offpolicy value evaluation is importance sampling methods,
also termed inverse propensity score methods in statistical
causal inference (Rosenbaum & Rubin, 1983). Importance
sampling (IS) attempts to correct the mismatch between the
distributions produced by the behavior and target policies
(Precup et al., 2000; Precup, 2000). IS estimators are unbiased under mild conditions, but their variance tends to
be large when the evaluation and behavior policies differ
significantly (Farajtabar et al., 2018), and grows exponentially with the horizon, rendering them (Farajtabar et al.,
2018) impractical for many RL settings. A third class of
estimators, Doubly Robust (DR) estimators, obtained by
combining a DM estimator and an IS estimator, are becoming standard in OPE (Farajtabar et al., 2018; Jiang & Li,
2015; Thomas & Brunskill, 2016). These originate from the
statistics literature (Robins et al., 1994; Robins & Rotnitzky,
1995; Bang & Robins, 2005; van der Laan & Rubin, 2006;
van der Laan & Rose, 2011; 2018), and were introduced in
the RL literature by Dudik et al. (2011). Combining a DM
and an IS estimator under the form of a DR estimator leads
to lower bias than DM alone, and lower variance than IS
alone.

*

2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Our contribution to OPE in RL is multifold. First we adapt
a doubly robust estimator from statistical causal inference,
the Longitudinal Targeted Maximum Likelihood Estimator
(LTMLE) to the OPE in RL setting. We√show that our
adapted estimator converges at rate OP (1/ n) to the true

