Fingerprint Policy Optimisation
for Robust Reinforcement Learning

Supratik Paul 1 Michael A. Osborne 2 Shimon Whiteson 1

Abstract
Policy gradient methods ignore the potential value
of adjusting environment variables: unobservable
state features that are randomly determined by
the environment in a physical setting, but are controllable in a simulator. This can lead to slow
learning, or convergence to suboptimal policies,
if the environment variable has a large impact on
the transition dynamics. In this paper, we present
fingerprint policy optimisation (FPO), which finds
a policy that is optimal in expectation across the
distribution of environment variables. The central idea is to use Bayesian optimisation (BO)
to actively select the distribution of the environment variable that maximises the improvement
generated by each iteration of the policy gradient method. To make this BO practical, we contribute two easy-to-compute low-dimensional fingerprints of the current policy. Our experiments
show that FPO can efficiently learn policies that
are robust to significant rare events, which are
unlikely to be observable under random sampling,
but are key to learning good policies.

1. Introduction
Policy gradient methods have demonstrated remarkable success in learning policies for various continuous control tasks
(Lillicrap et al., 2016; Mordatch et al., 2015; Schulman
et al., 2016). However, the expense of running physical
trials, coupled with the high sample complexity of these
methods, pose significant challenges in directly applying
them to a physical setting, e.g., to learn a locomotion policy
for a robot. Another problem is evaluating the robustness
of a learned policy; it is difficult to ensure that the policy
performs as expected, as it is usually infeasible to test it
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, UK.
Correspondence to: Supratik Paul <supratik.paul@cs.ox.ac.uk>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

across all possible settings. Fortunately, policies can often
be trained and tested in a simulator that exposes key environment variables – state features that are unobservable to
the agent and randomly determined by the environment in a
physical setting, but that are controllable in the simulator.
Environment variables are ubiquitous in real-world settings.
For example, localisation errors may mean that a robot is
much nearer to an obstacle than expected, increasing the
risk of a collision. While an actual robot cannot directly
trigger such errors, they are trivial to introduce in simulation.
Similarly, if we want to train a helicopter to fly robustly, we
can easily simulate different wind conditions, even though
we cannot control weather in the real world.
A naı̈ve application of a policy gradient method updates
a policy at each iteration by using a batch of trajectories
sampled from the original distribution over environment
variables irrespective of the current policy or the training
iteration. Thus, it does not explicitly take into account how
environment variables affect learning for different policies.
Furthermore, this approach is not robust to significant rare
events (SREs), i.e., it fails any time there are rare events
that have significantly different rewards thereby affecting
expected performance.
For example, even if robot localisation errors are rare, coping with them properly may still be key to maximising expected performance, since the collisions they can trigger are
so catastrophic. Similarly, handling certain wind conditions
properly may be essential to robustly flying a helicopter,
even if those conditions are rare, since doing so may avoid
a crash. In such cases, the naı̈ve approach will not see such
rare events often enough to learn an appropriate response.
These problems can be avoided by learning off environment
(Frank et al., 2008; Ciosek & Whiteson, 2017; Paul et al.,
2018), i.e., exploiting the ability to adjust environment variables in simulation to trigger SREs more often and thereby
improve the efficiency and robustness of learning. However,
existing off environment approaches have significant disadvantages. They either require substantial prior knowledge
about the environment and/or dynamics (Frank et al., 2008;
Ciosek & Whiteson, 2017), can only be applied to low dimensional policies (Paul et al., 2018), or are highly sample

