Automatic Posterior Transformation for Likelihood-free Inference
David S. Greenberg 1 Marcel Nonnenmacher 1 Jakob H. Macke 1

Abstract
How can one perform Bayesian inference on
stochastic simulators with intractable likelihoods?
A recent approach is to learn the posterior from
adaptively proposed simulations using neural
network-based conditional density estimators.
However, existing methods are limited to a narrow range of proposal distributions or require importance weighting that can limit performance
in practice. Here we present automatic posterior
transformation (APT), a new sequential neural
posterior estimation method for simulation-based
inference. APT can modify the posterior estimate
using arbitrary, dynamically updated proposals,
and is compatible with powerful flow-based density estimators. It is more flexible, scalable and
efficient than previous simulation-based inference
techniques. APT can operate directly on highdimensional time series and image data, opening
up new applications for likelihood-free inference.

1. Introduction
Many applications in science, engineering and economics
make extensive use of complex simulations describing the
structure and dynamics of the process being investigated.
Such models are derived from knowledge of the mechanisms
and principles underlying the data-generating process, and
are of critical importance for scientific hypothesis-building
and testing. However, linking complex mechanistic models
to empirical measurements can be challenging, since many
models are defined implicitly through stochastic simulators
(e.g. metabolic models, spiking networks in neuroscience,
climate and weather simulations, chemical reaction systems,
detector models in high energy physics, graphics engines,
population models in genetics, dynamical systems in ecology, complex economic models, . . . ).
1

Computational Neuroengineering, Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: <{david.greenberg, marcel.Nonnenmacher, macke}@tum.de>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

For complex data-generating processes such as simulationbased models, it is often impossible to compute the likelihood p(x|θ) of data x given parameters θ, because it involves intractable integrals, because a simulator’s internal
states are unavailable or because real-world experiments
are involved. Classical approaches to such likelihood-free
statistical inference (also known as Approximate Bayesian
Computation (ABC), see Sisson et al., 2018) do not scale to
high-dimensional applications, and typically rely on ad-hoc
choices to design summary statistics and distance functions.
Recently, several studies have trained conditional density
estimators to perform simulation-based inference, while
adaptively tuning the simulations to yield informative data.
The techniques fall into two main classes, which seek to
directly estimate either the likelihood or the posterior:
Synthetic likelihood (SL) methods (Wood, 2010; Fan et al.,
2013; Turner & Sederberg, 2014) aim to estimate the likelihood p(x|θ), and plug the results into an inference procedure (such as MCMC) to compute the posterior. A powerful
recent approach, sequential neural likelihood (SNL), trains
a neural conditional density estimator (e.g. masked flow,
Papamakarios et al., 2017) to estimate p(x|θ) for all x and
θ (Papamakarios et al., 2018; Lueckmann et al., 2018).
Posterior density estimation approaches directly target the
posterior p(θ|x) by training a density-estimation neural network from (simulated) data x to θ. This approach does not
require additional inference procedures, and thus naturally
amortizes inference. In addition, it leverages the ability of
neural networks to learn informative features from data.
However, posterior estimation faces a key challenge: Drawing simulation parameters from the prior is wasteful, but
other, adaptively-chosen proposals require either numerically unstable post-hoc corrections (Papamakarios & Murray, 2016) or importance weights (Lueckmann et al., 2017)
that increase variance during learning (details in 2.3).
Here we propose Automatic Posterior Transformation
(APT), a new sequential neural posterior estimation approach that combines desirable properties of posterior estimation (directly targeting the posterior, amortization, feature
learning) and likelihood estimation (flexible proposals, no
importance weights or post-hoc corrections). APT learns
a mapping from data to the true posterior by maximizing
the probability of simulation parameters under the proposal

