A Quantitative Analysis of the Effect of Batch Normalization on Gradient
Descent
Yongqiang Cai 1 Qianxiao Li 1 2 Zuowei Shen 1

Abstract
Despite its empirical success and recent theoretical progress, there generally lacks a quantitative
analysis of the effect of batch normalization (BN)
on the convergence and stability of gradient descent. In this paper, we provide such an analysis
on the simple problem of ordinary least squares
(OLS), where the precise dynamical properties of
gradient descent (GD) is completely known, thus
allowing us to isolate and compare the additional
effects of BN. More precisely, we show that unlike GD, gradient descent with BN (BNGD) converges for arbitrary learning rates for the weights,
and the convergence remains linear under mild
conditions. Moreover, we quantify two different sources of acceleration of BNGD over GD –
one due to over-parameterization which improves
the effective condition number and another due
having a large range of learning rates giving rise
to fast descent. These phenomena set BNGD
apart from GD and could account for much of
its robustness properties. These findings are confirmed quantitatively by numerical experiments,
which further show that many of the uncovered
properties of BNGD in OLS are also observed
qualitatively in more complex supervised learning problems.

1. Introduction
Batch normalization (BN) is one of the most important techniques for training deep neural networks and has proven
extremely effective in avoiding gradient blowups during
back-propagation and speeding up convergence. In its original introduction (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015), the desirable
1

effects of BN are attributed to the so-called “reduction of
covariate shift”. However, it is unclear what this statement
means in precise mathematical terms.
Although recent theoretical work have established certain convergence properties of gradient descent with BN
(BNGD) and its variants (Ma & Klabjan, 2017; Kohler et al.,
2018; Arora et al., 2019), there generally lacks a quantitative comparison between the dynamics of the usual gradient
descent (GD) and BNGD. In other words, a basic question
that one could pose is: what quantitative changes does BN
bring to the stability and convergence of gradient descent dynamics? Or even more simply: why should one use BNGD
instead of GD? To date, a general mathematical answer to
these questions remain elusive. This can be partly attributed
to the complexity of the optimization objectives that one
typically applies BN to, such as those encountered in deep
learning. In these cases, even a quantitative analysis of the
dynamics of GD itself is difficult, not to mention a precise
comparison between the two.
For this reason, it is desirable to formulate the simplest nontrivial setting, on which one can concretely study the effect
of batch normalization and answer the questions above in
a quantitative manner. This is the goal of the current paper, where we focus on perhaps the simplest supervised
learning problem – ordinary least squares (OLS) regression
– and analyze precisely the effect of BNGD when applied to
this problem. A primary reason for this choice is that the
dynamics of GD in least-squares regression is completely
understood, thus allowing us to isolate and contrast the additional effects of batch normalization.
Our main findings can be summarized as follows
1. Unlike GD, BNGD converges for arbitrarily large learning rates for the weights, and the convergence remains
linear under mild conditions.

Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, Singapore 2 Institute of High Performance Computing, A*STAR, Singapore. Correspondence to: Yongqiang Cai
<matcyon@nus.edu.sg>, Qianxiao Li <Qianxiao@nus.edu.sg>,
Zuowei Shen <matzuows@nus.edu.sg>.

2. The asymptotic linear convergence of BNGD is faster
than that of GD, and this can be attributed to the overparameterization that BNGD introduces.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

3. Unlike GD, the convergence rate of BNGD is insensitive to the choice of learning rates. The range of
insensitivity can be characterized, and in particular it

