Predicate Exchange: Inference with Declarative Knowledge

Zenna Tavares 1 Javier Burroni 2 Edgar Minasyan 3 Armando Solar Lezama 1 Rajesh Ranganath 4

Abstract
Programming languages allow us to express complex predicates, but existing inference methods
are unable to condition probabilistic models on
most of them. To support a broader class of predicates, we develop an inference procedure called
predicate exchange, which softens predicates. A
soft predicate quantifies the extent to which values of model variables are consistent with its hard
counterpart. We substitute the likelihood term
in the Bayesian posterior with a soft predicate,
and develop a variant of replica exchange MCMC
to draw posterior samples. We implement predicate exchange as a language agnostic tool which
performs a nonstandard execution of a probabilistic program. We demonstrate the approach on
sequence models of health and inverse rendering.

1. Introduction
Conditioning in Bayesian inference incorporates observed
data into a model. In a broader sense, conditioning revises
a model such that a predicate of uncertain truth becomes a
fact. Conventionally, this predicate is the equality of observable variables to data. Predicates outside of this class have
received significantly less attention, partly because it makes
the inference problem significantly more challenging, and
partly because conditioning on data accommodates many
applications. Nevertheless, there are many more predicates
outside this class than inside; our inability to condition on
them is a major limitation.
The ability to condition on a broader class of predicates
would enable us to incorporate more kinds of declarative
domain knowledge into generative models. For example,
probabilistic variants of inverse rendering (Marschner &
Greenberg, 1998; Kulkarni et al., 2015) require a prior dis1
MIT, USA 2 College of Information and Computer Science,
University of Massachusetts, Amherst, USA. 3 Princeton University, USA 4 NYU, USA. Correspondence to: Zenna Tavares
<zenna@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

tribution over three dimensional scenes. Some forms of
knowledge, such as the fact that rigid bodies do not intersect, are easier to express declaratively as predicates, than
constructively in a generative model. Conditioning on predicates allows us to express what should be true without the
burden of specifying how.
Predicates can also represent observations that restrict variables to sets rather than single values. For example, a medical practitioner may observe that a patient is hypoglycemic,
i.e., that their glucose levels have fallen below a critical
value. Given a model over time series of glucose levels
(Levine et al., 2017; Murata et al., 2004), this observation
can be realized as a predicate that maps the series to 1 if
it falls below the threshold. Neither hypoglycemia nor any
of the infinite number of predicates that can be expressed,
need to exist in the generative model apriori.
Probability theory treats conditioning on predicates and concrete observations uniformly, but sampling from models
conditioned on most predicates is challenging due to the
lack of a tractable likelihood function. The likelihood function quantifies the extent to which values of latent variables
are consistent with observations, and is deemed intractable if
it is normalized by intractable integrals or summations. This
can occur, for example, if we condition random variables
that are deterministic transformations of other random variables (e.g., the occurrence of hypoglycemia in the example
above, or the mean of a collection of variables). Alternatively, if the model is generative, i.e. specified as a stochastic
simulation, the likelihood is not explicitly available even
when the condition is a conventional observation. The numerous effective likelihood-based sampling (Andrieu et al.,
2003) and variational (Jordan et al., 1999; Ranganath et al.,
2014) methods are inapplicable as a result.
In this paper we present predicate exchange: a likelihoodfree method to sample from distributions conditioned on
predicates from a broad class. It is composed of two parts:
1. Predicate Relaxation constructs soft predicates which
return values in a continuous Boolean algebra: the unit
interval [0, 1] with continuous logical connectives ˜
∧.
˜
¬. Softened predicates approximate their hard
∨ and ˜
counterparts.
2. Replica Exchange is a Markov Chain Monte Carlo

