A Kernel Perspective for Regularizing Deep Neural Networks

Alberto Bietti * 1 Grégoire Mialon * 1 2 Dexiong Chen 1 Julien Mairal 1

Abstract
We propose a new point of view for regularizing
deep neural networks by using the norm of a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS). Even though
this norm cannot be computed, it admits upper
and lower approximations leading to various practical strategies. Specifically, this perspective (i)
provides a common umbrella for many existing
regularization principles, including spectral norm
and gradient penalties, or adversarial training, (ii)
leads to new effective regularization penalties, and
(iii) suggests hybrid strategies combining lower
and upper bounds to get better approximations of
the RKHS norm. We experimentally show this
approach to be effective when learning on small
datasets, or to obtain adversarially robust models.

1. Introduction
Learning predictive models for complex tasks often requires
large amounts of annotated data. For instance, convolutional
neural networks are huge-dimensional and typically involve
more parameters than training samples, which raises several challenges: achieving good generalization with small
datasets is indeed difficult, which limits the deployment
of such deep models to many tasks where labeled data is
scarce, e.g., in biology (Ching et al., 2018). Besides, imperceptible adversarial perturbations can significantly degrade
the prediction quality (Szegedy et al., 2013; Biggio & Roli,
2018). These issues raise the question of regularization as
an essential tool to control the complexity of deep models,
as well as their stability to small variations of their inputs.
In this paper, we present a new perspective on regularization
of deep networks, by viewing convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) as elements of a RKHS following the work of Bietti & Mairal (2019) on deep convolutional kernels. For
*
Equal contribution 1 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS,
Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France 2 Département
d’informatique de l’ENS, ENS, CNRS, Inria, PSL, 75005 Paris,
France. Correspondence to: <firstname.lastname@inria.fr>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

such kernels, the RKHS contains indeed deep convolutional
networks similar to generic ones—up to smooth approximations of rectified linear units. Such a point of view provides
a natural regularization function, the RKHS norm, which
allows us to control the variations of the predictive model
and to limit its complexity for better generalization. Besides,
the norm also acts as a Lipschitz constant, which provides a
direct control on the stability to adversarial perturbations.
In contrast to traditional kernel methods, the RKHS norm
cannot be explicitly computed in our setup. Yet, this norm
admits numerous approximations—lower bounds and upper
bounds—which lead to many strategies for regularization
based on penalties, constraints, or combinations thereof.
Depending on the chosen approximation, we recover then
many existing principles such as spectral norm regularization (Cisse et al., 2017; Yoshida & Miyato, 2017; Miyato
et al., 2018a; Sedghi et al., 2019), gradient penalties and
double backpropagation (Drucker & Le Cun, 1991; SimonGabriel et al., 2019; Gulrajani et al., 2017; Roth et al.,
2017; 2018; Arbel et al., 2018), adversarial training (Madry
et al., 2018), and we also draw links with tangent propagation (Simard et al., 1998). For all these principles, we
provide a unified viewpoint and theoretical insights, and we
also introduce new variants, which we show are effective
in practice when learning with few labeled data, or in the
presence of adversarial perturbations.
Moreover, regularization and robustness are tightly linked in
our kernel framework. Specifically, some lower bounds on
the RKHS norm lead to robust optimization objectives with
worst-case ℓ2 perturbations; further, we can extend marginbased generalization bounds in the spirit of Bartlett et al.
(2017); Boucheron et al. (2005) to the setting of adversarially robust generalization (see Schmidt et al., 2018), where
an adversary can perturb test data. We also discuss connections between recent regularization strategies for training
generative adversarial networks and approaches to generative modeling based on kernel two-sample tests (MMD) (Dziugaite et al., 2015; Li et al., 2017; Bińkowski et al., 2018).
Summary of the contributions.
• We introduce an RKHS perspective for regularizing deep
neural networks models which provides a unified view on
various practical regularization principles, together with
theoretical insight and guarantees;

