Autoregressive Energy Machines

Charlie Nash * 1 Conor Durkan * 1

Abstract
Neural density estimators are flexible families of
parametric models which have seen widespread
use in unsupervised machine learning in recent
years. Maximum-likelihood training typically dictates that these models be constrained to specify
an explicit density. However, this limitation can
be overcome by instead using a neural network
to specify an energy function, or unnormalized
density, which can subsequently be normalized
to obtain a valid distribution. The challenge with
this approach lies in accurately estimating the
normalizing constant of the high-dimensional energy function. We propose the Autoregressive
Energy Machine, an energy-based model which
simultaneously learns an unnormalized density
and computes an importance-sampling estimate
of the normalizing constant for each conditional
in an autoregressive decomposition. The Autoregressive Energy Machine achieves state-of-theart performance on a suite of density-estimation
tasks.

1. Introduction
Modeling the joint distribution of high-dimensional random
variables is a key task in unsupervised machine learning.
In contrast to other unsupervised approaches such as variational autoencoders (Kingma & Welling, 2013; Rezende
et al., 2014) or generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014), neural density estimators allow for exact
density evaluation, and have enjoyed success in modeling
natural images (van den Oord et al., 2016b; Dinh et al.,
2017; Salimans et al., 2017; Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018),
audio data (van den Oord et al., 2016a; Prenger et al., 2018;
Kim et al., 2018), and also in variational inference (Rezende
& Mohamed, 2015; Kingma et al., 2016). Neural density
estimators are particularly useful where the focus is on ac*

Equal contribution 1 School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Charlie Nash <charlie.nash@ed.ac.uk>, Conor Durkan <conor.durkan@ed.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

curate density estimation rather than sampling, and these
models have seen use as surrogate likelihoods (Papamakarios et al., 2019) and approximate posterior distributions
(Papamakarios & Murray, 2016; Lueckmann et al., 2017)
for likelihood-free inference.

(a) Data

(b) ResMADE

(c) AEM

Figure 1: Accurately modeling a distribution with sharp
transitions and high-frequency components, such as the
distribution of light in a image (a), is a challenging task. We
find that an autoregressive energy-based model (c) is able
to preserve fine detail lost by an alternative model (b) with
explicit conditionals.
Neural networks are flexible function approximators, and
promising candidates to learn a probability density function. Typically, neural density models are normalized a
priori, but this can hinder flexibility and expressiveness. For
instance, many flow-based density estimators (Dinh et al.,
2017; Papamakarios et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2018) rely
on invertible transformations with tractable Jacobian which
map data to a simple base density, so that the log probability
of an input point can be evaluated using a change of variables. Autoregressive density estimators (Uria et al., 2013;
Germain et al., 2015) often rely on mixtures of parametric
distributions to model each conditional. Such families can
make it difficult to model the low-density regions or sharp
transitions characterized by multi-modal or discontinuous
densities, respectively.
The contributions of this work are shaped by two main

