Geometric Scattering for Graph Data Analysis

Feng Gao 1 2 Guy Wolf * 3 Matthew Hirn * 1 4

Abstract
We explore the generalization of scattering transforms from traditional (e.g., image or audio) signals to graph data, analogous to the generalization
of ConvNets in geometric deep learning, and the
utility of extracted graph features in graph data
analysis. In particular, we focus on the capacity
of these features to retain informative variability
and relations in the data (e.g., between individual graphs, or in aggregate), while relating our
construction to previous theoretical results that
establish the stability of similar transforms to families of graph deformations. We demonstrate the
application of our geometric scattering features in
graph classification of social network data, and in
data exploration of biochemistry data.

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, numerous examples have established
that deep neural networks (i.e., cascades of linear operations
and simple nonlinearities) typically outperform traditional
“shallow” models in various modern machine learning applications, especially given the increasing Big Data availability
nowadays. Perhaps the most well known example of the advantages of deep networks is in computer vision, where the
utilization of 2D convolutions enable network designs that
learn cascades of convolutional filters, which have several
advantages over fully connected network architectures, both
computationally and conceptually. Indeed, in terms of supervised learning, convolutional neural networks (ConvNets)
hold the current state of the art in image classification, and
have become the standard machine learning approach to*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computational Math., Science and Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing,
MI, USA; 2 Department of Plant, Soil & Microbial Sciences, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA; 3 Department of
Mathematics and Statistics, Université de Montréal, Montreal,
QC, Canada; 4 Department of Mathematics, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA. Correspondence to: Guy Wolf
<guy.wolf@umontreal.ca>, Matthew Hirn <mhirn@msu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

wards processing big structured-signal data, including audio
and video processing. See, e.g., Goodfellow et al. (2016,
Chapter 9) for a detailed discussion.
Beyond their performances when applied to specific tasks,
pretrained ConvNet layers have been explored as image
feature extractors by freezing the first few pretrained convolutional layers and then retraining only the last few layers for
specific datasets or applications (e.g., Yosinski et al., 2014;
Oquab et al., 2014). Such transfer learning approaches provide evidence that suitably constructed deep filter banks
should be able to extract task-agnostic semantic information
from structured data, and in some sense mimic the operation of human visual and auditory cortices, thus supporting
the neural terminology in deep learning. An alternative
approach towards such universal feature extraction was presented in Mallat (2012), where a deep filter bank, known
as the scattering transform, is designed, rather than trained,
based on predetermined families of distruptive patterns that
should be eliminated to extract informative representations.
The scattering transform is constructed as a cascade of linear
wavelet transforms and nonlinear complex modulus operations that provides features with guaranteed invariance to
a predetermined Lie group of operations such as rotations,
translations, or scaling. Further, it also provides Lipschitz
stability to small diffeomorphisms of the inputted signal.
Following recent interest in geometric deep learning approaches for processing graph-structured data (see, for example, Bronstein et al. (2017) and references therein), several attempts have been made to generalize the scattering
transform to graphs (Zou & Lerman, 2018; Gama et al.,
2019) and manifolds (Perlmutter et al., 2018), which we
will generally term “geometric scattering.” These works
mostly focus on following the footsteps of Mallat (2012) in
establishing the stability of their respective constructions to
deformations of input signals or graphs. Their results essentially characterize the type of disruptive information eliminated by geometric scattering, by providing upper bounds
for distances between scattering features, phrased in terms
of a deformation size. Here, we further explore the notion
of geometric scattering features by considering the complimentary question of how much information is retained by
them, since stability alone does not ensure useful features
in practice (e.g., a constant all-zero map would be stable
to any deformation, but would clearly be useless). In other

