Quantile Stein Variational Gradient Descent for Batch Bayesian Optimization

Chengyue Gong 1 Jian Peng 2 Qiang Liu 1

Abstract
Batch Bayesian optimization has been shown to
be an efficient and successful approach for blackbox function optimization, especially when the
evaluation of cost function is highly expensive
but can be efficiently parallelized. In this paper,
we introduce a novel variational framework for
batch query optimization, based on the argument
that the query batch should be selected to have
both high diversity and good worst case performance. This motivates us to introduce a variational objective that combines a quantile-based
risk measure (for worst case performance) and
entropy regularization (for enforcing diversity).
We derive a gradient-based particle optimization
algorithm for solving our quantile-based variational objective, which generalizes Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD) by Liu & Wang
(2016). We evaluate our method on a number
of real-world applications, and show that it consistently outperforms other recent state-of-the-art
batch Bayesian optimization methods.

1. Introduction
Bayesian optimization (BO) is an efficient method for optimizing non-convex and black-box functions. It has been
recently well-studied in the machine learning community
and starts to be applied to many applications in science
and engineering (Fernandez et al., 2011; Turgeon et al.,
2016). From searching hyper-parameter for machine learning algorithms (Oh et al., 2018), to designing electronic
or chemical products automatically (Lyu et al., 2018; Griffiths, 2017; Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018), Bayesian optimization has already shown great success and potential for
problems where automation is needed to replace tedious
human labor.
The idea of Bayesian optimization is to treat the unknown,
Department of Computer Science, UT Austin 2 University of
Illinois at Urbana Champaign, IL. Correspondence to: Chengyue
Gong <cygong@cs.utexas.edu>.

or expensive objective function as a random variable and
leverage Bayesian inference, typically with a Gaussian process prior, to estimate the posterior distribution of the function value on new points in the design space, given the existing function evaluations collected. An acquisition function, such as the expected improvement (Jones et al., 1998)
or the upper confidence bound (Srinivas et al., 2009), is
then constructed based on the posterior estimation to determine a new point as query to evaluate the objective function. The choice of the new query points should balance the
trade-off between exploration and exploitation, so that one
can optimize the objective function using as few function
evaluations as possible.
In this work, we focus on the setting of batch (or parallel) Bayesian optimization (Frazier et al., 2009; Frazier &
Clark, 2012; Kathuria et al., 2016). In this setting, multiple
query points are obtained simultaneously at each iteration,
so that they can be evaluated in parallel. Because it is often
easy to run multiple experiments or evaluation programs in
parallel in practice, batch Bayesian optimization is an essential and practical way to accelerate Bayesian optimization for highly expensive experiments.
Unfortunately, searching multiple points jointly is much
more challenging than searching for single query point,
given that we search in a higher dimensional space with
the same amount of information, and may yield a significant waste of computational resource if the joint selection
is not performed carefully. We argue that the set of new
query points should satisfy the following two desiderata,
both arise due to the highly expensive evaluation cost.
I) High Diversity. The query points in the batch should
be sufficiently different from each other, so that the evaluation is not redundant. This corresponds to exploration in
optimization.
II) Risk Aversion. Every single query point, not just the
average or mean of the whole batch, should have a sufficiently high expected function value or value of information, so that each evaluation deserves its cost.

1

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Although there has been a significant number of recent
work on batch Bayesian optimization (e.g. González et al.,
2016; Desautels et al., 2014; Contal et al., 2013; Kathuria
et al., 2016; Lyu et al., 2018), they are not designed to
explicitly address these two desiderata jointly. The goal

