Area Attention
Yang Li 1 Lukasz Kaiser 1 Samy Bengio 1 Si Si 1

Abstract
Existing attention mechanisms are trained to attend to individual items in a collection (the memory) with a predefined, fixed granularity, e.g., a
word token or an image grid. We propose area
attention: a way to attend to areas in the memory,
where each area contains a group of items that
are structurally adjacent, e.g., spatially for a 2D
memory such as images, or temporally for a 1D
memory such as natural language sentences. Importantly, the shape and the size of an area are dynamically determined via learning, which enables
a model to attend to information with varying
granularity. Area attention can easily work with
existing model architectures such as multi-head
attention for simultaneously attending to multiple
areas in the memory. We evaluate area attention
on two tasks: neural machine translation (both
character and token-level) and image captioning,
and improve upon strong (state-of-the-art) baselines in all the cases. These improvements are
obtainable with a basic form of area attention that
is parameter free.

1. Introduction
Attentional mechanisms have significantly boosted the accuracy on a variety of deep learning tasks (Bahdanau et al.,
2014; Luong et al., 2015; Xu et al., 2015). They allow the
model to selectively focus on specific pieces of information,
which can be a word in a sentence for neural machine translation (Bahdanau et al., 2014; Luong et al., 2015) or a region
of pixels in image captioning (Xu et al., 2015; Sharma et al.,
2018).
An attentional mechanism typically follows a memory-query
paradigm, where the memory M contains a collection of
items of information from a source modality such as the
1
Google Research, Mountain View, CA, USA. Correspondence
to: Yang Li <liyang@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

embeddings of an image (Xu et al., 2015) or the hidden
states of encoding an input sentence (Bahdanau et al., 2014;
Luong et al., 2015), and the query q comes from a target
modality such as the hidden state of a decoder model. In
recent architectures such as Transformer (Vaswani et al.,
2017), self-attention involves queries and memory from the
same modality for either encoder or decoder. Each item in
the memory has a key-value pair, (ki , vi ), where the key is
used to compute the probability ai regarding how well the
query matches the item (see Equation 1).
exp(fatt (q, ki ))
ai = P|M |
j=1 exp(fatt (q, kj ))

(1)

The typical choices for fatt include dot products qki (Luong
et al., 2015) and a multilayer perceptron (Bahdanau et al.,
2014). The output OqM from querying the memory M with q
is then calculated as the sum of all the values in the memory
weighted by their probabilities (see Equation 2), which can
be fed to other parts of the model for further calculation.
During training, the model learns to attend to specific pieces
of information given a query. For example, it can associate
a word in the target sentence with a word in the source
sentence for translation tasks.

OqM =

|M |
X

ai vi

(2)

i=1

Attention mechanisms are typically designed to focus on
individual items in the entire memory, where each item
defines the granularity of what the model can attend to.
For example, it can be a character for a character-level
translation model, a word for a word-level model, a grid cell
for an image-based model or a hidden state in a latent space.
Such a construction of attention granularity is predetermined
rather than learned. While this kind of item-based attention
has been helpful for many tasks, it can be fundamentally
limited for modeling complex attention distribution that
might be involved in a task.
In this paper, we propose area attention, as a general mechanism for the model to attend to a group of items in the
memory that are structurally adjacent. In area attention,
each unit for attention calculation is an area that can contain
one or more than one item. Because each of these areas

