Using Pre-Training Can Improve Model Robustness and Uncertainty

Dan Hendrycks 1 Kimin Lee 2 Mantas Mazeika 3

Abstract
He et al. (2018) have called into question the
utility of pre-training by showing that training from scratch can often yield similar performance to pre-training. We show that although pre-training may not improve performance on traditional classification metrics, it improves model robustness and uncertainty estimates. Through extensive experiments on label corruption, class imbalance, adversarial examples, out-of-distribution detection, and confidence calibration, we demonstrate large gains
from pre-training and complementary effects
with task-specific methods. We show approximately a 10% absolute improvement over the
previous state-of-the-art in adversarial robustness. In some cases, using pre-training without
task-specific methods also surpasses the stateof-the-art, highlighting the need for pre-training
when evaluating future methods on robustness
and uncertainty tasks.

1. Introduction
Pre-training is a central technique in the research and applications of deep convolutional neural networks (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012). In research settings, pre-training is ubiquitously applied in state-of-the-art object detection and segmentation (He et al., 2017). Moreover, some researchers
aim to use pre-training to create “universal representations”
that transfer to multiple domains (Rebuffi et al., 2017). In
applications, the “pre-train then tune” paradigm is commonplace, especially when data for a target task is acutely
scarce (Zeiler & Fergus, 2014). This broadly applicable
technique enables state-of-the-art model convergence.
However, He et al. (2018) argue that model convergence
is merely faster with pre-training, so that the benefit on
modern research datasets is only improved wall-clock time.
1
UC Berkeley 2 KAIST 3 University of Chicago. Correspondence to: Dan Hendrycks <hendrycks@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Surprisingly, pre-training provides no performance benefit on various tasks and architectures over training from
scratch, provided the model trains for long enough. Even
models trained from scratch on only 10% of the COCO
dataset (Lin et al., 2014) attain the same performance as
pre-trained models. This casts doubt on our understanding
of pre-training and raises the important question of whether
there are any uses for pre-training beyond tuning for extremely small datasets. They conclude that, with modern
research datasets, ImageNet pre-training is not necessary.
In this work, we demonstrate that pre-training is not
needless. While He et al. (2018) are correct that models
for traditional tasks such as classification perform well
without pre-training, pre-training substantially improves
the quality of various complementary model components.
For example, we show that while accuracy may not noticeably change with pre-training, what does tremendously
improve with pre-training is the model’s adversarial
robustness. Furthermore, even though training for longer
on clean datasets allows models without pre-training to
catch up, training for longer on a corrupted dataset leads
to model deterioration. And the claim that “pre-training
does not necessarily help reduce overfitting” (He et al.,
2018) is valid when measuring only model accuracy,
but it becomes apparent that pre-training does reduce
overfitting when also measuring model calibration. We
bring clarity to the doubts raised about pre-training by
showing that pre-training can improve model robustness to
label corruption (Sukhbaatar et al., 2014), class imbalance
(Japkowicz, 2000), and adversarial attacks (Szegedy et al.,
2014); it additionally improves uncertainty estimates
for out-of-distribution detection (Hendrycks & Gimpel,
2017b) and calibration (Nguyen & O’Connor, 2015),
though not necessarily traditional accuracy metrics.
Pre-training yields improvements so significant that on
many robustness and uncertainty tasks we surpass stateof-the-art performance. We even find that pre-training
alone improves over techniques devised for a specific task.
Note that experiments on these tasks typically overlook
pre-training, even though pre-training is ubiquitous elsewhere. This is problematic since we find there are techniques which do not comport well with pre-training; thus
some evaluations of robustness are less representative of
real-world performance than previously thought. Thus re-

