A Block Coordinate Descent Proximal Method
for Simultaneous Filtering and Parameter Estimation
Ramin Raziperchikolaei 1 2 Harish S. Bhat 3 4

Abstract
We propose and analyze a block coordinate descent proximal algorithm (BCD-prox) for simultaneous filtering and parameter estimation of ODE
models. As we show on ODE systems with up
to d = 40 dimensions, as compared to state-ofthe-art methods, BCD-prox exhibits increased robustness (to noise, parameter initialization, and
hyperparameters), decreased training times, and
improved accuracy of both filtered states and estimated parameters. We show how BCD-prox can
be used with multistep numerical discretizations,
and we establish convergence of BCD-prox under
hypotheses that include real systems of interest.

1. Introduction
Though ordinary differential equations (ODE) are used extensively in science and engineering, the task of learning
ODE states and parameters from data still presents challenges. This is especially true for nonlinear ODE that do
not have analytical solutions. For such problems, several
published and widely used methods—including Bayesian,
spline-based, and extended Kalman filter methods—work
well with data with a high signal-to-noise ratio. As the
magnitude of noise increases, these methods break down,
leading to unreliable estimates of states and parameters.
Problem domains such as biology commonly feature both
nonlinear ODE models and highly noisy observations, motivating the present work.
Motivated by recent advances in alternating minimization
(Chatterji & Bartlett, 2017; Li et al., 2016; Yi et al., 2014),
1

Rakuten Institute of Technology, San Mateo, CA, USA
Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Merced, USA 3 Department of Mathematics, University of Utah,
USA 4 Department of Applied Mathematics, University of California, Merced, USA. Correspondence to: Ramin Raziperchikolaei <ramin.raziperchikola@rakuten.com>, Harish S. Bhat <hbhat@ucmerced.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

block coordinate descent (BCD) (Xu & Yin, 2013; Zhang
& Brand, 2017), and proximal methods (Parikh & Boyd,
2014; Sun et al., 2015), we study a BCD proximal algorithm (BCD-prox) to solve the simultaneous filtering and
parameter estimation problem. Here filtering means recovering clean ODE states from noisy observations. BCD-prox
works by minimizing a unified objective function that directly measures how well the states and parameters satisfy
the ODE system, in contrast to other methods that use separate objectives. BCD-prox learns the states directly in the
original space, instead of learning them indirectly by fitting
a smoothed function to the observations. Under hypotheses
that include systems of real interest, BCD-prox is provably
convergent. In comparison with other methods, BCD-prox
is more robust with respect to noise, parameter initialization,
and hyperparameters. BCD-prox is also easy to implement
and runs quickly.
There have been several different approaches to the filtering
and estimation problem. Nonlinear least squares methods
start with an initial guess for the parameters that is iteratively
updated to bring the model’s predictions close to measurements (Bard, 1973; Benson, 1979; Himmelblau et al., 1967;
Hosten, 1979). These methods diverge when the initial
parameters are far from the true parameters.
Of more recent interest are spline-based methods, in which
filtered, clean states are computed via (cubic) splines fit to
noisy data. As splines are differentiable, parameter estimation then reduces to a regression problem (Cao & Zhao,
2008; Cao et al., 2011; Poyton et al., 2006; Ramsay et al.,
2007; Varah, 1982). Estimators other than splines, such
as smoothing kernels and local polynomials, are also used
(Dattner & Klaassen, 2015; Gugushvili & Klaassen, 2012;
Liang & Wu, 2008). These methods are sensitive to numerous hyperparameters (such as smoothing parameters and the
numbers/positions of knots), to parameter initialization, and
to the magnitude/type of noise that contaminates the data.
Bayesian approaches (Calderhead et al., 2009; Dondelinger
et al., 2013; Girolami, 2008; Gorbach et al., 2017) must
set hyperparameters (prior distributions, variances, kernel
widths, etc.) very carefully to produce reasonable results.
Bayesian methods also feature large training times. Another
disadvantage of these methods, mentioned by Gorbach et al.

