Learning Generative Models across Incomparable Spaces

Charlotte Bunne 1 David Alvarez-Melis 2 Andreas Krause 1 Stefanie Jegelka 2

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks have shown remarkable success in learning a distribution that
faithfully recovers a reference distribution in its
entirety. However, in some cases, we may want to
only learn some aspects (e.g., cluster or manifold
structure), while modifying others (e.g., style, orientation or dimension). In this work, we propose
an approach to learn generative models across
such incomparable spaces, and demonstrate how
to steer the learned distribution towards target
properties. A key component of our model is
the Gromov-Wasserstein distance, a notion of discrepancy that compares distributions relationally
rather than absolutely. While this framework subsumes current generative models in identically
reproducing distributions, its inherent flexibility
allows application to tasks in manifold learning,
relational learning and cross-domain learning.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs, Goodfellow et al.
(2014)) and its variations (Radford et al., 2016; Arjovsky
et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017) are powerful models for learning
complex distributions. Broadly, these methods rely on an
adversary that compares samples from the true and learned
distributions, giving rise to a notion of divergence between
them. The divergences implied by current methods require
the two distributions to be supported in sets that are identical
or at the very least comparable; examples include Optimal
Transport (OT) distances (Salimans et al., 2018; Genevay
et al., 2018) or Integral Probability Metrics (IPM) (Müller,
1997; Sriperumbudur et al., 2012; Mroueh et al., 2017). In
all of these cases, the spaces over which the distributions are
defined must have the same dimensionality (e.g., the space
1

Department of Computer Science, Eidgenössische Technische
Hochschule (ETH), Zürich, Switzerland 2 Computer Science and
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL), Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, USA. Correspondence to:
Charlotte Bunne <bunnec@ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

of 28 × 28-pixel vectors for MNIST), and the generated distribution that minimizes the objective has the same support
as the reference one. This is of course desirable when the
goal is to generate samples that are indistinguishable from
those of the reference distribution.
Many other applications, however, require modeling only
topological or relational aspects of the reference distribution.
In such cases, the absolute location of the data manifold is
irrelevant (e.g., distributions over learned representations,
such as word embeddings, are defined only up to rotations),
or it is not available (e.g., if the data is accessible only as a
weighted graph indicating similarities among sample points).
Another reason for modeling only topological aspects is the
desire to, e.g., change the appearance or style of the samples,
or down-scale images. Divergences that directly compare
samples from the two distributions, and hence most current
generative models, do not apply to those settings.
In this work, we develop a novel class of generative models that can learn across incomparable spaces, e.g., spaces
of different dimensionality or data type. Here, the relational information between samples, i.e., the topology of
the reference data manifold, is preserved, but other characteristics, such as the ambient dimension, can vary. A
key component of our approach is the Gromov-Wasserstein
(GW) distance (Mémoli, 2011), a generalization of classic
Optimal Transport distances to incomparable ground spaces.
Instead of directly comparing points in the two spaces, the
GW distance computes pairwise intra-space distances, and
compares those distances across spaces, greatly increasing
the modeling scope. Figure 1 illustrates the new model.
To realize this model, we address several challenges. First,
we enable the use of the Gromov-Wasserstein distance in
various learning settings by improving its robustness and
ensuring unbiased learning. Similar to existing OT-based
generative models (Salimans et al., 2018; Genevay et al.,
2018), we leverage the differentiability of this distance to
provide gradients for the generator. Second, for efficiency,
we further parametrize it via a learnable adversary. The
added flexibility of the GW distance necessitates to constrain the adversary. To this end, we propose a novel orthogonality regularization, which might be of independent
interest.
A final challenge —which doubles as one of the main ad-

