Greedy Orthogonal Pivoting Algorithm for Non-negative Matrix Factorization

Kai Zhang 1 Jun Liu 2 Jie Zhang 3 Jun Wang 1

Abstract
Non-negative matrix factorization is a powerful
tool for learning useful representations in the data and has been widely applied in many problems
such as data mining and signal processing. Orthogonal NMF, which can further improve the
locality of decomposition, has drawn considerable interest in clustering problems. However,
imposing simultaneous non-negative and orthogonal structure can be difficult, and so existing
algorithms can only solve it approximately. To
address this challenge, we propose an innovative procedure called Greedy Orthogonal Pivoting Algorithm (GOPA). The GOPA method fully
exploits the sparsity of non-negative orthogonal
solutions to break the global problem into a series of local optimizations, in which an adaptive
subset of coordinates are updated in a greedy,
closed-form manner. The biggest advantage of
GOPA is that it promotes exact orthogonality and
provides solid empirical evidence that stronger
orthogonality does contribute favorably to better
clustering performance. On the other hand, we
have designed randomized and batch-mode version of GOPA, which can further reduce the computational cost and improve accuracy, making it
suitable for large data.

1. Introduction
Non-negative matrix factorization (Lee & Seung, 2000; Ding et al., 2006; Wang & Zhang, 2013) is a powerful tool
for learning useful representations. Given an n × d data
matrix X where each column is one feature and each row
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory for Trustworthy Computing,
School of Computer Science and Software Engineering, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China 2 Infinia ML Inc., Durham,
North Carolina, USA 3 Institute of Science and Technology for
Brain-Inspired Intelligence, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
Correspondence to: Kai Zhang <kzhang980@gmail.com>, Jun
Wang <jwang@sei.ecnu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

is one data point, the main idea behind NMF is to approximate these input vectors by nonnegative linear combinations of nonnegative basis vectors (rows of of H) with the
coefficients stored in columns of W, as follows
min

kX − WHk2F

s.t.

W ≥ 0, H ≥ 0.

W,H

By imposing simultaneous non-negative structures in data reconstruction and basis identification, NMF has shown
great potential in unravelling important structures in the data from various applications, such as data clustering (Kuang
et al., 2012; Li & Ding, 2006), image processing (Lee &
Seung, 2000), text mining (Xu et al., 2003; Ding et al.,
2008), and signal processing (Ozerov & Fevotte, 2010).
See a recent review in (Wang & Zhang, 2013).
The NMF is not jointly convex with W and H, and various
approaches have been proposed to solve it. Early attempt mainly focused on multiplicative updates. For example,
Lee & Seung (2000) proposed the following procedures
Wij = Wij
Hij = Hij

(XH0 )ij
,
(WHH0 )ij
(W0 X)ij
,
(W0 WH)ij

and proved its convergence using the technique of auxiliary functions. More variations of multiplicative updates
can be found in (Yang & Oja, 2011). In order to further
improve the convergence rate and quality, many other optimization strategies were proposed, such as the projected
gradient descent (Lin, 2007), alternating least squares (Cichocki & Anh-Huy, 2009), active set method (Kim & Park,
2008a;b), block-coordinate descent (Kim et al., 2014), and
greedy coordinate descent (Hsieh & Dhillon, 2011).
NMF has been shown to generate part based representation
in many applications such as image and signal processing,
where data points are reconstructed using a limited number
of components that can be easy to interpret. However, this
may not be guaranteed for several reasons. First, the solution of NMF is not unique (even consider re-scaling), and
extra constraints are needed to obtain (more) well-posed
NMF problems. Indeed, it is found that the sample points
have to fill a proper subset of the positive orthant such that a

