First-order Adversarial Vulnerability of Neural Networks and Input Dimension

Carl-Johann Simon-Gabriel 1 2 Yann Ollivier 2 Bernhard Schölkopf 1 Léon Bottou 2 David Lopez-Paz 2

Abstract
Over the past few years, neural networks were
proven vulnerable to adversarial images: targeted
but imperceptible image perturbations lead to
drastically different predictions. We show that
adversarial vulnerability increases with the gradients of the training objective when viewed as
a function of the inputs. Surprisingly, vulnerability does not depend on network topology: for
many standard network architectures, we prove
that at initialization, the `1 -norm of these gradients grows as the square root of the input dimension, leaving the networks increasingly vulnerable
with growing image size. We empirically show
that this dimension dependence persists after either usual or robust training, but gets attenuated
with higher regularization.

1. Introduction
Following the work of Goodfellow et al. (2015), Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have been found vulnerable
to adversarial examples: an adversary can drive the performance of state-of-the art CNNs down to chance level with
imperceptible changes to the inputs.
Based on a simple linear model, Goodfellow et al. already
noted that adversarial vulnerability should depend on input
dimension. Gilmer et al. (2018); Shafahi et al. (2019) later
confirmed this, by showing that adversarial robustness is
harder to obtain with larger input dimension. However,
these results are different in nature from Goodfellow et al.’s
original observation: they rely on assumptions on the dataset
that amount to a form of uniformity in distribution over
the input dimensions (e.g. concentric spheres, or bounded
densities with full support). In the end, this analysis tends
to incriminate the data: if the data can be anything, and in
1
Empirical Inference Department, Max Planck Institute for
Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 Facebook AI Research,
Paris/New York. Correspondence to: Carl-Johann Simon-Gabriel
<cjsimon@tue.mpg.de>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

particular if it can spread homogeneously across many input
dimensions, then robust classification gets harder.
Image datasets do not satisfy these assumptions: they do
not have full support, and their probability distributions get
more and more peaked with larger input dimension (pixel
correlation increases). Intuitively, for image classification,
higher resolution should help, not hurt. Hence data might be
the wrong culprit: if we want to understand the vulnerability
of our classifiers, then we should understand what is wrong
with our classifiers, not with our images.
We therefore follow Goodfellow et al.’s original approach,
which explains adversarial vulnerability by properties of the
classifiers. Our main theoretical results start by formally
extending their result for a single linear layer to almost all
current deep feedforward network architectures. There is a
further correction: based on the gradients of a linear layer,
Goodfellow et al. predicted a linear increase of adversarial
vulnerability with input dimension d. However, they did
not √
take into account that a layer’s typical weights decrease
√
like d. Accounting for this, the dependence becomes d
rather than d, which is confirmed by both our theory and
experiments.
Our approach relies on evaluating the norm of gradients
of the network output with respect to its inputs. At first
order, adversarial vulnerability is related to gradient norms.
We show that this norm is a function of input dimension
only, whatever the network architecture is. The analysis is
fully formal at initialization, and experiments show that the
predictions remain valid throughout training with very good
precision.
Obviously, this approach assumes that the classifier and
loss are differentiable. So arguably it is unclear whether it
can explain the vulnerability of networks with obfuscated
or masked gradients. Still, Athalye et al. (2018) recently
showed that masked gradients only give a false sense of
security: by reconstructing gradient approximations (using
differentiable nets!), the authors circumvented all state-ofthe-art masked-gradient defenses. This suggests that explaining the vulnerability of differentiable nets is crucial,
even for non-differentiable nets.
Although adversarial vulnerability was known to increase
with gradient norms, the exact relation between the two,

