CompILE: Compositional Imitation Learning and Execution

Thomas Kipf 1 † Yujia Li 2 Hanjun Dai 3 † Vinicius Zambaldi 2 Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez 2
Edward Grefenstette 4 # Pushmeet Kohli 2 Peter Battaglia 2

Abstract
We introduce Compositional Imitation Learning and Execution (CompILE): a framework for
learning reusable, variable-length segments of
hierarchically-structured behavior from demonstration data. CompILE uses a novel unsupervised, fully-differentiable sequence segmentation
module to learn latent encodings of sequential
data that can be re-composed and executed to perform new tasks. Once trained, our model generalizes to sequences of longer length and from environment instances not seen during training. We
evaluate CompILE in a challenging 2D multi-task
environment and a continuous control task, and
show that it can find correct task boundaries and
event encodings in an unsupervised manner. Latent codes and associated behavior policies discovered by CompILE can be used by a hierarchical
agent, where the high-level policy selects actions
in the latent code space, and the low-level, taskspecific policies are simply the learned decoders.
We found that our CompILE-based agent could
learn given only sparse rewards, where agents
without task-specific policies struggle.

1. Introduction
Discovering compositional structure in sequential data, without supervision, is an important ability in human and machine learning. For example, when a cook prepares a meal,
they re-use similar behavioral sub-sequences (e.g., slicing,
dicing, chopping) and compose the components hierarchically (e.g., stirring together eggs and milk, pouring the mix†

Work done during an internship at DeepMind. # Work done
while employed at DeepMind. 1 Informatics Institute, University
of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands 2 DeepMind, London,
UK 3 School of Computational Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, USA 4 Facebook
AI Research, London, UK. Correspondence to: Thomas Kipf
<t.n.kipf@uva.nl>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Latent code
(per segment)

Differentiable
segmentation

Task 1

Task 2

Task 3

Figure 1: Joint unsupervised learning of task segmentation and encoding in CompILE. CompILE auto-encodes
sequential demonstration data by 1) softly breaking an input
sequence into segments of variable length, and 2) mapping
each such segment into a latent code, which can be executed
to reconstruct the input sequence. At test time, the latent
code can be re-composed to produce novel behavior.

ture into a hot pan and stirring it to form scrambled eggs).
Humans are adept at inferring event structure by hierarchically segmenting continuous sensory experience (Zacks
et al., 2001; Baldassano et al., 2017; Radvansky & Zacks,
2017), which may support building efficient event representations in episodic memory (Ezzyat & Davachi, 2011) and
constructing abstract plans (Richmond & Zacks, 2017).
An important benefit of compositional sub-sequence representations is combinatorial generalization to never-beforeseen conjunctions (Davidson, 1984; Denil et al., 2017). Behavioral sub-components can also be used as high-level
actions in hierarchical decision-making, offering improved
credit assignment and efficient planning. To reap these benefits in machines, however, the event structure and composable representations must be discovered in an unsupervised
manner, as sub-sequence labels are rarely available.
In this work, we focus on the problem of jointly learning to
segment, explain, and imitate agent behavior (from demonstrations) via an unsupervised auto-encoding objective. The
encoder learns to jointly infer event boundaries and highlevel abstractions (latent encodings) of activity within each
event segment, while the task of the decoder is to reconstruct
or imitate the original behavior by executing the inferred
sequence of latent codes.

