The Odds are Odd:
A Statistical Test for Detecting Adversarial Examples

Kevin Roth * 1 Yannic Kilcher * 1 Thomas Hofmann 1

Abstract
We investigate conditions under which test statistics exist that can reliably detect examples, which
have been adversarially manipulated in a whitebox attack. These statistics can be easily computed and calibrated by randomly corrupting inputs. They exploit certain anomalies that adversarial attacks introduce, in particular if they follow
the paradigm of choosing perturbations optimally
under p-norm constraints. Access to the log-odds
is the only requirement to defend models. We
justify our approach empirically, but also provide
conditions under which detectability via the suggested test statistics is guaranteed to be effective.
In our experiments, we show that it is even possible to correct test time predictions for adversarial
attacks with high accuracy.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have been used with great success for
perceptual tasks such as image classification (Simonyan &
Zisserman, 2014; LeCun et al., 2015) or speech recognition
(Hinton et al., 2012). While they are known to be robust to
random noise, it has been shown that the accuracy of deep
nets can dramatically deteriorate in the face of so-called
adversarial examples (Biggio et al., 2013; Szegedy et al.,
2013; Goodfellow et al., 2014), i.e. small perturbations of
the input signal, often imperceptible to humans, that are
sufficient to induce large changes in the model output.
A plethora of methods have been proposed to find adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2013; Goodfellow et al.,
2014; Kurakin et al., 2016; Moosavi Dezfooli et al., 2016;
Sabour et al., 2015). These often transfer across different
architectures, enabling black-box attacks even for inaccessible models (Papernot et al., 2016; Kilcher & Hofmann,
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, ETH
Zürich. Correspondence to: <kevin.roth@inf.ethz.ch>, <yannic.kilcher@inf.ethz.ch>, <thomas.hofmann@inf.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

2017; Tramèr et al., 2017). This apparent vulnerability is
worrisome as deep nets start to proliferate in the real-world,
including in safety-critical deployments.
The most direct and popular strategy of robustification is to
use adversarial examples as data augmentation during training (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Kurakin et al., 2016; Madry
et al., 2017), which improves robustness against specific
attacks, yet does not address vulnerability to more cleverly
designed counter-attacks (Athalye et al., 2018; Carlini &
Wagner, 2017a). This raises the question of whether one
can protect models with regard to a wider range of possible
adversarial perturbations.
A different strategy of defense is to detect whether or not
the input has been perturbed, by detecting characteristic regularities either in the adversarial perturbations themselves
or in the network activations they induce (Grosse et al.,
2017; Feinman et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2017; Metzen et al.,
2017; Carlini & Wagner, 2017a). In this spirit, we propose
a method that measures how feature representations and
log-odds change under noise: If the input is adversarially
perturbed, the noise-induced feature variation tends to have
a characteristic direction, whereas it tends not to have any
specific direction if the input is natural. We evaluate our
method against strong iterative attacks and show that even
an adversary aware of the defense cannot evade our detector. E.g. for an L8 -PGD white-box attack on CIFAR10,
our method achieves a detection rate of 99% (FPR ă 1%),
with accuracies of 96% on clean and 92% on adversarial
samples respectively. On ImageNet, we achieve a detection rate of 99% (FPR 1%). Our code can be found at
https://github.com/yk/icml19_public.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
• We propose a statistical test for the detection and classification of adversarial examples.
• We establish a link between adversarial perturbations
and inverse problems, providing valuable insights into
the feature space kinematics of adversarial attacks.
• We conduct extensive performance evaluations as well
as a range of experiments to shed light on aspects of
adversarial perturbations that make them detectable.

