Neural Separation of Observed and Unobserved Distributions

Tavi Halperin 1 Ariel Ephrat 2 Yedid Hoshen 1 3

Abstract
Separating mixed distributions is a long standing
challenge for machine learning and signal processing. Most current methods either rely on making
strong assumptions on the source distributions or
rely on having training samples of each source
in the mixture. In this work, we introduce a new
method—Neural Egg Separation—to tackle the
scenario of extracting a signal from an unobserved
distribution additively mixed with a signal from
an observed distribution. Our method iteratively
learns to separate the known distribution from
progressively finer estimates of the unknown distribution. In some settings, Neural Egg Separation
is initialization sensitive, we therefore introduce
Latent Mixture Masking which ensures a good
initialization. Extensive experiments on audio
and image separation tasks show that our method
outperforms current methods that use the same
level of supervision, and often achieves similar
performance to full supervision.

1. Introduction
Humans are remarkably good at separating data coming
from a mixture of distributions, e.g. hearing a person speaking in a crowded cocktail party. Artificial intelligence, on
the the hand, is far less adept at separating mixed signals.
This is an important ability as signals in nature are typically
mixed, e.g. speakers are often mixed with other speakers or
environmental sounds, objects in images are typically seen
along other objects as well as the background. Understanding mixed signals is harder than understanding pure sources,
making source separation an important research topic.
Most previous work focused on the following settings:
Full supervision: The learner has access to a training set
1
Department of Computer Science, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel 2 Google Research
3
Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to: Tavi Halperin
<tavi.halperin@mail.huji.ac.il >.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

including samples of mixed signals {y} ∈ Y as well as
the ground truth sources of the same signals {b} ∈ B and
{x} ∈ X (such that y = x + b). Having such strong
supervision is very potent, allowing the learner to directly
learn a mapping from the mixed signal y to its sources (x, b).
Obtaining such strong supervision is nearly never possible,
as it requires knowing for each input mixture y, its exact
separate signals (x, b). This information is rarely available
in a single microphone setting.
Synthetic full supervision: The learner has access to a training set containing samples from the mixed signal {y} ∈ Y
as well as samples from all source distributions {b} ∈ B
and {x} ∈ X . The learner however does not have access to
paired sets of the mixed and unmixed signal ground truth
(that is for any given y in the training set, its separate b and
x are unknown). This supervision setting is more realistic
than the fully supervised case, and occurs when each of the
source distributions can be sampled in isolation (e.g. we can
record a violin and piano separately in a studio and can thus
obtain unmixed samples of each of their distributions). It is
typically solved by learning to separate synthetic mixtures
b + x of independently sampled b and x.
No supervision: The learner only has access to training
samples of the mixed signal Y but not to sources B and
X . Although this settings puts the least requirements on
the training dataset, it is a hard problem and can be poorly
specified in the absence of strong assumptions and priors. It
is generally necessary to make strong assumptions on the
properties of the component signals (e.g. smoothness, low
rank, periodicity) in order to make progress in separation.
This limits the applicability of such methods.
In this work we concentrate on the semi-supervised setting:
unmixing of signals in the case where the mixture Y consists
of a signal coming from an unobserved distribution X and
another signal from an observed distribution B (i.e. the
learner has access to a training set of clean samples such
that {b} ∈ B along with different mixed samples {y 0 } ∈ Y).
One possible way of obtaining such supervision is to label
every element of a signal (e.g. short waveform segment)
by a label, indicating if it comes only from the observed
distribution B or if it is a mixture of both distributions B+X .
The task is to learn a parametric function able to separate
the mixed signal y ∈ Y into sources x ∈ X and b ∈ B s.t.

