Optimal Mini-Batch and Step Sizes for SAGA

Nidham Gazagnadou 1 Robert M. Gower 1 Joseph Salmon 2

Abstract
Recently it has been shown that the step sizes
of a family of variance reduced gradient methods called the JacSketch methods depend on the
expected smoothness constant. In particular, if
this expected smoothness constant could be calculated a priori, then one could safely set much
larger step sizes which would result in a much
faster convergence rate. We fill in this gap, and
provide simple closed form expressions for the
expected smoothness constant and careful numerical experiments verifying these bounds. Using
these bounds, and since the SAGA algorithm is
part of this JacSketch family, we suggest a new
standard practice for setting the step and minibatch sizes for SAGA that are competitive with a
numerical grid search. Furthermore, we can now
show that the total complexity of the SAGA algorithm decreases linearly in the mini-batch size
up to a pre-defined value: the optimal mini-batch
size. This is a rare result in the stochastic variance
reduced literature, only previously shown for the
Katyusha algorithm. Finally we conjecture that
this is the case for many other stochastic variance
reduced methods and that our bounds and analysis of the expected smoothness constant is key to
extending these results.

1. Introduction
Consider the empirical risk minimization (ERM) problem:


n
1X
∗
w ∈ arg min f (w) :=
fi (w) ,
(1)
n i=1
w∈Rd
where each fi is Li -smooth and f is µ-strongly convex.
Each fi represents a regularized loss over a sampled data
1

LTCI, Télécom ParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay,
Paris, France 2 IMAG, Univ Montpellier, CNRS, Montpellier, France.
Correspondence to: Nidham Gazagnadou
<nidham.gazagnadou@telecom-paristech.fr>, Robert M. Gower
<robert.gower@telecom-paristech.fr>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

point. Solving the ERM problem is often time consuming
for large number of samples n, so much so that algorithms
scanning through all the data points at each iteration are not
competitive. Gradient descent (GD) falls into this category,
and in practice its stochastic version is preferred.
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD), on the other hand, allows to solve the ERM incrementally by computing at each
iteration an unbiased estimate of the full gradient, ∇fi (wk )
for i randomly sampled in [n] := {1, 2, . . . , n} (Robbins &
Monro, 1951). On the downside, for SGD to converge one
needs to tune a sequence of asymptotically vanishing step
sizes, a cumbersome and time-consuming task for the user.
Recent works have taken advantage of the sum structure
in Eq. (1) to design stochastic variance reduced gradient
algorithms (Johnson & Zhang, 2013; Shalev-Shwartz &
Zhang, 2013; Defazio et al., 2014; Schmidt et al., 2017).
In the strongly convex setting, these methods lead to fast
linear convergence instead of the slow O(1/t) rate of SGD.
Moreover, they only require a constant step size, informed
by theory, instead of sequence of decreasing step sizes.
In practice, most variance reduced methods rely on a minibatching strategy for better performance. Yet most convergence analysis (with the Katyusha algorithm of Allen-Zhu
(2017) being an exception) indicates that a mini-batch size
of b = 1 gives the best overall complexity, disagreeing with
practical findings, where larger mini-batch often gives better
results. Here, we show both theoretically and numerically
that b = 1 is not the optimal mini-batch size for the SAGA
algorithm (Defazio et al., 2014).
Our analysis leverages recent results in (Gower et al., 2018),
where the authors prove that the iteration complexity and
the step size of SAGA, and a larger family of methods called
the JacSketch methods, depend on an expected smoothness
constant. This constant governs the trade-off between the
increased cost of an iteration as the mini-batch size is increased, and the decreased total complexity. Thus if this
expected smoothness constant could be calculated a priori,
then we could set the optimal mini-batch size and step size.
We provide simple formulas for computing the expected
smoothness constant when sampling mini-batches without
replacement, and use them to calculate optimal mini-batches
and significantly larger step sizes for SAGA.
In particular, we provide two bounds on the expected

