Unifying Orthogonal Monte Carlo Methods

Krzysztof Choromanski * 1 Mark Rowland * 2 Wenyu Chen 3 Adrian Weller 2 4

Abstract
Many machine learning methods making use of
Monte Carlo sampling in vector spaces have been
shown to be improved by conditioning samples
to be mutually orthogonal. Exact orthogonal coupling of samples is computationally intensive,
hence approximate methods have been of great
interest. In this paper, we present a unifying perspective of many approximate methods by considering Givens transformations, propose new approximate methods based on this framework, and
demonstrate the first statistical guarantees for families of approximate methods in kernel approximation. We provide extensive empirical evaluations
with guidance for practitioners.

1. Introduction
Monte Carlo methods are used to approximate integrals in
many applications across statistics and machine learning.
Back at least as far as (Metropolis & Ulam, 1949), the study
of variance reduction or other ways to improve statistical
efficiency has been a key area of research. Popular approaches include control variates, antithetic sampling, and
randomized quasi-Monte Carlo (Dick & Pillichshammer,
2010).
When sampling from a multi-dimensional probability distribution, a variety of recent theoretical and empirical results
have shown that coupling samples to be orthogonal to one
another, rather than being i.i.d., can significantly improve
statistical efficiency. We highlight applications in linear dimensionality reduction (Choromanski et al., 2017), localitysensitive hashing (Andoni et al., 2015), random feature approximations to kernel methods such as Gaussian processes
(Choromanski et al., 2018a) and support vector machines
(Yu et al., 2016), and black-box optimization (Choromanski
*
Equal contribution 1 Google Brain 2 University of Cambridge 3 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 4 Alan Turing Institute. Correspondence to: Krzysztof Choromanski
<kchoro@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

et al., 2018b). We refer to the class of methods using such
orthogonal couplings as orthogonal Monte Carlo (OMC).
The improved statistical efficiency of OMC methods bears
the cost of additional computational overhead. To reduce
this cost significantly, several popular Markov chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) schemes sample from an approximate distribution. We refer to such schemes as approximate orthogonal Monte Carlo (AOMC). Much remains to be understood
about AOMC methods, including which methods are best to
use in practical settings. In this paper, we present a unifying
account of AOMC methods and their associated statistical
and computational considerations. In doing so, we propose several new families of AOMC methods, and provide
theoretical and empirical analysis of their performance.
Our approaches are orthogonal to, and we believe could
be combined with, methods in recent papers which focus
on control variates (rather than couplings) for variance reduction of gradients of deep models with discrete variables
(Tucker et al., 2017; Grathwohl et al., 2018).
We highlight the following novel contributions:
1. We draw together earlier approaches to scalable orthogonal Monte Carlo, and cast them in a unifying framework
using the language of random Givens transformations;
see Sections 2 and 3.
2. Using this framework, we introduce several new variants
of approximate orthogonal Monte Carlo, which empirically have advantages over existing approaches; see
Sections 3 and 4.
3. We provide a theoretical analysis of Kac’s random walk,
a particular AOMC method. We show that several previous theoretical guarantees for the performance of exact
OMC can be extended to approximate OMC via Kac’s
random walk; see Section 5. In particular, to our knowledge we give the first theoretical guarantees showing that
some classes of AOMCs provide gains not only in computational and space complexity, but also in accuracy, in
non-linear domains (RBF kernel approximation).
4. We evaluate empirically AOMC approaches, noting relative strengths and weaknesses; see Section 6. We include
an extensive analysis of the efficiency of AOMC methods in reinforcement learning evolutionary strategies,
showing they can successfully replace exact OMC.

