Self-Attention Graph Pooling

Junhyun Lee * 1 Inyeop Lee * 1 Jaewoo Kang 1

Abstract
Advanced methods of applying deep learning to
structured data such as graphs have been proposed
in recent years. In particular, studies have focused on generalizing convolutional neural networks to graph data, which includes redefining
the convolution and the downsampling (pooling)
operations for graphs. The method of generalizing the convolution operation to graphs has been
proven to improve performance and is widely
used. However, the method of applying downsampling to graphs is still difficult to perform
and has room for improvement. In this paper, we
propose a graph pooling method based on selfattention. Self-attention using graph convolution
allows our pooling method to consider both node
features and graph topology. To ensure a fair
comparison, the same training procedures and
model architectures were used for the existing
pooling methods and our method. The experimental results demonstrate that our method achieves
superior graph classification performance on the
benchmark datasets using a reasonable number of
parameters.

1. Introduction
The advent of deep learning has led to extensive improvements in technology used to recognize and utilize patterns
in data (LeCun et al., 2015). In particular, convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) successfully leverage the properties of data such as images, speech, and video on Euclidean
domains (grid structure) (Hinton et al., 2012; Krizhevsky
et al., 2012; He et al., 2016; Karpathy et al., 2014). CNNs
consist of convolutional layers and downsampling (pooling) layers. The convolutional and pooling layers exploit
the shift-invariance (also known as stationary) property and
*

1

Equal contribution Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Korea. Correspondence to:
Jaewoo Kang <kangj@korea.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

compositionality of grid-structured data (Simoncelli & Olshausen, 2001; Bronstein et al., 2017). As a result, CNNs
perform well with a small number of parameters.
In various fields, however, a large amount of data, such
as graphs, exists on the non-Euclidean domain. For example, social networks, biological networks, and molecular
structures can be represented by nodes and edges of graphs
(Lazer et al., 2009; Davidson et al., 2002; Duvenaud et al.,
2015). Therefore, attempts have been made to successfully
use CNNs in the non-Euclidean domain. Most previous
studies have redefined the convolution and pooling layers to
process graph data.
To define graph convolution, studies have used the spectral
(Bruna et al., 2014; Henaff et al., 2015; Defferrard et al.,
2016; Kipf & Welling, 2016) and non-spectral (Monti et al.,
2017; Hamilton et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2018a; Velikovi et al.,
2018; Morris et al., 2018) methods. The application of
graph convolution has resulted in outstanding performance
in a variety of fields which include recommender systems
(van den Berg et al., 2017; Yao & Li, 2018; Monti et al.,
2017), chemical researches (You et al., 2018; Zitnik et al.,
2018), natural language processing (Bastings et al., 2017;
Peng et al., 2018; Yao et al., 2018), and in many tasks as
reported in Zhou et al..
There are fewer methods for graph pooling than for graph
convolution. Previous researches have adopted the pooling
method that considers only graph topology (Defferrard et al.,
2016; Rhee et al., 2018). With growing interest in graph
pooling, several improved methods have been proposed (Dai
et al., 2016; Duvenaud et al., 2015; Gilmer et al., 2017b;
Zhang et al., 2018b). They utilize node features to obtain a
smaller graph representation. Recently, Ying et al.; Gao &
Ji; Cangea et al. have proposed innovative pooling methods
that can learn hierarchical representations of graphs. These
methods allow Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to attain
scaled-down graphs after pooling in an end-to-end fashion.
However, the above pooling methods have room for improvement. For example, the differentiable hierarchical
pooling method of Ying et al. has a quadratic storage complexity and the number of its parameters is dependent on the
number of nodes. Gao & Ji; Cangea et al. have addressed
the complexity issue, but their method does not take graph
topology into account.

