Zeno: Distributed Stochastic Gradient Descent with Suspicion-based
Fault-tolerance
Cong Xie 1 Oluwasanmi Koyejo 1 Indranil Gupta 1

1. Introduction
In distributed machine learning, one of the hardest problems
today is fault-tolerance. Faulty workers may take arbitrary
actions or modify their portion of the data and/or models
arbitrarily. In addition to adversarial attacks on purpose, it is
also common for the workers to have hardware or software
failures, such as bit-flipping in the memory or communication media. While fault-tolerance has been studied for
distributed machine learning (Blanchard et al., 2017; Chen
et al., 2017; Yin et al., 2018; Feng et al., 2014; Su & Vaidya,
2016a;b; Alistarh et al., 2018), much of the work on faulttolerant machine learning makes strong assumptions. For
instance, a common assumption is that no more than 50% of
the workers are faulty (Blanchard et al., 2017; Chen et al.,
2017; Yin et al., 2018; Su & Vaidya, 2016a; Alistarh et al.,
2018).
We present Zeno, a new technique that generalizes the failure model so that we only require at least one non-faulty
(good) worker. In particular, faulty gradients may pretend
to be good by behaving similar to the correct gradients in
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, USA. Correspondence to: Cong Xie
<cx2@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

4: Aggregation
Server
1: Pull

We present Zeno, a technique to make distributed
machine learning, particularly Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), tolerant to an arbitrary number of faulty workers. Zeno generalizes previous results that assumed a majority of nonfaulty nodes; we need assume only one non-faulty
worker. Our key idea is to suspect workers that are
potentially defective. Since this is likely to lead to
false positives, we use a ranking-based preference
mechanism. We prove the convergence of SGD
for non-convex problems under these scenarios.
Experimental results show that Zeno outperforms
existing approaches.

variance and magnitude, making them hard to distinguish. It
is also possible that in different iterations, different groups
of workers are faulty, which means that we can not simply
identify workers which are always faulty.

3: Push

Abstract

Worker

Worker

...

Worker

2: Gradient Computation

Figure 1. Parameter Server architecture.

We focus on Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), and use
the Parameter Server (PS) architecture (Li et al., 2014a;b)
for distributed SGD. As illustrated in Figure 1, processes
are composed of the server nodes and worker nodes. In
each SGD iteration, the workers pull the latest model from
the servers, estimate the gradients using the locally sampled
training data, then push the gradient estimators to the servers.
The servers aggregate the gradient estimators, and update
the model by using the aggregated gradients.
Our approach, in a nutshell is the following. We treat each
candidate gradient estimator as a suspect. We compute a
score using a stochastic zero-order oracle. This ranking indicates how trustworthy the given worker is in that iteration.
Then, we take the average over the several candidates with
the highest scores. This allows us to tolerate a large number
of incorrect gradients. We prove that the convergence is
as fast as fault-free SGD. Further, the variance falls as the
number of non-faulty workers increases.
To the best of our knowledge this paper is the first to theoretically and empirically study cases where a majority of
workers are faulty for non-convex problems. In summary,
our contributions are:
• A new approach for SGD with fault-tolerance, that works

