Loss Landscapes of Regularized Linear Autoencoders

Daniel Kunin * 1 Jonathan M. Bloom * 2 Aleksandrina Goeva 2 Cotton Seed 2

Abstract
L(W1 , W2 ) = ||X − W2 W1 X||2F .
Autoencoders are a deep learning model for representation learning. When trained to minimize the
distance between the data and its reconstruction,
linear autoencoders (LAEs) learn the subspace
spanned by the top principal directions but cannot learn the principal directions themselves. In
this paper, we prove that L2 -regularized LAEs are
symmetric at all critical points and learn the principal directions as the left singular vectors of the decoder. We smoothly parameterize the critical manifold and relate the minima to the MAP estimate
of probabilistic PCA. We illustrate these results
empirically and consider implications for PCA
algorithms, computational neuroscience, and the
algebraic topology of learning.

1. Introduction
Consider a data set consisting of points x1 , . . . , xn in Rm .
Let X ∈ Rm×n be the data matrix with columns xi . We
will assume throughout that k ≤ min{m, n} and that the
singular values of X are positive and distinct.
An autoencoder consists of an encoder f : Rm → Rk and
decoder g : Rk → Rm ; the latter maps the latent representation f (xi ) to the reconstruction x̂i = g(f (xi )) (Goodfellow
et al., 2016). The full network is trained to minimize reconstruction error, typically the squared Euclidean distance
between the dataset X and its reconstruction X̂ (or equivalently, the Frobenius norm of X − X̂). When the activations
of the network are the identity, the model class reduces to
that of one encoder layer W1 ∈ Rk×m and one decoder
layer W2 ∈ Rm×k . We refer to this model as a linear
autoencoder (LAE) with loss function defined by
*

Equal contribution 1 Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA
2
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
USA. Correspondence to: Daniel Kunin <kunin@stanford.edu>,
Jonathan M. Bloom <jbloom@broadinstitute.org>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Parameterizing L by the product W = W2 W1 , the EckartYoung Theorem (Eckart & Young, 1936) states that the optimal W orthogonally projects X onto the subspace spanned
by its top k principal directions1 .
Without regularization, LAEs learn this subspace but cannot
learn the principal directions themselves due to the symmetry of L under the action of the group GLk (R) of invertible
k × k matrices defined by (W1 , W2 ) 7→ (GW1 , W2 G−1 ):
X − (W2 G−1 )(GW1 )X = X − W2 W1 X.

(1)

Indeed, L achieves its minimum value on a smooth submanifold of Rk×m × Rm×k diffeomorphic to GLk (R); the
learned latent representation is only defined up to deformation by invertible linear maps; and the k-dimensional
eigenspace of W with eigenvalue one has no preferred basis.
In light of the above, the genesis of this work was our
surprise at the theorem2 and empirical observation in Plaut
(2018) that the principal directions of X are recovered from
a trained LAE as the left singular vectors of the decoder (or
as the right singular vectors of the encoder). We realized by
looking at the code that training was done with the common
practice of L2 -regularization:


Lσ (W1 , W2 ) = L(W1 , W2 ) + λ ||W1 ||2F + ||W2 ||2F .
In this paper, we prove that LAEs with L2 -regularization do
in fact learn the principal directions in this way, while shrinking eigenvalues in the manner of probabilistic PCA (Tipping
& Bishop, 1999). The key idea is that regularization reduces
the symmetry group from GLk (R) to the orthogonal group
Ok (R), which preserves the structure of SVD. We further
prove that the encoder and decoder are transposes at all
1

The principal directions of X are the eigenvectors of the
m × m covariance of X in descending order by eigenvalue, or
equivalently the left singular vectors of the mean-centered X in
descending order by (squared) singular values.
2
The theorem was retracted following our correspondance.

