Revisiting the Softmax Bellman Operator:
New Benefits and New Perspective
Zhao Song 1 * Ronald E. Parr 1 Lawrence Carin 1

Abstract
The impact of softmax on the value function itself
in reinforcement learning (RL) is often viewed as
problematic because it leads to sub-optimal value
(or Q) functions and interferes with the contraction properties of the Bellman operator. Surprisingly, despite these concerns, and independent
of its effect on exploration, the softmax Bellman
operator when combined with Deep Q-learning,
leads to Q-functions with superior policies in practice, even outperforming its double Q-learning
counterpart. To better understand how and why
this occurs, we revisit theoretical properties of the
softmax Bellman operator, and prove that (i) it
converges to the standard Bellman operator exponentially fast in the inverse temperature parameter,
and (ii) the distance of its Q function from the
optimal one can be bounded. These alone do not
explain its superior performance, so we also show
that the softmax operator can reduce the overestimation error, which may give some insight
into why a sub-optimal operator leads to better
performance in the presence of value function
approximation. A comparison among different
Bellman operators is then presented, showing the
trade-offs when selecting them.

1. Introduction
The Bellman equation (Bellman, 1957) has been a fundamental tool in reinforcement learning (RL), as it provides a
sufficient condition for the optimal policy in dynamic programming. The use of the max function in the Bellman
equation further suggests that the optimal policy should be
greedy w.r.t. the Q-values. On the other hand, the trade-off
between exploration and exploitation (Thrun, 1992) mo1
Duke University ⇤ Work performed as a graduate student
at Duke University; now at Baidu Research. Correspondence
to: Zhao Song <zsong@alumni.duke.edu>, Ronald E. Parr
<parr@cs.duke.edu>, Lawrence Carin <lcarin@duke.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

tivates the use of exploratory and potentially sub-optimal
actions during learning, and one commonly-used strategy
is to add randomness by replacing the max function with
the softmax function, as in Boltzmann exploration (Sutton
& Barto, 1998). Furthermore, the softmax function is a
differentiable approximation to the max function, and hence
can facilitate analysis (Reverdy & Leonard, 2016).
The beneficial properties of the softmax Bellman operator are in contrast to its potentially negative effect on the
accuracy of the resulting value or Q-functions. For example, it has been demonstrated that the softmax Bellman
operator is not a contraction, for certain temperature parameters (Littman, 1996, Page 205). Given this, one might
expect that the convenient properties of the softmax Bellman operator would come at the expense of the accuracy
of the resulting value or Q-functions, or the quality of the
resulting policies. In this paper, we demonstrate that, in
the case of deep Q-learning, this expectation is surprisingly
incorrect. We combine the softmax Bellman operator with
the deep Q-network (DQN) (Mnih et al., 2015) and double
DQN (DDQN) (van Hasselt et al., 2016a) algorithms, by replacing the max function therein with the softmax function,
in the target network. We then test the variants on several
games in the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) (Bellemare et al., 2013), a standard large-scale deep RL testbed.
The results show that the variants using the softmax Bellman operator can achieve higher test scores, and reduce the
Q-value overestimation as well as the gradient noise on most
of them. This effect is independent of exploration and is
entirely attributable to the change in the Bellman operator.
This surprising result suggests that a deeper understanding
of the softmax Bellman operator is warranted. To this end,
we prove that starting from the same initial Q-values, we can
upper and lower bound how far the Q-functions computed
with the softmax operator can deviate from those computed
with the regular Bellman operator. We further show that the
softmax Bellman operator converges to the optimal Bellman
operator in an exponential rate w.r.t. the inverse temperature
parameter. This gives insight into why the negative convergence results may not be as discouraging as they initially
seem, but it does not explain the superior performance observed in practice. Motivated by recent work (van Hasselt
et al., 2016a; Anschel et al., 2017) targeting bias and insta-

