Learning to Convolve: A Generalized Weight-Tying Approach

Nichita Diaconu 1 * Daniel Worrall 1 *

Abstract
Recent work (Cohen & Welling, 2016a) has
shown that generalizations of convolutions, based
on group theory, provide powerful inductive biases for learning. In these generalizations, filters
are not only translated but can also be rotated,
flipped, etc. However, coming up with exact models of how to rotate a 3 × 3 filter on a square
pixel-grid is difficult. In this paper, we learn how
to transform filters for use in the group convolution, focussing on roto-translation. For this, we
learn a filter basis and all rotated versions of that
filter basis. Filters are then encoded by a set of
rotation invariant coefficients. To rotate a filter,
we switch the basis. We demonstrate we can produce feature maps with low sensitivity to input
rotations, while achieving high performance on
MNIST and CIFAR-10.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are now the model
of choice for many perceptual recognition tasks, such as
image recognition (Russakovsky et al., 2015) or semantic
segmentation (Cordts et al., 2016). Among all the architectural innovations of recent years, a key component has
not changed: the convolution. Convolutions constrain a
mapping to have translational symmetry (Cohen & Welling,
2016a). This has proven to be a significant inductive bias,
and has added bonuses of reducing the number of trainable
weights via weight-tying. As such, CNNs have improved
sample complexity (Sokolic et al., 2017) and thus better
generalization compared to their non-symmetric cousins.
Recently, there has been a flurry of works (Cohen & Welling,
2016a;b; Worrall et al., 2017; Worrall & Brostow, 2018;
Bekkers et al., 2018; Weiler et al., 2018b;a; Esteves et al.,
2018) on extending the class of symmetries beyond pixelwise translations. Most notably Cohen & Welling (2016a)’s
*

1

Equal contribution
Philips Lab, University of Amsterdam, Netherlands. Correspondence to: Daniel Worrall
<d.e.worrall@uva.nl>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

group convolutions extend standard translational convolution to the setting where the symmetry is a discrete algebraic
group (explained in Section 2.2). In other words, these are
convolutions over invertible transformations, so kernels are
not only translated but also rotated, flipped, etc.
One of the key assumptions with Cohen & Welling (2016a)
and associated approaches is that the set of transformations
forms a group. We cannot pick an arbitrary set of transformations. For instance, in Cohen & Welling (2016a) the
authors choose the group of pixelwise translations, 90◦ rotations, and flips, that is the set of all transformations that
map the regular square-lattice into itself; and in Hoogeboom
et al. (2018) the authors consider the set of all transformations that map the hexagonal lattice into itself. However, in
general the set of 2π
N rotations for integer N and pixelwise
translations does not form a group because of pixelwise
discretization, yet in Bekkers et al. (2018) and Weiler et al.
(2018b), the authors use these sets of transformations. Their
line of thought is to model roto-translations in the continuous setting and then discretize post hoc. To synthesize
rotating a filter, they apply bilinear interpolation (Bekkers
et al., 2018) or a Fourier-based interpolation scheme (Weiler
et al., 2018b). Both of these methods suffer from the fact
that the post hoc discretization is not accounted for by the
interpolation schemes employed.
Our solution is to learn an interpolation scheme to transform
the filters, which accounts for this post hoc discretization.
Our proposal is to learn a space of filters and transformed
versions of this space. A filter at one orientation is defined
by its coefficients in a chosen basis. It can then be rotated
by changing the basis, while keeping the coefficients unchanged. As a result, this is a generalized version of weighttying. Since the bases are learned, we do not explicitly
define a transformation rule on the filters. This avoids some
of the overlooked flaws of handcrafted transformations.
Our contributions are:
• We present an expanded definition of the group convolution, with a new proof of equivariance.
• We pinpoint the spurious non-equivariance properties
of existing roto-translational group CNNs down to the
non-unitarity of the filter transformations used.
• We present a generalized weight-tying method, where

