Scaling Up Ordinal Embedding: A Landmark Approach

Jesse Anderton 1 Javed Aslam 1

Abstract
Ordinal Embedding is the problem of placing n
objects into Rd to satisfy constraints like “object
a is closer to b than to c.” It can accommodate
data that embeddings from features or distances
cannot, but is a more difficult problem. We propose a novel landmark-based method as a partial
solution. At small to medium scales, we present a
novel combination of existing methods with some
new theoretical justification. For very large values
of n optimizing over an entire embedding breaks
down, so we propose a novel method which first
embeds a subset of m  n objects and then embeds the remaining objects independently and in
parallel. We prove a distance error bound for our
method in terms of m and that it has O(dn log m)
time complexity, and show empirically that it is
able to produce high quality embeddings in a fraction of the time needed for any published method.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of converting pairwise distance
comparisons of a set of n objects into a d-dimensional Euclidean representation X ∈ Rn×d which preserves the order, particularly in the large n setting. This task is variously known as ordinal embedding or non-metric multidimensional scaling. Algorithms take as input a set of
triplets (a, b, c) meaning that the embedding should satisfy
kxa − xb k < kxa − xc k (denoting the ith row of X by xi ).
The triplets may be fixed in advance or actively selected by
the embedding algorithm.
In many other embedding tasks, one either has access to
a vector representation of the objects or one can somehow
estimate pairwise distances between the objects. In these
cases, efficient and effective embedding algorithms already
exist. Ordinal embedding addresses embedding when such
1

College of Computer and Information Science, Northeastern
University, Boston, Massachusetts. Correspondence to: Jesse
Anderton <jesse@ccs.neu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

positions and distances are not readily available. It was originally used with triplets sourced from human comparisons
of phenomena for which answering distance or position
questions is effectively impossible. For example, early experiments in color theory (Borg & Groenen, 2005) asked
human participants to identify the most perceptually-similar
pair of colors from among three examples. Ordinal embedding is also of use when precise distances are very expensive
to compute but comparing distances is more tractable; for
example, one could perform a breadth-first search of a large
graph down to some fixed depth and infer that any nodes
not visited must be more distant from the source than any
node already seen. A third domain of interest involves data
which is highly sparse or noisy, so one would prefer to rely
only on the order of distance estimates rather than their magnitudes. A final possibility is in exploring novel distance
or ranking functions for which deriving distance-based embedding algorithms may be laborious; ordinal embedding
is agnostic about the distances used to derive triplets, and
exploratory embeddings can be produced with out-of-thebox ordinal methods to compare various distance functions.
High-quality ordinal embeddings of large scale datasets can
also yield interesting new algorithms for important orderdependent tasks such as similarity search, product recommendation, metric/kernel learning, or information retrieval.
Unfortunately, state-of-the-art ordinal embedding algorithms are unable to handle large datasets. Methods which
optimize over a Gram matrix are inherently quadratic in n,
while current methods which optimize over point positions
are non-convex, so with large enough n and d a random
initialization is highly unlikely to be near the global optimum. Improving the scalability of these methods is an
active research topic, but to date the published results show
at most n = 10, 000 points embedded into d = 3 dimensions. Even the recent work of Cucuringu & Woodworth
(2015), designed explicitly for large-n datasets, only shows
results for up to 5, 000 points. See Section 1.1 for a further
discussion.
This work allows ordinal embeddings of much larger
datasets, raising the number of points supported by the
state-of-the-art from tens of thousands to millions or more.
We recommend a novel combination of existing methods
for up to tens of thousands of points, and when n is very
large we provide a fast new landmark-based algorithm with

