Imperceptible, Robust, and Targeted
Adversarial Examples for Automatic Speech Recognition

Yao Qin 1 Nicholas Carlini 2 Ian Goodfellow 2 Garrison Cottrell 1 Colin Raffel 2

Abstract
Adversarial examples are inputs to machine learning models designed by an adversary to cause
an incorrect output. So far, adversarial examples
have been studied most extensively in the image
domain. In this domain, adversarial examples
can be constructed by imperceptibly modifying
images to cause misclassification, and are practical in the physical world. In contrast, current
targeted adversarial examples applied to speech
recognition systems have neither of these properties: humans can easily identify the adversarial
perturbations, and they are not effective when
played over-the-air. This paper makes advances
on both of these fronts. First, we develop effectively imperceptible audio adversarial examples
(verified through a human study) by leveraging
the psychoacoustic principle of auditory masking, while retaining 100% targeted success rate
on arbitrary full-sentence targets. Next, we make
progress towards physical-world over-the-air audio adversarial examples by constructing perturbations which remain effective even after applying
realistic simulated environmental distortions.

1. Introduction
Adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2013) are inputs that
have been specifically designed by an adversary to cause a
machine learning algorithm to produce a misclassification
(Biggio et al., 2013). Initial work on adversarial examples
focused mainly on the domain of image classification. In
order to differentiate properties of adversarial examples on
neural networks in general from properties which hold true
only on images, it is important to study adversarial examples in different domains. Indeed, adversarial examples
1

Department of CSE, University of California, San Diego,
USA 2 Google Brain, USA. Correspondence to: Yao Qin
<yaq007@eng.ucsd.edu>, Colin Raffel <craffel@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

are known to exist on domains ranging from reinforcement
learning (Huang et al., 2017) to reading comprehension (Jia
& Liang, 2017) to speech recognition (Carlini & Wagner,
2018). This paper focuses on the latter of these domains,
where (Carlini & Wagner, 2018) showed that any given
source audio sample can be perturbed slightly so that an automatic speech recognition (ASR) system would transcribe
the audio as any different target sentence.
To date, adversarial examples on ASR differ from adversarial examples on images in two key ways. First, adversarial
examples on images are imperceptible to humans: it is possible to generate an adversarial example without changing
the 8-bit brightness representation (Szegedy et al., 2013).
Conversely, adversarial examples on ASR systems are often
perceptible. While the perturbation introduced is often small
in magnitude, upon listening it is obvious that the added
perturbation is present (Schönherr et al., 2018). Second,
adversarial examples on images work in the physical world
(Kurakin et al., 2016) (e.g., even when taking a picture of
them). In contrast, adversarial examples on ASR systems
do not yet work in such an “over-the-air” setting where they
are played by a speaker and recorded by a microphone.
In this paper1 , we improve the construction of adversarial
examples on the ASR system and match the power of attacks
on images by developing adversarial examples which are
imperceptible, and make steps towards robust adversarial
examples.
In order to generate imperceptible adversarial examples,
we depart from the common `p distance measure widely
used for adversarial example research. Instead, we make
use of the psychoacoustic principle of auditory masking,
and only add the adversarial perturbation to regions of the
audio where it will not be heard by a human, even if this
perturbation is not “quiet” in terms of absolute energy.
Further investigating properties of adversarial examples
which appear to be different from images, we examine the
ability of an adversary to construct physical-world adversarial examples (Kurakin et al., 2016). These are inputs
that, even after taking into account the distortions intro1
The project webpage is at http://cseweb.ucsd.edu/
˜yaq007/imperceptible-robust-adv.html

