On Discriminative Learning of Prediction Uncertainty

Vojtech Franc 1 Daniel Prusa 1

Abstract
In classification with a reject option, the classifier is allowed in uncertain cases to abstain from
prediction. The classical cost based model of an
optimal classifier with a reject option requires the
cost of rejection to be defined explicitly. An alternative bounded-improvement model, avoiding
the notion of the reject cost, seeks for a classifier with a guaranteed selective risk and maximal
cover. We prove that both models share the same
class of optimal strategies, and we provide an
explicit relation between the reject cost and the
target risk being the parameters of the two models.
An optimal rejection strategy for both models is
based on thresholding the conditional risk defined
by posterior probabilities which are usually unavailable. We propose a discriminative algorithm
learning an uncertainty function which preserves
ordering of the input space induced by the conditional risk, and hence can be used to construct
optimal rejection strategies.

1. Introduction
In classification with a reject option the classifier is allowed
in uncertain cases to abstain from prediction. This setting is
essential e.g. in medical diagnosis, safety critical systems
and many other applications. The cost-based model of an
optimal classification strategy with the reject option was
proposed by Chow in his pioneering work (Chow, 1970).
The goal is to minimize the expected loss equal to the cost
of misclassification, if the classifier predicts, and to the reject cost, if the classifier abstains from prediction. The well
known Bayes-optimal strategy rejects to predict whenever
the conditional risk exceeds the reject cost. Computation of
the conditional risk requires the class posterior probabilities
which are usually unavailable. A common solution is the
1

Department of Cybernetics, Faculty of Electrical Engineering,
Czech Technical University in Prague. Correspondence to: Vojtech
Franc <xfrancv@cmp.felk.cvut.cz>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

plug-in rule obtained after replacing the posterior probabilities by their estimates. A quality of the plug-in rule heavily
depends on the estimated probabilities (Fumera et al., 2000;
Herbei & Wegkamp, 2006). Discriminative methods instead
learn the reject option classification strategy directly without
the probability estimation, e.g. (Bartlett & Wegkamp, 2008;
Ramaswamy & Agarwal, 2016). Many works assume that
the uncertainty measure is known, e.g. obtained from responses of trained Neural Network (LeCun et al., 1990), and
the task is to find only the rejection thresholds (Tortorella,
2000; Kummert et al., 2016; Fischer et al., 2016). Most
existing methods, including this paper, account for aleatoric
uncertainty only, while literature dealing with the epistemic
uncertainty is scarce (Wang et al., 2017).
The cost-based model requires the reject cost to be defined
explicitly which is difficult in some applications like e.g.
medical diagnosis. An alternative bounded-improvement
model proposed by (Pietraszek, 2005) avoids explicit definition of the reject cost. The rejection strategy is evaluated
by two antagonistic quantities: i) the selective risk defined
as the expected misclassification cost on the non-reject region and ii) the coverage corresponding to the probability
mass of the non-reject region. An optimal strategy for the
bounded-improvement model maximizes the coverage under
the condition that the selective risk does not exceed a specified target value. In contrast to the cost-based model, it has
not been formally shown what is the optimal class of strategies when the underlying model is known. The solution was
proposed only for special instances of the task. (Pietraszek,
2005) proposed a method based on ROC analysis applicable when a score proportional to posterior probabilities is
known and the task is to find only the optimal thresholds.
(El-Yaniv & Wiener, 2010) proposed an algorithm learning
the optimal strategy in the noise-free setting, i.e. when a
perfect strategy with zero selective risk exists. (Geifman &
El-Yaniv, 2017) shows how to equip a trained classifier with
a reject option provided an uncertainty measure is known
and the task is to find a rejection threshold optimal under
the bounded-improvement model.
This paper describes three contributions:
1) We provide necessary and sufficient conditions for an optimal strategy of the bounded-improvement model when the
underlying distribution is known. We show that an optimal

