Batch Policy Learning under Constraints

Hoang M. Le 1 Cameron Voloshin 1 Yisong Yue 1

Abstract
When learning policies for real-world domains,
two important questions arise: (i) how to efficiently use pre-collected off-policy, non-optimal
behavior data; and (ii) how to mediate among different competing objectives and constraints. We
thus study the problem of batch policy learning under multiple constraints, and offer a systematic solution. We first propose a flexible meta-algorithm
that admits any batch reinforcement learning and
online learning procedure as subroutines. We then
present a specific algorithmic instantiation and
provide performance guarantees for the main objective and all constraints. As part of off-policy
learning, we propose a simple method for offpolicy policy evaluation (OPE) and derive PACstyle bounds. Our algorithm achieves strong empirical results in different domains, including in a
challenging problem of simulated car driving subject to multiple constraints such as lane keeping
and smooth driving. We also show experimentally
that our OPE method outperforms other popular
OPE techniques on a standalone basis, especially
in a high-dimensional setting.

1. Introduction
We study the problem of policy learning under multiple constraints. Contemporary approaches to learning sequential
decision making policies have largely focused on optimizing
some cost objective that is easily reducible to a scalar value
function. However, in many real-world domains, choosing
the right cost function to optimize is often not a straightforward task. Frequently, the agent designer faces multiple
competing objectives. For instance, consider the aspirational
task of designing autonomous vehicle controllers: one may
care about minimizing the travel time while making sure
the driving behavior is safe, consistent, or fuel efficient. In1
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA. Correspondence to: Hoang M. Le <hmle@caltech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

deed, many such real-world applications require the primary
objective function be augmented with an appropriate set of
constraints (Altman, 1999).
Contemporary policy learning research has largely focused
on either online reinforcement learning (RL) with a focus on
exploration, or imitation learning (IL) with a focus on learning from expert demonstrations. However, many real-world
settings already contain large amounts of pre-collected data
generated by existing policies (e.g., existing driving behavior, power grid control policies, etc.). We thus study the
complementary question: can we leverage this abundant
source of (non-optimal) behavior data in order to learn sequential decision making policies with provable guarantees
on both primary objective and constraint satisfaction?
We thus propose and study the problem of batch policy
learning under multiple constraints. Historically, batch RL
is regarded as a subfield of approximate dynamic programming (ADP) (Lange et al., 2012), where a set of transitions
sampled from the existing system is given and fixed. From
an interaction perspective, one can view many online RL
methods (e.g., DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2016)) as running a
growing batch RL subroutine per round of online RL. In
that sense, batch policy learning is complementary to any
exploration scheme. To the best of our knowledge, the study
of constrained policy learning in the batch setting is novel.
We present an algorithmic framework for learning sequential
decision making policies from off-policy data. We employ
multiple learning reductions to online and supervised learning, and present an analysis that relates performance in the
reduced procedures to the overall performance with respect
to both the primary objective and constraint satisfaction.
Constrained optimization is a well studied problem in supervised machine learning and optimization. In fact, our approach is inspired by the work of Agarwal et al. (2018) in the
context of fair classification. In contrast to supervised learning for classification, batch policy learning for sequential
decision making introduces multiple additional challenges.
First, setting aside the constraints, batch policy learning
itself presents a layer of difficulty, and the analysis is significantly more complicated. Second, verifying whether the
constraints are satisfied is no longer as straightforward as
passing the training data through the learned classifier. In
sequential decision making, certifying constraint satisfac-

