Finding Options that Minimize Planning Time

Yuu Jinnai 1 David Abel 1 D Ellis Hershkowitz 2 Michael L. Littman 1 George Konidaris 1

Abstract
We formalize the problem of selecting the optimal
set of options for planning as that of computing
the smallest set of options so that planning converges in less than a given maximum of valueiteration passes. We first show that the problem
is NP-hard, even if the task is constrained to be
deterministic—the first such complexity result
for option discovery. We then present the first
polynomial-time boundedly suboptimal approximation algorithm for this setting, and empirically
evaluate it against both the optimal options and a
representative collection of heuristic approaches
in simple grid-based domains.

1. Introduction
Markov Decision Processes or MDPs (Puterman, 1994)
are a widely used expressive model of sequential decisionmaking. However, MDPs are computationally expensive
to solve (Papadimitriou & Tsitsiklis, 1987; Littman, 1997;
Goldsmith et al., 1997). One approach to solving such
problems is to add high-level, temporally extended actions—
often formalized as options (Sutton et al., 1999)—to the set
of actions available to the agent. The right set of options
allows planning to probe more deeply into the search space
with a single computation. Thus, if options are chosen appropriately, planning algorithms can find good plans with
less computation.
Indeed, previous work has offered substantial support that
abstract actions can accelerate planning (Mann & Mannor,
2014; Silver & Ciosek, 2012). However, little is known
about how to find the right set of options for planning. Prior
work often seeks to codify an intuitive notion of what underlies an effective option, such as identifying relatively novel
states (Şimşek & Barto, 2004), identifying bottleneck states
or high-betweenness states (Şimşek et al., 2005; Şimşek &
1

2

Brown University, Providence, RI, United States Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, United States. Correspondence
to: Yuu Jinnai <yuu jinnai@brown.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Barto, 2009; Bacon, 2013; Moradi et al., 2012), finding repeated policy fragments (Pickett & Barto, 2002), or finding
states that often occur on successful trajectories (McGovern & Barto, 2001; Bakker & Schmidhuber, 2004). While
such intuitions often capture important aspects of the role of
options in planning, the resulting algorithms are somewhat
heuristic in that they are not based on optimizing any precise performance-related metric; consequently, their relative
performance can only be evaluated empirically.
We aim to formalize what it means to find the set of options that is optimal for planning, and to use the resulting
formalization to develop an algorithm with performance
guarantees and a principled theoretical foundation. Specifically, we consider the problem of finding the smallest set of
options so that planning converges in fewer than ` value iterations (VI). Our main result is that this problem is NP-hard.
More precisely, the problem:
1−

1. is 2log n -hard to approximate for any  > 0 unless
NP ⊆ DTIME(npoly log n ),1 where n is the input size;
2. is Ω(log n)-hard to approximate even for deterministic
MDPs unless P = NP;
3. has an O(n)-approximation algorithm;
4. has an O(log n)-approximation algorithm for deterministic MDPs.
In Section 4, we introduce A-MOMI, a polynomial-time
approximation algorithm that has O(n) suboptimality in
general and O(log n) suboptimality for deterministic MDPs.
1−
The expression 2log n is only slightly smaller than n: if
 = 0 then Ω(2log n ) = Ω(n). Thus, the inapproximability
results claim that A-MOMI is close to the best possible
approximation factor.
In addition, we consider the complementary problem of
finding a set of k options that minimize the number of VI
iterations until convergence. We show that this problem is
also NP-hard, even for a deterministic MDP and introduce
A-MIMO, a polynomial time approximation algorithm.
1
This is a standard complexity assumption: See, for example,
Dinitz et al. (2012).

