Graphite: Iterative Generative Modeling of Graphs
Aditya Grover 1 Aaron Zweig 1 Stefano Ermon 1

Abstract
Graphs are a fundamental abstraction for modeling relational data. However, graphs are discrete
and combinatorial in nature, and learning representations suitable for machine learning tasks
poses statistical and computational challenges. In
this work, we propose Graphite, an algorithmic
framework for unsupervised learning of representations over nodes in large graphs using deep latent variable generative models. Our model parameterizes variational autoencoders (VAE) with
graph neural networks, and uses a novel iterative
graph refinement strategy inspired by low-rank
approximations for decoding. On a wide variety
of synthetic and benchmark datasets, Graphite
outperforms competing approaches for the tasks
of density estimation, link prediction, and node
classification. Finally, we derive a theoretical connection between message passing in graph neural
networks and mean-field variational inference.

1. Introduction
Latent variable generative modeling is an effective approach for unsupervised representation learning of highdimensional data (Loehlin, 1998). In recent years, representations learned by latent variable models parameterized by
deep neural networks have shown impressive performance
on many tasks such as semi-supervised learning and structured prediction (Kingma et al., 2014; Sohn et al., 2015).
However, these successes have been largely restricted to
specific data modalities such as images and speech. In particular, it is challenging to apply current deep generative
models for large scale graph-structured data which arise in
a wide variety of domains in physical sciences, information
sciences, and social sciences.
To effectively model the relational structure of large graphs
for deep learning, prior works have proposed to use graph
1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, USA.
Correspondence to: Aditya Grover <adityag@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

neural networks (Gori et al., 2005; Scarselli et al., 2009;
Bruna et al., 2013). A graph neural network learns nodelevel representations by parameterizing an iterative message
passing procedure between nodes and their neighbors. The
tasks which have benefited from graph neural networks, including semi-supervised learning (Kipf & Welling, 2017)
and few shot learning (Garcia & Bruna, 2018), involve encoding an input graph to a final output representation (such
as the labels associated with the nodes). The inverse problem of learning to decode a hidden representation into a
graph, as in the case of a latent variable generative model,
is a pressing challenge that we address in this work.
We propose Graphite, a latent variable generative model
for graphs based on variational autoencoding (Kingma &
Welling, 2014). Specifically, we learn a directed model expressing a joint distribution over the entries of adjacency
matrix of graphs and latent feature vectors for every node.
Our framework uses graph neural networks for inference
(encoding) and generation (decoding). While the encoding
is straightforward and can use any existing graph neural network, the decoding of these latent features to reconstruct the
original graph is done using a multi-layer iterative procedure.
The procedure starts with an initial reconstruction based on
the inferred latent features, and iteratively refines the reconstructed graph via a message passing operation. The
iterative refinement can be efficiently implemented using
graph neural networks. In addition to the Graphite model,
we also contribute to the theoretical understanding of graph
neural networks by deriving equivalences between message
passing in graph neural networks with mean-field inference
in latent variable models via kernel embeddings (Smola
et al., 2007; Dai et al., 2016), formalizing what has thus far
has been largely speculated empirically to the best of our
knowledge (Yoon et al., 2018).
In contrast to recent works focussing on generation of small
graphs e.g., molecules (You et al., 2018; Li et al., 2018), the
Graphite framework is particularly suited for representation
learning on large graphs. Such representations are useful for
several downstream tasks. In particular, we demonstrate that
representations learned via Graphite outperform competing
approaches for graph representation learning empirically
for the tasks of density estimation (over entire graphs), link
prediction, and semi-supervised node classification on synthetic and benchmark datasets.

