Non-monotone Submodular Maximization with
Nearly Optimal Adaptivity and Query Complexity

Matthew Fahrbach 1 Vahab Mirrokni 2 Morteza Zadimoghaddam 2

Abstract
Submodular maximization is a general optimization problem with a wide range of applications
in machine learning (e.g., active learning, clustering, and feature selection). In large-scale optimization, the parallel running time of an algorithm is governed by its adaptivity, which measures the number of sequential rounds needed if
the algorithm can execute polynomially-many independent oracle queries in parallel. While low
adaptivity is ideal, it is not sufficient for an algorithm to be efficient in practice—there are many
applications of distributed submodular optimization where the number of function evaluations
becomes prohibitively expensive. Motivated by
these applications, we study the adaptivity and
query complexity of submodular maximization.
In this paper, we give the first constant-factor
approximation algorithm for maximizing a nonmonotone submodular function subject to a cardinality constraint k that runs in O(log(n)) adaptive
rounds and makes O(n log(k)) oracle queries in
expectation. In our empirical study, we use three
real-world applications to compare our algorithm
with several benchmarks for non-monotone submodular maximization. The results demonstrate
that our algorithm finds competitive solutions using significantly fewer rounds and queries.

1. Introduction
Submodular set functions are a powerful tool for modeling
real-world problems because they naturally exhibit the property of diminishing returns. Several well-known examples
of submodular functions include graph cuts, entropy-based
clustering, coverage functions, and mutual information. As
a result, submodular functions have been increasingly used
1
Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Google. Correspondence to:
Matthew Fahrbach <matthew.fahrbach@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

in applications of machine learning such as data summarization (Simon et al., 2007; Sipos et al., 2012; Tschiatschek
et al., 2014), feature selection (Das & Kempe, 2008; Khanna
et al., 2017), and recommendation systems (El-Arini &
Guestrin, 2011). While some of these applications involve
maximizing monotone submodular functions, the more general problem of non-monotone submodular maximization
has also been used extensively (Feige et al., 2011; Buchbinder et al., 2014; Mirzasoleiman et al., 2016; Balkanski
et al., 2018; Norouzi-Fard et al., 2018). Some specific applications of non-monotone submodular maximization include
image summarization and movie recommendation (Mirzasoleiman et al., 2016), and revenue maximization in viral
marketing (Hartline et al., 2008). Two compelling uses of
non-monotone submodular maximization algorithms are:
• Optimizing objectives that are a monotone submodular
function minus a linear cost function that penalizes the
addition of more elements to the set (e.g., the coverage
and diversity trade-off). This appears in facility location problems where opening centers is expensive and
in exemplar-based clustering (Dueck & Frey, 2007).
• Expressing learning problems such as feature selection
using weakly submodular functions (Das & Kempe,
2008; Khanna et al., 2017; Elenberg et al., 2018;
Qian & Singer, 2019). One possible source of nonmonotonicity in this context is overfitting to training
data by selecting too many representative features (e.g.,
Section 1.6 and Corollary 3.19 in (Mohri et al., 2018)).
Although most of these learning problems have not yet
been rigorously modeled as non-monotone submodular
functions, there has been a recent surge of interest and
a substantial amount of momentum in this direction.
The literature on submodular optimization typically assumes
access to an oracle that evaluates the submodular function.
In practice, however, oracle queries may take a long time to
process. For example, the log-determinant of submatrices of
a positive semi-definite matrix is a submodular function that
is notoriously expensive to compute (Kazemi et al., 2018).
Therefore, our goal when designing distributed algorithms
is to minimize the number of rounds where the algorithm
communicates with the oracle. This motivates the notion of

