Imputing Missing Events in Continuous-Time Event Streams

Hongyuan Mei 1 Guanghui Qin 2 Jason Eisner 1

Abstract
Events in the world may be caused by other,
unobserved events. We consider sequences of
events in continuous time. Given a probability
model of complete sequences, we propose particle smoothing—a form of sequential importance
sampling—to impute the missing events in an
incomplete sequence. We develop a trainable
family of proposal distributions based on a type
of bidirectional continuous-time LSTM. Bidirectionality lets the proposals condition on future
observations, not just on the past as in particle
filtering. Our method can sample an ensemble
of possible complete sequences (particles), from
which we form a single consensus prediction that
has low Bayes risk under our chosen loss metric.
We experiment in multiple synthetic and real domains, using different missingness mechanisms,
and modeling the complete sequences in each domain with a neural Hawkes process (Mei & Eisner, 2017). On held-out incomplete sequences,
our method is effective at inferring the groundtruth unobserved events, with particle smoothing
consistently improving upon particle filtering.

1. Introduction
Event streams of discrete events in continuous time are
often partially observed. We would like to impute the
missing events z. Suppose we know the prior distribution pmodel of complete event streams, as well as the “missingness mechanism” pmiss (z | complete stream), which
stochastically determines which of the events will not be
observed. One can then use use Bayes’ Theorem, as spelled
out in equation (1) below, to define the posterior distribution p(z | x) given just the observed events x.1
Why is this important? The ability to impute z is useful
in many applied domains, for example:
1
Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University,
USA 2 Department of Physics, Peking University, China. Correspondence to: Hongyuan Mei <hmei@cs.jhu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright

• Medical records. Some patients record detailed symptoms, self-administered medications, diet, and sleep.
Imputing these events for other patients would produce an augmented medical record that could improve
diagnosis, prognosis, treatment, and counseling.
Similar remarks apply to users of life-tracking apps
(e.g., MyFitnessPal) who forget to log some of their
daily activities (e.g., meals, sleep and exercise).
• Competitive games. In poker or StarCraft, a player
lacks full information about what her opponents have
acquired (cards) or done (build mines and train soldiers). Accurately imputing hidden actions from
“what I did” and “what I observed others doing” can
help the player make good decisions. Similar remarks
apply to practical scenarios (e.g., military) where multiple actors compete and/or cooperate.
• User interface interactions. Cognitive events are usually unobserved. For example, users of an online
news provider (e.g., Bloomberg Terminal) may have
read and remembered a displayed headline whether or
not they clicked on it. Such events are expensive to
observe (e.g., via gaze tracking or asking the user).
Imputing them given the observed events (e.g., other
clicks) would facilitate personalization.
• Other partially observed event streams arise in online
shopping, social media, etc.
Why is it challenging?
It is computationally difficult
to reason about the posterior distribution p(z | x). Even
for a simple pmodel like a Hawkes process (Hawkes, 1971),
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods are needed,
and these methods obtain an efficient transition kernel only
by exploiting special properties of the process (Shelton
et al., 2018). Unfortunately, such properties no longer hold
for the more flexible neural models that we will use in this
paper (Du et al., 2016; Mei & Eisner, 2017).
What is our contribution?
We are, to the best of our
knowledge, the first to develop general sequential Monte
Carlo (SMC) methods to approximate the posterior distribution over incompletely observed draws from a neural
point process. We begin by sketching the approach.
2019 by the author(s).
1
Bayes’ Theorem can be applied even if pmiss is a missingnot-at-random (MNAR) mechanism, as is common in this setting.
MNAR is only tricky if we know neither pmodel nor pmiss .

