Locally Private Bayesian Inference for Count Models

Aaron Schein 1 Zhiwei Steven Wu 2 Alexandra Schofield 3 Mingyuan Zhou 4 Hanna Wallach 5

Abstract
We present a general and modular method for
privacy-preserving Bayesian inference for Poisson factorization, a broad class of models that
includes some of the most widely used models in
the social sciences. Our method satisfies limitedprecision local privacy, a generalization of local
differential privacy that we introduce to formulate
appropriate privacy guarantees for sparse count
data. We present an MCMC algorithm that approximates the posterior distribution over the latent variables conditioned on data that has been
locally privatized by the geometric mechanism.
Our method is based on two insights: 1) a novel
reinterpretation of the geometric mechanism in
terms of the Skellam distribution and 2) a general theorem that relates the Skellam and Bessel
distributions. We demonstrate our method’s utility using two case studies that involve real-world
email data. We show that our method consistently
outperforms the commonly used naı̈ve approach,
wherein inference proceeds as usual, treating the
locally privatized data as if it were not privatized.

1. Introduction
Data from social processes often take the form of discrete
observations (e.g., edges in a social network, word tokens
in an email). These observations often contain sensitive
information. As more aspects of social interaction are digitally recorded, the opportunities for social scientific insights
grow; however, so too does the risk of unacceptable privacy
violations. As a result, there is a growing need to develop
privacy-preserving data analysis methods. In practice, social
scientists will be more likely to adopt these methods if doing
so entails minimal change to their current methodology.
1
University of Massachusetts Amherst 2 University of Minnesota 3 Cornell University 4 University of Texas at Austin
5
Microsoft.
Correspondence to:
Aaron Schein <aschein@cs.umass.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Toward that end, we present a method for privacy-preserving
Bayesian inference for Poisson factorization (Titsias, 2008;
Cemgil, 2009; Zhou & Carin, 2012; Gopalan & Blei, 2013;
Paisley et al., 2014), a broad class of models for inferring
latent structure from discrete data. This class contains some
of the most widely used models in the social sciences, including topic models for text corpora (Blei et al., 2003;
Buntine & Jakulin, 2004; Canny, 2004), population models
for genetic data (Pritchard et al., 2000), stochastic block
models for social networks (Ball et al., 2011; Gopalan &
Blei, 2013; Zhou, 2015), and tensor factorization of dyadic
data (Welling & Weber, 2001; Chi & Kolda, 2012; Schmidt
& Morup, 2013; Schein et al., 2015; 2016b). It further includes deep hierarchical models (Ranganath et al., 2015;
Zhou et al., 2015), dynamic models (Charlin et al., 2015;
Acharya et al., 2015; Schein et al., 2016a), and many others.
Our method assumes that observations are privatized (or
noised) via a randomized response method before they are
aggregated into a data set for analysis. This ensures that
no single location need ever store the non-privatized data
set. We introduce limited-precision local privacy (LPLP)—a
generalization of local differential privacy—in order to formulate appropriate privacy guarantees for sparse count data.
We focus specifically on the geometric mechanism of Ghosh
et al. (2012) and prove that it is a mechanism for LPLP.
Under local privacy, a data analysis algorithm sees only
the privatized data set. Inferring latent structure (including
model parameters) that accurately reflects the non-privatized
data set is therefore a key statistical challenge. One option
is a naı̈ve approach, wherein inference proceeds as usual,
treating the privatized data set as if it were not privatized.
In the context of maximum likelihood estimation, the naı̈ve
approach has been shown to exhibit pathologies when
observations are discrete or count-valued. Researchers
have therefore advocated for treating the non-privatized
observations as latent variables to be inferred (Yang et al.,
2012; Karwa et al., 2014; Bernstein et al., 2017; Bernstein &
Sheldon, 2018). We embrace this approach and extend it to
Bayesian inference for Poisson factorization, where our goal
is to approximate the locally private posterior distribution
over the latent variables conditioned on the privatized data
set and the randomized response method. Toward that
goal, we present a Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
algorithm that is asymptotically guaranteed to draw samples

