Feature Grouping as a Stochastic Regularizer
for High-Dimensional Structured Data

Sergül Aydöre 1 Bertrand Thirion 2 Gaël Varoquaux 2

Abstract
In many applications where collecting data is expensive, for example neuroscience or medical
imaging, the sample size is typically small compared to the feature dimension. These datasets call
for intelligent regularization that exploits known
structure, such as correlations between the features arising from the measurement device. However, existing structured regularizers need specially crafted solvers, which are difficult to apply
to complex models. We propose a new regularizer specifically designed to leverage structure in
the data in a way that can be applied efficiently
to complex models. Our approach relies on feature grouping, using a fast clustering algorithm
inside a stochastic gradient descent loop: given a
family of feature groupings that capture feature
covariations, we randomly select these groups at
each iteration. Experiments on two real-world
datasets demonstrate that the proposed approach
produces models that generalize better than those
trained with conventional regularizers, and also
improves convergence speed, and has a linear
computational cost.

1. Introduction
Fitting complex machine learning (ML) models has lead
to impressive gains in accuracy in various fields, such as
computer vision, speech processing, and natural language
processing (LeCun et al., 2015a; Mnih et al., 2013). Yet,
the success of complex models has not carried over to highdimensional small-sample data such as full-brain images,
despite clear potential (Plis et al., 2014; Suk et al., 2016).
Indeed, complex models are prone to overfitting in settings
such as those encountered in neuroimaging:
1

Stevens Institute of Technology, New Jersey, USA 2 Inria
Saclay, Palaiseau, France. Correspondence to: Sergul Aydore
<sergulaydore@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

1. Large feature dimension: Neuroimaging data are very
high-dimensional, due to the progress in image resolution. For example, functional Magnetic Resonance
Images (fMRIs) 1 are represented by 4D-arrays of 3D
images over time. The total dimensionality is in the order of 107 . This leads to the phenomenon known as the
curse of dimensionality, and is often an obstacle so the
success of ML.
2. Noise in the data: Neuroimaging data contain a significant amount of physiological, respiratory, and mechanical artifacts unrelated to the effect of interest. Removal
of this noise is a difficult task. Ideally, we need an ML
model that is robust against noise.
3. Small sample size: Neuroimaging data typically have
small sample sizes due to the logistics and cost of data
acquisition, as well as the effort required to recruit subjects. It takes several hours to collect data from a single
individual. Therefore, the number of examples in neuroimaging data is usually in the order of hundreds, as
opposed to other ML applications, such as computer
vision, in which modern data sets comprise at least hundreds of thousands samples.
These challenges are not limited to neuroimaging applications. They are common in medical imaging, genomics,
chemistry, and financial applications (Fan & Li, 2006; Consortium et al., 2015). Regularization is crucial for the success of ML in such settings. The optimal regularization
strategy for a given dataset should leverage the known structure of the data. Yet, classic approaches to structured regularization (Bach et al., 2012) entail high computational
cost and are not-well suited for fitting complex models with
stochastic gradient descent. Here, we introduce a structured
regularization strategy integrated in a stochastic gradient descent (SGD) loop to tackle the challenges described above.
1.1. Related works: strategies to tackle overfit
A long-standing body of work tackle overfit in ML models.
Here, we briefly mention approaches that are most closely
related to the present effort. Conventional approaches to
1
fMRI is a noninvasive neuroimaging modality that measures
brain activity during cognitive tasks in humans.

