Social Influence as Intrinsic Motivation
for Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning

Natasha Jaques 1 2 Angeliki Lazaridou 2 Edward Hughes 2 Caglar Gulcehre 2 Pedro A. Ortega 2 DJ Strouse 3
Joel Z. Leibo 2 Nando de Freitas 2

Abstract
We propose a unified mechanism for achieving
coordination and communication in Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning (MARL), through
rewarding agents for having causal influence
over other agents’ actions. Causal influence is
assessed using counterfactual reasoning. At each
timestep, an agent simulates alternate actions that
it could have taken, and computes their effect on
the behavior of other agents. Actions that lead to
bigger changes in other agents’ behavior are considered influential and are rewarded. We show that
this is equivalent to rewarding agents for having
high mutual information between their actions.
Empirical results demonstrate that influence leads
to enhanced coordination and communication
in challenging social dilemma environments,
dramatically increasing the learning curves of the
deep RL agents, and leading to more meaningful
learned communication protocols. The influence
rewards for all agents can be computed in a
decentralized way by enabling agents to learn a
model of other agents using deep neural networks.
In contrast, key previous works on emergent
communication in the MARL setting were unable
to learn diverse policies in a decentralized manner
and had to resort to centralized training. Consequently, the influence reward opens up a window
of new opportunities for research in this area.

1. Introduction
Intrinsic Motivation for Reinforcement Learning (RL) refers
to reward functions that allow agents to learn useful behavior
1

Media Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
USA 2 Google DeepMind, London, UK 3 Institute for Advanced
Study, Princeton University, Princeton, USA. Correspondence to:
Natasha Jaques <jaquesn@mit.edu>, Angeliki Lazaridou <angeliki@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

across a variety of tasks and environments, sometimes in
the absence of environmental reward (Singh et al., 2004).
Previous approaches to intrinsic motivation often focus on
curiosity (e.g. Pathak et al. (2017); Schmidhuber (2010)),
or empowerment (e.g. Klyubin et al. (2005); Mohamed &
Rezende (2015)). Here, we consider the problem of deriving
intrinsic social motivation from other agents in multi-agent
RL (MARL). Social learning is incredibly important for
humans, and has been linked to our ability to achieve
unprecedented progress and coordination on a massive scale
(Henrich, 2015; Harari, 2014; Laland, 2017; van Schaik &
Burkart, 2011; Herrmann et al., 2007). While some previous
work has investigated intrinsic social motivation for RL (e.g.
Sequeira et al. (2011); Hughes et al. (2018); Peysakhovich &
Lerer (2018)), these approaches rely on hand-crafted rewards
specific to the environment, or allowing agents to view the
rewards obtained by other agents. Such assumptions make it
impossible to achieve independent training of MARL agents
across multiple environments.
Achieving coordination among agents in MARL still remains
a difficult problem. Prior work in this domain (e.g., Foerster
et al. (2017; 2016)), often resorts to centralized training to
ensure that agents learn to coordinate. While communication
among agents could help with coordination, training emergent communication protocols also remains a challenging
problem; recent empirical results underscore the difficulty
of learning meaningful emergent communication protocols,
even when relying on centralized training (e.g., Lazaridou
et al. (2018); Cao et al. (2018); Foerster et al. (2016)).
We propose a unified method for achieving both coordination
and communication in MARL by giving agents an intrinsic
reward for having a causal influence on other agents’ actions.
Causal influence is assessed using counterfactual reasoning;
at each timestep, an agent simulates alternate, counterfactual
actions that it could have taken, and assesses their effect
on another agent’s behavior. Actions that lead to relatively
higher change in the other agent’s behavior are considered
to be highly influential and are rewarded. We show how
this reward is related to maximizing the mutual information
between agents’ actions, and hypothesize that this inductive
bias will drive agents to learn coordinated behavior. Maximiz-

