The Effect of Network Width on Stochastic Gradient Descent
and Generalization: an Empirical Study

Daniel S. Park 1 2 Jascha Sohl-Dickstein 1 Quoc V. Le 1 Samuel L. Smith 3

Abstract
We investigate how the final parameters found by
stochastic gradient descent are influenced by overparameterization. We generate families of models
by increasing the number of channels in a base network, and then perform a large hyper-parameter
search to study how the test error depends on
learning rate, batch size, and network width. We
find that the optimal SGD hyper-parameters are
determined by a “normalized noise scale,” which
is a function of the batch size, learning rate, and
initialization conditions. In the absence of batch
normalization, the optimal normalized noise scale
is directly proportional to width. Wider networks,
with their higher optimal noise scale, also achieve
higher test accuracy. These observations hold for
MLPs, ConvNets, and ResNets, and for two different parameterization schemes (“Standard” and
“NTK”). We observe a similar trend with batch
normalization for ResNets. Surprisingly, since the
largest stable learning rate is bounded, the largest
batch size consistent with the optimal normalized
noise scale decreases as the width increases.

1. Introduction
Generalization is a fundamental concept in machine learning, but it remains poorly understood (Zhang et al., 2016).
Theoretical generalization bounds are usually too loose for
practical tasks (Harvey et al., 2017; Neyshabur et al., 2017;
Bartlett et al., 2017; Dziugaite & Roy, 2017; Zhou et al.,
2018; Nagarajan & Kolter, 2018), and practical approaches
to hyper-parameter optimization are often developed in an
ad-hoc fashion (Sculley et al., 2018). A number of authors
have observed that Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) can
be a surprisingly effective regularizer (Keskar et al., 2016;
1

Google Brain, Mountain View, USA 2 Work done as a member
of the Google AI Residency Program. 3 DeepMind, London, UK.
Correspondence to: Daniel S. Park <danielspark@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Wilson et al., 2017; Sagun et al., 2017; Mandt et al., 2017;
Smith & Le, 2017; Chaudhari & Soatto, 2017; Soudry et al.,
2018). In this paper, we provide a rigorous empirical study
of the relationship between generalization and SGD, which
focuses on how both the optimal SGD hyper-parameters and
the final test accuracy depend on the network width.
This is a broad topic, so we restrict the scope of our investigation to ensure we can collect thorough and unambiguous
experimental results within a reasonable (though still substantial) compute budget. We consider training a variety of
neural networks on classification tasks using SGD without
learning rate decay (“constant SGD”), both with and without batch normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015). We define
the performance of a network by its average test accuracy
at “late times” and over multiple training runs. The set of
optimal hyperparameters Hopt denote the hyper-parameters
for which this average test accuracy was maximized. We
stress that optimality is defined purely in terms of the performance of the trained network on the test set. This should
be distinguished from references to ideal learning rates in
the literature, which are often defined as the learning rate
which converges fastest during training (LeCun et al., 1996;
Karakida et al., 2017). Our use of optimality should also
not be confused with references to optimality or criticality
in some recent studies (Shallue et al., 2018; McCandlish
et al., 2018) where these terms are defined with respect to
efficiency of training, rather than final performance.
Given these definitions, we study the optimal hyperparameters and final test accuracy of networks in the same
class but with different widths. Two networks are in the
same class if one can be obtained from the other by adjusting the numbers of channels. For example, all three-layer
perceptrons are in the same class, while a two-layer perceptron is in a different class to a three-layer perceptron. For
simplicity, we consider a “linear family” of networks,
{Nw1 , · · · , Nwk },

(1)

each of which is obtained from a base network N1 by introducing a widening factor, much in the spirit of wide residual
networks (Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016). That is, network Nw can be obtained from N1 by widening every layer
by a constant factor of w. We aim to identify a predictive

