A Recurrent Neural Cascade-based Model for Continuous-Time Diffusion
Sylvain Lamprier 1

Abstract
Many works have been proposed in the literature
to capture the dynamics of diffusion in networks.
While some of them define graphical Markovian
models to extract temporal relationships between
node infections in networks, others consider diffusion episodes as sequences of infections via
recurrent neural models. In this paper we propose
a model at the crossroads of these two extremes,
which embeds the history of diffusion in infected
nodes as hidden continuous states. Depending
on the trajectory followed by the content before
reaching a given node, the distribution of influence probabilities may vary. However, content
trajectories are usually hidden in the data, which
induces challenging learning problems. We propose a topological recurrent neural model which
exhibits good experimental performances for diffusion modelling and prediction.

1. Introduction
The recent development of online social networks enabled
researchers to suggest methods to explain and predict observations of diffusion across networks. A diffusion process
refers to the temporal spread of related events on a network.
These events can correspond to the publication of a given
video, the listening of a specific music album, the adoption
of a given behavior or language, or even the infection by
a given disease. Classical cascade models, which are at
the heart of the research literature on diffusion, regard the
phenomenon of diffusion as an iterative process in which a
content transits from nodes to others in the network (Saito
et al., 2008; Gomez-Rodriguez et al., 2011), by a so-called
word-of-mouth phenomenon. In this setting, diffusion modeling corresponds to learning probability distributions of
content transmission. Various cascade models have been
proposed in the literature, each inducing its own learning
1
Sorbonne Universités, LIP6, F-75005, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Sylvain Lamprier <Sylvain.Lamprier@lip6.fr>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

process to extract the main dynamics of the network from
observed diffusion episodes.
However, most of these models rely on a strong Markovian
assumption for which the probabilities of next infections1
only depend on who is infected at the current step, not on
the past trajectories of the diffused content. We claim that
the history of spread contains much valuable information
that should be taken into account by the models. In many
applications the object of the diffusion is either unknown
(due to privacy or technical limitations for instances) or its
available features are not exploitable by the models (low
correlation with the diffusion, high noise, high variability,
etc.). In such cases, which is the setting of our work, past
trajectories can give useful insights about the nature of the
diffusion. Also, the content may be changed during the diffusion, with different transformations depending on which
nodes re-transmit the information.
Some recent approaches rely on representation learning and
recurrent neural networks (RNN) to predict the future spread
of diffusion given the past. A naive possibility would be
to consider diffusion episodes as sequences of infections
and propose temporal point process approaches to model
the dynamics. Using the Recurrent Marked Temporal Point
Process model (Du et al., 2016), the current hidden state of
the RNN would embed the history of the whole diffusion
sequence, which would be used to output the next infected
node and its time of infection. However, diffusion episodes
are not sequences but trees, naive recurrent methods usually
fail in capturing the true dynamics of the networks. Embedding the whole past in the state of a given node rather
than restraining it to its specific ancestor branch leads to
consider many independent and noisy events for future predictions. A model that would consider the true diffusion
paths would be more effective, by focusing on the useful
past. If the true diffusion paths were known, it would be
possible to adapt works on recurrent neural models for tree
structures such as successfully proposed in (Tai et al., 2015)
for NLP tasks. Unfortunately, in most of applications the
topology of diffusion is unknown while learning. In the task
considered in this paper, the only observations available are
the timestamps of the infected nodes.
1

Throughout this paper, we refer to infection for denoting the
participation of a node of the network in the diffusion.

