A Multitask Multiple Kernel Learning Algorithm for Survival Analysis
with Application to Cancer Biology

Onur Dereli 1 Ceyda Oğuz 2 Mehmet Gönen 2 3 4

Abstract
Predictive performance of machine learning algorithms on related problems can be improved
using multitask learning approaches. Rather than
performing survival analysis on each data set to
predict survival times of cancer patients, we developed a novel multitask approach based on multiple kernel learning (MKL). Our multitask MKL
algorithm both works on multiple cancer data sets
and integrates cancer-related pathways/gene sets
into survival analysis. We tested our algorithm,
which is named as Path2MSurv, on the Cancer
Genome Atlas data sets analyzing gene expression profiles of 7,655 patients from 20 cancer
types together with cancer-specific pathway/gene
set collections. Path2MSurv obtained better or
comparable predictive performance when benchmarked against random survival forest, survival
support vector machine, and single-task variant of
our algorithm. Path2MSurv has the ability to identify key pathways/gene sets in predicting survival
times of patients from different cancer types.

1. Introduction
Understanding the formation and progression mechanisms
of the diseases plays a vital importance in treating them.
To this aim, genomic characterizations have been used in
answering various research problems. Survival analysis
is one of these research problems that aims to predict survival times of patients. There are several machine learning
algorithms developed to predict survival times using genomic characterizations and clinical information of patients

(Cox, 1972; Cox & Oakes, 1984; Bakker et al., 2004; Shivaswamy et al., 2007; Evers & Messow, 2008; Ishwaran et al.,
2008; Khan & Zubek, 2008; Van Belle et al., 2011a;b; Mogensen & Gerds, 2013; Kiaee et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2016;
Yousefi et al., 2017). These existing algorithms consider
the censored observations, but most of them cannot handle high-dimensional feature representations (e.g., genomic
characterizations) effectively due to the limited number of
training samples. These standard algorithms were recently
shown to be more suitable for low-dimensional feature representations (i.e., clinical variables) (Yuan et al., 2014).
Pathways/gene sets are simply the sets of genes with roles
in the same or similar biological mechanisms. Relating
pathways/gene sets to clinical phenotypes helps us better
understand the underlying mechanisms of diseases. That is
why several machine learning algorithms were proposed to
identify pathways/gene sets associated with disease-related
phenotypes such as overall survival time after diagnosis.
These algorithms either (i) identify survival-related molecular mechanisms using feature selection and learn a survival
analysis model on selected features only or (ii) train a survival analysis model on each pathway/gene set separately
and pick survival-related ones by comparing their predictive
performances (Pang et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2017; Pang
et al., 2010; 2011). However, both approaches have drawbacks. The first approach might pick biologically unrelated
genes due to highly correlated structure of genomic characterizations. The second approach might pick related or
similar pathways/gene sets due to the fact that each pathway/gene set is analyzed separately. To eliminate these
problems, pathway/gene set collections should be integrated
into the model during the training step, so that learning algorithm can pick informative pathways/gene sets in a more
robust manner.

1

Graduate School of Sciences and Engineering, Koç University,
İstanbul 34450, Turkey 2 Department of Industrial Engineering,
College of Engineering, Koç University, İstanbul 34450, Turkey
3
School of Medicine, Koç University, İstanbul 34450, Turkey
4
Department of Biomedical Engineering, School of Medicine, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR 97239, USA. Correspondence to: Mehmet Gönen <mehmetgonen@ku.edu.tr>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Using high-dimensional genomic characterizations in machine learning algorithms is a challenging task due to their
highly correlated structures. Kernel-based machine learning
algorithms were used to address this problem in survival
analysis (Shivaswamy et al., 2007; Evers & Messow, 2008;
Khan & Zubek, 2008; Van Belle et al., 2011a;b). Kernel
methods were also shown to be very successful in other
cancer-related problems such as drug sensitivity predic-

