DP-GP-LVM: A Bayesian Non-Parametric Model for
Learning Multivariate Dependency Structures

Andrew R. Lawrence 1 Carl Henrik Ek 2 Neill D. F. Campbell 1

Abstract
We present a non-parametric Bayesian latent variable model capable of learning dependency structures across dimensions in a multivariate setting.
Our approach is based on flexible Gaussian process priors for the generative mappings and interchangeable Dirichlet process priors to learn
the structure. The introduction of the Dirichlet
process as a specific structural prior allows our
model to circumvent issues associated with previous Gaussian process latent variable models.
Inference is performed by deriving an efficient
variational bound on the marginal log-likelihood
of the model. We demonstrate the efficacy of our
approach via analysis of discovered structure and
superior quantitative performance on missing data
imputation.

1

Introduction

Latent variable models provide data-efficient and interpretable descriptions of data. By specifying a generative
model, it is possible to achieve a compact representation
through exploiting dependency structures in the observed
data. Their probabilistic structure allows the model to be
integrated as a component in a larger system and facilitates
tasks such as data-imputation and synthesis.
Efficient representations can be achieved when the intrinsic
dimensionality of the data is much lower than in its observed
representation. Traditional approaches, such as probabilistic
PCA (Tipping & Bishop, 1999) and the GP-LVM (Lawrence,
2005), assume that the data lie on a single low-dimensional
manifold embedded in the high-dimensional space. However, in many scenarios, this assumption is too simplistic
as more intricate dependency structures are present in the
data. In specific, there are many situations where groups of
1

Dept. of Computer Science, University of Bath, UK 2 Dept. of
Computer Science, University of Bristol, UK. Correspondence to:
Andrew R. Lawrence <A.R.Lawrence@bath.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

dimensions co-vary. For a human walking, each limb shares
a variation from the direction of travel. One would expect
that both arms share information not always present in the
lower limbs; however, it is conceivable that the left-side
limbs share information not present on the right.
Variations that are not common to all dimensions are challenging to model. If included in the representation, a variation only present in a subset of dimensions will pollute
the representation of the dimensions that do not share this
characteristic.
One approach to circumvent this issue is to learn a factorized latent representation where independent latent variables
describe each group of variations. An example of such approach is the Inter-Battery Factor Analysis (IBFA) (Tucker,
1958) model, where the latent space consists of dimensions
encoding structure shared across all dimensions separately
from structure that is private within a group of variates. This
model, and the approaches building on this idea, assume
that the grouping of the observed dimensions is known a
priori. Importantly, this means that the learning task is to
recover a latent representation that reflects a given grouping
of the dimensions in the observed space.
Even for familiar data, such as human motion, specifying
these groupings is challenging, while, in other tasks, extracting the groupings themselves is essential. We refer to these
disjoint groupings as views. One such example is a medical
scenario where each observed variate corresponds to a specific, potentially costly and for the patient intrusive, medical
test. If we can learn the groupings of variations we can
potentially reduce the range of tests needed for diagnosis.
In this paper, we describe a latent variable model, which
we term the DP-GP-LVM, that automatically learns the
grouping of the observed data thereby removing the need
for a priori specification. By formulating the generative
model non-parametrically, our approach has unbounded
representative power and can infer its complexity from data.
The Bayesian formulation enables us to average over all
possible groupings of the observations allowing the structure
to emerge naturally from the data. We perform approximate
Bayesian inference by optimizing a lower bound on the
marginal likelihood of the model.

