LegoNet: Efficient Convolutional Neural Networks with Lego Filters

Zhaohui Yang 1 2 * Yunhe Wang 2 Hanting Chen 1 2 * Chuanjian Liu 2
Boxin Shi 3 4 Chao Xu 1 Chunjing Xu 2 Chang Xu 5

Abstract
This paper aims to build efficient convolutional
neural networks using a set of Lego filters. Many
successful building blocks, e.g. inception and
residual modules, have been designed to refresh
state-of-the-art records of CNNs on visual recognition tasks. Beyond these high-level modules,
we suggest that an ordinary filter in the neural network can be upgraded to a sophisticated module
as well. Filter modules are established by assembling a shared set of Lego filters that are often of
much lower dimensions. Weights in Lego filters
and binary masks to stack Lego filters for these
filter modules can be simultaneously optimized in
an end-to-end manner as usual. Inspired by network engineering, we develop a split-transformmerge strategy for an efficient convolution by exploiting intermediate Lego feature maps. The
compression and acceleration achieved by Lego
Networks using the proposed Lego filters have
been theoretically discussed. Experimental results
on benchmark datasets and deep models demonstrate the advantages of the proposed Lego filters
and their potential real-world applications on mobile devices.

1. Introduction
The success of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
has been well demonstrated on a wide variety of computer
vision (CV) tasks, such as object recognition (Simonyan
and Zisserman, 2014; Szegedy et al., 2015; He et al., 2016;
*

This work was done when Zhaohui Yang and Hanting Chen were interns at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab. 1 Key
Laboratory of Machine Perception (Ministry of Education),
Peking University. 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab. 3 National
Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology, Peking
5
University 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory.
School of Computer Science, University of Sydney. Correspondence to:
Zhaohui Yang <zhaohuiyang@pku.edu.cn>, Yunhe Wang
<wangyunhe@pku.edu.cn>, Chang Xu <c.xu@sydney.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Huang et al., 2017), detection (Ren et al., 2015; Liu et al.,
2016), segmentation (He et al., 2017a), and tracking (Luo
et al., 2017b). Due to the powerful feature expression ability
of CNNs, building deeper networks will result in higher
performance, but lead to the need for more resources. For
instance, more than 90MB memory and 109 FLOPs (floatingnumber operations) are required for launching the ResNet50 (He et al., 2016), which limits the application of these
deep neural networks on mobile phones, laptops, and other
edge devices. Thus, we are motivated to explore portable
deep neural networks with high performance.
A number of algorithms have been proposed to reduce memory and FLOPs of convolutional networks with different
concerns. (Han et al., 2015) introduced pruning, quantization and Huffman coding for generating extremely compact deep models without obviously affecting their accuracy. (Jaderberg et al., 2014) used matrix factorization
to decompose spatial structure of kernels. (Li et al., 2016)
proposed to learn 2-bit weight and constructed binary neural networks. (Molchanov et al., 2016) investigated Taylor
expansions to eliminate side effects caused by removing
filters. (He et al., 2017b) fine-tuned the pruned model for
higher efficiency. (Gao et al., 2018) pruned useless channels during the inference stage to accelerate. (Wang et al.,
2018b) discarded redundant coefficients of parameters in
the DCT frequency domain and introduced a data-driven
method. (Xie et al., 2018) decompose convolution kernels
along channel and spatial dimensions. (Buciluǎ et al., 2006;
Hinton et al., 2015; Romero et al., 2014; Polino et al., 2018)
introduced teacher-student distillation strategy. (Wu et al.,
2018; Juefei-Xu et al., 2017) build light-weight network
with depth-wise convolution. (Wang et al., 2017) introduced circulant matrix to construct convolution kernels.
Moreover, (Wu et al., 2016) compressed network based on
product quantization, (Wang and Cheng, 2017) decomposed
a weight matrix into two ternary matrices and a non-negative
diagonal matrix to reduce memory and computational complexity. (Rastegari et al., 2016; Courbariaux et al., 2015) further studied the weight binarization problem in deep CNNs.
Although these methods can produce very high compression
and speed-up ratios, they often involve special architectures
and operations (e.g. sparse convolution, fixed-point multiplication, and Huffman codebooks), which cannot be directly

