Deep Compressed Sensing

Yan Wu 1 Mihaela Rosca 1 Timothy Lillicrap 1

Abstract
Compressed sensing (CS) provides an elegant
framework for recovering sparse signals from
compressed measurements. For example, CS can
exploit the structure of natural images and recover
an image from only a few random measurements.
CS is flexible and data efficient, but its application has been restricted by the strong assumption
of sparsity and costly reconstruction process. A
recent approach that combines CS with neural
network generators has removed the constraint of
sparsity, but reconstruction remains slow. Here
we propose a novel framework that significantly
improves both the performance and speed of signal recovery by jointly training a generator and
the optimisation process for reconstruction via
meta-learning. We explore training the measurements with different objectives, and derive a family of models based on minimising measurement
errors. We show that Generative Adversarial Nets
(GANs) can be viewed as a special case in this
family of models. Borrowing insights from the
CS perspective, we develop a novel way of improving GANs using gradient information from
the discriminator.

1. Introduction
Encoding and decoding are central problems in communication (MacKay, 2003). Compressed sensing (CS) provides
a framework that separates encoding and decoding into independent measurement and reconstruction processes (Candes et al., 2006; Donoho, 2006). Unlike commonly used
auto-encoding models (Bourlard & Kamp, 1988; Kingma
& Welling, 2013; Rezende et al., 2014), which feature endto-end trained encoder and decoder pairs, CS reconstructs
signals from low-dimensional measurements via online optimisation. This model architecture is highly flexible and
sample efficient: high dimensional signals can be reconstructed from a few random measurements with little or no
1

DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to: Yan Wu
<yanwu@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

training at all. CS has been successfully applied in scenarios
where measurements are noisy and expensive to take, such
as in MRI (Lustig et al., 2007). Its sample efficiency enables
the development of, for example, the “single pixel camera”,
which reconstructs a full resolution image from a single
light sensor (Duarte et al., 2008).
However, the wide application of CS, especially in processing large scale data where modern deep learning approaches
thrive, is hindered by its assumption of sparse signals and
the slow optimisation process for reconstruction. Recently,
Bora et al. (2017) combined CS with separately trained neural network generators. Although these pre-trained neural
networks were not optimized for CS, they demonstrated reconstruction performance superior to existing methods such
as the Lasso (Tibshirani, 1996). Here we propose the deep
compressed sensing (DCS) framework in which neural networks can be trained from-scratch for both measuring and
online reconstruction. We show that this framework leads
naturally to a family of models, including GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014), which can be derived by training the
measurement functions with different objectives. In summary, this work contributes the following:
• We demonstrate how to train deep neural networks
within the CS framework.
• We show that a meta-learned reconstruction process
leads to a more accurate and orders of magnitudes
faster method compared with previous models.
• We develop a new GAN training algorithm based on latent optimisation, which improves GAN performance.
The non-saturated generator loss − ln (D(G(z)))
emerges as a measurement error.
• We extend our framework to training semi-supervised
GANs, and show that latent optimisation results in
semantically meaningful latent spaces.
Notations
We use bold letters for vectors and matrices and normal
letters for scalars. Ep(x) [f (x)] indicates taking the expectation of f (x) over the distribution p(x). We use subscriptions of Greek letters to indicate function parameters. For
example, Gθ is a function parametrised by θ.

