kernelPSI: a Post-Selection Inference Framework for Nonlinear Variable
Selection
Lotfi Slim 1 2 Clément Chatelain 1 Chloé-Agathe Azencott 2 3 Jean-Philippe Vert 2 4

Abstract
Model selection is an essential task for many applications in scientific discovery. The most common approaches rely on univariate linear measures of association between each feature and
the outcome. Such classical selection procedures
fail to take into account nonlinear effects and interactions between features. Kernel-based selection procedures have been proposed as a solution.
However, current strategies for kernel selection
fail to measure the significance of a joint model
constructed through the combination of the basis
kernels. In the present work, we exploit recent
advances in post-selection inference to propose a
valid statistical test for the association of a joint
model of the selected kernels with the outcome.
The kernels are selected via a step-wise procedure which we model as a succession of quadratic
constraints in the outcome variable.

1. Introduction
Variable selection is an important preliminary step in many
data analysis tasks, both to reduce the computational complexity of dealing with high-dimensional data and to discard
nuisance variables that may hurt the performance of subsequent regression or classification tasks. Statistical inference
about the selected variables, such as testing their association with an outcome of interest, is also relevant for many
applications, such as identifying genes associated with a
phenotype in genome-wide association studies. If the variables are initially selected using the outcome, then standard
statistical tests must be adapted to correct for the fact that
1

Translational Sciences, SANOFI R&D, France 2 MINES
ParisTech, PSL Research University, CBIO - Centre for Computational Biology, F-75006 Paris, France 3 Institut Curie, PSL
Research University, INSERM, U900, F-75005 Paris, France
4
Google Brain, F-75009 Paris, France. Correspondence to:
Lotfi Slim <lotfi.slim@mines-paristech.fr>, Jean-Philippe Vert
<jpvert@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

the variables tested after selection are likely to exhibit strong
association with the outcome, because they were selected
for that purpose.
This problem of post-selection inference (PSI) can be solved
by standard data splitting strategies, where we use different
samples for variable selection and statistical inference (Cox,
1975). Splitting data is however not optimal when the total
number of samples is limited, and alternative approaches
have recently been proposed to perform proper statistical inference after variable selection (Taylor & Tibshirani, 2015).
In particular, in the conditional coverage setting of Berk
et al. (2013), statistical inference is performed conditionally to the selection of the model. For linear models with
Gaussian additive noise, Lee et al. (2016); Tibshirani et al.
(2016) show that proper statistical inference is possible and
computationally efficient in this setting for features selected
by lasso, forward stepwise or least angle regression. In these
cases it is indeed possible to characterize the distribution of
the outcome under a standard null hypothesis model conditionally to the selection of a given set of features. This
distribution is a Gaussian distribution truncated to a particular polyhedron. Similar PSI schemes were derived when
features are selected not individually but in groups (Loftus
& Taylor, 2015; Yang et al., 2016; Reid et al., 2017).
Most PSI approaches have been limited to linear models so
far. In many applications, it is however necessary to account
for nonlinear effects or interactions, which requires nonlinear feature selection. This requires generalizing PSI techniques beyond linear procedures. Recently, Yamada et al.
(2018) took a first step in that direction by proposing a PSI
procedure to follow kernel selection, where kernels are used
to generalize linear models to the nonlinear setting. However, their approach is limited to a single way of selecting
kernels, namely, marginal estimation of the Hilbert-Schmidt
Independent Criterion (HSIC) independence measure (Song
et al., 2007). In addition, it only allows to derive postselection statistical guarantees for one specific question,
that of the association of a selected kernel with the outcome.
In this work we go one step further and propose a general
framework for kernel selection, that leads to valid PSI procedures for a variety of statistical inference questions. Our
main contribution is to propose a large family of statistics

