Validating Causal Inference Models via Influence Functions

Ahmed M. Alaa 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1 2 3

Abstract
The problem of estimating causal effects of treatments from observational data falls beyond the
realm of supervised learning — because counterfactual data is inaccessible, we can never observe
the true causal effects. In the absence of “supervision”, how can we evaluate the performance of
causal inference methods?
In this paper, we use influence functions — the
functional derivatives of a loss function — to develop a model validation procedure that estimates
the estimation error of causal inference methods.
Our procedure utilizes a Taylor-like expansion to
approximate the loss function of a method on a
given dataset in terms of the influence functions
of its loss on a “synthesized”, proximal dataset
with known causal effects. Under minimal regularity assumptions, we show that our procedure is
√
n-consistent and efficient. Experiments on 77
benchmark datasets show that using our procedure, we can accurately predict the comparative
performances of state-of-the-art causal inference
methods applied to a given observational study.

1. Introduction
The problem of estimating individualized causal effects of
a treatment from observational data is central in many application domains such as healthcare (Foster et al., 2011),
computational advertising (Bottou et al., 2013), and social
sciences (Xie et al., 2012). In the past few years, numerous
machine learning-based models for causal inference were
developed, capitalizing on ideas from representation learning (Yao et al., 2018), multi-task learning (Alaa & van der
Schaar, 2018) and adversarial training (Yoon et al., 2018).
The literature on machine learning-based causal inference
is constantly growing, with various related workshops and
competitions being held every year (Dorie et al., 2017).
1

University of California, Los Angeles, USA 2 University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 3 Alan Turing Institute, London, UK.
Correspondence to: Ahmed M. Alaa <ahmedmalaa@ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright

Figure 1. Pictorial representation of our validation procedure.
To estimate the performances of two competing models (model 1
and model 2), we first estimate their performances with respect to
the plug-in distribution (`1 (θ̃) and `2 (θ̃)), and then correct for the
plug-in bias using the influence functions `˙1 (θ̃) and `˙2 (θ̃).

The fundamental problem of causal inference is that after a
subject receives a treatment and displays an outcome, it is
impossible to know what the counterfactual outcome would
have been had they received an alternative treatment. Since
causal effects are determined by both factual and counterfactual outcomes, ground-truth effects can never be measured in an observational study (Stuart et al., 2013). In the
absence of “labels” for causal effects, how can we evaluate
the performance of causal inference methods?
Addressing this question is an important step for translating advances in (machine learning-based) causal inference
into practice. This is because the performance of a given
method depends on the dataset at hand, and the comparative
performances of different methods can vary wildly across
datasets (Dorie et al., 2017). With the vast multitude of
methods at their disposal, practitioners need a data-driven
validation procedure — akin to cross-validation — in order to determine which method to use for a given study.
Absent such a procedure, many practitioners would abstain
from using machine learning, and instead resort to familiar
“white-box” models (e.g., linear regression).
In this paper, we develop a model validation procedure that
estimates the performance of causal inference methods applied to a given observational dataset without the need to
access counterfactual data. To the best of our knowledge,
2019 by the author(s).

