Predictor-Corrector Policy Optimization

Ching-An Cheng 1 2 Xinyan Yan 1 Nathan Ratliff 2 Byron Boots 1 2

Abstract
We present a predictor-corrector framework,
called P IC C O LO, that can transform a first-order
model-free reinforcement or imitation learning algorithm into a new hybrid method that leverages
predictive models to accelerate policy learning.
The new “P IC C O LOed” algorithm optimizes a
policy by recursively repeating two steps: In the
Prediction Step, the learner uses a model to predict the unseen future gradient and then applies
the predicted estimate to update the policy; in the
Correction Step, the learner runs the updated policy in the environment, receives the true gradient,
and then corrects the policy using the gradient
error. Unlike previous algorithms, P IC C O LO corrects for the mistakes of using imperfect predicted
gradients and hence does not suffer from model
bias. The development of P IC C O LO is made
possible by a novel reduction from predictable online learning to adversarial online learning, which
provides a systematic way to modify existing firstorder algorithms to achieve the optimal regret
with respect to predictable information. We show,
in both theory and simulation, that the convergence rate of several first-order model-free algorithms can be improved by P IC C O LO.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has recently solved a number
of challenging problems (Mnih et al., 2013; Duan et al.,
2016; Silver et al., 2018). However, many of these successes
are confined to games and simulated environments, where
a large number of agent-environment interactions can be
cheaply performed. Therefore, they are often unrealistic in
real-word applications (like robotics) where data collection
is an expensive and time-consuming process. Improving
sample efficiency still remains a critical challenge for RL.
1
Georgia Tech 2 NVIDIA. Correspondence to: Ching-An Cheng
<cacheng@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Model-based RL methods improve sample efficiency by
leveraging an accurate model that can cheaply simulate interactions to compute policy updates in lieu of real-world
interactions (Tan et al., 2018). A classical example of
pure model-based methods is optimal control (Jacobson
& Mayne, 1970; Todorov & Li, 2005; Deisenroth & Rasmussen, 2011; Pan & Theodorou, 2014), which has recently
been extended to model abstract latent dynamics with neural
networks (Silver et al., 2017; Oh et al., 2017). These methods use a (local) model of the dynamics and cost functions
to predict cost-to-go functions, policy gradients, or promising improvement direction when updating policies (Levine
& Koltun, 2013; Sun et al., 2018; Anthony et al., 2017).
Another way to use model information is the hybrid DYNA
framework (Sutton, 1991; Sutton et al., 2012), which interleaves model-based and model-free updates, ideally cutting
learning time in half. However, all of these approaches,
while potentially accelerating policy learning, suffer from
a common drawback: when the model is inaccurate, the
performance of the policy can become biased away from
the best achievable in the policy class.
Several strategies have been proposed to remove this performance bias. Learning-to-plan attempts to train the planning
process end-to-end (Pascanu et al., 2017; Srinivas et al.,
2018; Amos et al., 2018), so the performance of a given
planning structure is directly optimized. However, these algorithms are still optimized through standard model-free RL
techniques; it is unclear as to whether they are more sample
efficient. In parallel, another class of bias-free algorithms is
control variate methods (Chebotar et al., 2017; Grathwohl
et al., 2018; Papini et al., 2018), which use models to reduce
the variance of sampled gradients to improve convergence.
In this paper, we provide a novel learning framework that
can leverage models to improve sample efficiency while
avoiding performance bias due to modeling errors. Our
approach is built on techniques from online learning (Gordon, 1999; Zinkevich, 2003). The use of online learning to
analyze policy optimization was pioneered by Ross et al.
(2011), who proposed to reduce imitation learning (IL) to
adversarial online learning problems. This reduction provides a framework for performance analysis, leading to
algorithms such as DAGGER (Ross et al., 2011) and AG GRE VAT E (Ross & Bagnell, 2014). However, it was recently
shown that the naı̈ve reduction to adversarial online learning

