Almost Unsupervised Text to Speech and Automatic Speech Recognition

Yi Ren * 1 Xu Tan * 2 Tao Qin 2 Sheng Zhao 3 Zhou Zhao 1 Tie-Yan Liu 2

Abstract

Text to speech (TTS) and automatic speech recognition (ASR) are two dual tasks in speech processing and both achieve impressive performance
thanks to the recent advance in deep learning
and large amount of aligned speech and text data.
However, the lack of aligned data poses a major practical problem for TTS and ASR on lowresource languages. In this paper, by leveraging
the dual nature of the two tasks, we propose an
almost unsupervised learning method that only
leverages few hundreds of paired data and extra
unpaired data for TTS and ASR. Our method consists of the following components: (1) a denoising
auto-encoder, which reconstructs speech and text
sequences respectively to develop the capability
of language modeling both in speech and text
domain; (2) dual transformation, where the TTS
model transforms the text y into speech x̂, and the
ASR model leverages the transformed pair (x̂, y)
for training, and vice versa, to boost the accuracy
of the two tasks; (3) bidirectional sequence modeling, which addresses error propagation especially in the long speech and text sequence when
training with few paired data; (4) a unified model
structure, which combines all the above components for TTS and ASR based on Transformer
model. Our method achieves 99.84% in terms of
word level intelligible rate and 2.68 MOS for TTS,
and 11.7% PER for ASR on LJSpeech dataset, by
leveraging only 200 paired speech and text data
(about 20 minutes audio), together with extra unpaired speech and text data.

*
Equal contribution. This work was conducted in Microsoft
1
Research Asia.
Zhejiang University 2 Microsoft Research
3
Microsoft STC Asia. Correspondence to: Tao Qin <taoqin@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Text to speech (TTS) and automatic speech recognition
(ASR) are two popular tasks in speech processing and have
attracted a lot of attention in recent years due to advances in
deep learning. Nowadays, the state-of-the-art TTS and ASR
systems are mostly based on deep neural models and are all
data-hungry, which brings challenges on many languages
that are scarce of paired speech and text data. Therefore,
a variety of techniques for low-resource and zero-resource
ASR and TTS have been proposed recently, including unsupervised ASR (Yeh et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2018a; Liu
et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2018b), low-resource ASR (Chuangsuwanich, 2016; Dalmia et al., 2018; Zhou et al., 2018), TTS
with minimal speaker data (Chen et al., 2019; Jia et al., 2018;
Arik et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018), and boosting TTS and
ASR simultaneously in a speech chain (Tjandra et al., 2017;
2018).
Works focusing on unsupervised ASR (Chen et al., 2018a;
Liu et al., 2018) do not leverage additional information from
TTS, which is a dual task to ASR and is of great potential
to improve the performance of ASR. Besides, unsupervised
ASR typically leverages some task specific algorithms that
first segment the speech waveform into words or phonemes
and align speech with text data at the segment level. However, TTS usually converts the speech waveform into melspectrograms (Wang et al., 2017; Ping et al., 2018; Shen
et al., 2018) or MFCC (Arik et al., 2017) and processes it
in the frame-level. Therefore, the algorithm designed for
unsupervised ASR cannot be easily applied to TTS. The
works trying to synthesize the voice of a certain speaker
with few samples leverage large amount labeled speech and
text data from other speakers, which is usually regarded as a
transfer learning problem but not an unsupervised learning
problem (Chen et al., 2019; Arik et al., 2018). The speech
chain proposed in (Tjandra et al., 2017) relied on two welltrained ASR and TTS models to further boost accuracy with
unpaired speech and text data, which is not applicable in the
zero- or low-resource setting.
In this paper, inspired by the dual nature of TTS and ASR
tasks, we proposed a novel almost unsupervised method for
both TTS and ASR, by leveraging a few amount of paired
speech and text data and extra unpaired data. Our method
consists of the following components:

