Moment-Based Variational Inference for Markov Jump Processes

Christian Wildner 1 Heinz Koeppl 1

Abstract
We propose moment-based variational inference
as a flexible framework for approximate smoothing of latent Markov jump processes. The main
ingredient of our approach is to partition the set
of all transitions of the latent process into classes.
This allows to express the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the approximate and the exact
posterior process in terms of a set of moment functions that arise naturally from the chosen partition.
To illustrate possible choices of the partition, we
consider special classes of jump processes that
frequently occur in applications. We then extend
the results to parameter inference and demonstrate
the method on several examples.

1. Introduction
Markov jump processes (MJPs) are popular modelling tools
in a number of domains including physics, biology, mathematical finance and chemistry (Anderson, 1991). In many
cases, these models are used for planning and prediction.
To achieve this, the model parameters have to be calibrated
from sparse and noisy measurements. Mathematically, this
leads to the problem of inference for stochastic processes.
Unfortunately, inference in such scenarios is notoriously difficult because parameter inference requires estimation of the
latent Markov chain given the observations as an intermediate step. This is especially true in scenarios with unbounded
state-spaces such as population models. In recent years,
population models have become popular in systems and
synthetic biology to describe the intrinsic stochasticity of
bio-chemical reactions in a cellular environment (Anderson
& Kurtz, 2015).
Algorithms for latent state estimation are often based on
the sequential Monte Carlo framework (Doucet & Johansen,
2011) or specialized MCMC approaches (Rao & Teh, 2013).
Alternatively, if the state space is not too large, one can
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology, Technische Universität Darmstadt, Germany. Correspondence to: Heinz Koeppl <heinz.koeppl@bcs.tu-darmstadt.de>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

also apply a continuous version of the classical forwardbackward algorithm for hidden Markov models. In the context of parameter learning, many approaches are likelihoodbased and apply a form of the EM-algorithm (Bladt &
Sørensen, 2005; Metzner et al., 2007; Liu et al., 2015).
Bayesian approaches to joint estimation of latent states
and parameters usually focus on the particle Markov chain
Monte Carlo framework which has inspired many applications (Andrieu et al., 2010; Golightly & Wilkinson, 2011;
Frigola et al., 2013).
While variational inference is ubiquituos in machine learning, most applications focus on probabilistic graphical models (Blei et al., 2017). An important contribution in the
domain of continuous time dynamic models is the work of
Archambeau et al. (2007) who developed a Gaussian approximation for stochastic differential equations. Opper &
Sanguinetti (2008) proposed the first variational method for
MJPs on the process level. The core idea of their approach
is to approximate a coupled multi-component process by a
product of independent component processes. This idea was
adapted by Cohn et al. (2010) to continuous time Bayesian
networks. More recently, Zhang et al. (2017) combined
uniformization with the classical variational method for
graphical models.
In this work, we propose a general procedure to derive
variational inference algorithms for arbitrary MJPs on a
countable state space. While based on the same divergence
functional as the approach in (Opper & Sanguinetti, 2008),
our approximation is conceptually different. The key step
in our approach is to partition the state of all transitions
into a number of predefined classes. We then express the
divergence function in terms of natural moment functions
that are induced by the partition. This allows to approximate the inference problem by an optimal control problem
with a complexity controlled by the chosen partition for the
transitions. Another difference to the mean-field approach
is that we construct our variational family as a modification
of the prior process, thus overcoming issues with absolute
continuity that can arise from a product approximation.
The remaining part of the paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 summarizes background material on MJPs. In
Section 3 we construct our variational smoothing algorithm
and discuss a few special process classes. Section 4 discusses an extension to latent parameter inference. Finally, in
Section 5 we demonstrate the methods on several examples.

