Conditioning by adaptive sampling for robust design
David H. Brookes 1 Hahnbeom Park 2 3 Jennifer Listgarten 4

Abstract
We present a method for design problems wherein
the goal is to maximize or specify the value of
one or more properties of interest (e. g., maximizing the fluorescence of a protein). We assume
access to black box, stochastic “oracle” predictive
functions, each of which maps from design space
to a distribution over properties of interest. Because many state-of-the-art predictive models are
known to suffer from pathologies, especially for
data far from the training distribution, the design
problem is different from directly optimizing the
oracles. Herein, we propose a method to solve
this problem that uses model-based adaptive sampling to estimate a distribution over the design
space, conditioned on the desired properties.

1. Predictive-model based design
The design of molecules and proteins to achieve desired
properties, such as binding affinity to a target, has a long
history in chemistry and bioengineering. Historically, design has been performed through a time-consuming and
costly iterative experimental process, often dependent on
domain experts using a combination of intuition and trial
and error. For example, a popular technique is Directed
Evolution (Chen & Arnold, 1991), where first random variations in a parent population of proteins are induced; next,
for each of these variants, the property of interest or a proxy
to it, is measured; finally, the procedure is repeated on the
top-performing variants and the process is iterated. This
process is dependent on expensive and time-consuming laboratory measurements. Moreover, it is performing a hybrid
greedy-random (uniform) walk through the protein design
space—a strategy that is not likely to be particularly efficient
in finding the best protein.
1

Biophysics Graduate Group, UC Berkeley, CA 2 Department of
Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 3 Institute for
Protein Design, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 4 EECS Department, UC Berkeley, CA. Correspondence to: David Brookes,
Jennifer Listgarten <{david.brookes, jennl}@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Advances in biotechnology, chemistry and machine learning
allow for the possibility to improve such design cycles with
computational approaches (e. g., Schneider & Wrede (1994);
Schneider et al. (1998); Gómez-Bombarelli et al. (2018);
Killoran et al. (2017); Brookes & Listgarten (2018); Gupta
& Zou (2019); Yang et al. (2018)). Where exactly should
computational methods be used in such a setting? Within
the aforementioned Directed Evolution, the obvious place
to employ machine learning is to replace the laboratorybased property measurements with a property ‘oracle’—a
regression model that bypasses costly and time-consuming
laboratory experiments. However, a potentially higher impact innovation is to also replace the greedy-random search
by a more effective search. In particular, given a probabilistic oracle for a property of interest, one can achieve
more effective search by employing state-of-the-art optimization algorithms over the inputs (e. g., protein sequence)
of the oracle regression model, ideally while accounting
for uncertainty in the oracle (e. g., Brookes & Listgarten
(2018)).
In the framing of the problem just described, there is an implicit assumption that the regression oracle is well-behaved,
in the sense that it is trustworthy not only in and near the
regime of inputs where it was trained, but also beyond. However, it is now well-known that many state-of-the-art predictive models suffer from pathological behaviour, especially
in regimes far from the training data (Szegedy et al., 2014;
Nguyen et al., 2015). Methods that optimize these predictive
functions directly may be led astray into areas of state space
where the predictions are unreliable and the corresponding
suggested sequences are unrealistic (e. g., correspond to proteins that will not fold). Therefore, we must modulate the
optimization with prior information to avoid this problem.
There are two related viewpoints on what this prior information represents: either as encoding knowledge about the
regions where the oracle is expected to be accurate (e. g., by
representing information about the distribution of training
inputs), or as encoding knowledge about what constitutes
a ‘realistic’ input (e. g., by representing proteins known to
stably fold). Herein we focus on the former viewpoint, and
thus assume that we have access to the input distribution of
our oracle training data. However, the latter viewpoint is
required when such data is not available.
How then should one use such prior knowledge? Formally,

