Variational Implicit Processes

Chao Ma 1 Yingzhen Li 2 José Miguel Hernández-Lobato 1 2

Abstract
We introduce the implicit processes (IPs), a
stochastic process that places implicitly defined
multivariate distributions over any finite collections of random variables. IPs are therefore highly
flexible implicit priors over functions, with examples including data simulators, Bayesian neural networks and non-linear transformations of
stochastic processes. A novel and efficient approximate inference algorithm for IPs, namely the variational implicit processes (VIPs), is derived using generalised wake-sleep updates. This method
returns simple update equations and allows scalable hyper-parameter learning with stochastic optimization. Experiments show that VIPs return
better uncertainty estimates and lower errors over
existing inference methods for challenging models such as Bayesian neural networks, and Gaussian processes.

1

This paper explores the extension of implicit models to
Bayesian modeling of random functions. Similar to the construction of Gaussian processes (GPs), an implicit process
(IP) assigns implicit distributions over any finite collections
of random variables. Therefore IPs can be much more flexible than GPs when complicated models like neural networks
are used for the implicit distributions. With an IP as the
prior, we can directly perform (variational) posterior inference over functions in a non-parametric fashion. This is
beneficial for better-calibrated uncertainty estimates like
GPs (Bui et al., 2016a). It also avoids typical issues of inference in parameter space, that is, symmetric modes in the
posterior distribution of Bayesian neural network weights.
The function-space inference for IPs is achieved by our proposed variational implicit process (VIP) algorithm, which
addresses the intractability issues of implicit distributions.
Concretely, our contributions are threefold:
• We formalize implicit stochastic process priors over
functions, and prove its well-definedness in both finite
and infinite dimensional cases. By allowing the usage
of IPs with rich structures as priors ( e.g., data simulators and Bayesian LSTMs), our approach provides
a unified and powerful Bayesian inference framework
for these important but challenging deep models.
• We derive a novel and efficient variational inference
framework that gives a closed-form approximation to
the IP posterior. It does not rely on e.g. density ratio/gradient estimators in implicit variational inference
literature which can be inaccurate in high dimensions.
Our inference method is computationally cheap, and it
allows scalable hyper-parameter learning in IPs.
• We conduct extensive comparisons between IPs
trained with the proposed inference method, and
GPs/BNNs/Bayesian LSTMs trained with existing variational approaches. Our method consistently outperforms other methods, and achieves state-of-the-art results on a large scale Bayesian LSTM inference task.

Introduction

Probabilistic models with implicit distributions as core components have recently attracted enormous interest in both
deep learning and the approximate Bayesian inference communities. In contrast to prescribed probabilistic models
(Diggle & Gratton, 1984) that assign explicit densities to
possible outcomes of the model, implicit models implicitly
assign probability measures by the specification of the data
generating process. One of the most well known implicit
distributions is the generator of generative adversarial nets
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Arjovsky et al., 2017) that
transforms isotropic noise into high dimensional data, using
neural networks. In approximate inference context, implicit
distributions have also been used as flexible approximate
posterior distributions (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015; Liu &
Feng, 2016; Tran et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017).
1
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 2 Microsoft Research Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
Correspondence to: Chao Ma <cm905@cam.ac.uk>, José Miguel
Hernández-Lobato <jmh233@cam.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

2

Implicit Stochastic Processes

In this section, we generalize GPs to implicit stochastic processes. Readers are referred to appendix A for a detailed
introduction, but briefly speaking, a GP defines the distribution of a random function f by placing a multivariate Gaus-

