Fine-Grained Analysis of Optimization and Generalization for
Overparameterized Two-Layer Neural Networks
Sanjeev Arora * 1 2 Simon S. Du * 3 Wei Hu * 1 Zhiyuan Li * 1 Ruosong Wang * 3

Abstract
Recent works have cast some light on the mystery of why deep nets fit any data and generalize
despite being very overparametrized. This paper
analyzes training and generalization for a simple
2-layer ReLU net with random initialization, and
provides the following improvements over recent
works:
(i) Using a tighter characterization of training
speed than recent papers, an explanation for
why training a neural net with random labels leads to slower training, as originally
observed in [Zhang et al. ICLR’17].
(ii) Generalization bound independent of network size, using a data-dependent complexity measure. Our measure distinguishes
clearly between random labels and true labels on MNIST and CIFAR, as shown by
experiments. Moreover, recent papers require sample complexity to increase (slowly)
with the size, while our sample complexity is
completely independent of the network size.
(iii) Learnability of a broad class of smooth functions by 2-layer ReLU nets trained via gradient descent.
The key idea is to track dynamics of training and
generalization via properties of a related kernel.

1. Introduction
The well-known work of Zhang et al. (2017) highlighted
intriguing experimental phenomena about deep net training – specifically, optimization and generalization – and
asked whether theory could explain them. They showed
*
Alphabetical order 1 Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA
Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, NJ, USA 3 Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Wei
Hu <huwei@cs.princeton.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

that sufficiently powerful nets (with vastly more parameters
than number of training samples) can attain zero training
error, regardless of whether the data is properly labeled or
randomly labeled. Obviously, training with randomly labeled data cannot generalize, whereas training with properly
labeled data generalizes. See Figure 2 replicating some of
these results.
Recent papers have begun to provide explanations, showing
that gradient descent can allow an overparametrized multilayer net to attain arbitrarily low training error on fairly
generic datasets (Du et al., 2018a;c; Li & Liang, 2018; AllenZhu et al., 2018b; Zou et al., 2018), provided the amount
of overparametrization is a high polynomial of the relevant
parameters (i.e. vastly more than the overparametrization in
(Zhang et al., 2017)). Under further assumptions it can also
be shown that the trained net generalizes (Allen-Zhu et al.,
2018a). But some issues were not addressed in these papers,
and the goal of the current paper is to address them.
First, the experiments in (Zhang et al., 2017) show that
though the nets attain zero training error on even random
data, the convergence rate is much slower. See Figure 1.
Question 1. Why do true labels give faster convergence
rate than random labels for gradient descent?
The above papers do not answer this question, since their
proof of convergence does not distinguish between good
and random labels.
The next issue is about generalization: clearly, some property of properly labeled data controls generalization, but
what? Classical measures used in generalization theory
such as VC-dimension and Rademacher complexity are
much too pessimistic. A line of research proposed normbased (e.g. (Bartlett et al., 2017a)) and compression-based
bounds (Arora et al., 2018). But the sample complexity
upper bounds obtained are still far too weak. Furthermore
they rely on some property of the trained net that is revealed/computed at the end of training. There is no property
of data alone that determine upfront whether the trained net
will generalize. A recent paper (Allen-Zhu et al., 2018a)
assumed that there exists an underlying (unknown) neural
network that achieves low error on the data distribution, and
the amount of data available is quite a bit more than the min-

