Weak Detection of Signal in the Spiked Wigner Model

Hye Won Chung 1 Ji Oon Lee 2

Abstract
We consider the problem of detecting the presence of the signal in a rank-one signal-plus-noise
data matrix. In case the signal-to-noise ratio is
under the threshold below which a reliable detection is impossible, we propose a hypothesis test
based on the linear spectral statistics of the data
matrix. When the noise is Gaussian, the error of
the proposed test is optimal as it matches the error
of the likelihood ratio test that minimizes the sum
of the Type-I and Type-II errors. The test is datadriven and does not depend on the distribution
of the signal or the noise. If the density of the
noise is known, it can be further improved by an
entrywise transformation to lower the error of the
test.

1. Introduction
One of the fundamental questions in statistics is to detect
signals from given data. When the data is given as a matrix,
it is common to analyze the data by the largest eigenvalue
and the corresponding eigenvector, which is known as principal component analysis (PCA). For a null model where
the signal is not present, the data is pure noise and the behavior of the largest eigenvalue is now well understood by
random matrix theory (Tracy & Widom, 1994; 1996; Johnstone, 2001; Tao & Vu, 2010; Erdős et al., 2012). If the data
matrix is of ‘signal-plus-noise’ type and the signal is in the
form of a vector, the model is often referred to as a ‘spiked
random matrix.’
When the signal is an N -dimensional vector and the data is
an N × N real symmetric matrix, one of the most natural
signal-plus-noise models is of the form
√
M = λxxT + H,
(1)
1
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea
Department of Mathematical Sciences, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea.
Correspondence to: Hye Won Chung <hwchung@kaist.ac.kr>, Ji
Oon Lee <jioon.lee@kaist.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

where the signal x ∈ RN and H is an N × N Wigner matrix. (See Definitions 1 and 2.) The spiked Wigner model
is widely used as a low-rank model for which PCA can be
applied to detect or recover signal from noisy high dimensional data. It can be used in the signal detection/recovery
problems such as community detection (Abbe, 2017) and
submatrix localization (Butucea et al., 2013). In the community detection, the spike x ∈ {1, −1}N indicates communities each node belongs to and the data matrix M models
noisy pairwise interactions with different means depending
on whether the corresponding nodes are in the same community or not. In the submatrix localization, the task is
to detect within a large Gaussian matrix small blocks with
atypical mean.
The Wigner matrix H represents the noise, and we assume
that Hij are independent random variables with mean 0 and
variance N −1 . With the assumption, the spectral norm of
H, kHk → 2 as N → ∞ almost surely. Thus, when the
signal is normalized so that kxk2 = 1, the strengths of
the signal kxxT k and the noise kHk are comparable. If
the parameter λ, which corresponds to the signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR), is very large (λ  1) or small (λ  1), a
perturbation argument can be applied for PCA; if λ  1,
the
between the largest eigenvalues of M and
√ difference
λxxT is negligible, and if λ  1, the largest eigenvalue
of M cannot be distinguished from that of H.
The case λ ∼ 1 has been intensively studied in random matrix theory. The first result in this direction was obtained by
Baik, Ben Arous, and Péché (Baik et al., 2005) for complex
Wishart matrices, which is of the form X ∗ X where X is a
(rectangular) matrix with independent Gaussian entries, and
later extended to more general sample covariance matrices
(Paul, 2007; Nadler, 2008; Johnstone & Lu, 2009). Similar
results were proved for Wigner matrices (Péché, 2006; Féral
& Péché, 2007; Capitaine et al., 2009; Benaych-Georges &
Nadakuditi, 2011). In these results, the largest eigenvalue
exhibits phase transition; when λ > 1, the largest eigenvalue
separates
from the other eigenvalues of M and converges to
√
λ + √1λ , which is strictly larger than 2, whereas for λ < 1,
the behavior of the largest eigenvalue coincides with that of
the pure noise model. In the former case, the eigenvector
corresponding to the largest eigenvalue has nontrivial correlation with the signal x, which means that the signal can
be detected and recovered by PCA. We refer to the work

