Molecular Hypergraph Grammar
with Its Application to Molecular Optimization

Hiroshi Kajino 1

Abstract
Molecular optimization aims to discover novel
molecules with desirable properties, and its two
fundamental challenges are: (i) it is not trivial to
generate valid molecules in a controllable way due
to hard chemical constraints such as the valency
conditions, and (ii) it is often costly to evaluate a
property of a novel molecule, and therefore, the
number of property evaluations is limited. These
challenges are to some extent alleviated by a combination of a variational autoencoder (VAE) and
Bayesian optimization (BO), where VAE converts
a molecule into/from its latent continuous vector,
and BO optimizes a latent continuous vector (and
its corresponding molecule) within a limited number of property evaluations. While the most recent work, for the first time, achieved 100% validity, its architecture is rather complex due to
auxiliary neural networks other than VAE, making it difficult to train. This paper presents a
molecular hypergraph grammar variational autoencoder (MHG-VAE), which uses a single VAE
to achieve 100% validity. Our idea is to develop
a graph grammar encoding the hard chemical
constraints, called molecular hypergraph grammar (MHG), which guides VAE to always generate valid molecules. We also present an algorithm
to construct MHG from a set of molecules.

1. Introduction
Molecular optimization aims to discover a novel molecule
that possesses prescribed properties given by a user. For
example, Gómez-Bombarelli et al. (2016) aim to maximize
the efficiency of an organic light-emitting diode. Letting
M be a set of valid molecules, the molecular optimization
1
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab; IBM Research, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Hiroshi Kajino <kajino@jp.ibm.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

problem is to obtain m? ∈ M such that,
m? = arg max f (m),

(1)

m∈M

where f : M → R is an unknown function that outputs a
chemical property of the input molecule to be maximized.
There are two obstacles to solve Eq. (1). First, the set of feasible solutions M is discrete, and it is difficult to generate
a candidate m from M in a controllable way. Second, f is
unknown and costly to evaluate, and only a small sample
{(mn , yn )}N
n=1 ⊂ M × R is available, where yn = f (mn ).
In fact, the function evaluation often requires wet-lab experiments or day-long simulation based on quantum mechanics.
A recent innovation (Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018) facilitates the optimization by leveraging VAE (Kingma &
Welling, 2014) and BO (Močkus, 1975). The first challenge
is addressed by casting the discrete optimization problem
into continuous with the help of VAE. In specific, they first
train a VAE, a pair of Enc : M → RD and Dec : RD → M
such that Dec(Enc(m)) ≈ m holds for any m ∈ M, and
they obtain m? as follows:
?





m = Dec arg max f (Dec(z)) ,

(2)

z∈RD

The second challenge is addressed by using BO, which iteratively optimizes a black-box function in a limited number
of function evaluations. In specific, at each iteration, the
inner optimization problem in Eq. (2) is solved by BO with
training sample {(Enc(m1 ), y1 ), . . . , (Enc(mN ), yN )} ⊂
RD ×R, and the resultant latent vector xN +1 ∈ RD is added
to the sample with property evaluation f (Dec(xN +1 )). This
procedure is iterated for a fixed number of times, and BO
outputs the best molecule found so far.
While they elegantly address the two obstacles, the decoding
sometimes fails, and no molecule is obtained, which we call
the decoding error issue. This is mainly due to the use of
SMILES (Weininger, 1988) to represent a molecule. Let Σ
be a set of symbols used in SMILES, and EncS : M → Σ∗
be a SMILES encoder. For example, Σ includes atomic
symbols, e.g., C, H ∈ Σ; given a phenol as input, the encoder outputs c1c(O)cccc1, where the digits represent

