Probability Functional Descent: A Unifying Perspective
on GANs, Variational Inference, and Reinforcement Learning

Casey Chu 1 Jose Blanchet 2 Peter Glynn 2

Abstract
The goal of this paper is to provide a unifying
view of a wide range of problems of interest in
machine learning by framing them as the minimization of functionals defined on the space of
probability measures. In particular, we show that
generative adversarial networks, variational inference, and actor-critic methods in reinforcement
learning can all be seen through the lens of our
framework. We then discuss a generic optimization algorithm for our formulation, called probability functional descent (PFD), and show how
this algorithm recovers existing methods developed independently in the settings mentioned earlier.

1. Introduction
Deep learning now plays an important role in many domains,
for example, in generative modeling, deep reinforcement
learning, and variational inference. In the process, dozens
of new algorithms have been proposed for solving these
problems with deep neural networks, specific of course to
domain at hand.
In this paper, we introduce a conceptual framework which
can be used to understand in a unified way a broad class of
machine learning problems. Central to this framework is
an abstract optimization problem in the space of probability
measures, a formulation that stems from the observation
that in many fields, the object of interest is a probability
distribution; moreover, the learning process is guided by
a probability functional to be minimized, a loss function
that conceptually maps a probability distribution to a real
number. Table 1 lists these correspondences in the case of
generative adversarial networks, variational inference, and
1
Institute for Computational & Mathematical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA 2 Management Science
& Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA.
Correspondence to: Casey Chu <caseychu@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

reinforcement learning.
Because the optimization now takes place in the infinitedimensional space of probability measures, standard finitedimensional algorithms like gradient descent are initially
unavailable; even the proper notion for the derivative of
these functionals is unclear. We call upon on a body of
literature known as von Mises calculus (von Mises, 1947;
Fernholz, 2012), originally developed in the field of asymptotic statistics, to make these functional derivatives precise.
Remarkably, we find that once the connection is made, the
resulting generalized descent algorithm, which we call probability functional descent, is intimately compatible with
standard deep learning techniques such as stochastic gradient descent (Bottou, 2010), the reparameterization trick
(Kingma & Welling, 2013), and adversarial training (Goodfellow et al., 2014).
When we apply probability functional descent to the aforementioned domains, we find that we recover a wide range
of existing algorithms, and the essential distinction between
them is simply the way that the functional derivative, the von
Mises influence function in this context, is approximated.
Table 2 lists these algorithms and their corresponding approximation methods. Probability functional descent therefore acts as a unifying framework for the analysis of existing
algorithms as well as the systematic development of new
ones.
1.1. Related work
The problem of optimizing functionals of probability measures is not new. For example, Gaivoronski (1986) and
Molchanov & Zuyev (2001) study these types of problems
and even propose Frank-Wolfe and steepest descent algorithms to solve these problems. However, their algorithms
are not immediately practical for the high-dimensional machine learning settings described here, and it is not clear
how to integrate their methods with modern deep learning
techniques.
Several others in the machine learning community also
adopt the perspective of descent in the space of probability distributions. In order to introduce functional gradients,
these approaches endow the space of probability distribu-

