Beyond the Chinese Restaurant and Pitman-Yor processes:
Statistical Models with double power-law behavior

Fadhel Ayed * 1 Juho Lee * 1 2 François Caron 1

Abstract
Bayesian nonparametric approaches, in particular
the Pitman-Yor process and the associated twoparameter Chinese Restaurant process, have been
successfully used in applications where the data
exhibit a power-law behavior. Examples include
natural language processing, natural images or
networks. There is also growing empirical evidence suggesting that some datasets exhibit a tworegime power-law behavior: one regime for small
frequencies, and a second regime, with a different
exponent, for high frequencies. In this paper, we
introduce a class of completely random measures
which are doubly regularly-varying. Contrary to
the Pitman-Yor process, we show that when completely random measures in this class are normalized to obtain random probability measures and
associated random partitions, such partitions exhibit a double power-law behavior. We present
two general constructions and discuss in particular
two models within this class: the beta prime process (Broderick et al. (2015, 2018) and a novel
process called generalized BFRY process. We
derive efficient Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithms to estimate the parameters of these models.
Finally, we show that the proposed models provide a better fit than the Pitman-Yor process on
various datasets.

1. Introduction
Power-law distributions appear to arise in a wide range of
contexts, including natural languages, natural images or
networks. For example, the empirical distribution of the
word frequencies in natural languages is well approximated
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, University
of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom 2 AITRICS, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Fadhel Ayed <fadhel.ayed@stats.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

by a power-law distribution, an observation attributed to Zipf
(1935). That is, the frequency f(k) of the kth most frequent
word in a corpus satisfies, within some range
f(k) ≃ Ck −ξ
where C is some constant and ξ > 0 is the power-law
exponent which is typically close to 1 for natural languages.
These empirical findings have motivated the development of
numerous generative models that can reproduce this powerlaw behavior; see the reviews of (Mitzenmacher, 2004) and
(Newman, 2005).
Amongst these generative models, Bayesian nonparametric hierarchical models based on infinite-dimensional random measures have been successfully used to capture the
power-law behavior of various datasets. Applications include natural language processing (Goldwater et al., 2006;
Teh, 2006; Wood et al., 2009; Mochihashi et al., 2009; Sato
& Nakagawa, 2010), natural image segmentation (Sudderth
& Jordan, 2009) or network analysis (Caron, 2012; Caron
& Fox, 2017; Crane & Dempsey, 2018; Cai et al., 2016).
A very popular model is the Pitman-Yor (PY) process (Pitman, 1995; Pitman & Yor, 1997; Pitman, 2006), an infinitedimensional random probability measure whose properties
induce a power-law behavior. It admits two parameters
(0 ≤ α < 1, θ > −α). The PY random probability measure
is almost surely discrete, with weights π(1) ≥ π(2) ≥, . . .
following the so-called two-parameter Poisson-Dirichlet distribution PD(α, θ) (Pitman & Yor, 1997). For α > 0, the
random weights satisfy
π(k) ∼ k −1/α S almost surely as k → ∞
where S is a random variable. That is, small weights asymptotically follow a power-law distribution whose exponent is
controlled by the parameter α. The PY process also enjoys
tractable alternative constructions via the two-parameter
Chinese restaurant process or the stick-breaking construction which explains its great popularity amongst models
with similar properties. Other popular infinite-dimensional
random measures that have been used for their similar
power-law properties include the stable Indian buffet process (Teh & Gorur, 2009) or the generalized gamma process (Hougaard, 1986; Brix, 1999).

