Inference and Sampling of K33 -free Ising Models

Valerii Likhosherstov 1 Yury Maximov 1 2 Michael Chertkov 1 2 3

Abstract
We call an Ising model tractable when it is possible to compute its partition function value (statistical inference) in polynomial time. The tractability
also implies an ability to sample configurations
of this model in polynomial time. The notion
of tractability extends the basic case of planar
zero-field Ising models. Our starting point is to
describe algorithms for the basic case, computing
partition function and sampling efficiently. Then,
we extend our tractable inference and sampling
algorithms to models whose triconnected components are either planar or graphs of O(1) size. In
particular, it results in a polynomial-time inference and sampling algorithms for K33 (minor)free topologies of zero-field Ising models—a generalization of planar graphs with a potentially unbounded genus.

1. Introduction
Computing the partition function of the Ising model is generally intractable, even an approximate solution in the special
anti-ferromagnetic case of arbitrary topology would have
colossal consequences in the complexity theory (Jerrum &
Sinclair, 1993). Therefore, a question of interest—rather
than addressing the general case—is to look after tractable
families of Ising models. In the following, we briefly review
tractability related to planar graphs and graphs embedded in
surfaces of small genus.
Related work. Onsager (1944) gave a closed-form solution
for the partition function in the case of a homogeneous interaction Ising model over an infinite two-dimensional square
grid without a magnetic field. This result has opened an exciting era of phase transition discoveries, which is arguably
1
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, Russia 2 Theoretical Division and Center for Nonlinear Studies, Los
Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM, USA 3 Graduate
Program in Applied Mathematics, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA. Correspondence to: Valerii Likhosherstov <valerii.likhosherstov@skoltech.ru>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

one of the most significant contributions in theoretical and
mathematical physics of the 20th century. Then, Kac and
Ward (1952) showed in the case of a finite square lattice
that the problem of the partition function computation is
reducible to a determinant. Kasteleyn (1963) generalized
the results to the case of an arbitrary inhomogeneous interaction Ising model over an arbitrary planar graph. Kasteleyn’s
construction was based on mapping of the Ising model to a
perfect matching (PM) model with specially defined weights
over a modified graph. Kasteleyn’s construction was also
based on the so-called Pfaffian orientation, which allows
counting of PMs by finding a single Pfaffian (or determinant) of a matrix. Fisher (1966) simplified Kasteleyn’s
construction such that the modified graph remained planar. Transition to PM is fruitful because it extends planar
zero-field Ising model inference to models embedded on
a torus (Kasteleyn, 1963) and, in fact, on any surface of
small (orientable) genus g, but with a price of the additional,
multiplicative, and exponential in genus, 4g , factor in the
algorithm’s run time (Gallucio & Loebl, 1999).
A parallel way of reducing the planar zero-field Ising model
to a PM problem consists of constructing a so-called expanded dual graph (Bieche et al., 1980; Barahona, 1982;
Schraudolph & Kamenetsky, 2009). This approach is more
natural and interpretable because there is a one-to-one correspondence between spin configurations and PMs on the
expanded dual graph. An extra advantage of this approach
is that the reduction allows one to develop an exact efficient
sampling. Based on linear algebra and planar separator
theory (Lipton & Tarjan, 1979), Wilson introduced an algorithm (1997) that allows one to sample PMs over planar
3
graphs in O(N 2 ) time. The algorithms were implemented
in (Thomas & Middleton, 2009; 2013) for the Ising model
sampling, however, the implementation was limited to only
the special case of a square lattice. In (Thomas & Middleton,
2009) a simple extension of the Wilson’s algorithm to the
case of bounded genus graphs was also suggested, again
with the 4g factor in complexity. Notice that imposing zero
field condition is critical, as otherwise, the Ising model over
a planar graph is NP-hard (Barahona, 1982). On the other
hand, even in the case of zero magnetic field Ising models
over general graphs are difficult (Barahona, 1982).
Contribution. In this manuscript, we discuss tractability
related to the Ising model with zero magnetic fields over

