Neural Logic Reinforcement Learning

Zhengyao Jiang 1 Shan Luo 1

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has achieved
significant breakthroughs in various tasks. However, most DRL algorithms suffer a problem of
generalising the learned policy, which makes the
policy performance largely affected even by minor modifications of the training environment.
Except that, the use of deep neural networks
makes the learned policies hard to be interpretable. To address these two challenges, we
propose a novel algorithm named Neural Logic
Reinforcement Learning (NLRL) to represent the
policies in reinforcement learning by first-order
logic. NLRL is based on policy gradient methods
and differentiable inductive logic programming
that have demonstrated significant advantages in
terms of interpretability and generalisability in
supervised tasks. Extensive experiments conducted on cliff-walking and blocks manipulation
tasks demonstrate that NLRL can induce interpretable policies achieving near-optimal performance while showing good generalisability to
environments of different initial states and problem sizes.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) algorithms have achieved stunning breakthroughs in vairous
tasks, e.g., video game playing (Mnih et al., 2015) and
the game of Go (Silver et al., 2017). However, similar to
traditional reinforcement learning algorithms such as tabular TD-learning (Sutton & Barto, 1998), DRL algorithms
can only learn policies that are hard to interpret (Montavon
et al.) and cannot be generalized from one environment to
another similar one (Wulfmeier et al., 2017).
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
Correspondence to:
Zhengyao Jiang <z.jiang22@student.liverpool.ac.uk>, Shan Luo
<shan.luo@liverpool.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

(Doshi-Velez & Kim, 2017) defines interpretability as the
ability to explain or to present the decision in understandable terms. The interpretability is a critical capability of
reinforcement learning or generally all machine learning
algorithms for system verification and improvement. Interpretable RL can promote the scientific understanding of the
algorithm or the problem to be solved. Furthermore, we can
check whether an AI system is safe and whether it complies
with existing rules, ethnically or legally, in human society.
On the engineering level, the interpretability also enables
easier debugging of the system. The neural network based
DRL models, however, lack interpretability since the inference processes of neural networks are opaque to humans.
The generalizability is also important for reinforcement
learning algorithms. In the real world, it is not common that the training and test environments are exactly the
same. However, most DRL algorithms have the assumption
that these two environments are identical, which makes a
trained network that performs well on one task often performs very poorly on a new but similar task. An exampleis
the reality gap (Collins et al., 2018) in the robotics applications that often makes agents trained in simulation ineffective once transferred in the real world.
The generalization of DRL policy is a rather intricate and
difficult problem since the action can affect the environment dynamics. In supervised learning, there are regularization techniques such as Dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014)
that can help to promote generalization. However, (Zhang
et al., 2018) shows that noise injection methods used in several DRL works cannot robustly detect or alleviate overfitting. On the other hand, it is good to see that, similar to
the supervised learning, a proper inductive bias that fits the
problem bias can significantly improve the generalizability
of the learned policies (Zhang et al., 2018). One candidate of inductive bias suitable for general decision-making
is the relational inductive bias (Zambaldi et al., 2018). Relational inductive bias usually represents the abstract concepts as entities and relationships between them and perform deduction on the relations. The graph-based relational
inductive bias has been tested in RL context (Zambaldi
et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018) and showed significantly
better generalization compared with Multilayer Perceptron
(MLP) architectures or Convoluational Neural Networks
(CNNs). However, another more expressive relational in-

