Multi-objective training of Generative Adversarial Networks
with multiple discriminators

Isabela Albuquerque * 1 João Monteiro * 1 Thang Doan 2 Breandan Considine 3 Tiago Falk 1
Ioannis Mitliagkas 3

Abstract
Recent literature has demonstrated promising results for training Generative Adversarial Networks by employing a set of discriminators, in
contrast to the traditional game involving one generator against a single adversary. Such methods
perform single-objective optimization on some
simple consolidation of the losses, e.g. an arithmetic average. In this work, we revisit the
multiple-discriminator setting by framing the simultaneous minimization of losses provided by
different models as a multi-objective optimization problem. Speciﬁcally, we evaluate the performance of multiple gradient descent and the
hypervolume maximization algorithm on a number of different datasets. Moreover, we argue that
the previously proposed methods and hypervolume maximization can all be seen as variations
of multiple gradient descent in which the update
direction can be computed efﬁciently. Our results
indicate that hypervolume maximization presents
a better compromise between sample quality and
computational cost than previous methods.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al., 2014) offer a new approach to generative modeling,
using game-theoretic training schemes to implicitly learn a
given probability density. Prior to the emergence of GAN architectures, realistic generative modeling remained elusive.
While offering unprecedented realism, GAN training still
remains fraught with stability issues. Commonly reported
*
Equal contribution 1 INRS-EMT, Université du Québec, Montreal, Canada 2 Desautels Faculty of Management, McGill University, Montreal, Canada 3 Quebec Artiﬁcial Intelligence Institute,
Université de Montréal, Montreal, Canada. Correspondence to:
Isabela Albuquerque <isabela.albuquerque@emt.inrs.ca>, João
Monteiro <joao.monteiro@emt.inrs.ca>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the authors.

shortcomings involve the lack of useful gradient signal provided by the discriminator, and mode collapse, i.e. lack of
diversity in the generator’s samples.
Considerable research has been devoted in recent literature
to overcome training instability1 within the GAN framework.
Some architectures such as BEGAN (Berthelot et al., 2017)
have applied auto-encoders as discriminators and proposed
a new loss function to help stabilize training. Methods such
as TTUR (Heusel et al., 2017), in turn, have attempted to
deﬁne separate schedules for updating the generator and
discriminator. The PacGAN algorithm (Lin et al., 2017)
proposes to modify the discriminator’s architecture to accept m concatenated samples as input. These samples are
jointly classiﬁed as either real or generated, and the authors
show that such an approach can help to enforce sample diversity. Furthermore, spectral normalization was applied
to the discriminator’s parameters in SNGAN (Miyato et al.,
2018) aiming to ensure Lipschitz continuity, which is empirically shown to yield high quality samples across several
sets of hyperparameters. Alternatively, recent approaches
have proposed to tackle GAN instability issues with multiple discriminators. Neyshabur et al. (2017) propose a setting
such that one generator is trained against a set of discriminators, where each one sees a ﬁxed random projection of the
inputs. Prior work, including Durugkar et al. (2016) have
also explored training with multiple discriminators.
In this paper, we build upon Neyshabur et al. (2017)’s framework and propose reformulating their average loss minimization to further stabilize GAN training. Speciﬁcally,
we propose treating the loss signal provided by each discriminator as an independent objective function. To achieve
this, we simultaneously minimize the losses using multiobjective optimization techniques. Namely, we exploit well
known methods in optimization literature such as the multiple gradient descent (MGD) algorithm (Désidéri, 2012).
However, due to MGD’s prohibitively high cost in the case
of large neural networks, we propose to use more efﬁcient
1
Instability in the sense commonly used in GANs literature,
i.e. when the discriminator is able to easily distinguish between
real and fake samples during the training phase (Neyshabur et al.,
2017; Arjovsky et al., 2017; Berthelot et al., 2017).

