Geometry Aware Convolutional Filters for Omnidirectional Images
Representation

Renata Khasanova 1 Pascal Frossard 1

Abstract
Due to their wide field of view, omnidirectional
cameras are frequently used by autonomous vehicles, drones and robots for navigation and other
computer vision tasks. The images captured by
such cameras, are often analyzed and classified
with techniques designed for planar images that
unfortunately fail to properly handle the native
geometry of such images and therefore results in
suboptimal performance. In this paper we aim
at improving popular deep convolutional neural
networks so that they can properly take into account the specific properties of omnidirectional
data. In particular we propose an algorithm that
adapts convolutional layers, which often serve as
a core building block of a CNN, to the properties
of omnidirectional images. Thus, our filters adapt
their shape and size to the location on the omnidirectional image. We show that our method is not
limited to spherical surfaces and is able to incorporate the knowledge about any kind of projective
geometry inside the deep learning network. As
depicted by our experiments, our method outperforms the existing deep neural network techniques
for omnidirectional image classification and compression tasks.

1. Introduction
Drone vision, autonomous cars and robot navigation systems often use omnidirectional cameras, as they allow
recording the scene with wide field of view. Despite their
advantages, images obtained by such cameras have different
statistics compared to planar images. Nevertheless, omnidirectional images are often processed with standard techniques, which are unfortunately poorly adapted to the spe1

Department of Electrical Engineering, EPFL, Lausanne,
Switzerland. Correspondence to: Renata Khasanova <renata.khasanova@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Adaptation of the size and shape of the circular filter
defined on a tangent plane (a), which is then projected at different
elevations of the spherical surface (b) that, in turn, results in having
different projections of the filter area on an equirectangular image
(c). Our network is capable of modeling this differences and thus
adapting the size and shape of the filter with respect to the elevation
in an omnidirectional image.

cific geometry of such images.
In this paper we improve one of the most popular frameworks for image processing, namely convolutional neural
network (CNN) for omnidirectional images. CNNs prove
to be effective, as they permit to achieve very good performance in many different tasks like image classification,
segmentation, generation and compression. In the context
of omnidirectional cameras, CNNs are typically applied directly to the unwrapped and distorted spherical images. This
approach, however, is suboptimal: due to specific geometry
of these images, and, in particular, the change in the image
statistics with the position in the image. The latter forces
the network to learn different filters for different locations
in the omnidirectional images (see Fig. 1).
To solve this issue, we replace ordinary convolutional filters with the graph-based ones that can adapt their size
and shape depending on the position in the omnidirectional
image thanks to the flexible graph structure. In order to
overcome the common limitation of these graph-based filters being isotropic (i.e. invariant to the changes in the
objects orientation in the image) we suggest to use multiple directed graphs instead of a single undirected one, as

