Accelerated Linear Convergence of Stochastic Momentum Methods
in Wasserstein Distances
Bugra Can 1 Mert Gurbuzbalaban 1 Lingjiong Zhu 2

Abstract
Momentum methods such as Polyak’s heavy ball
(HB) method, Nesterov’s accelerated gradient
(AG) as well as accelerated projected gradient
(APG) method have been commonly used in machine learning practice, but their performance is
quite sensitive to noise in the gradients. We study
these methods under a first-order stochastic oracle model where noisy estimates of the gradients
are available. For strongly convex problems, we
show that the distribution of the iterates
of AG
√
converges with the accelerated O( κ log(1/ε))
linear rate to a ball of radius ε centered at a unique
invariant distribution in the 1-Wasserstein metric
where κ is the condition number as long as the
noise variance is smaller than an explicit upper
bound we can provide. Our analysis also certifies linear convergence rates as a function of the
stepsize, momentum parameter and the noise variance; recovering the accelerated rates in the noiseless case and quantifying the level of noise that
can be tolerated to achieve a given performance.
To the best of our knowledge, these are the first
linear convergence results for stochastic momentum methods under the stochastic oracle model.
We also develop finer results for the special case
of quadratic objectives, extend our results to the
APG method and weakly convex functions showing accelerated rates when the noise magnitude is
sufficiently small.

supervised learning include linear and non-linear regression
problems, support vector machines, logistic regression or
more generally risk minimization problems (Vapnik, 2013).
Accelerated first-order optimization methods based on momentum averaging and their stochastic and proximal variants have been of significant interest in the machine learning
community due to their scalability to large-scale problems
and good performance in practice both in convex and nonconvex settings, including deep learning (see e.g. Sutskever
et al. (2013); Nitanda (2014); Hu et al. (2009); Xiao (2010)).

1
Department of Management Science and Information Systems,
Rutgers Business School, Piscataway, NJ-08854, United States of
America 2 Department of Mathematics, Florida State University,
1017 Academic Way, Tallahassee, FL-32306, United States of
America. The authors are in alphabetical order. Correspondence
to: Mert Gürbüzbalaban <mg1366@rutgers.edu>.

Accelerated optimization methods for unconstrained problems based on momentum averaging techniques go back to
Polyak who proposed the heavy ball (HB) method (Polyak,
1964) and are closely related to Tschebyshev acceleration, conjugate gradient and under-relaxation methods from
numerical linear algebra (Varga, 2009; Karimi & Vavasis, 2017). Another popular momentum-based method is
the Nesterov’s accelerated gradient (AG) method (Nesterov, 2004). For deterministic strongly convex problems,
with access to the gradients of the objective, there is a
well-established convergence theory for momentum methods. In particular, for minimizing strongly convex smooth
objectives
with Lipschitz gradients AG method requires
√
O( κ log(1/ε)) iterations to find an ε-optimal solution
where κ is the condition number, this improves significantly
over the O(κ log(1/ε)) complexity of the gradient descent
(GD) method. HB method also achieves a similar accelerated rate asymptotically in a local neighborhood around the
global minimum. Also, for the special case of quadratic
objectives, HB method can achieve the accelerated linear
rate globally. In the absence of strong convexity, for con√
vex functions, AG has an iteration complexity of O(1/ ε)
in function values which accelerates the standard O(1/ε)
convergence rate of GD. In particular, it can be argued that
AG method achieves an optimal convergence rate among
all the methods that has access to only first-order information (Nesterov, 2004). For constrained problems, a variant
of AG, the accelerated projected gradient (APG) method
(O’Donoghue & Candes, 2015) can also achieve similar
accelerated rates (Nesterov, 2004; Fazlyab et al., 2017).

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

On the other hand, in many applications, the true gradient
of the objective function ∇f (x) is not available but we have
access to a noisy but unbiased estimated gradient ˆ
∇f (x)

1. Introduction
Many key problems in machine learning can be formulated
as convex optimization problems. Prominent examples in

