HyperGAN: A Generative Model for Diverse, Performant Neural Networks

Neale Ratzlaff 1 Li Fuxin 1

Abstract
Standard neural networks are often overconfident
when presented with data outside the training
distribution. We introduce HyperGAN, a new
generative model for learning a distribution of
neural network parameters. HyperGAN does not
require restrictive assumptions on priors, and networks sampled from it can be used to quickly
create very large and diverse ensembles. HyperGAN employs a novel mixer to project prior samples to a latent space with correlated dimensions,
and samples from the latent space are then used
to generate weights for each layer of a deep neural network. We show that HyperGAN can learn
to generate parameters which label the MNIST
and CIFAR-10 datasets with competitive performance to fully supervised learning, while learning a rich distribution of effective parameters.
We also show that HyperGAN can also provide
better uncertainty estimates than standard ensembles by evaluating on out of distribution data as
well as adversarial examples.

1. Introduction
It is well known that it is possible to train deep neural networks from different random initializations and obtain models that, albeit having quite different parameters,
achieve similar loss values (Freeman & Bruna, 2016). It
has further been found that ensembles of deep networks
that are trained in such a way have significant performance
advantages over single models (Maclin & Opitz, 2011),
similar to the classical bagging approach in statistics. Ensembles are also more robust to outliers, and can provide
uncertainty estimates over their inputs (Lakshminarayanan
et al., 2017).
In Bayesian deep learning, there is a significant interest in
1

School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University. Correspondence to: Neale Ratzlaff <ratzlafn@oregonstate.edu>, Li Fuxin <lif@oregonstate.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

learning approximate posterior distributions over network
parameters. Past approaches mostly leverage variational inference to model this likely intractable distribution. (Gal &
Ghahramani, 2016) formulated dropout as a Bayesian approximation, and showed that networks with dropout following each layer are equivalent to a deep Gaussian process (Damianou & Lawrence, 2013) marginalized over its
covariance functions. They proposed MC dropout as a simple way to estimate model uncertainty. Applying dropout to
every layer however, may result in underfitting of the data.
Moreover, dropout only integrates over the space of models reachable from a single (random initialization). As another interesting direction, hypernetworks (Ha et al., 2016)
are neural networks which output parameters for a target
neural network. The hypernetwork and the target network
together form a single model which is trained jointly. Originally, hypernetwork produced the target weights as a deterministic function of its own weights, but Bayesian Hypernetworks (BHNs) (Krueger et al., 2017), and Multiplicative Normalizing Flows (MNF) (Louizos & Welling, 2016)
learn variational approximations by transforming samples
from a Gaussian prior through a normalizing flow. Normalizing flows can model complicated posteriors, but they are
composed of invertible bijections, which limits their scalability and the variety of learnable functions.
In this paper we explore an approach which generates all
the parameters of a neural network in a single pass, without assuming any fixed noise models or functional form of
the generating function. To keep our method scalable, we
do not restrict ourselves to invertible functions as in flowbased approaches. We instead utilize ideas from generative adversarial networks (GANs). We are especially motivated by recent Wasserstein Auto-encoder (Tolstikhin et al.,
2017) approaches, which have demonstrated an impressive
capability to model complicated, multimodal distributions.
One of the issues in generating weights for every layer
is the connectivity of the network. Namely, the output
of the previous layer becomes the input of the next layer,
hence the network weights must be correspondent in order to generate valid results. In our approach, we sample from a simple multi-dimensional Gaussian distribution,
and propose to transform this sample into multiple different vectors. We call this procedure a mixer since it introduces correlation to the otherwise independent random

