Causal Identification under Markov Equivalence:
Completeness Results

Amin Jaber 1 Jiji Zhang 2 Elias Bareinboim 1

Abstract
Causal effect identification is the task of determining whether a causal distribution is computable
from the combination of an observational distribution and substantive knowledge about the domain
under investigation. One of the most studied versions of this problem assumes that knowledge is
articulated in the form of a fully known causal
diagram, which is arguably a strong assumption
in many settings. In this paper, we relax this
requirement and consider that the knowledge is
articulated in the form of an equivalence class of
causal diagrams, in particular, a partial ancestral
graph (PAG). This is attractive because a PAG can
be learned directly from data, and the scientist
does not need to commit to a particular, unique
diagram. There are different sufficient conditions
for identification in PAGs, but none is complete.
We derive a complete algorithm for identification given a PAG. This implies that whenever the
causal effect is identifiable, the algorithm returns
a valid identification expression; alternatively, it
will throw a failure condition, which means that
the effect is provably not identifiable. We further provide a graphical characterization of nonidentifiability of causal effects in PAGs.

1. Introduction
One cognitive feature that arguably distinguishes humans
from other species is our ability to learn, process, and use
causal information. Pearl recently highlighted this point
eloquently: “Some tens of thousands of years ago, humans
began to realize that certain things cause other things and
that tinkering with the former can change the latter. . . From
this discovery came organized societies, then towns and
1

Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, USA 2 Department of Philosophy, Lingnan University,
NT, HK. Correspondence to: Amin Jaber <jaber0@purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

cities, and eventually the science and technology-based civilization we enjoy today. All because we asked a simple
question: Why?” (Pearl & Mackenzie, 2018).
At the center of causal reasoning lies the idea of “tinkering” – what would happen if reality were different – which
is formally materialized through cause and effect relations.
Fisher proposed a procedure to physically manipulate reality
such that an outcome variable can be evaluated under different conditions, which was called randomized controlled
experiments (Fisher, 1951). This method is indeed one of
the most pervasive techniques used throughout the sciences,
and it is often deemed the gold standard for causal inference.
For instance, the process of drug’s approval by the FDA is
conducted following Fisher’s method – one can discover, for
example, the effect of a drug (X) on survival (Y ), which is
written in causal language as the experimental distribution
P (y | do(x)), or Px (y) for short.
Causal Identification. The infeasibility of always physically manipulating reality to see “what would happen” leads
to one of the central challenges in causal inference, which
is known as the problem of identification of causal effects
(Pearl, 2000; Spirtes et al., 2001; Bareinboim & Pearl, 2016).
It’s well understood that no causal claim about Px (y) can
be made directly from the observational distribution P (V),
where V is the set of measured (observed) variables (Pearl,
2000, Ch. 3). The idea is then to combine a coarse description of the underlying system, usually specified as a causal
diagram (D), with the observational data (P (V)) in order
to infer the causal distribution Px (y).
A sample causal diagram is shown in Fig. 1a, where the
nodes represent random variables, directed edges represent
direct causal relations from tails to heads, and bi-directed
arcs represent the presence of unobserved (latent) variables
that generate spurious associations between the observed
variables, also known as confounding bias (Pearl, 1993).
One may seek to identify the effect of forcing variable X
to take the value x, i.e., do(X=x), on V4=v4 , i.e., Px (v4 ),
given the causal diagram in Fig. 1a and data from the observational distribution P (X, V1 , . . . , V4 ). In summary, the
causal identifiability problem asks whether the combination
of D and P (V) allows the identification of Px (y); as in any
decision problem, the answer is sometimes negative, which

