Simplifying Graph Convolutional Networks

Felix Wu * 1 Tianyi Zhang * 1 Amauri Holanda de Souza Jr. * 1 2 Christopher Fifty 1 Tao Yu 1
Kilian Q. Weinberger 1

Abstract
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) and their
variants have experienced significant attention and
have become the de facto methods for learning
graph representations. GCNs derive inspiration
primarily from recent deep learning approaches,
and as a result, may inherit unnecessary complexity and redundant computation. In this paper,
we reduce this excess complexity through successively removing nonlinearities and collapsing
weight matrices between consecutive layers. We
theoretically analyze the resulting linear model
and show that it corresponds to a fixed low-pass
filter followed by a linear classifier. Notably, our
experimental evaluation demonstrates that these
simplifications do not negatively impact accuracy
in many downstream applications. Moreover, the
resulting model scales to larger datasets, is naturally interpretable, and yields up to two orders of
magnitude speedup over FastGCN.

1. Introduction
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) (Kipf & Welling,
2017) are an efficient variant of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) on graphs. GCNs stack layers of learned
first-order spectral filters followed by a nonlinear activation
function to learn graph representations. Recently, GCNs and
subsequent variants have achieved state-of-the-art results
in various application areas, including but not limited to
citation networks (Kipf & Welling, 2017), social networks
(Chen et al., 2018), applied chemistry (Liao et al., 2019),
natural language processing (Yao et al., 2019; Han et al.,
2012; Zhang et al., 2018c), and computer vision (Wang
et al., 2018; Kampffmeyer et al., 2018).
Historically, the development of machine learning algo*

Equal contribution 1 Cornell University 2 Federal Institute of Ceara (Brazil).
Correspondence to: Felix Wu
<fw245@cornell.edu>, Tianyi Zhang <tz58@cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

rithms has followed a clear trend from initial simplicity to
need-driven complexity. For instance, limitations of the
linear Perceptron (Rosenblatt, 1958) motivated the development of the more complex but also more expressive neural
network (or multi-layer Perceptrons, MLPs) (Rosenblatt,
1961). Similarly, simple pre-defined linear image filters (Sobel & Feldman, 1968; Harris & Stephens, 1988) eventually
gave rise to nonlinear CNNs with learned convolutional
kernels (Waibel et al., 1989; LeCun et al., 1989). As additional algorithmic complexity tends to complicate theoretical analysis and obfuscates understanding, it is typically
only introduced for applications where simpler methods are
insufficient. Arguably, most classifiers in real world applications are still linear (typically logistic regression), which
are straight-forward to optimize and easy to interpret.
However, possibly because GCNs were proposed after the
recent “renaissance” of neural networks, they tend to be a
rare exception to this trend. GCNs are built upon multi-layer
neural networks, and were never an extension of a simpler
(insufficient) linear counterpart.
In this paper, we observe that GCNs inherit considerable
complexity from their deep learning lineage, which can
be burdensome and unnecessary for less demanding applications. Motivated by the glaring historic omission of a
simpler predecessor, we aim to derive the simplest linear
model that “could have” preceded the GCN, had a more
“traditional” path been taken. We reduce the excess complexity of GCNs by repeatedly removing the nonlinearities
between GCN layers and collapsing the resulting function
into a single linear transformation. We empirically show
that the final linear model exhibits comparable or even superior performance to GCNs on a variety of tasks while being computationally more efficient and fitting significantly
fewer parameters. We refer to this simplified linear model
as Simple Graph Convolution (SGC).
In contrast to its nonlinear counterparts, the SGC is intuitively interpretable and we provide a theoretical analysis
from the graph convolution perspective. Notably, feature
extraction in SGC corresponds to a single fixed filter applied
to each feature dimension. Kipf & Welling (2017) empirically observe that the “renormalization trick”, i.e. adding
self-loops to the graph, improves accuracy, and we demon-

