Unsupervised Deep Learning by Neighbourhood Discovery

Jiabo Huang 1 Qi Dong 1 Shaogang Gong 1 Xiatian Zhu 2

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
demonstrated remarkable success in computer vision by supervisedly learning strong visual feature
representations. However, training CNNs relies
heavily on the availability of exhaustive training
data annotations, limiting significantly their deployment and scalability in many application scenarios. In this work, we introduce a generic unsupervised deep learning approach to training deep
models without the need for any manual label supervision. Specifically, we progressively discover
sample anchored/centred neighbourhoods to reason and learn the underlying class decision boundaries iteratively and accumulatively. Every single
neighbourhood is specially formulated so that all
the member samples can share the same unseen
class labels at high probability for facilitating the
extraction of class discriminative feature representations during training. Experiments on image
classification show the performance advantages
of the proposed method over the state-of-the-art
unsupervised learning models on six benchmarks
including both coarse-grained and fine-grained
object image categorisation.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks, particularly convolutional neural networks (CNNs), have significantly advanced the progress of
computer vision problems (Goodfellow et al., 2016; LeCun
et al., 2015). However, such achievements are largely established upon supervised learning of network models on a
massive collection of exhaustively labelled training imagery
data (Krizhevsky et al., 2012a; Dong et al., 2019; 2018).
This dramatically restricts their scalability and usability to
many practical applications with limited labelling budgets.
A natural solution is unsupervised learning of deep fea1
Queen Mary University of London 2 Vision Semantics Limited.
Correspondence to: Xiatian Zhu <eddy.zhuxt@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

ture representations, which has recently drawn increasing
attention (Wu et al., 2018; Caron et al., 2018).
In the literature, representative unsupervised deep learning
methods include clustering (Caron et al., 2018; Xie et al.,
2016; Yang et al., 2017) and sample specificity analysis (Wu
et al., 2018; Bojanowski & Joulin, 2017). The objective of
clustering is to identify a set of clusters and each represents an underlying class concept. This strategy has great
potential with the best case reaching to the performance
of supervised learning, but is error-prone due to the enormous combinatorial space and complex class boundaries.
In contrast, sample specificity learning avoids the cluster
notion by treating every single sample as an independent
class. The hypothesis is that the model can reveal the underlying class-to-class semantic similarity structure, e.g. the
manifold geometry. Whilst collecting such instance labels
requires no manual annotation cost, the resulting supervision is ambiguous therefore weak to class discrimination.
Other contemporary self-supervised learning methods (Doersch et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2016; Noroozi & Favaro,
2016; Noroozi et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2017) share a similar limitation due to the insufficient correlation between the
auxiliary supervision and the underlying class target.

In this work, we present a generic unsupervised deep
learning method called Anchor Neighbourhood Discovery
(AND). The AND model combines the advantages of both
clustering and sample specificity learning whilst mitigating
their disadvantages in a principled formulation. Specifically, with a divide-and-conquer principle, the AND discovers class consistent neighbourhoods anchored to individual training samples (divide) and propagates the local
inter-sample class relationships within such neighbourhoods
(conquer) for more reliably extracting the latent discrimination information during model training. Neighbourhoods
can be considered as tiny sample anchored clusters with
higher compactness and class consistency. They are specially designed for minimising the clustering errors whilst
retaining the exploration of inter-sample class information
that is entirely neglected in sample specificity learning. To
enhance the neighbourhood quality (class consistency), we
introduce a progressive discovery curriculum for incremenCode is available at https://github.com/raymond-sci/AND.

