An Optimal Private Stochastic-MAB Algorithm
Based on an Optimal Private Stopping Rule

Touqir Sajed * 1 Or Sheffet * 1

Abstract
We present a provably optimal differentially private algorithm for the stochastic multi-arm bandit problem, as opposed to the private analogue
of the UCB-algorithm (Mishra and Thakurta,
2015; Tossou and Dimitrakakis, 2016) which
doesn’t meet the recently discovered lowerbound of Ω (K log(T )/) (Shariff and Sheffet,
2018). Our construction is based on a different algorithm, Successive Elimination (Even-Dar
et al., 2002), that repeatedly pulls all remaining
arms until an arm is found to be suboptimal and
is then eliminated. In order to devise a private
analogue of Successive Elimination we visit the
problem of private stopping rule, that takes as input a stream of i.i.d samples from an unknown
distribution and returns a multiplicative (1 ± α)approximation of the distribution’s mean, and
prove the optimality of our private stopping rule.
We then present the private Successive Elimination algorithm which meets both the non-private
lower bound (Lai and Robbins, 1985) and the
above-mentioned private lower bound. We also
compare empirically the performance of our algorithm with the private UCB algorithm.

1. Introduction
The well-known stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) is
a sequential decision-making task in which a learner repeatedly chooses an action (or arm) and receives a noisy
reward. The learner’s objective is to maximize cumulative reward by exploring the actions to discover optimal
ones (having the highest expected reward), balanced with
exploiting them. The problem, originally stemming from
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton AB, Canada. Correspondence
to: Touqir Sajed <touqir@ualberta.ca>, Or Sheffet <osheffet@ualberta.ca>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

experiments in medicine (Robbins, 1952), has applications
in fields such as ranking (Kveton et al., 2015), recommendation systems (collaborative filtering) (Caron and Bhagat,
2013), investment portfolio design (Hoffman et al., 2011)
and online advertising (Schwartz et al., 2017), to name a
few. Such applications, relying on sensitive data, raise privacy concerns.
Differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2006) has become in recent years the gold-standard for privacy preserving dataanalysis alleviating such concerns, as it requires that the
output of the data-analysis algorithm has a limited dependency on any single datum. Differentially private variants
of online learning algorithms have been successfully devised in various settings (Smith and Thakurta, 2013), including a private UCB-algorithm for the MAB problem
(details below) (Mishra and Thakurta, 2015; Tossou and
Dimitrakakis, 2016) as well as UCB variations in the linear (Kannan et al., 2018) and contextual (Shariff and Sheffet, 2018) settings.
More formally, in the MAB problem at every round t the
learner selects an arm a out of K available arms, pulls it,
and receives a random reward ra,t drawn i.i.d from a distribution Pa — of support [0, 1] and unknown mean µa .
The Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) algorithm for the
MAB problem was developed in a series of works (Berry
and Fristedt, 1985; Agrawal, 1995) culminating into (Auer
et al., 2002a), which is provably optimal for the MAB
problem (Lai and Robbins, 1985). The UCB algorithm
maintains a time-dependent high-probability upper-bound
Ba,t for each arm’s mean, and at each timestep optimistically pulls the arm with the highest bound. The
above-mentioned ε-differentially private (ε-DP) analogues
of the UCB-algorithm follow the same procedure except for
g
maintaining noisy estimations B
a,t using the “tree-based
mechanism” (Chan et al., 2010; Dwork et al., 2010). This
mechanism continuously releases aggregated statistics over
a stream of T observations, introducing only poly log(T )/ε
noise in each timestep. The details of this poly-log factor
are the focus of this work.
It was recently shown (Shariff and Sheffet, 2018) that

