Active Learning with Disagreement Graphs
Corinna Cortes 1 Giulia DeSalvo 1 Claudio Gentile 1 Mehryar Mohri 1 2 Ningshan Zhang 3

Abstract
We present two novel enhancements of an online importance-weighted active learning algorithm IWAL, using the properties of disagreements
among hypotheses. The first enhancement, IWAL D , prunes the hypothesis set with a more aggressive strategy based on the disagreement graph.
We show that IWAL - D improves the generalization performance and the label complexity of the
original IWAL, and quantify the improvement in
terms of a disagreement graph coefficient. The
second enhancement, IZOOM, further improves
IWAL - D by adaptively zooming into the current
version space and thus reducing the best-in-class
error. We show that IZOOM admits favorable theoretical guarantees with the changing hypothesis
set. We report experimental results on multiple
datasets and demonstrate that the proposed algorithms achieve better test performances than IWAL
given the same amount of labeling budget.

1. Introduction
In standard supervised learning, often a significant amount
of labeled data is needed to learn an accurate predictor. But,
while unlabeled data is virtually unlimited and available at
no cost in many applications such as natural language processing or image recognition, labeled data is typically very
costly, since it requires human inspection, often by domain
experts. This challenge of learning with a limited labeling
budget, or, equivalently, while minimizing the number of
labels requested, motivates the scenario of active learning.
The goal of active learning algorithms is to learn an accurate
predictor with as few labels as possible. There are two
standard settings. In the so-called pool setting, the learner is
provided with a pool of i.i.d. unlabeled points, from which
1
Google Research, New York, NY, USA; 2 Courant Institute,
New York, NY, USA; 3 Leonard N. Stern School of Business, New
York University, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Ningshan Zhang <nzhang@stern.nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

he interactively selects points to label. In the on-line setting,
the learner receives a sequence of i.i.d. unlabeled points
and, at each round, decides on whether to request the label
of the current point. In both settings, once the labeling
budget is reached, the learner returns a predictor chosen
out of a hypothesis set, which is hoped to admit a smaller
generalization error than if the labeling budget had been
spent at random. An active learning algorithm for the online setting can also be applied to the pool setting, since the
learner can stream the pool of samples.
Active learning algorithms are typically evaluated in terms
of their label complexity, that is how many labels are sufficient to obtain a small generalization error, ✏, with high probability. In the on-line setting, (Cohn et al., 1994) proposed a
disagreement-based algorithm, CAL, with label complexity
log( 1✏ ), when the data is separable, as opposed to random
sampling with a label complexity of 1✏ . The CAL algorithm
maintains a version space, which includes all the classifiers
that are consistent with the observed labels, and requests
labels only when there is some disagreement among the
predictors in the current version space.
Following the idea of disagreement-based active learning,
several algorithms extended CAL to the non-separable case:
A 2 (Balcan et al., 2006; Hanneke, 2007), DHM (Dasgupta
et al., 2008), IWAL (Beygelzimer et al., 2009; 2010), which
admit theoretical guarantees in generalization error and label complexity. In particular, the label complexities of these
disagreement-based algorithms are bounded in terms of two
critically quantities: the loss of the best predictor h⇤ in the
hypothesis set, and the so-called disagreement coefficient
(Hanneke, 2007) which depends on the disagreement between h⇤ and other hypotheses in the neighborhood of h⇤ .
More recently, Zhang and Chaudhuri (2014) moved beyond
disagreement-based active learning and instead combined
confidence-rated predictors with disagreements to improve
the label complexity. Besides disagreement-based active
learning, another line of work (Dasgupta et al., 2005; Balcan et al., 2007; Balcan and Long, 2013; Awasthi et al.,
2014; 2015; Zhang, 2018) studied learning linear separators by labeling samples close to the current estimate of
the decision boundary. This type of algorithms admit favorable label complexity assuming the uniform distribution
over the unit sphere or a log-concave distribution. Cortes
et al. (2019) recently proposed a region-based active learn-

