Online Meta-Learning
Chelsea Finn * 1 Aravind Rajeswaran * 2 Sham Kakade 2 Sergey Levine 1

Abstract
A central capability of intelligent systems is the
ability to continuously build upon previous experiences to speed up and enhance learning of new
tasks. Two distinct research paradigms have studied this question. Meta-learning views this problem as learning a prior over model parameters that
is amenable for fast adaptation on a new task, but
typically assumes the tasks are available together
as a batch. In contrast, online (regret based) learning considers a setting where tasks are revealed
one after the other, but conventionally trains a single model without task-specific adaptation. This
work introduces an online meta-learning setting,
which merges ideas from both paradigms to better
capture the spirit and practice of continual lifelong
learning. We propose the follow the meta leader
(FTML) algorithm which extends the MAML algorithm to this setting. Theoretically, this work
provides an O(log T ) regret guarantee with one
additional higher order smoothness assumption
(in comparison to the standard online setting). Our
experimental evaluation on three different largescale problems suggest that the proposed algorithm significantly outperforms alternatives based
on traditional online learning approaches.

1. Introduction
Two distinct research paradigms have studied how prior
tasks or experiences can be used by an agent to inform future
learning. Meta-learning (Schmidhuber, 1987; Santoro et al.,
2016; Finn et al., 2017) casts this as the problem of learning
to learn, where past experience is used to acquire a prior
over model parameters or a learning procedure, and typically
studies a setting where meta-training tasks are made available together upfront. In contrast, online learning (Hannan,
1957; Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006) considers a sequential

setting where tasks are revealed one after another, but aims
to attain zero-shot generalization without any task-specific
adaptation. We argue that neither setting is ideal for studying
continual lifelong learning. Meta-learning deals with learning to learn, but neglects the sequential and non-stationary
aspects of the problem. Online learning offers an appealing
theoretical framework, but does not generally consider how
past experience can accelerate adaptation to a new task. In
this work, we motivate and present the online meta-learning
problem setting, where the agent simultaneously uses past
experiences in a sequential setting to learn good priors, and
also adapt quickly to the current task at hand.
As an example, Figure 1 shows a family of sinusoids. Imagine that each task is a regression problem from x to y corresponding to one sinusoid. When presented with data from a
large collection of such tasks, a naïve approach that does not
consider the task structure would collectively use all the data,
and learn a prior that corresponds to the model y = 0. An
algorithm that understands the underlying structure would
recognize that each curve in the family is a sinusoid, and
would therefore attempt to identify, for a new batch of data,
which sinusoid it corresponds to. As another example where
joint training fails, Figure 1 also shows colored MNIST digits with different backgrounds. Suppose we’ve seen MNIST
digits with various colored backgrounds, and then observe
a “7” on a new color. We might conclude from training
on all of the data seen so far that all digits with that color
must all be “7.” In fact, this is an optimal conclusion from a
purely statistical standpoint. However, if we understand that
the data is divided into different tasks, and take note of the
fact that each task has a different color, a better conclusion
is that the color is irrelevant. Training on all of the data
together, or only on the new data, does not achieve this goal.
Meta-learning offers an appealing solution: by learning how
to learn from past tasks, we can make use of task structure

*

Equal contribution 1 UC Berkeley 2 University of Washington.
Correspondence to: Chelsea Finn <cbfinn@stanford.edu>,
Aravind Rajeswaran <aravraj@cs.washington.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Figure 1. (left) sinusoid functions and (right) colored MNIST

