Random Expert Distillation: Imitation Learning via Expert Policy Support
Estimation
Ruohan Wang 1 Carlo Ciliberto 1 Pierluigi V. Amadori 1 Yiannis Demiris 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of imitation learning
from a finite set of expert trajectories, without
access to reinforcement signals. The classical
approach of extracting the expert’s reward function via inverse reinforcement learning, followed
by reinforcement learning is indirect and may be
computationally expensive. Recent generative
adversarial methods based on matching the policy distribution between the expert and the agent
could be unstable during training. We propose
a new framework for imitation learning by estimating the support of the expert policy to compute a fixed reward function, which allows us to
re-frame imitation learning within the standard reinforcement learning setting. We demonstrate the
efficacy of our reward function on both discrete
and continuous domains, achieving comparable or
better performance than the state of the art under
different reinforcement learning algorithms.

1. Introduction
We consider a specific setting of imitation learning - the task
of policy learning from expert demonstrations - in which
the learner only has a finite number of expert trajectories
without any further access to the expert. Two broad categories of approaches to this setting are behavioral cloning
(BC) (Pomerleau, 1991), which directly learns a policy mapping from states to actions with supervised learning from
expert trajectories; and inverse reinforcement learning (IRL)
(Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Ng & Russell, 2000), which learns
a policy via reinforcement learning, using a cost function
extracted from expert trajectories.
Most notably, BC has been successfully applied to the task
of autonomous driving (Bansal et al., 2018; Bojarski et al.,
1

Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Imperial College London, UK;. Correspondence to: Ruohan Wang
<r.wang16@imperial.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

2016). Despite its simplicity, BC typically requires a large
amount of training data to learn good policies, as it may
suffer from compounding errors caused by covariate shift
(Ross & Bagnell, 2010; Ross et al., 2011). BC is often
used as a policy initialization step for further reinforcement
learning (Nagabandi et al., 2018; Rajeswaran et al., 2017).
IRL estimates a cost function from expert trajectories and
uses reinforcement learning to derive policies. As the cost
function evaluates the quality of trajectories rather than that
of individual actions, IRL avoids the problem of compounding errors. IRL is effective with a wide range of problems,
from continuous control benchmarks in the Mujoco environment (Ho & Ermon, 2016), to robot footsteps planning
(Ziebart et al., 2008).
Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning (GAIL) (Baram
et al., 2017; Ho & Ermon, 2016) connects IRL to the general framework of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
(Goodfellow et al., 2014), and re-frames imitation learning
as distribution matching between the expert policy and the
learned policy via Jensen-Shannon Divergence. However,
GAIL naturally inherits the challenges of GAN training,
including possible training instability, and overfitting to
training data (Arjovsky & Bottou, 2017; Brock et al., 2018).
Similarly, generative moment matching imitation learning
(GMMIL) considers distribution matching via maximum
mean discrepancy. Both GAIL and GMMIL iteratively update reward function and learned policy during training.
In this paper, we propose imitation learning via expert policy support estimation, a new general framework for recovering a reward function from expert trajectories. We
propose Random Expert Distillation (RED) by providing a
connection between Random Network Distillation (RND)
(Burda et al., 2018) – a method to design intrinsic rewards
for RL exploration based on the ”novelty” of states visited
– and support estimation ideas. Our method computes a
fixed reward function from expert trajectories, and obviates
the need for dynamic update of reward functions found in
classical IRL, GAIL and GMMIL. Evaluating RED using
different reinforcement learning algorithms on both discrete
and continuous domains, we show that the proposed method
achieves comparable or better performance than the stateof-arts methods on a variety of tasks, including a driving

