Improved Convergence for `1 and `1 Regression via Iteratively Reweighted
Least Squares
Alina Ene * 1 Adrian Vladu * 1

Abstract
The iteratively reweighted least squares method
(IRLS) is a popular technique used in practice for
solving regression problems. Various versions of
this method have been proposed, but their theoretical analyses failed to capture the good practical
performance.
In this paper we propose a simple and natural
version of IRLS for solving `1 and `1 regression, which provably converges to a (1 + ")approximate solution in O(m1/3 log(1/")/"2/3 +
log m/"2 ) iterations, where m is the number of
rows of the input matrix. Interestingly, this running time is independent of the conditioning of
the input, and the dominant term of the running
time depends sublinearly in " 1 , which is atypical
for the optimization of non-smooth functions.
This improves upon the more complex algorithms
of Chin et al. (ITCS ’12), and Christiano et al.
(STOC ’11) by a factor of at least 1/"2 , and yields
a truly efficient natural algorithm for the slime
mold dynamics (Straszak-Vishnoi, SODA ’16,
ITCS ’16, ITCS ’17).

1. Introduction
Regression problems are fundamental primitives in scientific
computing. Among these, `1 - and `1 -regression are their
hardest instantiations, since through standard reductions
they can be shown to be equivalent to linear programming.
While the series of works on these topics is truly extensive
and diverse, the simpler methods have pervaded into the
realm of practical applications. Among these, an extremely
popular scheme known for its simplicity is the iteratively
re-weighted least squares (IRLS) method. The idea behind
*

Equal contribution 1 Boston University, Boston, USA. Correspondence to: Alina Ene <aene@bu.edu>, Adrian Vladu
<avladu@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

it is to reduce optimization problems to iteratively solving
a series of weighted `2 -minimization problems, where the
weights are adaptively chosen in such a way that the resulting solutions from the sequence of least-squares problems
converge to the sought optimal point. In particular, due to
its relevance in signal processing, `1 regression is a very important application of IRLS (Candès et al., 2006; Chartrand
& Yin, 2008).
Despite the fact that various versions of this method have
been studied ever since the 60’s (Lawson, 1961; Osborne,
1985) theoretical understanding of their convergence has
lacked. Recent works have attempted to fill this gap, and
offer provable guarantees (Daubechies et al., 2010; Straszak
& Vishnoi, 2016a;b;c), some of them inspired from the interpretation of this method as a dynamical system. In particular,
we note the Physarum dynamics, which have been studied
in a completely different context (Ito et al., 2011; Johannson
& Zou, 2012; Tero et al., 2007; Bonifaci et al., 2012; Becchetti et al., 2013) in order to justify an experiment which
revealed that a unicellular organism, the slime mold, could
solve the shortest path problem in a maze (Nakagaki et al.,
2000). The fact that these dynamics are essentially just a
version of the IRLS method was observed in (Straszak &
Vishnoi, 2016a).
Returning to the more classical world of algorithm design
and analysis, it is worth observing that existing analyses of
IRLS methods fall into one of the following two categories:
(i) they show convergence only when the problem is properly
initialized, or (ii) the guaranteed running time is prohibitive
in the sense that it is highly dependent on how the input is
conditioned, or it has a high polynomial dependency on the
desired solution accuracy.
In this paper, we focus on analyzing simple versions of
IRLS which overcome both aforementioned obstacles. In
particular, our methods always converge to 1 + " multiplicative approximation for the objectives minx :Ax =b kx kp ,
p 2 {1, 1}, in e
O(m1/3 /"2/3 + 1/"2 ) iterations1 of solving
a weighted least squares problem, where m is the dimension
of the sought vector x .
1

e notation to suppress polylogarithmic factors in
We use O
m/".

