Cautious Regret Minimization:
Online Optimization with Long-Term Budget Constraints

Nikolaos Liakopoulos 1 2 Apostolos Destounis 1 Georgios Paschos 1 Thrasyvoulos Spyropoulos 2
Panayotis Mertikopoulos 3

Abstract
We study a class of online convex optimization
problems with long-term budget constraints that
arise naturally as reliability guarantees or total
consumption constraints. In this general setting,
prior work by Mannor et al. (2009) has shown that
achieving no regret is impossible if the functions
defining the agent’s budget are chosen by an adversary. To overcome this obstacle, we refine the
agent’s regret metric by introducing the notion of
a “K-benchmark”, i.e., a comparator which meets
the problem’s allotted budget over any window of
length K. The impossibility analysis of Mannor
et al. (2009) is recovered when K = T ; however, for K = o(T ), we show that it is possible to
minimize regret while still meeting the problem’s
long-term budget constraints. We achieve this via
an online learning algorithm based on cautious
online Lagrangian descent (COLD) for which
we derive explicit bounds, in terms of both the
incurred regret and the residual budget violations.

1. Introduction
Consider the following bare-bones model of an online portfolio management problem: At each stage t = 1, 2, . . . ,
an investor places an investment over d diverse goods.
This investment is modeled as a vector of unit bid prices
xt = (x1t , . . . , xdt ), with each xit representing the amount
of money the investor is willing to pay for a unit of the i-th
good – for instance, for an advertiser requesting ad space
from different publishers, xit would denote the cost-per-click
(CPC). Based on the performance of each individual asset
(e.g., the number of clicks), the investor pays a total cost as
1

Paris Research Center, Huawei Technologies, Paris, France
2
EURECOM, Sophia-Antipolis, France 3 Univ. Grenoble Alpes,
CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, LIG, Grenoble, France. Correspondence to: Nikolaos Liakopoulos <liakopoulosnp@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

a function of xit and a performance parameter pit of the i-th
asset, and concurrently collects a corresponding reward wt
from their investment portfolio.
In our running example of online ad placement, the agent’s
utility ut (xt ; pt ) would be typically assumed concave in the
agent’s investment vector (to model diminishing returns),
but otherwise stage-dependent, reflecting the variability of
the performance parameter pit of each investment. As such,
utility maximization in this setting leads to an online optimization
PTproblem with the goal of maximizing the total
reward t=1 ut (xt ) accrued over T stages.
A considerable complication arises in this problem when
the agent also needs to balance their total investment against
an allotted budget (daily, monthly, or otherwise). In more
detail, assume that the agent
PT must meet a long-term budget
constraint of the form t=1 ct ≤ bT , where ct = hpt , xt i
denotes the total expenditure of the consumer at time t.
Since the performance parameters pt are not known ahead
of time (nor can they be assumed to follow a stationary probability law), techniques based on dynamic programming and
optimal control cannot be applied in this context.
More generally, long-term
PT budget constraints of this type
can be formulated as t=1 gt (xt ) ≤ 0 (1), where gt is a
convex function representing the impact to the budget at
time t. For instance, in our previous example, we have
gt (xt ) = hpt , xt i − bT /T , so it simply represents the target
PT
t=1 hpt , xt i ≤ bT . Importantly, these constraint functions
are not only a priori unknown, but their evolution could
even be adversarial: for instance, in online ad markets, competitors may click on ads to deplete their rivals’ advertising
budget, fraudulent publishers may attempt to manufacture
revenue by increasing the click-through-rate (CTR) without
legitimate buying intent, as shown in The Economist (2005).
In this way, we obtain the following archetype of an online
optimization problem with long-term budget constraints:
PT
minimize
t=1 ft (xt ),
(2)
PT
subject to
t=1 gt (xt ) ≤ 0.
In the above, the problem’s loss and constraint functions
(ft and gt respectively) are assumed convex and Lipschitz

