Adversarial camera stickers:
A physical camera-based attack on deep learning systems

Juncheng B. Li 1 2 Frank R. Schmidt 1 J. Zico Kolter 1 2

Abstract
Recent work has documented the susceptibility
of deep learning systems to adversarial examples,
but most such attacks directly manipulate the digital input to a classifier. Although a smaller line
of work considers physical adversarial attacks, in
all cases these involve manipulating the object of
interest, e.g., putting a physical sticker on an object to misclassify it, or manufacturing an object
specifically intended to be misclassified. In this
work, we consider an alternative question: is it
possible to fool deep classifiers, over all perceived
objects of a certain type, by physically manipulating the camera itself? We show that by placing
a carefully crafted and mainly-translucent sticker
over the lens of a camera, one can create universal perturbations of the observed images that are
inconspicuous, yet misclassify target objects as a
different (targeted) class. To accomplish this, we
propose an iterative procedure for both updating
the attack perturbation (to make it adversarial for
a given classifier), and the threat model itself (to
ensure it is physically realizable). For example,
we show that we can achieve physically-realizable
attacks that fool ImageNet classifiers in a targeted
fashion 49.6% of the time. This presents a new
class of physically-realizable threat models to consider in the context of adversarially robust machine learning. Our demo video can be viewed at:
https://youtu.be/wUVmL33Fx54

1. Introduction
Many recent papers have established that deep learning
classifiers are particularly susceptible to adversarial attacks,
1
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence 2 School of Computer
Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA. Correspondence to: Juncheng B. Li <billy.li@us.bosch.com>, Frank
R. Schmidt <frank.r.schmidt@de.bosch.com>, J. Zico Kolter
<zico.kolter@us.bosch.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 36 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Illustration of our approach: (left) our adversarial sticker
affixed to a camera lens; (right) view from the camera with sticker,
where the keyboard is reliably classified as a computer mouse for
most viewpoints and scales.

manipulations of the input to a classifier specifically crafted
to be largely unobservable to humans, but which cause
the classifier to predict incorrectly (Szegedy et al., 2013;
Goodfellow et al., 2015). These perturbations be crafted to
be bounded by various Lp norms (Su et al., 2019; Carlini
& Wagner, 2017; Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016). In the
majority of the cases studied, however, these attacks are
considered in a “purely digital” domain, that is they consider
perturbations that directly modify the digital input to the
classifier in order to fool the model. A smaller but still
substantial line of work has emerged to show that these
attacks can also transfer to the physical world: these have
considered cases of printing out pictures intended to fool
classifiers (Brown et al., 2017), placing physical stickers on
objects to fool a classifier (Evtimov et al., 2018), or directly
manufacturing objects intended to fool a classifier (even
when observed from multiple angles) (Athalye et al., 2017).
In all these cases, though, the primary mode of attack has
been manipulating the object of interest, often with very
visually apparent perturbations. Compared to attacks in the
digital space, physical attacks have not been explored to its
full extent: we still lack baselines and feasible threat models
that work robustly in reality.
In this work, we propose a method for physically fooling a
network such that all objects of a particular class are misclassified using a visually inconspicuous modification. To
accomplish this, we develop an adversarial camera sticker,

