TapNet: Neural Network Augmented with Task-Adaptive Projection for
Few-Shot Learning

Sung Whan Yoon 1 Jun Seo 1 Jaekyun Moon 1

Abstract
Handling previously unseen tasks after given
only a few training examples continues to be a
tough challenge in machine learning. We propose
TapNets, neural networks augmented with taskadaptive projection for improved few-shot learning. Here, employing a meta-learning strategy
with episode-based training, a network and a set
of per-class reference vectors are learned across
widely varying tasks. At the same time, for every episode, features in the embedding space are
linearly projected into a new space as a form of
quick task-specific conditioning. The training loss
is obtained based on a distance metric between the
query and the reference vectors in the projection
space. Excellent generalization results in this way.
When tested on the Omniglot, miniImageNet and
tieredImageNet datasets, we obtain state of the art
classification accuracies under various few-shot
scenarios.

1. Introduction
Few-shot learning promises to allow machines to carry out
tasks that are previously unencountered, using only a small
number of relevant examples. As such, few-shot learning
finds wide applications, where labeled data are scarce or
expensive, which is far more often the case than not. Unfortunately, despite immense interest and active research
in recent years, few-shot learning remains an elusive challenge to machine learning community. For example, while
deep networks now routinely offer near-perfect classification scores on standard image test datasets given ample
training, reported results on few-shot learning still fall well
below the levels that would be considered reliable in crucial
real world settings.
1

School of Electrical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute
of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, Korea. Correspondence to: Sung Whan Yoon <shyoon8@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

One popular way of developing few-shot learning strategies
is to take a meta-learning perspective coupled with episodic
training (Vinyals et al., 2016; Ravi & Larochelle, 2017;
Chen et al., 2019). Meta-learning seems to convey somewhat different meanings to different people, but none would
disagree that it is about learning a general strategy to learn
new tasks (Vanschoren, 2018). Episodic training refers to a
training method in which widely varying tasks (or episodes)
are presented to the learning model one by one, with each
episode containing only a few labeled examples. The repetitive exposure to previously unseen tasks, each time with low
samples, during this initial learning or meta-training stage
seems to provide a viable option for preparing the learner
for quick adaptation to new data (Vinyals et al., 2016).
Among the well-known approaches in this direction are
the metric-based learners like Matching Networks (Vinyals
et al., 2016) and Prototypical Networks (Snell et al., 2017).
These methods all incorporate non-parametric, distancebased learning, where embedding space is trained to minimize a relevant distance metric across episodes before stabilizing to perform actual few-shot classification. Matching
Networks train separate networks to process labeled samples and query samples, and utilize each labeled sample
in the embedding space as reference points in classifying
the query samples. Prototypical Networks employ only
one embedding network with its per-class centroids used
as classification references in the embedding space. Based
on learning only a single feed-forward feature extractor,
Prototypical Networks offer a surprisingly good ability to
generalize to new tasks, as an inductive bias seems to settle
in somehow via episodic training.
We are also interested in distance-based learning with no
fine-tuning of parameters beyond the episodic meta-training
stage. Relative to prior work, the unique characteristic of
our method is in explicit task-dependent conditioning via
linear projection of embedded features. Once the neural network outputs are projected into a new space, classification is
done there based on distances from per-class reference vectors. Both the neural network and the reference vectors are
learned across the sequence of episodes reflecting widely
varying tasks, while the projected classification space is
constructed anew specific to each episode. The projection to

