Graph U-Nets

Hongyang Gao 1 Shuiwang Ji 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of representation learning for graph data. Convolutional neural networks
can naturally operate on images, but have significant challenges in dealing with graph data.
Given images are special cases of graphs with
nodes lie on 2D lattices, graph embedding tasks
have a natural correspondence with image pixelwise prediction tasks such as segmentation. While
encoder-decoder architectures like U-Nets have
been successfully applied on many image pixelwise prediction tasks, similar methods are lacking for graph data. This is due to the fact that
pooling and up-sampling operations are not natural on graph data. To address these challenges,
we propose novel graph pooling (gPool) and unpooling (gUnpool) operations in this work. The
gPool layer adaptively selects some nodes to form
a smaller graph based on their scalar projection
values on a trainable projection vector. We further propose the gUnpool layer as the inverse operation of the gPool layer. The gUnpool layer
restores the graph into its original structure using the position information of nodes selected
in the corresponding gPool layer. Based on our
proposed gPool and gUnpool layers, we develop
an encoder-decoder model on graph, known as
the graph U-Nets. Our experimental results on
node classification and graph classification tasks
demonstrate that our methods achieve consistently
better performance than previous models.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (LeCun et al., 2012)
have demonstrated great capability in various challenging
artificial intelligence tasks, especially in fields of computer
1

Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Texas
A&M University, TX, USA. Correspondence to: Hongyang Gao
<hongyang.gao@tamu.edu>, Shuiwang Ji <sji@tamu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

vision (He et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2017) and natural language processing (Bahdanau et al., 2015). One common
property behind these tasks is that both images and texts
have grid-like structures. Elements on feature maps have locality and order information, which enables the application
of convolutional operations (Defferrard et al., 2016).
In practice, many real-world data can be naturally represented as graphs such as social and biological networks.
Due to the great success of CNNs on grid-like data, applying them on graph data (Gori et al., 2005; Scarselli et al.,
2009) is particularly appealing. Recently, there have been
many attempts to extend convolutions to graph data (GNNs)
(Kipf & Welling, 2017; Veličković et al., 2017; Gao et al.,
2018). One common use of convolutions on graphs is to
compute node representations (Hamilton et al., 2017; Ying
et al., 2018). With learned node representations, we can
perform various tasks on graphs such as node classification
and link prediction.
Images can be considered as special cases of graphs, in
which nodes lie on regular 2D lattices. It is this special
structure that enables the use of convolution and pooling operations on images. Based on this relationship, node classification and embedding tasks have a natural correspondence
with pixel-wise prediction tasks such as image segmentation (Noh et al., 2015; Gao & Ji, 2017; Jégou et al., 2017). In
particular, both tasks aim to make predictions for each input
unit, corresponding to a pixel on images or a node in graphs.
In the computer vision field, pixel-wise prediction tasks
have achieved major advances recently. Encoder-decoder
architectures like the U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015) are
state-of-the-art methods for these tasks. It is thus highly
interesting to develop U-Net-like architectures for graph
data. In addition to convolutions, pooling and up-sampling
operations are essential building blocks in these architectures. However, extending these operations to graph data
is highly challenging. Unlike grid-like data such as images
and texts, nodes in graphs have no spatial locality and order
information as required by regular pooling operations.
To bridge the above gap, we propose novel graph pooling (gPool) and unpooling (gUnpool) operations in this
work. Based on these two operations, we propose U-Netlike architectures for graph data. The gPool operation samples some nodes to form a smaller graph based on their

