Guarantees for Spectral Clustering with Fairness Constraints

Matthäus Kleindessner 1 Samira Samadi 2 Pranjal Awasthi 1 Jamie Morgenstern 2

Abstract
Given the widespread popularity of spectral clustering (SC) for partitioning graph data, we study
a version of constrained SC in which we try
to incorporate the fairness notion proposed by
Chierichetti et al. (2017). According to this notion, a clustering is fair if every demographic
group is approximately proportionally represented
in each cluster. To this end, we develop variants
of both normalized and unnormalized constrained
SC and show that they help find fairer clusterings
on both synthetic and real data. We also provide
a rigorous theoretical analysis of our algorithms
on a natural variant of the stochastic block model,
where h groups have strong inter-group connectivity, but also exhibit a “natural” clustering structure
which is fair. We prove that our algorithms can
recover this fair clustering with high probability.

1. Introduction
Machine learning (ML) has recently seen an explosion of
applications in settings to guide or make choices directly
affecting people. Examples include applications in lending,
marketing, education, and many more. Close on the heels
of the adoption of ML methods in these everyday domains
have been any number of examples of ML methods displaying unsavory behavior towards certain demographic groups.
These have spurred the study of fairness of ML algorithms.
Numerous mathematical formulations of fairness have been
proposed for supervised learning settings, each with their
strengths and shortcomings in terms of what they disallow
and how difficult they may be to satisfy (e.g., Dwork et al.,
2012; Hardt et al., 2016; Kleinberg et al., 2017; Zafar et al.,
2017). Somewhat more recently, the community has begun
1
Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University, NJ
College of Computing, Georgia Tech, GA. Correspondence to:
Matthäus Kleindessner <matthaeus.kleindessner@rutgers.edu>,
Samira Samadi <ssamadi6@gatech.edu>, Pranjal Awasthi
<pranjal.awasthi@rutgers.edu>,
Jamie
Morgenstern
<jamiemmt@cs.gatech.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

to study appropriate notions of fairness for unsupervised
learning settings (e.g., Chierichetti et al., 2017; Celis et al.,
2018a;b; Samadi et al., 2018; Kleindessner et al., 2019).
In particular, the work of Chierichetti et al. (2017) proposes
a notion of fairness for clustering: namely, that each cluster
has proportional representation from different demographic
groups. Their paper provides approximation algorithms that
incorporate this fairness notion for k-center and k-median
clustering. The follow-up work of Schmidt et al. (2018)
extends this to k-means clustering. These papers open up an
important line of work that aims at studying the following
questions for clustering: a) How to incorporate fairness constraints into popular clustering objectives and algorithms?
and b) What is the price of fairness? For example, the experimental results of Chierichetti et al. (2017) indicate that fair
clusterings come with a significant increase in the k-center
or k-median objective value. While the above works focus
on clustering data sets in Euclidean / metric spaces, many
clustering problems involve graph data. On such data, spectral clustering (SC; von Luxburg, 2007) is the method of
choice in practice. In this paper, we extend the above line
of work by studying the implications of incorporating the
fairness notion of Chierichetti et al. (2017) into SC.
The contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We show how to incorporate the constraints that in each
cluster, every group should be represented with the same
proportion as in the original data set into the SC framework.
For continuity with prior work (as discussed above; also
see Section 5), we refer to these constraints as fairness
constraints and speak of fair clusterings. However, the
terms proportionality and proportional would be a more
formal description of our goal. Our approach to incorporate
the fairness constraints is analogous to existing versions of
constrained SC that try to incorporate must-link constraints
(see Section 5). In contrast to the work of Chierichetti et al.
(2017), which always yields a fair clustering no matter how
much the objective value increases compared to an unfair
clustering, our approach does not guarantee that we end up
with a fair clustering. Rather, our approach guides SC to
find a good and fair clustering if such a one exists.
• Indeed, we prove that our algorithms find a good and
fair clustering in a natural variant of the famous stochastic
block model that we propose. In our variant, h demographic

