QTRAN: Learning to Factorize with Transformation for
Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement learning

Kyunghwan Son 1 Daewoo Kim 1 Wan Ju Kang 1 David Hostallero 1 Yung Yi 1

Abstract
We explore value-based solutions for multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL) tasks in the centralized training with decentralized execution
(CTDE) regime popularized recently. However,
VDN and QMIX are representative examples that
use the idea of factorization of the joint actionvalue function into individual ones for decentralized execution. VDN and QMIX address only
a fraction of factorizable MARL tasks due to
their structural constraint in factorization such
as additivity and monotonicity. In this paper, we
propose a new factorization method for MARL,
QTRAN, which is free from such structural constraints and takes on a new approach to transforming the original joint action-value function
into an easily factorizable one, with the same
optimal actions. QTRAN guarantees more general factorization than VDN or QMIX, thus covering a much wider class of MARL tasks than
does previous methods. Our experiments for the
tasks of multi-domain Gaussian-squeeze and modified predator-prey demonstrate QTRAN’s superior performance with especially larger margins
in games whose payoffs penalize non-cooperative
behavior more aggressively.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning aims to instill in agents a good
policy that maximizes the cumulative reward in a given
environment. Recent progress has witnessed success in
various tasks, such as Atari games (Mnih et al., 2015), Go
(Silver et al., 2016; 2017), and robot control (Lillicrap et al.,
2015), just to name a few, with the development of deep
learning techniques. Such advances largely consist of deep
1

School of Electrical Enginerring, KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea. Correspondence to: Yung Yi <yiyung@kaist.edu>, Kyunghwan Son <kevinson9473@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

neural networks, which can represent action-value functions
and policy functions in reinforcement learning problems
as a high-capacity function approximator. However, more
complex tasks such as robot swarm control and autonomous
driving, often modeled as cooperative multi-agent learning
problems, still remain unconquered due to their high scales
and operational constraints such as distributed execution.
The use of deep learning techniques carries through to cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL). MADDPG (Lowe et al., 2017) learns distributed policy in continuous action spaces, and COMA (Foerster et al., 2018)
utilizes a counterfactual baseline to address the credit assignment problem. Among value-based methods, value function
factorization (Koller & Parr, 1999; Guestrin et al., 2002a;
Sunehag et al., 2018; Rashid et al., 2018) methods have been
proposed to efficiently handle a joint action-value function
whose complexity grows exponentially with the number of
agents.
Two representative examples of value function factorization
include VDN (Sunehag et al., 2018) and QMIX (Rashid
et al., 2018). VDN factorizes the joint action-value function
into a sum of individual action-value functions. QMIX extends this additive value factorization to represent the joint
action-value function as a monotonic function — rather
than just as a sum — of individual action-value functions,
thereby covering a richer class of multi-agent reinforcement
learning problems than does VDN. However, these value
factorization techniques still suffer structural constraints,
namely, additive decomposability in VDN and monotonicity in QMIX, often failing to factorize a factorizable task.
A task is factorizable if the optimal actions of the joint
action-value function are the same as the optimal ones of
the individual action-value functions, where additive decomposability and monotonicity are only sufficient — somewhat
excessively restrictive — for factorizability.
Contribution In this paper, we aim at successfully
factorizing any factorizable task, free from additivity/monotonicity concerns. We transform the original joint
action-value function into a new, easily factorizable one
with the same optimal actions in both functions. This is
done by learning a state-value function, which corrects for
the severity of the partial observability issue in the agents.

