Understanding Geometry of Encoder-Decoder CNNs

Jong Chul Ye 1 2 Woon Kyoung Sung 2

Abstract
Encoder-decoder networks using convolutional
neural network (CNN) architecture have been extensively used in deep learning literatures thanks
to its excellent performance for various inverse
problems. However, it is still difficult to obtain
coherent geometric view why such an architecture
gives the desired performance. Inspired by recent
theoretical understanding on generalizability, expressivity and optimization landscape of neural
networks, as well as the theory of deep convolutional framelets, here we provide a unified theoretical framework that leads to a better understanding of geometry of encoder-decoder CNNs. Our
unified framework shows that encoder-decoder
CNN architecture is closely related to nonlinear
frame representation using combinatorial convolution frames, whose expressivity increases exponentially with the depth. We also demonstrate
the importance of skipped connection in terms of
expressivity, and optimization landscape.

1. Introduction
For the last decade, we have witnessed the unprecedented
success of deep neural networks (DNN) in various applications in computer vision, classification, medical imaging,
etc. Aside from traditional applications such as classification (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), segmentation (Ronneberger
et al., 2015), image denoising (Zhang et al., 2017), superresolution (Kim et al., 2016), etc, deep learning approaches
have already become the state-of-the-art technologies in
various inverse problems in x-ray CT, MRI, etc (Kang et al.,
2017; Jin et al., 2017; Hammernik et al., 2018)
However, the more we see the success of deep learning,
the more mysterious the nature of deep neural networks
becomes. In particular, the amazing aspects of expressive
1
Dept. of Bio/Brain Engineering, KAIST Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea. 2 Dept. of Mathematical Sciences, KAIST,
Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea.. Correspondence to: Jong
Chul Ye <jong.ye@kaist.ac.kr>.
th

Proceedings of the 36 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

power, generalization capability, and optimization landscape of DNNs have become an intellectual challenge for
machine learning community, leading to many new theoretical results with varying capacities to facilitate the understanding of deep neural networks (Ge & Ma, 2017; Hanin &
Sellke, 2017; Yarotsky, 2017; Nguyen & Hein, 2017; Arora
et al., 2016; Du et al., 2018; Raghu et al., 2017; Bartlett
et al., 2017; Neyshabur et al., 2018; Nguyen & Hein, 2018;
Rolnick & Tegmark, 2017; Shen, 2018).
In inverse problems, one of the most widely employed network architectures is so-called encoder-decoder CNN architectures (Ronneberger et al., 2015). In contrast to the
simplified form of the neural networks that are often used
in theoretical analysis, these encoder-decoder CNNs usually have more complicated network architectures such as
symmetric network configuration, skipped connections, etc.
Therefore, it is not clear how the aforementioned theory
can be used to understand the geometry of encoder-decoder
CNNs to examine the origin of their superior performance.
Recently, the authors in (Ye et al., 2018) proposed so-called
deep convolutional framelets to explain the encoder-decoder
CNN architecture from a signal processing perspective. The
main idea is that a data-driven decomposition of Hankel
matrix constructed from the input data provides encoderdecoder layers that have striking similarity to the encoderdecoder CNNs. However, one of the main weaknesses of
the theory is that it is not clear where the exponential expressiveness comes from. Moreover, many theoretical issues
of neural networks such as generalizability and the optimization landscape, which have been extensively studied in
machine learning literature, have not been addressed.
Therefore, this work aims at filling the gap and finding the
connections between machine learning and signal processing to provide a unified theoretical analysis that facilitates
the geometric understanding of encoder-decoder CNNs. Accordingly, we have revealed the following geometric features of encoder-decoder CNNs:

• An encoder-decoder CNN with an over-parameterized
feature layer approximates a map between two smooth
manifolds that is decomposed as a high-dimensional
embedding followed by a quotient map.

