GMNN: Graph Markov Neural Networks

Meng Qu 1 2 Yoshua Bengio 1 2 3 Jian Tang 1 3 4

Abstract
This paper studies semi-supervised object classification in relational data, which is a fundamental
problem in relational data modeling. The problem has been extensively studied in the literature
of both statistical relational learning (e.g. relational Markov networks) and graph neural networks (e.g. graph convolutional networks). Statistical relational learning methods can effectively
model the dependency of object labels through
conditional random fields for collective classification, whereas graph neural networks learn effective object representations for classification
through end-to-end training. In this paper, we propose the Graph Markov Neural Network (GMNN)
that combines the advantages of both worlds. A
GMNN models the joint distribution of object labels with a conditional random field, which can
be effectively trained with the variational EM algorithm. In the E-step, one graph neural network
learns effective object representations for approximating the posterior distributions of object labels.
In the M-step, another graph neural network is
used to model the local label dependency. Experiments on object classification, link classification,
and unsupervised node representation learning
show that GMNN achieves state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
We live in an interconnected world, where entities are connected through various relations. For example, web pages
are linked by hyperlinks; social media users are connected
through friendship relations. Modeling such relational data
is an important topic in machine learning, covering a variety of applications such as entity classification (Perozzi
et al., 2014), link prediction (Taskar et al., 2004) and link
1
Montréal Institute for Learning Algorithms (MILA)
University of Montréal 3 Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR) 4 HEC Montréal. Correspondence to: Meng Qu
<meng.qu@umontreal.ca>, Jian Tang <jian.tang@hec.ca>.
2

th

Proceedings of the 36 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

classification (Dettmers et al., 2018).
Many of these applications can be boiled down to the
fundamental problem of semi-supervised object classification (Taskar et al., 2007). Specifically, objects 1 are interconnected and associated with some attributes. Given the
labels of a few objects, the goal is to infer the labels of
other objects. This problem has been extensively studied in
the literature of statistical relational learning (SRL), which
develops statistical methods to model relational data. Some
representative methods include relational Markov networks
(RMN) (Taskar et al., 2002) and Markov logic networks
(MLN) (Richardson & Domingos, 2006). Generally, these
methods model the dependency of object labels using conditional random fields (Lafferty et al., 2001). Because of
their effectiveness for modeling label dependencies, these
methods achieve compelling results on semi-supervised object classification. However, several limitations still remain.
(1) These methods typically define potential functions in
conditional random fields as linear combinations of some
hand-crafted feature functions, which are quite heuristic.
Moreover, the capacity of such models is usually insufficient.
(2) Due to the complexity of relational structures between
objects, inferring the posterior distributions of object labels
for unlabeled objects remains a challenging problem.
Another line of research is based on the recent progress of
graph neural networks (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Hamilton
et al., 2017; Gilmer et al., 2017; Veličković et al., 2018).
Graph neural networks approach object classification by
learning effective object representations with non-linear neural architectures, and the whole framework can be trained
in an end-to-end fashion. For example, the graph convolutional network (GCN) (Kipf & Welling, 2017) iteratively
updates the representation of each object by combining its
own representation and the representations of the surrounding objects. These approaches have been shown to achieve
state-of-the-art performance because of their effectiveness
in learning object representations on relational data. However, one critical limitation is that the labels of objects are
independently predicted based on their representations. In
other words, the joint dependency of object labels is ignored.
1

In this paper, we will use “object” and “node” interchangeably
to refer to entities in the graph, because they are different terminologies used in the litteratures of statistical relational learning
and graph neural networks.

