Fair Regression: Quantitative Definitions and Reduction-based Algorithms
Alekh Agarwal 1 Miroslav Dudı́k 2 Zhiwei Steven Wu 3

Abstract
In this paper, we study the prediction of a realvalued target, such as a risk score or recidivism
rate, while guaranteeing a quantitative notion of
fairness with respect to a protected attribute such
as gender or race. We call this class of problems
fair regression. We propose general schemes for
fair regression under two notions of fairness: (1)
statistical parity, which asks that the prediction be
statistically independent of the protected attribute,
and (2) bounded group loss, which asks that the
prediction error restricted to any protected group
remain below some pre-determined level. While
we only study these two notions of fairness, our
schemes are applicable to arbitrary Lipschitzcontinuous losses, and so they encompass leastsquares regression, logistic regression, quantile
regression, and many other tasks. Our schemes
only require access to standard risk minimization
algorithms (such as standard classification or
least-squares regression) while providing theoretical guarantees on the optimality and fairness of
the obtained solutions. In addition to analyzing
theoretical properties of our schemes, we empirically demonstrate their ability to uncover fairness–
accuracy frontiers on several standard datasets.

1. Introduction
As machine learning touches increasingly critical aspects
of our life, including education, healthcare, criminal justice
and lending, there is a growing focus to ensure that the algorithms treat various subpopulations fairly (see, e.g., Barocas
& Selbst, 2016; Podesta et al., 2014; Corbett-Davies & Goel,
2018; and references therein). These questions have been
particularly extensively researched in the context of classification, where several quantitative measures of fairness
1
Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA 2 Microsoft Research, New
York, NY 3 University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN. Correspondence to: A. Agarwal <alekha@microsoft.com>, M. Dudı́k
<mdudik@microsoft.com>, Z. S. Wu <zsw@umn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

have been proposed (Berk et al., 2017; Chouldechova, 2017;
Hardt et al., 2016; Kleinberg et al., 2017), leading to a variety of algorithms that aim to satisfy them (see, e.g., CorbettDavies & Goel, 2018, for an overview of the literature).
These classifier-based formulations appear to fit the settings
where the decision space is discrete and small, such as accept/reject decisions in hiring, school admissions, or lending.
However, in practice, the decision makers work with tools
that estimate a continuous quantity, such as success on the
job, GPA in the first year of college, or risk of default on a
loan. Predictions of these quantities are treated as scores,
which are used by human decision makers, perhaps in the
context of a partly automated workflow, to reach final decisions (see, e.g., Waters & Miikkulainen, 2014; US Federal
Reserve, 2007; Northpointe, 2010; Lowenkamp et al., 2012).
While, in principle, a fair classification tool could be used
to recommend the yes/no decision directly, such tools are
often resisted by practitioners, because they limit their autonomy, whereas ranking or scoring tools do not have this
drawback (Veale et al., 2018). In such situations, it is desirable to work with real-valued scores that satisfy some
notion of fairness. Yet, despite ample motivation and use
cases, the prior work on designing fair continuous predictors
is quite limited in its scope compared with the generality
of methods for fair classification (e.g., Hardt et al., 2016;
Agarwal et al., 2018).
This paper seeks to diminish this gap by developing efficient
algorithms for a substantially broader set of regression tasks
and model classes than done before, in many cases providing
the first method with theoretical performance guarantees.
We consider the problem of predicting a real-valued
target, where the prediction quality is measured by any
Lipschitz-continuous loss function. Each example contains
a protected attribute, such as race or gender, with respect
to which we seek to guarantee fairness. We study two
definitions of fairness from previous literature: statistical
parity (SP), which asks that the prediction be statistically independent of the protected attribute, and bounded group loss
(BGL), which asks that the prediction error restricted to any
protected group stay below some pre-determined level. We
define fair regression as the task of minimizing the expected
loss of our real-valued predictions, subject to either of these
fairness constraints. By choosing the appropriate loss, we

