Policy Certificates: Towards Accountable Reinforcement Learning

Christoph Dann 1 Lihong Li 2 Wei Wei 2 Emma Brunskill 3

Abstract
The performance of a reinforcement learning algorithm can vary drastically during learning because
of exploration. Existing algorithms provide little
information about the quality of their current policy before executing it, and thus have limited use
in high-stakes applications like healthcare. We
address this lack of accountability by proposing
that algorithms output policy certificates. These
certificates bound the sub-optimality and return of
the policy in the next episode, allowing humans
to intervene when the certified quality is not satisfactory. We further introduce two new algorithms
with certificates and present a new framework for
theoretical analysis that guarantees the quality of
their policies and certificates. For tabular MDPs,
we show that computing certificates can even improve the sample-efficiency of optimism-based
exploration. As a result, one of our algorithms is
the first to achieve minimax-optimal PAC bounds
up to lower-order terms, and this algorithm also
matches (and in some settings slightly improves
upon) existing minimax regret bounds.

1. Introduction
There is increasing excitement around applications of machine learning, but also growing awareness and concerns
about fairness, accountability and transparency. Recent research aims to address these concerns but most work focuses
on supervised learning and only few results (Jabbari et al.,
2016; Joseph et al., 2016; Kannan et al., 2017; Raghavan
et al., 2018) exist on reinforcement learning (RL).
One challenge when applying RL in practice is that, unlike
in supervised learning, the performance of an RL algorithm
is typically not monotonically increasing with more data
due to the trial-and-error nature of RL that necessitates ex1

Carnegie Mellon University 2 Google Research
Stanford University. Correspondence to: Christoph Dann
<cdann@cdann.net>.
3

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

ploration. Even sharp drops in policy performance during
learning are common, e.g., when the agent starts to explore
a new part of the state space. Such unpredictable performance fluctuation has limited the use of RL in high-stakes
applications like healthcare, and calls for more accountable
algorithms that can quantify and reveal their performance
online during learning.
To address this lack of accountability, we propose that RL
algorithms output policy certificates in episodic RL. Policy certificates consist of (1) a confidence interval of the
algorithm’s expected sum of rewards (return) in the next
episode (policy return certificates) and (2) a bound on how
far from the optimal return the performance can be (policy optimality certificates). Certificates make the policy’s
performance more transparent and accountable, and allow
designers to intervene if necessary. For example, in medical
applications, one would need to intervene unless the policy
achieves a certain minimum treatment outcome; in financial
applications, policy optimality certificates can be used to
assess the potential loss when learning a trading strategy. In
addition to accountability, we also want RL algorithms to
be sample-efficient and quickly achieve good performance.
To formally quantify accountability and sample-efficiency
of an algorithm, we introduce a new framework for theoretical analysis called IPOC. IPOC bounds guarantee that
certificates indeed bound the algorithm’s expected performance in an episode, and prescribe the rate at which the
algorithm’s policy and certificates improve with more data.
IPOC is stronger than other frameworks like regret (Jaksch
et al., 2010), PAC (Kakade, 2003) and Uniform-PAC (Dann
et al., 2017), that only guarantee the cumulative performance
of the algorithm, but do not provide bounds for individual episodes during learning. IPOC also provides stronger
bounds and more nuanced guarantees on per episode performance than KWIK (Li et al., 2008).
A natural way to create accountable and sample-efficient
RL algorithms is to combine existing sample-efficient algorithms with off-policy policy evaluation approaches to
estimate the return (expected sum of rewards) of the algorithm’s policy before each episode. Existing policy evaluation approaches estimate the return of a fixed policy from
a batch of data (e.g., Thomas et al., 2015b; Jiang & Li,
2016; Thomas & Brunskill, 2016). They provide little to no
guarantees when the policy is not fixed but computed from

