Sparse Extreme Multi-label Learning with Oracle Property

Weiwei Liu 1 Xiaobo Shen 2

Abstract
The pioneering work of sparse local embeddings
for extreme classification (SLEEC) (Bhatia et al.,
2015) has shown great promise in multi-label
learning. Unfortunately, the statistical rate of convergence and oracle property of SLEEC are still
not well understood. To fill this gap, we present
a unified framework for SLEEC with nonconvex
penalty. Theoretically, we rigorously prove that
our proposed estimator enjoys oracle property
(i.e., performs as well as if the underlying model
were known beforehand), and obtains a desirable
statistical convergence rate. Moreover, we show
that under a mild condition on the magnitude of
the entries in the underlying model, we are able to
obtain an improved convergence rate. Extensive
numerical experiments verify our theoretical findings and the superiority of our proposed estimator.

1. Introduction
Extreme multi-label learning (Yu et al., 2014; Prabhu &
Varma, 2014; Bhatia et al., 2015; Yen et al., 2016; Liu &
Tsang, 2017; Babbar & Schölkopf, 2017) refers to learn a
classifier that is able to automatically annotate a data point
with the most relevant subset of labels from an extremely
large number of labels, which has opened up a new research
frontier in data mining and machine learning. A wide range
of challenging applications, such as product categorization
for e-commerce (Shen et al., 2011) and document, video
and image annotation, can benefit from being formulated as
multi-label learning (Dembczynski et al., 2010; Tsoumakas
et al., 2012; Liu & Tsang, 2015b; Gibaja & Ventura, 2015;
Du et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2017; Shen et al., 2018a;b) tasks
with hundreds of thousands or even millions of labels.
Due to the simplicity and ease of implementation, embed1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China 2 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China. Correspondence
to: Weiwei Liu <liuweiwei863@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

ding approaches (Hsu et al., 2009; Yu et al., 2014; Prabhu
& Varma, 2014; Liu & Tsang, 2015a; Bhatia et al., 2015;
Babbar & Schölkopf, 2017; Liu et al., 2019) have been
proved to be the most popular methods for addressing extreme multi-label learning tasks. Specifically, based on an
assumption that the label matrix is low-rank, embedding
approaches project label vectors into a lower dimensional
compressed label space. A regression is then learned for
each compressed label and a decompression matrix is used
to lift the embedded label vectors back to the original label space. Because the low rank assumption is violated in
most real world applications, leading embedding approaches can not obtain high prediction accuracies, and scale to
large-scale data sets.
To break the low-rank assumption and boost classification
accuracy, the pioneering work of SLEEC (Bhatia et al.,
2015) is developed to learn a small ensemble of local distance preserving embeddings. Extensive empirical studies in
(Bhatia et al., 2015) show that SLEEC significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art embedding and tree-based methods. Although SLEEC has achieved great success in extreme
multi-label classification, the statistical rate of convergence
and oracle property of SLEEC remain less explored.
To bridge this gap, we propose a unified framework for
SLEEC with nonconvex penalty. Theoretically, we show
that our proposed estimator enjoys oracle property, which
performs as well as if the underlying model were known
beforehand, as well √
as attains
a desirable statistical con√
∗
√ s ), where σ, $, µ are positive
vergence rate of O( σ µ$+
n
constants, n is the sample size and s∗ denotes the cardinality
of the true support of underlying model. Considering the
magnitude of the entries in the underlying model,√ we are
∗
able to achieve a refined convergence rate of O( µ√sn ) under suitable conditions. Moreover, we adapt an accelerated
proximal gradient method with soft-thresholding to solve
the proposed estimator. Empirical results on various data
sets validate our theoretical results and the superiority of
our proposed estimator.
We organize this paper as follows. §2 presents some preliminaries of SLEEC. §3 introduces our proposed estimator. §4
analyzes the statistical properties of our proposed estimator. §5 presents an optimization algorithm and experimental
results are presented in §6. The last section provides our

