Learning to Collaborate in Markov Decision Processes

Goran Radanovic 1 Rati Devidze 2 David C. Parkes 1 Adish Singla 2

Abstract
We consider a two-agent MDP framework where
agents repeatedly solve a task in a collaborative
setting. We study the problem of designing a
learning algorithm for the first agent (A1 ) that
facilitates successful collaboration even in cases
when the second agent (A2 ) is adapting its policy in an unknown way. The key challenge in our
setting is that the first agent faces non-stationarity
in rewards and transitions because of the adaptive
behavior of the second agent.
We design novel online learning algorithms
for agent A
 1 whose regret decays as

max{1− 73 ·α, 14 }
, for T learning episodes,
O T
provided that the magnitude in the change in
agent A2 ’s policy between any two consecutive
episodes is upper bounded by O(T −α ). Here, the
parameter α is assumed to be strictly greater than
0, and we show that this assumption is necessary
provided that the learning parity with noise problem is computationally hard. We show that sublinear regret of agent A1 further implies nearoptimality of the agents’ joint return for MDPs
that manifest the properties of a smooth game.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in AI have the potential to change our
daily lives by boosting productivity (e.g., via virtual personal assistants), augmenting human capabilities (e.g., via
smart mobility systems), and increasing automation (e.g.,
via auto-pilots and assistive robots). These are settings of
intelligence augmentation, where societal benefit will come
not from complete automation but rather from the interaction between people and machines, in a process of a productive human-machine collaboration.
1
Harvard University. 2 Max Planck Institute for Software
Systems (MPI-SWS). Correspondence to: Goran Radanovic
<gradanovic@g.harvard.edu>, Adish Singla <adishs@mpisws.org>.

We expect that useful collaboration will come about
through AI agents that can adapt to the behavior of users.
As an example, consider self-driving cars where auto-pilots
can be overridden by human drivers. In an initial period, a
human driver would likely change their behavior until accustomed with new features of an auto-pilot mode. Without
accounting for this changing behavior of users, the performance of the AI agent could considerably deteriorate, leading to, for example, hazardous situations in an auto-pilot
mode. Hence, it is important that the AI agent updates its
decision-making policy accordingly.
We formalize this problem through a two-agent, reinforcement learning (RL) framework. The agents, hereafter referred to as agent A1 and agent A2 , jointly solve a task in
a collaborative setting (i.e., share a common reward function and a transition kernel that is based on their joint actions). Our goal is to develop a learning algorithm for agent
A1 that facilitates a successful collaboration even in cases
when agent A2 is adapting its own policy. In the above
examples, agent A1 could represent the AI agent whereas
agent A2 could be a person with time-evolving behavior.
We primarily focus on an episodic Markov decision process (MDP) setting, in which the agents repeatedly interact:
(i) agent A1 decides on its policy based on historic information (agent A2 ’s past policies) and the underlying
MDP model;
(ii) agent A1 commits to its policy for a given episode
without knowing the policy of agent A2 ;
(iii) agent A1 updates its policy at the end of the episode
based on agent A2 ’s observed behavior.
When agent A2 ’s policy is fixed and known, one can find
an optimal policy for agent A1 using standard MDP planning techniques. In our setting, however, we do not assume
agent A2 ’s behavior is stationary, and we do not assume
any particular model for how agent A2 changes its policy.
This differs from similar two-agent (human-AI) collaborative settings (Dimitrakakis et al., 2017; Nikolaidis et al.,
2017) that prescribe a particular behavioral model to agent
A2 (human agent).
1.1. Overview of Our Approach

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

The presence of agent A2 in our framework implies that
the reward function and transition kernel are non-stationary

