Switching Linear Dynamics for Variational Bayes Filtering

Philip Becker-Ehmck 1 2 Jan Peters 2 Patrick van der Smagt 1

Abstract
System identification of complex and nonlinear
systems is a central problem for model predictive
control and model-based reinforcement learning.
Despite their complexity, such systems can often be approximated well by a set of linear dynamical systems if broken into appropriate subsequences. This mechanism not only helps us
find good approximations of dynamics, but also
gives us deeper insight into the underlying system. Leveraging Bayesian inference, Variational
Autoencoders and Concrete relaxations, we show
how to learn a richer and more meaningful state
space, e.g. encoding joint constraints and collisions with walls in a maze, from partial and highdimensional observations. This representation
translates into a gain of accuracy of learned dynamics showcased on various simulated tasks.

1. Introduction
Learning dynamics from raw data (also known as system
identification) is a key component of model predictive control and model-based reinforcement learning. Problematically, environments of interest often give rise to very complex and highly nonlinear dynamics which are seemingly
difficult to approximate. However, switching linear dynamical systems (SLDS) approaches claim that those environments can often be broken down into simpler units made
up of areas of equal and linear dynamics (Ackerson & Fu,
1970; Chang & Athans, 1978).
Not only have those approaches demonstrated good predictive performance in various settings, which often is the
sole goal of learning a system’s dynamics, they also encode useful information into so called switching variables
which determine the dynamics of the next transition. For
1
Machine Learning Research Lab, Volkswagen Group, Munich,
Germany 2 Department of Computer Science, Technische Universität Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany. Correspondence to: Philip
Becker-Ehmck <philip.becker-ehmck@volkswagen.de>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

example, when looking at the movement of an arm, one is intuitively aware of certain restrictions of possible movements,
e.g., constraints to the movement due to joint constraints
or obstacles. The knowledge is present without the need to
simulate; it is explicit. Exactly this kind of information will
be encoded when successfully inferring switching variables.
Our goal in this work will therefore entail the search for
richer representations in the form of latent state space models which encode knowledge about the underlying system
dynamics. In turn, we expect this to improve the accuracy
of our simulation as well. Such a representation alone could
then be used in a reinforcement learning approach that possibly only takes advantage of the learned latent features but
not necessarily its learned dynamics.
To learn richer representations, we identify one common
problem with prevalent recurrent Variational Autoencoder
models (Chung et al., 2015; Fraccaro et al., 2016; Karl
et al., 2017a; Krishnan et al., 2015): the non-probabilistic
treatment of the transition dynamics often modelled by a
powerful nonlinear function approximator. From the history of the Autoencoder to the Variational Autoencoder, we
know that in order to detect robust features in an unsupervised manner, probabilistic treatment of the latent space
is paramount (Dai et al., 2017; Kingma et al., 2014). As
our starting point, we will build on previously proposed
approaches by Krishnan et al. (2017) and Karl et al. (2017a).
The latter already made use of locally linear dynamics, but
only in a deterministic fashion. We extend their approaches
by a stochastic SLDS model with structured inference and
show that such treatment is vital for learning richer representations and simulation accuracy.

2. Background
We consider discretized time-series data consisting of continuous observations xt ∈ X ⊂ Rnx and control inputs
ut ∈ U ⊂ Rnu that we would like to model by corresponding latent states zt ∈ Z ⊂ Rnz . We will denote sequences
of variables by x1:T = (x1 , x2 , ..., xT ).
2.1. Switching Linear Dynamical Systems
A Switching Linear Dynamical Systems (SLDS) model
enables us to model nonlinear time series data by splitting
it into subsequences governed by linear dynamics. At each

