Online Convex Optimization in Adversarial Markov Decision Processes

Aviv Rosenberg 1 Yishay Mansour 1 2

Abstract
We consider online learning in episodic loopfree Markov decision processes (MDPs), where
the loss function can change arbitrarily between
episodes, and the transition function
pis not known
to the learner. We show Õ(L|X| |A|T ) regret
bound, where T is the number of episodes, X
is the state space, A is the action space, and L
is the length of each episode. Our online algorithm is implemented using entropic regularization methodology, which allows to extend the original adversarial MDP model to handle convex performance criteria (different ways to aggregate the
losses of a single episode) , as well as improve
previous regret bounds.

1. Introduction
Markov Decision processes (Puterman, 1994) have been
widely used to model reinforcement learning problems problems involving sequential decision making in a stochastic environment. In this model both the losses and dynamics
of the environment are assumed to be stationary over time.
However, in real world applications, the losses might change
over time, even throughout the learning process.
The adversarial MDP model (Even-Dar et al., 2009) was
proposed to address these issues. In this model, the loss
function can change arbitrarily (while still assuming a fixed
stochastic transition function). The learner’s objective is to
minimize its average loss during the learning process, and
its performance is measured by the regret - comparing to
the best stationary policy in hindsight. These ideas originate
from online learning problems (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi,
2006) - where, in each round, the learner selects an action
before knowing the current loss function.
BGP routing is considered as a motivating example in the
full version of the paper.
1

Tel Aviv University, Israel 2 Google Research, Tel Aviv, Israel.
Correspondence to: Aviv Rosenberg <avivros007@gmail.com>,
Yishay Mansour <mansour.yishay@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

We propose a novel algorithm for the adversarial MDP
model where the transition function is unknown to the
learner and the losses change arbitrarily over time. Our
algorithm, UC-O-REPS, uses two important ingredients,
the first is Online Mirror Descent (OMD) (Shalev-Shwartz,
2012) and the second is UCRL-2 (Auer et al., 2008). A
major challenge in this work is to handle convex performance criteria, which model different ways of aggregating
the losses of each episode. In order to handle convex performance criteria, we use the methodology of OMD, which is
widely used for online convex optimization, and we implement it in the adversarial MDP setting. In order to overcome
the unknown dynamics (stochastic transition function) we
incorporate techniques from UCRL-2.
Our main contribution is extending the adversarial MDP
model to include convex performance criteria, and showing
that our algorithm, UC-O-REPS, achieves near-optimal regret bounds in the general model. This is an important extension since different applications have different optimization
criteria, other than minimizing the expected average loss.
Examples include risk-sensitive objectives and robust objectives (that combine multiple loss functions). In addition,
we improve the known regret bound of Neu √
et al. (2012) for
the expected
average
loss
from
Õ(L|X||A|
T ) to achieve
p
Õ(L|X| |A|T ), which is especially important for large action spaces. Our bounds also hold with high probability, and
not only in expectation. Our algorithm builds on a simple
entropic regularization method, and the main challenge is
the analysis of the regret and computational complexity.
1.1. Related Work
The works of Auer et al. (2008) and Bartlett & Tewari
(2009) assume
an unknown fixed MDP, and achieve a
p
Õ(L|X| |A|T ) regret compared to the optimal
p policy. A
recent work by Azar et al. (2017) achieves Õ( L|X||A|T )
regret for large enough T , which is optimalp(Auer et al.,
2008). We remark that the lower bound of Ω( L|X||A|T )
by Auer et al. (2008) shows that our regret bound is optimal
with respect to the number of time steps T and actions |A|.
The work of Even-Dar et al. (2009), which presented the adversarial MDP model, assumes full knowledge of the transition function and full information feedback about the losses.
They propose an algorithm, MDP-E, which uses an experts

