Learning Distance for Sequences by Learning a Ground Metric

Bing Su 1 Ying Wu 2

Abstract
Learning distances that operate directly on multidimensional sequences is challenging because
such distances are structural by nature and the
vectors in sequences are not independent. Generally, distances for sequences heavily depend
on the ground metric between the vectors in sequences. We propose to learn the distance for sequences through learning a ground Mahalanobis
metric for the vectors in sequences. The learning
samples are sequences of vectors for which how
the ground metric between vectors induces the
overall distance is given, and the objective is that
the distance induced by the learned ground metric produces large values for sequences from different classes and small values for those from the
same class. We formulate the metric as a parameter of the distance, bring closer each sequence to
an associated virtual sequence w.r.t. the distance
to reduce the number of constraints, and develop
a general iterative solution for any ground-metricbased sequence distance. Experiments on several
sequence datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
and efficiency of our method.

1. Introduction
In many domains, the data are naturally in the form of
multi-dimensional sequences. Pairwise distance measures
between sequences serve as a proxy to manipulate the structured sequences so that any metric-based machine learning methods can be directly applied. The performances
of metric-based algorithms such as the k-nearest neighbor classifier (k-NN) heavily depend on the quality of the
distance measures. Therefore, learning distances for sequences from data is especially appealing.
1

Science & Technology on Integrated Information System Laboratory, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA. Correspondence to:
Bing Su <subingats@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Although metric learning has achieved a considerable maturity level both in practice and in theory (Bellet et al., 2013),
propagating these advances to sequence data is not trivial.
This is because most existing metric learning methods are
developed for static data which are in the form of “flat”
feature vectors. An acquiescent assumption is that these
vector data are independent and identically distributed, but
the elements in sequences exhibit temporal relationships.
Much less work has been devoted to metric learning for
sequence data, and most of them actually encode each sequence into a vector and simply build the metric upon the
vectors, which cannot capture the alignments or relationships among the vectors in sequences explicitly and may
lose significant temporal information. Learning distances
that operate directly on sequences is challenging, because
such distances are naturally structural and combinatorial.
Specifically, the major difficulties lie in two aspects.
First, different sequences vary in length, evolution speed,
and local temporal duration. Different distance measures
for sequences such as (Sakoe & Chiba, 1978; Su & Hua,
2017) perform temporal alignments to eliminate the local
temporal discrepancies. Inferring the alignments depends
on the metric between elements in sequences. For a specific sequence pair, their alignments cannot be inferred before
the underlying metric is learned. Therefore, the objective
of learning distances for sequences generally involves latent alignment structures when formulating the distances
as a function of the unknown metric, and hence is difficult
to manipulate and optimize.
Second, most metric learning methods employ the
must-link/cannot-link constraints over positive/negative
pairs (Xing et al., 2003; Davis et al., 2007) or the relative constraints over triplets (Schultz & Joachims, 2004;
Weinberger & Saul, 2009). The number of constraints is
quadratic or cubic in the number of training samples, which
easily becomes intractable when more training samples are
available. One heuristic is to mine only a subset of the
most informative constraints, but such mining is not trivial.
Because of the complexity of measuring distances for sequences, the cost of constructing these constraints is larger
and it can be computationally prohibitive to update the subset of constraints with the update of the metric during the
optimization. Reducing the number of constraints is more
crucial for sequence data.

