Exploration Conscious Reinforcement Learning Revisited

Lior Shani * 1 Yonathan Efroni * 1 Shie Mannor 1

Abstract
The Exploration-Exploitation tradeoff arises in
Reinforcement Learning when one cannot tell if a
policy is optimal. Then, there is a constant need to
explore new actions instead of exploiting past experience. In practice, it is common to resolve the
tradeoff by using a fixed exploration mechanism,
such as -greedy exploration or by adding Gaussian noise, while still trying to learn an optimal
policy. In this work, we take a different approach
and study exploration-conscious criteria, that result in optimal policies with respect to the exploration mechanism. Solving these criteria, as we
establish, amounts to solving a surrogate Markov
Decision Process. We continue and analyze properties of exploration-conscious optimal policies
and characterize two general approaches to solve
such criteria. Building on the approaches, we apply simple changes in existing tabular and deep
Reinforcement Learning algorithms and empirically demonstrate superior performance relatively
to their non-exploration-conscious counterparts,
both for discrete and continuous action spaces.

1. Introduction
The main goal of Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton
et al., 1998) is to find an optimal policy for a given decision
problem. A major difficulty arises due to the ExplorationExploitation tradeoff, which characterizes the omnipresent
tension between exploring new actions and exploiting the
so-far acquired knowledge. Considerable line of work has
been devoted for dealing with this tradeoff. Algorithms
that explicitly balance between exploration and exploitation
were developed for tabular RL (Kearns & Singh, 2002; Brafman & Tennenholtz, 2002; Jaksch et al., 2010; Osband et al.,
2013). However, generalizing these results to approximate
*

1
Equal contribution
Department of Electrical Engineering, Technion, Haifa, Israel.
Correspondence to:
Lior Shani <shanlior@gmail.com>, Yonathan Efroni
<jonathan.efroni@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

RL, i.e, when using function approximation, remains an
open problem. On the practical side, recent works combined more advanced exploration schemes in approximate
RL (e.g, Bellemare et al. (2016); Fortunato et al. (2017)),
inspired by the theory of tabular RL. Nonetheless, even in
the presence of more advanced mechanisms, -greedy exploration is still applied (Bellemare et al., 2017; Dabney et al.,
2018; Osband et al., 2016). More generally, the traditional
and simpler -greedy scheme (Sutton et al., 1998; Asadi &
Littman, 2016) in discrete RL, and Gaussian action noise in
continuous RL, are still very useful and popular in practice
(Mnih et al., 2015; 2016; Silver et al., 2014; Schulman et al.,
2017; Horgan et al., 2018), especially due to their simplicity.
These types of exploration schemes share common properties. First, they all fix some exploration parameter beforehand, e.g, , the ‘inverse temperature’ β, or the action variance σ for the -greedy, soft-max and Gaussian exploration
schemes, respectively. By doing so, the balance between
exploration and exploitation is set. Second, they all explore
using a random policy, and exploit using current estimate
of the optimal policy. In this work, we follow a different
approach, when using these fixed exploration schemes: exploiting by using an estimate of the optimal policy w.r.t. the
exploration mechanism.
Exploration-Consciousness is the main reason for the improved performance of on-policy methods like Sarsa and
Expected-Sarsa (Van Seijen et al., 2009) over Q-learning
during training (Sutton et al., 1998)[Example 6.6: Cliff
Walking]. Imagine a simple Cliff-Walking problem: The
goal of the agent is to reach the end without falling of the
cliff, where the optimal policy is to go alongside the cliff.
While using a fixed-exploration scheme, playing a near optimal policy which goes alongside the cliff will lead to a
significant sub-optimal performance. This, in turn, will hurt
the acquisition of new experience needed to learn the optimal policy. However, learning to act optimally w.r.t. the
exploration scheme can mitigate this difficultly; the agent
learns to reach the goal while keeping a safe enough distance
from the cliff.
In the past, tabular q-learning-like exploration-conscious
algorithms were suggested (John, 1994; Littman et al., 1997;
Van Seijen et al., 2009). Here we take a different approach,
and focus on exploration conscious policies. The main
contributions of this work are as follows:

