ARSM: Augment-REINFORCE-Swap-Merge Estimator for
Gradient Backpropagation Through Categorical Variables

Mingzhang Yin * 1 Yuguang Yue * 1 Mingyuan Zhou 2

Abstract
To address the challenge of backpropagating
the gradient through categorical variables, we
propose the augment-REINFORCE-swap-merge
(ARSM) gradient estimator that is unbiased
and has low variance. ARSM first uses variable augmentation, REINFORCE, and RaoBlackwellization to re-express the gradient as an
expectation under the Dirichlet distribution, then
uses variable swapping to construct differently
expressed but equivalent expectations, and finally
shares common random numbers between these
expectations to achieve significant variance reduction. Experimental results show ARSM closely
resembles the performance of the true gradient for
optimization in univariate settings; outperforms
existing estimators by a large margin when applied to categorical variational auto-encoders; and
provides a “try-and-see self-critic” variance reduction method for discrete-action policy gradient,
which removes the need of estimating baselines
by generating a random number of pseudo actions
and estimating their action-value functions.

1. Introduction
The need to maximize an objective function, expressed
as the expectation over categorical variables, arises in a
wide variety of settings, such as discrete latent variable
models (Zhou, 2014; Jang et al., 2017; Maddison et al.,
2017) and policy optimization for reinforcement learning
(RL) with discrete actions (Sutton & Barto, 1998; Weaver
& Tao, 2001; Schulman et al., 2015; Mnih et al., 2016;
Grathwohl et al., 2018). More specifically, let us denote
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics and Data
Sciences, 2 Department of IROM, McCombs School of
Business, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin,
TX 78712, USA. Correspondence to: Mingyuan Zhou
<mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

zk ∈ {1, 2, . . . , C} as a univariate C-way categorical variable, and z = (z1 , . . . , zK ) ∈ {1, 2, . . . , C}K as a Kdimensional C-way multivariate categorical vector. In discrete latent variable models, K will be the dimension of
the discrete latent space, each dimension of which can be
further represented as a C-dimensional one-hot vector. In
RL, C represents the size of the discrete action space and
z is a sequence of discrete actions from that space. In even
more challenging settings, one may have a sequence of Kdimensional C-way multivariate categorical vectors, which
appear both in categorical latent variable models with multiple stochastic layers, and in RL with a high dimensional
discrete action space or multiple agents, which may consist
of as many as C K unique combinations at each time step.
With f (z) and qφ (z) denoted as the reward function and distribution for categorical z, respectively, we need to optimize
parameter φ to maximize the expected reward as
R
E(φ) = f (z)qφ (z)dz = Ez∼qφ (z) [f (z)].
(1)
Here we consider both categorical latent variable models
and policy optimization for discrete actions, which arise in a
wide array of real-world applications. A number of unbiased
estimators for backpropagating the gradient through discrete
latent variables have been recently proposed (Tucker et al.,
2017; Grathwohl et al., 2018; Yin & Zhou, 2019; Andriyash
et al., 2018). However, they all mainly, if not exclusively,
focus on the binary case (i.e., C = 2). The categorical case
(i.e., C ≥ 2) is more widely applicable but generally much
more challenging. In this paper, to optimize the objective in
(1), inspired by the augment-REINFORCE-merge (ARM)
gradient estimator restricted for binary variables (Yin &
Zhou, 2019), we introduce the augment-REINFORCE-swapmerge (ARSM) estimator that is unbiased and well controls
its variance for categorical variables.
The proposed ARSM estimator combines variable augmentation (Tanner & Wong, 1987; Van Dyk & Meng, 2001),
REINFORCE (Williams, 1992) in an augmented space, RaoBlackwellization (Casella & Robert, 1996), and a merge step
that shares common random numbers between different but
equivalent gradient expectations to achieve significant variance reduction. While ARSM with C = 2 reduces to the
ARM estimator (Yin & Zhou, 2019), whose merge step can

