Infinite Mixture Prototypes for Few-Shot Learning

Kelsey R. Allen 1 Evan Shelhamer * 2 Hanul Shin * 1 Joshua B. Tenenbaum 1

Abstract
We propose infinite mixture prototypes to adaptively represent both simple and complex data distributions for few-shot learning. Infinite mixture
prototypes combine deep representation learning
with Bayesian nonparametrics, representing each
class by a set of clusters, unlike existing prototypical methods that represent each class by a
single cluster. By inferring the number of clusters, infinite mixture prototypes interpolate between nearest neighbor and prototypical representations in a learned feature space, which improves accuracy and robustness in the few-shot
regime. We show the importance of adaptive capacity for capturing complex data distributions
such as super-classes (like alphabets in character recognition), with 10-25% absolute accuracy
improvements over prototypical networks, while
still maintaining or improving accuracy on standard few-shot learning benchmarks. By clustering
labeled and unlabeled data with the same rule, infinite mixture prototypes achieve state-of-the-art
semi-supervised accuracy, and can perform purely
unsupervised clustering, unlike existing fully- and
semi-supervised prototypical methods.

1. Introduction
Few-shot classification is the problem of learning to recognize new classes from only a few examples of each class
(Lake et al., 2015; Fei-Fei et al., 2006; Miller et al., 2000).
This requires careful attention to generalization, since overfitting or underfitting to the sparsely available data is more
likely. Nonparametric methods are well suited to this task,
as they can model decision boundaries that more closely
reflect the data distribution by using the data itself.
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Center for Brains, Minds, and Machines (CBMM), CSAIL,
MIT, Cambridge, MA 2 Computer Science, UC Berkeley, Berkeley,
CA. Correspondence to: Kelsey R. Allen <krallen@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Two popular classes of nonparametric methods are nearest
neighbor methods and prototypical methods. Nearest neighbor methods represent a class by storing all of its examples,
and are high-capacity models that can capture complex distributions. Prototypical methods, such as Gaussian mixture
models, represent a class by the mean of its examples, and
are low-capacity models that can robustly fit simple distributions. Neighbors and prototypes are thus two ends of a
spectrum from complex to simple decision boundaries, and
the choice of which to apply generally requires knowledge
about the complexity of the distribution.
Recent work has looked at combining nonparametric methods with deep representation learning, such that the learned
features are directly optimized for nonparametric inference
(Snell et al., 2017; Vinyals et al., 2016). However, these
approaches have fixed model capacity: the complexity of
the task is handled by the representation learning, rather
than the inference procedure, and cannot adapt.
Here we investigate adaptively modulating model capacity during inference. This is especially useful in few-shot
learning where the complexity of individual tasks can differ,
and so should not necessarily be handled by the representation learning component alone. Several approaches exist
to tackle this, such as choosing k for k-nearest neighbours,
selecting the number of mixture components for Gaussian
mixture models, or adjusting the bandwidth (Jones et al.,
1996) for kernel density estimation (Parzen, 1962).
Infinite mixture modeling (Hjort et al., 2010) represents one
way of unifying these approaches for adaptively setting capacity. By inferring the number of mixture components for a
given class from the data, it is possible to span the spectrum
from nearest neighbors to prototypical representations.
This is particularly important in few-shot learning, where
both underfitting and overfitting are common problems, because current models are fixed in their capacity.
To give an example, consider the problems of character
and alphabet recognition. Recognizing characters is fairly
straightforward: each character looks alike, and can be
represented as a single prototype (a uni-modal Gaussian
distribution). Recognizing alphabets is more complex: the
uni-modal distribution assumption could be violated, and a
multi-modal approach could better capture the complexity

