Learning to Optimize Multigrid PDE Solvers

Daniel Greenfeld 1 Meirav Galun 1 Ron Kimmel 2 Irad Yavneh 2 Ronen Basri 1

Abstract
Constructing fast numerical solvers for partial differential equations (PDEs) is crucial for many
scientific disciplines. A leading technique for
solving large-scale PDEs is using multigrid methods. At the core of a multigrid solver is the prolongation matrix, which relates between different
scales of the problem. This matrix is strongly
problem-dependent, and its optimal construction
is critical to the efficiency of the solver. In practice, however, devising multigrid algorithms for
new problems often poses formidable challenges.
In this paper we propose a framework for learning
multigrid solvers. Our method learns a (single)
mapping from a family of parameterized PDEs
to prolongation operators. We train a neural network once for the entire class of PDEs, using an
efficient and unsupervised loss function. Experiments on a broad class of 2D diffusion problems
demonstrate improved convergence rates compared to the widely used Black-Box multigrid
scheme, suggesting that our method successfully
learned rules for constructing prolongation matrices.

1. Introduction
Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) are a key tool for modeling diverse problems in science and engineering. In all but
very specific cases, the solution of PDEs requires carefully
designed numerical discretization methods, by which the
PDEs are approximated by algebraic systems of equations.
Practical settings often give rise to very large ill-conditioned
problems, e.g., in predicting weather systems, oceanic flow,
image and video processing, aircraft and auto design, electromagnetics, to name just a few. Developing efficient solution methods for such large systems has therefore been an
active research area since many decades ago.
1

Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel. 2 Technion,
Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to:
Daniel Greenfeld <daniel.greenfeld@weizmann.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Multigrid methods are leading techniques for solving largescale discretized PDEs, as well as other large-scale problems (for textbooks see, e.g., (Briggs et al., 2000; Trottenberg et al., 2001)). Introduced about half a century ago
as a method for fast numerical solution of scalar elliptic
boundary-value problems, multigrid methods have since
been developed and adapted to problems of increasing generality and applicability. Despite their success, however,
applying off-the-shelf multigrid algorithms to new problems
is often non-optimal. In particular, new problems often require expertly devised prolongation operators, which are
critical to constructing efficient solvers. This paper demonstrates that machine learning techniques can be utilized to
derive suitable operators for wide classes of problems.
We introduce a framework for learning multigrid solvers,
which we illustrate by applying the framework to 2D diffusion equations. At the heart of our method is a neural
network that is trained to map discretized diffusion PDEs to
prolongation operators, which in turn define the multigrid
solver. The proposed approach has three main attractive
properties:
Scope. We train a single deep network once to handle any
diffusion equation whose (spatially varying) coefficients
are drawn from a given distribution. Once our network is
trained it can be used to produce solvers for any such equation. Our goal in this paper, unlike existing paradigms, is
not to learn to solve a given problem, but instead to learn
compact rules for constructing solvers for many different
problems.
Unsupervised training. The network is trained with no
supervision. It will not be exposed to ground truth operators,
nor will it see numerical solutions to PDEs. Instead, our
training is guided by algebraic properties of the produced
operators that allude to the quality of the resulting solver.
Generalization. While our method is designed to work with
problems of arbitrary size, it will suffice to train our system
on quite small problems. This will be possible due to the
local nature of the rules for determining the prolongation operators. Specifically, we train our system on block periodic
problem instances using a specialized block Fourier mode
analysis to achieve efficient training. At test time we generalize for size (train on 32×32 grid and test on a 1024×1024
grid), boundary conditions (train with periodic BCs and test
with Dirichlet), and instance types (train on block periodic

