Look Ma, No Latent Variables: Accurate Cutset Networks via Compilation

Tahrima Rahman * 1 Shasha Jin * 1 Vibhav Gogate 1

Abstract
Tractable probabilistic models obviate the need
for unreliable approximate inference approaches
and as a result often yield accurate query answers in practice. However, most tractable models
that achieve state-of-the-art generalization performance (measured using test set likelihood score)
use latent variables. Such models admit polytime marginal (MAR) inference but do not admit
poly-time (full) maximum-a-posteriori (MAP) inference. To address this problem, in this paper,
we propose a novel approach for inducing cutset
networks, a well-known tractable, highly interpretable representation that does not use latent
variables and admits linear time MAR as well as
MAP inference. Our approach addresses a major
limitation of existing techniques that learn cutset networks from data in that their accuracy is
quite low as compared to latent variable models
such as ensembles of cutset networks and sumproduct networks. The key idea in our approach
is to construct deep cutset networks by not only
learning them from data but also compiling them
from a more accurate latent tractable model. We
show experimentally that our new approach yields
more accurate MAP estimates as compared with
existing approaches and significantly improves
the test set log-likelihood score of cutset networks
bringing them closer in terms of generalization
performance to latent variable models.

1. Introduction
A fundamental shortcoming of probabilistic graphical models (PGMs) (Pearl, 1988) such as Bayesian and Markov
networks is that probabilistic inference—the process used
to answer queries—on most models used in practice is intractable. This is not surprising since even the most basic
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, The
University of Texas at Dallas, United States. Correspondence to:
Tahrima Rahman <tahrima.rahman@utdallas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

inference task of computing the marginal probability of a
variable given observations or evidence—posterior marginal
estimation—is #P-hard (Roth, 1996). To circumvent this
issue, one can either use approximate inference in lieu of
exponential time exact inference approaches or learn models such that exact inference is tractable, namely takes time
that is polynomial in the number of parameters. Both approaches are widely used in practice and each has their own
pros and cons. Tractable models are desirable because the
user can always recover accurate, reliable answers according to the model. This is a major plus over the approximate
inference approach (e.g., sampling, belief propagation, etc.)
because the latter often exhibits high variability; different
runs and algorithms often yield widely different query answers. However, tractable models typically have slightly
worse test set log-likelihood scores, namely they generalize
poorly, as compared to arbitrary latent PGMs. Therefore
improving the accuracy/fit of tractable models is an active
area of research (Rahman & Gogate, 2016a;b; Di Mauro
et al., 2016; 2017; Rashwan et al., 2016; Liang et al., 2017).
An often overlooked and one of the earliest goals of PGM
research is learning interpretable models (Pearl, 1988; Darwiche, 2009). By interpretable models, we mean PGMs
whose random variables, dependencies (structure) and parameters are interpretable. To this end, sparse Bayesian
networks having no latent variables are interpretable but
Markov networks are not because parameters of the latter
are not interpretable. Interpretability is desirable, especially
in interactive settings (Kulesza et al., 2015) and explainable
AI applications (Gunning, 2017) such as activity recognition
and medical diagnosis because it helps explain the model,
specifically its assumptions to the user. This allows the user
to update the model if the assumptions are wrong based
on his/her prior knowledge. When the interpretable model
is also tractable, it helps explain why a model made a particular decision as opposed to a different one to the user.
Thus, learning tractable interpretable models is an important research endeavor, especially for building high quality
explainable AI systems (Gunning, 2017).
In this paper, we focus on a particular class of tractable,
interpretable models called cutset networks (Rahman et al.,
2014). At a high level, these networks represent how a cutset
conditioning method (Pearl, 1988) that takes advantage of
determinism (Gogate, 2009), dynamic orderings, context-

