Learning with Bad Training Data via Iterative Trimmed Loss Minimization

Yanyao Shen 1 Sujay Sanghavi 1

Abstract
In this paper, we study a simple and generic framework to tackle the problem of learning model parameters when a fraction of the training samples
are corrupted. We first make a simple observation:
in a variety of such settings, the evolution of training accuracy (as a function of training epochs) is
different for clean and bad samples. Based on this
we propose to iteratively minimize the trimmed
loss, by alternating between (a) selecting samples with lowest current loss, and (b) retraining
a model on only these samples. We prove that
this process recovers the ground truth (with linear
convergence rate) in generalized linear models
with standard statistical assumptions. Experimentally, we demonstrate its effectiveness in three
settings: (a) deep image classifiers with errors
only in labels, (b) generative adversarial networks
with bad training images, and (c) deep image classifiers with adversarial (image, label) pairs (i.e.,
backdoor attacks). For the well-studied setting of
random label noise, our algorithm achieves stateof-the-art performance without having access to
any a-priori guaranteed clean samples.

Figure 1. Observation: Evolution of model accuracy for clean
and bad samples, as a function of training epochs, for four different tainted data settings: (a) classification for CIFAR-10 with
40% random errors in labels, (b) classification for CIFAR-10 with
40% systematic errors in labels, (c) DC-GAN trained on unlabeled
mixture of 70% MNIST images with 30% Fashion-MNIST images,
(d) backdoor attack on classification for CIFAR-10 with 250 watermarked backdoor attach samples as described in (Tran et al., 2018).
The CIFAR-10 classifications are done using the WideResNet-16
of (Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016). In all instances models are
trained on the respective tainted data. Early on, models are more
accurate on the good samples.

1. Introduction
State of the art accuracy in several machine learning problems now requires training very large models (i.e. with lots
of parameters) using very large training data sets. Such an
approach can be very sensitive to the quality of the training data used; this is especially so when the models themselves are expressive enough to fit all data (good and bad)
in way that may generalize poorly if data is bad. We are
interested both in poorly curated datasets – label errors in
supervised settings, and irrelevant samples in unsupervised
settings – as well as situations like backdoor attacks (Gu
et al., 2017) where a small number of adversarially altered
1

ECE Department, University of Texas at Austin, TX, USA.
Correspondence to: Yanyao Shen <shenyanyao@utexas.edu>,
Sujay Sanghavi <sanghavi@mail.utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

samples (i.e. labels and features changed) can compromise
security. These are well-recognized issues, and indeed several approaches exist for each kind of training data error;
we summarize these in the related work section. However,
these approaches are quite different, and in practice selecting which one to apply would need us to know / suspect the
form of training data errors a-priori.
In this paper we provide a single, simple approach that
can deal with several such tainted training data settings,
based on a key observation. We consider the (common)
setup where training proceeds in epochs / stages, and inspect
the evolution of the accuracy of the model on the training
samples – i.e. after each epoch, we take the model at that
stage and see whether or not it makes an error for each
of the training samples. Across several different settings
with errors/corruptions in training data, we find that the
accuracy on “clean” samples is higher than on the “bad”

