Ladder Capsule Network

Taewon Jeong 1 Youngmin Lee 1 Heeyoung Kim 1

Abstract
We propose a new architecture of the capsule network called the ladder capsule network, which
has an alternative building block to the dynamic
routing algorithm in the capsule network (Sabour
et al., 2017). Motivated by the need for using
only important capsules during training for robust performance, we first introduce a new layer
called the pruning layer, which removes irrelevant capsules. Based on the selected capsules,
we construct higher-level capsule outputs. Subsequently, to capture the part-whole spatial relationships, we introduce another new layer called the
ladder layer, the outputs of which are regressed
lower-level capsule outputs from higher-level capsules. Unlike the capsule network adopting the
routing-by-agreement, the ladder capsule network
uses backpropagation from a loss function to reconstruct the lower-level capsule outputs from
higher-level capsules; thus, the ladder layer implements the reverse directional inference of the
agreement/disagreement mechanism of the capsule network. The experiments on MNIST demonstrate that the ladder capsule network learns an
equivariant representation and improves the capability to extrapolate or generalize to pose variations.

1. Introduction
The convolutional neural network (CNN) has shown superhuman performances over the recent years for a wide range
of computer vision tasks such as image classification, segmentation, detection, and tracking. In essence, a CNN
predicts whether an object (e.g., face) exists by detecting the
existence of features or object parts (e.g., eye, nose, mouth).
However, CNN only captures the existence of features, and
1
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Korea
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon,
Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Heeyoung Kim <heeyoungkim@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

fails to capture the intrinsic spatial relationship between a
part and a whole (e.g., the correct positions of the eye, nose,
and mouth to form a face). This problem in CNN is due
to the max-pooling that discards the information about the
pose (position, size, orientation) of features, although it contributes to the extraction of translation-invariant features. As
an alternative to the CNN, the capsule network (CapsNet),
a new network architecture recently introduced by Sabour
et al. (2017), learns an equivariant representation that is
more robust to pose variations. CapsNet captures various
pose information of the same feature by replacing scalaroutput neurons in the CNN with vector-output capsules, and
captures part-whole spatial relationships by replacing the
max-pooling in the CNN with a dynamic routing algorithm.
CapsNets have shown to outperform CNNs on digit recognition, even when using a dataset of highly overlapping digits
(Sabour et al., 2017).
Although the dynamic routing algorithm has shown that
it is effective in capturing part-whole relationships, it is
inevitable that information on unnecessary lower-layer capsules would be included when constructing higher-layer
capsules owing to the nature of the algorithm that expresses
the higher-layer capsules by the weighted sum of many
lower-layer capsules. Too many unnecessary capsules, similar to other over-parameterized deep learning networks, can
cause confusion in delivering the necessary information to
the upper layers and can ultimately lead to difficulties in
performing the desired tasks (Costa et al., 2002).
In this paper, we propose a new architecture of capsule networks referred to as the ladder capsule network (L-CapsNet)
based on an alternative building structure to the dynamic
routing algorithm. We first demonstrate via experiments
that not all lower-layer capsules are necessarily required to
construct higher-layer capsules; only part of the capsules
is sufficient to construct higher-layer capsules. To address
this finding in the L-CapsNet, we introduce a new layer
called the pruning layer, which is inspired by pruning methods that primarily aim at reducing the size of deep neural
networks. The pruning layer removes the capsules with
small activities and only uses the capsules with large activities. Subsequently, we can construct the higher-level
capsules as a linear combination of the selected capsules
from the pruning layer, similar to the CapsNet. Unlike the
CapsNet that uses an iterative routing based on the agree-

