Boosted Density Estimation Remastered
Zac Cranko 1 2 Richard Nock 2 1 3

Abstract
There has recently been a steady increase in the
number iterative approaches to density estimation.
However, an accompanying burst of formal convergence guarantees has not followed; all results
pay the price of heavy assumptions which are often unrealistic or hard to check. The Generative
Adversarial Network (GAN) literature — seemingly orthogonal to the aforementioned pursuit
— has had the side effect of a renewed interest
in variational divergence minimisation (notably
f -GAN). We show how to combine this latter
approach and the classical boosting theory in supervised learning to get the first density estimation algorithm that provably achieves geometric
convergence under very weak assumptions. We
do so by a trick allowing to combine classifiers
as the sufficient statistics of an exponential family. Our analysis includes an improved variational
characterisation of f -GAN.

1. Introduction
In the emerging area of Generative Adversarial Networks
(GAN’s) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) a binary classifier, called
a discriminator, is used learn a highly efficient sampler for a
data distribution P ; combining what would traditionally be
two steps — first learning the density function from a family
of densities, then fine-tuning a sampler — into one. Interest
in this field has sparked a series of formal inquiries and
generalisations describing GAN’s in terms of (among other
things) divergence minimisation (Nowozin et al., 2016; Arjovsky et al., 2017). Using a similar framework to Nowozin
et al. (2016), Grover & Ermon (2018) make a preliminary
analysis of an algorithm that takes a series of iteratively
trained discriminators to estimate a density function1 . The
1
The Australian National University 2 Data61 3 The University of Sydney.
Correspondence to:
Zac Cranko
<zac.cranko@anu.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).
1
Grover & Ermon (2018) call this procedure “multiplicative
discriminative boosting”.

cost here, insofar as we have been able to devise, is that one
forgoes learning an efficient sampler (as with a GAN), and
must make do with classical sampling techniques to sample
from the learned density. We leave the issue of efficient sampling from these density as an open problem, and instead
focus on analysing the densities learned with formal convergence guarantees. Previous formal results have established
a range of guarantees, from qualitative convergence (Grover
& Ermon, 2018), to geometric convergence rates (Tolstikhin
et al., 2017), with numerous results in between (See §1.1).
Our starting point is fundamentally different, we learn a
density from a sequence of binary classifiers. By using a
similar weak learning assumptions in boosting, is shown to
be able to fit arbitrarily closely the target density.

With the advent of deep learning, such an approach appears
to be very promising, as the formal bounds we obtain yield
geometric convergence under assumptions arguably much
weaker than other similar works in this area
The rest of the paper and our contributions are as follows: in
§2, to make explicit the connections between classification,
density estimation, and divergence minimisation we re-introduce the variational f -divergence formulation, and in doing
so are able to fully explain some of the underspecified components of f -GAN (Nowozin et al., 2016); in §3, we relax
a number of the assumptions of Grover & Ermon (2018),
and then give both more general, and much stronger bounds
for their algorithm; in §4, we apply our algorithm to several
toy datasets in order demonstrate convergence and compare
directly with Tolstikhin et al. (2017); and finally, a final
section §5 concludes.

The appendices that follow in the supplementary material
are: §A, we compare our formal results with other related
works; §B, a geometric account of the function class in the
variational form of an f -divergence; §C, a further relaxation of the weak learning assumptions to some that could
actually be estimated experimentally and a proof that the
boosting rates are slightly worse but of essentially the same
order; §D, proofs for the main formal results from the paper; and finally, §E, technical details for the settings of our
experiments.

