Fairwashing: the risk of rationalization

Ulrich Aı̈vodji 1 Hiromi Arai 2 3 Olivier Fortineau 4 Sébastien Gambs 1 Satoshi Hara 5 Alain Tapp 6 7

Abstract
Black-box explanation is the problem of explaining how a machine learning model – whose internal logic is hidden to the auditor and generally complex – produces its outcomes. Current approaches for solving this problem include
model explanation, outcome explanation as well
as model inspection. While these techniques can
be beneficial by providing interpretability, they
can be used in a negative manner to perform fairwashing, which we define as promoting the false
perception that a machine learning model respects
some ethical values. In particular, we demonstrate
that it is possible to systematically rationalize decisions taken by an unfair black-box model using
the model explanation as well as the outcome explanation approaches with a given fairness metric.
Our solution, LaundryML, is based on a regularized rule list enumeration algorithm whose objective is to search for fair rule lists approximating an
unfair black-box model. We empirically evaluate
our rationalization technique on black-box models trained on real-world datasets and show that
one can obtain rule lists with high fidelity to the
black-box model while being considerably less
unfair at the same time.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the widespread use of machine learning
models in high stakes decision-making systems (e.g., credit
scoring (Siddiqi, 2012), predictive justice (Kleinberg et al.,
2017) or medical diagnosis (Caruana et al., 2015)) combined
with proven risks of incorrect decisions – such as people
being wrongly denied parole (Wexler, 2017a) – has considerably raised the public demand for being able to provide
explanations to algorithmic decisions.
1
Université du Québec à Montréal 2 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project 3 JST PRESTO 4 ENSTA ParisTech
5
Osaka University 6 UdeM 7 MILA. Correspondence to: Ulrich
Aı̈vodji <aivodji.ulrich@courrier.uqam.ca>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

In particular, to ensure transparency and explainability
in algorithmic decision processes, several initiatives have
emerged for regulating the use of machine learning models.
For instance, in Europe, the new General Data Protection
Regulation has a provision requiring explanations for the
decisions of machine learning models that have a significant
impact on individuals (Goodman & Flaxman, 2017).
Existing methods to achieve explainability include
transparent-box design and black-box explanation (also
called post-hoc explanation) (Lipton, 2018; Lepri et al.,
2017; Montavon et al., 2018; Guidotti et al., 2018). The
former consists in building transparent models, which are
inherently interpretable by design. This approach requires
the cooperation of the entity responsible for the training
and usage of the model. In contrast, the latter involves an
adversarial setting in which the black-box model, whose
internal logic is hidden to the auditor, is reversed-engineered
to create an interpretable surrogate model.
While many recent works have focused on black-box explanations, their use can be problematic in high stakes
decision-making systems (Reddix-Smalls, 2011; Wexler,
2017b) as explanations can be unreliable and misleading
(Rudin, 2018; Melis & Jaakkola, 2018). Current techniques
for providing black-box explanations include model explanation, outcome explanation and model inspection (Guidotti
et al., 2018). Model explanation consists in building an
interpretable model to explain the whole logic of the black
box while outcome explanation only cares about providing
a local explanation of a specific decision. Finally, model
inspection consists of all the techniques that can help to
understand (e.g., through visualizations or quantitative arguments) the influence of the attributes of the input on the
black-box decision.
Since the right to explanation as defined in current regulations (Goodman & Flaxman, 2017) does not give precise
directives on what it means to provide a “valid explanation” (Wachter et al., 2017; Edwards & Veale, 2017), there
is a legal loophole that can be used by dishonest companies to cover up the possible unfairness of their black-box
models by providing misleading explanations. In particular,
due to the growing importance of the concepts of fairness
in machine learning (Barocas & Selbst, 2016), a company
might be tempted to perform fairwashing, which we define

