Reinforcement Learning in Configurable Continuous Environments

Alberto Maria Metelli 1 Emanuele Ghelfi 1 Marcello Restelli 1

Abstract
Configurable Markov Decision Processes (ConfMDPs) have been recently introduced as an extension of the usual MDP model to account for
the possibility of configuring the environment to
improve the agent’s performance. Currently, there
is still no suitable algorithm to solve the learning
problem for real-world Conf-MDPs. In this paper, we fill this gap by proposing a trust-region
method, Relative Entropy Model Policy Search
(REMPS), able to learn both the policy and the
MDP configuration in continuous domains without requiring the knowledge of the true model of
the environment. After introducing our approach
and providing a finite-sample analysis, we empirically evaluate REMPS on both benchmark and
realistic environments by comparing our results
with those of the gradient methods.

1. Introduction
The overall goal of Reinforcement Learning (RL, Sutton &
Barto, 1998) is to make an agent learn a behavior that maximizes the amount of reward it collects during its interaction
with the environment. Most of the problems tackled by RL
are typically modeled as a Markov Decision Process (MDP,
Puterman, 2014) in which the environment is considered a
fixed entity and cannot be adjusted. Nevertheless, there exist
several real-world motivational examples in which partial
control over the environment can be exercised by the agent
itself or by an external supervisor (Metelli et al., 2018). For
instance, in a car racing problem, the vehicle can be set up
to better suit the driver’s needs. The entity that performs
the configuration can be either the driver itself (agent) or a
track engineer (supervisor). With the phrase environment
configuration, we refer to the activity of altering some environmental parameters to improve the performance of the
agent’s policy. This scenario has been recently formalized
1

Politecnico di Milano, 32, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci,
Milan, Italy. Correspondence to: Alberto Maria Metelli
<albertomaria.metelli@polimi.it>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

as a Configurable Markov Decision Process (Conf-MDP,
Metelli et al., 2018). As in traditional RL, in a Conf-MDP
the agent looks for the best policy but, in the meantime,
there exists an entity entitled to configure the environment
with the shared goal of maximizing the final performance of
the policy. The nature of this new kind of interaction with
the environment cannot be modeled either within the agent’s
action space or with a multi-agent framework. Indeed, the
configuration activity cannot be placed at the same level as
the agent’s learning process. Configuring the environment
may be more expensive and dangerous than updating the
agent’s policy and may occur on a different time scale w.r.t.
the agent’s learning process. Furthermore, while the entity
that configures the environment must be aware of the presence of the agent (in order to wisely choose the environment
configuration), the agent may not be aware of the fact that
the configuration is taking place, perceiving the changes in
the environment just as a non-stationarity. It is worth noting
that the configuration process is rather different from the
idea of changing the environment just to encourage learning
in the original environment. While in the Conf-MDP framework the environment is altered because we can decide to
change it (e.g., when a Formula 1 driver selects a car that
better fits their driving abilities), in other works, like Ciosek
& Whiteson (2017) and Florensa et al. (2017), the configuration is limited to a simulator and does not affect the real
environment. Recently, an approach similar to Conf-MDPs,
including also and explicit cost for altering the environment,
has been proposed (Silva et al., 2018).
Learning in a Conf-MDP, therefore, means finding an
agent’s policy π together with an environment configuration
p that, jointly, maximize the total reward. In Metelli et al.
(2018), a safe-learning algorithm, Safe Policy Model Iteration (SPMI), is presented to solve the learning problem in
the Conf-MDP framework. The basic idea is to optimize
a lower bound of the performance improvement to ensure
a monotonic increase of the total reward (Kakade & Langford, 2002; Pirotta et al., 2013). Although this approach
succeeded in showing the benefits of configuring the environment in some illustrative examples, it is quite far from
being applicable to real-world scenarios. We believe there
are two significant limitations of SPMI. First of all, it is
only applicable to problems with a finite state-action space,
while the most interesting Conf-MDP examples have, at

