Conditional Gradient Methods via
Stochastic Path-Integrated Differential Estimator

Alp Yurtsever 1 Suvrit Sra 2 Volkan Cevher 1

Abstract
We propose a class of novel variance-reduced
stochastic conditional gradient methods. By
adopting the recent stochastic path-integrated differential estimator technique (SPIDER) of Fang
et al. (2018) for the classical Frank-Wolfe (FW)
method, we introduce SPIDER-FW for finite-sum
minimization as well as the more general expectation minimization problems. SPIDER-FW enjoys
superior complexity guarantees in the non-convex
setting, while matching the best known FW variants in the convex case. We also extend our framework à la conditional gradient sliding (CGS) of
Lan & Zhou (2016), and propose SPIDER-CGS.

1. Introduction
We study two different problem settings in this paper, finitesum and the more general expectation minimization:

 Eξ f (x, ξ)
(expectation)
minimize F (x) :=
(1)
P
 1 n f (x) (finite-sum)
x∈Ω
i=1 i
n
. Ω ⊂ Rd is the convex and compact domain;
. F , f and fi are differentiable and possibly non-convex;
. ξ ∼ P is a random variable, supported on Ξ ⊂ Rp .
The expectation objective template covers a large number of
applications in machine learning and statistics. The finitesum template frequently arises in M-estimation and empirical risk minimization problems. Accordingly, there are
many applications for stochastic conditional gradient methods both in convex and non-convex settings. This includes
low-rank matrix and tensor factorizations, structured sparse
matrix estimation, dictionary learning applications, multiclass classification (considered as a motivating example in
1

Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA. Correspondence
to: Alp Yurtsever <alp.yurtsever@epfl.ch>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

a related work by Hazan & Luo (2016)), constrained deep
learning problems (e.g., Ravi et al. (2018) present an application in computer vision) and many more.
Template (1) can be solved by using the well-known projected stochastic gradient descent method (SGD). At each
iteration, SGD takes a stochastic gradient step followed by
a projection to ensure the feasibility of the new point. However, in many applications, projection onto Ω can impose a
computational bottleneck (e.g., projection onto the nuclear
norm-ball may require a full singular value decomposition),
or it can be even intractable (e.g., dual structural SVMs
(Lacoste-Julien et al., 2013)).
As a result, the Frank-Wolfe (FW) algorithm (aka conditional gradient method) has witnessed tremendous interest
in the machine learning community in the last decade. FW
avoids projection by leveraging the so-called linear minimization oracle instead:
lmoΩ (v) = arg min hx, vi.
x∈Ω

(lmo)

lmo is significantly cheaper to compute than projection. For
instance, lmo of nuclear norm-ball requires the computation
of the leading singular vectors only (vs. the full spectrum for
projection), which can be efficiently found by using Krylov
subspace methods (Jaggi, 2013).
Our focus in this paper is on the theoretical complexity of
stochastic and finite-sum FW, with an aim to identify and
present the tightest results known so far. To this end, we
also propose a class of novel variance-reduced stochastic
optimization algorithms, based on the recent stochastic pathintegrated differential estimator technique (SPIDER) of
Fang et al. (2018).
By combining SPIDER with the classical FW method, we
introduce SPIDER-FW for finite-sum and expectation minimization problems. We also extend our framework à la
conditional gradient sliding (CGS) of Lan & Zhou (2016),
and propose SPIDER-CGS.
From SPIDER, we adopt the variance bounds from Lemma 1
of (Fang et al., 2018), which relates the variance of the current estimator to the error of the previous estimator and
the distance between the iterates. Nevertheless, Fang et al.
(2018) introduce SPIDER for normalized gradient method

