Trading Redundancy for Communication:
Speeding up Distributed SGD for Non-convex Optimization

Farzin Haddadpour 1 Mohammad Mahdi Kamani 2 Mehrdad Mahdavi 1 Viveck R. Cadambe 1

Abstract

chine learning models such as deep neural networks which
use SGD are, nowadays, trained in distributed systems on
several computation nodes.

Communication overhead is one of the key challenges that hinders the scalability of distributed
optimization algorithms to train large neural networks. In recent years, there has been a great
deal of research to alleviate communication cost
by compressing the gradient vector or using local
updates and periodic model averaging. In this paper, we advocate the use of redundancy towards
communication-efficient distributed stochastic algorithms for non-convex optimization. In particular, we, both theoretically and practically, show
that by properly infusing redundancy to the training data with model averaging, it is possible to
significantly reduce the number of communication rounds. To be more precise, we show that
redundancy reduces residual error in local averaging, thereby reaching the same level of accuracy
with fewer rounds of communication as compared
with previous algorithms. Empirical studies on
CIFAR10, CIFAR100 and ImageNet datasets in
a distributed environment complement our theoretical results; they show that our algorithms have
additional beneficial aspects including tolerance
to failures, as well as greater gradient diversity.

In particular, the dataset D is partitioned into shards and
distributed to computation nodes. Each node evaluates the
partial gradients over a randomly sampled mini-batch from
its shard. In fully synchronous SGD, the computation nodes,
after evaluation of gradients over the sampled mini-batch,
exchanges their updates in every iteration to ensure that all
nodes have the same updated model. Thus, implementing
fully synchronous SGD to update the model as (1) incurs
significant amount of communication both in terms of number of rounds and data exchange. This communication cost
is, in fact, among the primary obstacles towards scaling
distributed SGD.

1. Introduction
The Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) is a fundamental
tool for solving numerous optimization problems in machine
learning. SGD is an iterative method in which the model
parameters x(t) , x(t+1) respectively at the tth and (t + 1)st
iteration are related as:
x(t+1) = x(t) − ηg̃(t) ,

(1)

where g̃(t) is the stochastic gradient of the cost function. Requiring immense computational resources, large scale ma1
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
College of Information Sciences and Technology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA. Correspondence
to: Farzin Haddadpour <fxh18@psu.edu>.

A promising strand of research that aims at mitigating communication bottlenecks in large scale SGD is model averaging, where each node locally updates the model sequentially
on different data partitions, and the models of the different
nodes are averaged periodically (McDonald et al., 2010;
Wang & Joshi, 2018; Yu et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2016;
Zhou & Cong, 2017; Zinkevich et al., 2010). Because of
local updates, the model averaging approach reduces the
number of rounds of communication in training and can
therefore be much faster in practice. However, since the
model for every iteration is not updated based on the entire
data, it suffers from a residual error with respect to fully
synchronous SGD; this residual error lowers the accuracy
in training for model averaging. In this paper, we develop
a new approach towards model averaging by infusing redundancy in the data stored at the computation nodes. Our
approach retains the benefits of model averaging - lower
number of rounds of communication - and yet leads to improved model accuracy via residual error reduction.
In summary, the main contributions of the present work are
as follows:

2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

• We present in Section 3, the Redundancy-Infused SGD
(RI-SGD) algorithm, which is a variation of distributed
SGD. In RI-SGD, the data is partitioned into shards;
each node has its own shard of data, and is allowed to
partially access the shards of a subset of other workers

