Parsimonious Black-Box Adversarial Attacks
via Efficient Combinatorial Optimization

Seungyong Moon * 1 2 Gaon An * 1 2 Hyun Oh Song 1 2

Abstract
Solving for adversarial examples with projected
gradient descent has been demonstrated to be
highly effective in fooling the neural network
based classifiers. However, in the black-box
setting, the attacker is limited only to the query
access to the network and solving for a successful
adversarial example becomes much more difficult.
To this end, recent methods aim at estimating the
true gradient signal based on the input queries but
at the cost of excessive queries. We propose an
efficient discrete surrogate to the optimization
problem which does not require estimating the
gradient and consequently becomes free of the
first order update hyperparameters to tune. Our
experiments on Cifar-10 and ImageNet show the
state of the art black-box attack performance
with significant reduction in the required queries
compared to a number of recently proposed
methods. The source code is available at
https://github.com/snu-mllab/
parsimonious-blackbox-attack.

1. Introduction
Understanding the vulnerability of neural network based
classifiers to adversarial perturbations (Szegedy et al., 2013;
Carlini et al., 2016) designed to fool the classifier predictions
have emerged as an important research area in machine
learning. Recent studies have devised highly successful
attacks in the white-box setting (Goodfellow et al., 2014;
Madry et al., 2017; Carlini & Wagner, 2017), where the
attacker has access to the network model parameters and
the corresponding loss gradient with respect to the input
perturbation.
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea 2 Neural
Processing Research Center. Correspondence to: Hyun Oh Song
<hyunoh@snu.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

However, in more realistic settings (Watson visual recognition, 2019; Google vision API, 2019; Clarifai API, 2019),
the attacker is limited to the access of input queries and
the corresponding model predictions. These web services
offer various commercial recognition services such as image classification, content moderation, and face recognition
backed up by pretrained neural network based classifiers. In
this setting, the inference network receives the query image
from the user and only exposes the inference results, so the
model weights are hidden from the user.
To this end, black-box methods construct adversarial perturbations without utilizing the model parameters or the gradient information. Some recent works on black-box attacks
compute the gradient using a substitute network (Papernot
et al., 2016; 2017) but it has been shown that the method
does not always transfer to the target network. On the other
hand, another line of works aim at estimating the gradient
based on the model predictions from the input queries and
apply first order updates with the estimated gradient vector
(Chen et al., 2017; Tu et al., 2018; Bhagoji et al., 2018; Ilyas
et al., 2018a;b). However, the robustness of this approach
can be susceptible to the choice of the hyperparameters such
as the learning rate, decay rates, and the update rule since
the performance of the method hinges on the first order
updates with approximated ascent directions.
We first consider a discrete surrogate problem which finds
the solution among the vertices of the `∞ ball and show
that this unlocks a new class of algorithms which constructs
adversarial perturbations without the need to estimate the
gradient vector. This comes with the benefit that the algorithm becomes free of the update hyperparameters and thus
is more applicable in black-box settings. Intuitively, our
proposed method defines and maintains upper bounds on
the marginal gain of attack locations, and this leads to a
parsimonious characteristic of the algorithm to terminate
quickly without having to perform excessive queries.
Our results on Cifar-10 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009) and
ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015) show the state of the
art attack performance under `∞ noise constraint demonstrating significantly higher attack success rates while making considerably less function queries compared to the recent baseline methods (Chen et al., 2017; Tu et al., 2018;

