Understanding and Controlling Memory in Recurrent Neural Networks

Doron Haviv 1 2 Alexnader Rivkind 2 3 4 Omri Barak 2 3

Abstract
To be effective in sequential data processing, Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are required to
keep track of past events by creating memories.
While the relation between memories and the
network’s hidden state dynamics was established
over the last decade, previous works in this direction were of a predominantly descriptive nature focusing mainly on locating the dynamical
objects of interest. In particular, it remained unclear how dynamical observables affect the performance, how they form and whether they can
be manipulated. Here, we utilize different training protocols, datasets and architectures to obtain
a range of networks solving a delayed classification task with similar performance, alongside
substantial differences in their ability to extrapolate for longer delays. We analyze the dynamics of the network’s hidden state, and uncover
the reasons for this difference. Each memory is
found to be associated with a nearly steady state
of the dynamics which we refer to as a ’slow
point’. Slow point speeds predict extrapolation
performance across all datasets, protocols and architectures tested. Furthermore, by tracking the
formation of the slow points we are able to understand the origin of differences between training
protocols. Finally, we propose a novel regularization technique that is based on the relation between hidden state speeds and memory longevity.
Our technique manipulates these speeds, thereby
leading to a dramatic improvement in memory
robustness over time, and could pave the way for
a new class of regularization methods.
1
Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Technion, Israel Institute of Technology 2 Network Biology Research Laboratory, Technion, Israel Institute of Technology 3 Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Israel Institute of Technology
4
Currently at Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel . Correspondence to: Doron Haviv <Doron.Haviv12@gmail.com>,
Alexnader Rivkind <Sashkarivkind@gmail.com>, Omri Barak
<Omri.Barak@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) are the key tool currently used in machine learning when dealing with sequential data (Sutskever et al., 2014), and in many tasks requiring a memory of past events (Oh et al., 2016). This
is due to the dependency of the network on its past states,
and through them on the entire input history. This ability comes with a cost - RNNs are known to be hard to train
(Pascanu et al., 2013a). This difficulty is commonly associated with the vanishing gradient that appears when trying to
propagate errors over long times (Hochreiter, 1998). When
training is successful, the network’s hidden state represents
these memories. Understanding how such representation
forms throughout training can open new avenues for improving learning of memory-related tasks.
Linking hidden state dynamics with task-related memories
requires some form of reverse engineering. This can be
done by focusing on individual recurrent units (Karpathy
et al., 2015; Oh et al., 2016), or by analyzing global network properties. We opt for the latter, analyzing the RNN’s
hidden states as a discrete-time dynamical system.
In this framework, memories might be associated with a
wide range of dynamical objects. On one extreme, transient
dynamics can be harnessed for memory operations (Manjunath & Jaeger, 2013; Maass, 2011; Maass et al., 2002). On
the other extreme, there are memory networks (Sukhbaatar
et al., 2015) that memorize everything and later use only
the relevant memories while ignoring all the rest. The idealized dynamical scenario where each memory is associated with a fixed point in the RNN state space (Hopfield,
1982; Sussillo, 2014; Barak, 2017; Amit, 1989) was refined in (Durstewitz, 2003; Sussillo & Barak, 2013; Mante
et al., 2013) where points which are only approximately
fixed (slow points), with a drift that is slower than the task
duration were shown to represent memory.
To allow in-depth analysis of the formation of memories
throughout training, we analyze a simple delayed classification task. While simple enough to analyze, the task requires both memory and processing - two key operations
in many RNN tasks. We train this task using different
Code availabe at: https://github.com/DoronHaviv/MemoryRNN

