Imitation Learning from Imperfect Demonstration

Yueh-Hua Wu 1 2 Nontawat Charoenphakdee 3 2 Han Bao 3 2 Voot Tangkaratt 2 Masashi Sugiyama 2 3

Abstract
Imitation learning (IL) aims to learn an optimal policy from demonstrations. However, such
demonstrations are often imperfect since collecting optimal ones is costly. To effectively learn
from imperfect demonstrations, we propose a
novel approach that utilizes confidence scores,
which describe the quality of demonstrations.
More specifically, we propose two confidencebased IL methods, namely two-step importance
weighting IL (2IWIL) and generative adversarial IL with imperfect demonstration and confidence (IC-GAIL). We show that confidence scores
given only to a small portion of sub-optimal
demonstrations significantly improve the performance of IL both theoretically and empirically.

1. Introduction
Imitation learning (IL) has become of great interest because
obtaining demonstrations is usually easier than designing
reward. Reward is a signal to instruct agents to complete the
desired tasks. However, ill-designed reward functions usually lead to unexpected behaviors (Everitt & Hutter, 2016;
Dewey, 2014; Amodei et al., 2016). There are two main
approaches that can be used to solve IL: behavioral cloning
(BC) (Schaal, 1999), which adopts supervised learning approaches to learn an action predictor that is trained directly
from demonstration data; and apprenticeship learning (AL),
which attempts to find a policy that is better than the expert
policy for a class of cost functions (Abbeel & Ng, 2004).
Even though BC can be trained with supervised learning approaches directly, it has been shown that BC cannot imitate
the expert policy without a large amount of demonstration
data for not considering the transition of environments (Ross
et al., 2011). In contrast, AL approaches learn from interacting with environments and optimize objectives such as
1
National Taiwan University, Taiwan 2 RIKEN Center
for Advanced Intelligence Project, Japan 3 The University
of Tokyo, Japan.
Correspondence to: Yueh-Hua Wu
<d06922005@csie.ntu.edu.tw>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

maximum entropy (Ziebart et al., 2008).
A state-of-the-art approach generative adversarial imitation
learning (GAIL) is proposed by Ho & Ermon (2016). The
method learns an optimal policy by performing occupancy
measure matching (Syed et al., 2008). An advantage of
the matching method is that it is robust to demonstrations
generated from a stochastic policy. Based on the concept
proposed in GAIL, variants have been developed recently
for different problem settings (Li et al., 2017; Kostrikov
et al., 2019).
Despite that GAIL is able to learn an optimal policy from
optimal demonstrations, to apply IL approaches to solve
real-world tasks, the difficulty in obtaining such demonstration data should be taken into consideration. However,
demonstrations from an optimal policy (either deterministic
or stochastic) are usually assumed to be available in the
above mentioned works, which can be barely fulfilled by
the fact that most of the accessible demonstrations are imperfect or even from different policies. For instance, to train
an agent to play basketball with game-play videos of the
National Basketball Association, we should be aware that
there are 14.3 turnovers per game1 , not to mention other
kinds of mistakes that may not be recorded. The reason why
optimal demonstrations are hard to obtain can be attributed
to the limited attention and the presence of distractions,
which make humans hard to follow optimal policies all the
time. As a result, some parts of the demonstrations may be
optimal and the others are not.
To mitigate the above problem, we propose to use confidence scores, which indicate the probability that a given
trajectory is optimal. An intuitive example to collect the
confidence scores is crowdsourcing, where data can be hardlabeled as being optimal or non-optimal by multiple labelers.
We can extract confidence from the proportion of labelers
giving a particular label, which corresponds to the probability that the instance has this label. Another example is when
it is difficult to judge whether the demonstration is optimal.
A labeler may rate a score digitized from 0, 0.1, . . . , 1 and
we can use it as confidence. Since the attained confidence
may not be perfect, to show the practicality of our methods,
in our experiments, we use estimated confidence instead
1
https://www.basketball-reference.com/
leagues/NBA_stats.html

