CoT: Cooperative Training for Generative Modeling of Discrete Data

Sidi Lu 1 Lantao Yu 2 Siyuan Feng 1 Yaoming Zhu 1 Weinan Zhang 1 Yong Yu 1

Abstract
In this paper, we study the generative models of
sequential discrete data. To tackle the exposure
bias problem inherent in maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), generative adversarial networks
(GANs) are introduced to penalize the unrealistic generated samples. To exploit the supervision signal from the discriminator, most previous models leverage REINFORCE to address the
non-differentiable problem of sequential discrete
data. However, because of the unstable property
of the training signal during the dynamic process
of adversarial training, the effectiveness of REINFORCE, in this case, is hardly guaranteed. To
deal with such a problem, we propose a novel approach called Cooperative Training (CoT) to improve the training of sequence generative models.
CoT transforms the min-max game of GANs into
a joint maximization framework and manages to
explicitly estimate and optimize Jensen-Shannon
divergence. Moreover, CoT works without the
necessity of pre-training via MLE, which is crucial to the success of previous methods. In the
experiments, compared to existing state-of-the-art
methods, CoT shows superior or at least competitive performance on sample quality, diversity, as
well as training stability.

1. Introduction
Generative modeling is essential in many scenarios, including continuous data modeling (e.g. image generation
(Goodfellow et al., 2014; Arjovsky et al., 2017), stylization
(Ulyanov et al., 2016), semi-supervised classification (Radford et al., 2015)) and sequential discrete data modeling,
typically neural text generation (Bahdanau et al., 2014; Yu
et al., 2017; Lu et al., 2018).
1
APEX Lab, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
China 2 Stanford University, California, USA. Correspondence
to: Sidi Lu <steve lu@apex.sjtu.edu.cn>, Weinan Zhang
<wnzhang@apex.sjtu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

For sequential discrete data with tractable density like natural language, generative models are predominantly optimized through Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE),
inevitably introducing exposure bias (Ranzato et al., 2015),
which results in that given a finite set of observations, the
optimal parameters of the model trained via MLE do not
correspond to the ones yielding the optimal generative quality. Specifically, the model is trained on the data distribution
of inputs and tested on a different distribution of inputs,
namely, the learned distribution. This discrepancy implies
that in the training stage, the model is never exposed to its
own errors and thus in the test stage, the errors made along
the way will quickly accumulate.
On the other hand, for general generative modeling tasks,
an effective framework, named Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), was proposed to
train an implicit density model for continuous data. GAN
introduces a discriminator Dφ parametrized by φ to distinguish the generated samples from the real ones. As is proved
by Goodfellow et al. (2014), GAN essentially optimizes an
approximately estimated Jensen-Shannon divergence (JSD)
between the currently learned distribution and the target
distribution. GAN shows promising results in many unsupervised and semi-supervised learning tasks. The success
of GAN brings the naissance of a new paradigm of deep
generative models, i.e. adversarial networks.
However, since the gradient computation requires backpropagation through the generator’s output, i.e. the data,
GAN can only model the distribution of continuous variables, making it non-applicable for generating discrete sequences like natural language. Researchers then proposed
Sequence Generative Adversarial Network (SeqGAN) (Yu
et al., 2017), which uses a model-free policy gradient algorithm to optimize the original GAN objective. With SeqGAN, the expected JSD between current and target discrete
data distribution is minimized if the training is perfect. SeqGAN shows observable improvements in many tasks. Since
then, many variants of SeqGAN have been proposed to improve its performance. Nonetheless, SeqGAN is not an ideal
algorithm for this problem, and current algorithms based on
it cannot show stable, reliable and observable improvements
that covers all scenarios, according to a previous survey (Lu
et al., 2018). The detailed reasons will be discussed in detail
in Section 2.

