Optimistic Policy Optimization via Multiple Importance Sampling

Matteo Papini 1 Alberto Maria Metelli 1 Lorenzo Lupo 1 Marcello Restelli 1

Abstract
Policy Search (PS) is an effective approach to
Reinforcement Learning (RL) for solving control tasks with continuous state-action spaces. In
this paper, we address the exploration-exploitation
trade-off in PS by proposing an approach based
on Optimism in the Face of Uncertainty. We cast
the PS problem as a suitable Multi Armed Bandit
(MAB) problem, defined over the policy parameter space, and we propose a class of algorithms
that effectively exploit the problem structure, by
leveraging Multiple Importance Sampling to perform an off-policy estimation of the expected return. We show that the regret
? of the proposed
r T q for both discrete
approach is bounded by Op
and continuous parameter spaces. Finally, we
evaluate our algorithms on tasks of varying difficulty, comparing them with existing MAB and
RL algorithms.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL, Sutton & Barto, 2018) allows
an agent to learn a control task by repeated interaction with
the environment in the presence of a reward signal. One
of the current challenges of RL is to master tasks, such as
robotic locomotion, in which states and actions are naturally modeled as real numbers. Policy optimization (PO,
Deisenroth et al., 2013) is a family of RL algorithms that
are particularly suited to this class of problems. In PO,
the behavior of the agent, or policy, is modeled explicitly,
typically as a parametric mapping from states to actions.
Learning corresponds to the optimization of a performance
measure w.r.t. the agent’s parameters.
The literature on PO focused mainly on the problem of
finding the optimal policy with the minimum amount of
interaction (Sutton et al., 2000; Sehnke et al., 2008; Silver
et al., 2014; Schulman et al., 2015; Mnih et al., 2016; Es1
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy. Correspondence to: Matteo Papini <matteo.papini@polimi.it>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

peholt et al., 2018). This is well motivated, as interacting
with some environments can be very expensive. However,
in many cases, we are also interested in the performance
of the agent during the learning process. We call this online policy optimization. This goal is particularly relevant
in applications where an agent must be deployed in the
real world to perfect its behavior (e.g., robot learning) or
to learn at all (e.g., recommender systems). In such cases,
the exploration-exploitation dilemma arises naturally, as
the agent must continually find the right trade-off between
complying with its current expertise or widening it by trial
and error. Equivalently, it must minimize its total regret
w.r.t. the optimal behavior. This problem has been thoroughly studied in the field of Multi Armed Bandits (MAB,
Auer et al., 2002; Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2019). In this
simple framework, an agent has to repeatedly select an action, called an arm in this context, in order to maximize
an unknown, stochastic reward. This can be seen as RL
without states. However, we can also see PO as a MAB-like
problem where the set of available actions is the parameter
space of the agent. Hopefully, this allows to apply some of
the theoretical and algorithmic ideas developed in the MAB
literature to the problem of exploration in continuous-action
RL, whose proposed solutions have been largely heuristic so
far (Houthooft et al., 2016; Haarnoja et al., 2017; 2018). In
particular, the Optimism in the Face of Uncertainty (OFU)
principle, at the heart of the Upper Confidence Bound (UCB,
Lai & Robbins, 1985; Agrawal, 1995; Auer, 2002) family of
MAB algorithms, lends itself to relatively straightforward
application to PO. The core idea is simply to overestimate
the expected reward of arms, which, in our scenario, are the
policies the agent can play. The overestimation is larger for
those arms the agent knows less about.
To apply the OFU principle to PO, we need to exploit some
structure in the way arms (policy parameters) concur to
generate rewards. This is both necessary, as the parameter
space is typically continuous, and desirable, as there exists
an evident correlation between arms that we can hope to
exploit (different policies can lead to similar performances).
Both features are absent in the classic MAB formulation,
but have been studied before (e.g., Pandey et al., 2007;
Kleinberg, 2005)1 .
1
See Section 7 for a brief overview of the related literature,
including applications to RL.

