Surrogate Losses for Online Learning of Stepsizes in Stochastic Non-Convex
Optimization

Zhenxun Zhuang 1 Ashok Cutkosky 2 Francesco Orabona 1 3

stepsize ηt > 0. In order to achieve a fast convergence,
the stepsizes must be carefully selected, taking into account
the objective function and characteristics of the noise. This
task becomes particularly daunting because the noise might
change over time due to a variety of factors such as, e.g., approaching the local minimum of the function, changing size
of the minibatch, gradients calculated through a simulation.

Abstract
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) has played
a central role in machine learning. However, it
requires a carefully hand-picked stepsize for fast
convergence, which is notoriously tedious and
time-consuming to tune. Over the last several
years, a plethora of adaptive gradient-based algorithms have emerged to ameliorate this problem.
In this paper, we propose new surrogate losses to
cast the problem of learning the optimal stepsizes
for the stochastic optimization of a non-convex
smooth objective function onto an online convex
optimization problem. This allows the use of noregret online algorithms to compute optimal stepsizes on the fly. In turn, this results in a SGD algorithm with self-tuned stepsizes that guarantees
convergence rates that are automatically adaptive
to the level of noise.

For the above reasons, a number of variants of SGD have
been proposed trying to “adapt” the stepsizes in more or
less theoretically principled ways. Indeed, the idea of
adapting stepsizes is an old one. A few famous examples are the Polyak’s rule (Polyak, 1987), Stochastic MetaDescent (Schraudolph, 1999), AdaGrad (Duchi et al., 2011).
However, most of previous approaches to adapting the stepsizes are designed for convex functions or without a guaranteed strategy of converging to some optimal stepsize. In fact,
often the definition itself of “optimal” stepsize is missing.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) has
become the tool of choice for fast optimization of convex
and non-convex objective functions. Its simplicity of implementation allows for use in virtually any machine learning
problem. In its basic version, it iteratively updates the solution to an optimization problem, moving in the negative
direction of the gradient of the objective function at the
current solution:
xt+1 = xt − ηt g(xt , ξt ),

(1)

where g(xt , ξt ) is a stochastic gradient of the objective function f at the current point xt depending on the stochastic
variable ξt . A critical component of the algorithm is the
1
Department of Computer Science, Boston University, Boston,
MA, US 2 Google, Mountain View, CA, US 3 Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA,
US. Correspondence to: Zhenxun Zhuang <zxzhuang@bu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

In this paper, we take a different and novel route. We study
theoretically the setting of stochastic smooth non-convex
optimization and we design convex surrogate loss functions
that upper bound the expected decrement of the objective
function after an SGD update. The first advantage of our
approach is that the optimal stepsize can be now defined
as the one minimizing the surrogate losses. Moreover, using a no-regret online learning algorithm (Cesa-Bianchi &
Lugosi, 2006), we can adapt the stepsizes and guarantee
that they will be close to the one of the a-posteriori optimal
stepsize. Moreover, basing our approach on online learning
methods, we gain the implicit robustness of these methods
to adversarial conditions.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We begin by
discussing related work (Section 2), and then introduce necessary definitions and assumptions (Section 3). Next, we introduce the surrogate loss functions (Section 4) and use them
to design an algorithm that adapts global and coordinatewise stepsizes (Sections 5 and 6). We also empirically
validate our theoretical findings on a classification task (Section 7 and Appendix) showing that, differently from other
adaptive methods, our method does not require fiddling with
stepsizes to guarantee convergence in the stochastic setting.
Finally, we draw some conclusions and describe the future
work in Section 8.

