Classifying Treatment Responders Under Causal Effect Monotonicity

Nathan Kallus 1

Abstract
In the context of individual-level causal inference,
we study the problem of predicting whether someone will respond or not to a treatment based on
their features and past examples of features, treatment indicator (e.g., drug/no drug), and a binary
outcome (e.g., recovery from disease). As a classification task, the problem is made difficult by not
knowing the example outcomes under the opposite treatment indicators. We assume the effect is
monotonic, as in advertising’s effect on a purchase
or bail-setting’s effect on reappearance in court:
either it would have happened regardless of treatment, not happened regardless, or happened only
depending on exposure to treatment. Predicting
whether the latter is latently the case is our focus. While previous work focuses on conditional
average treatment effect estimation, formulating
the problem as a classification task rather than an
estimation task allows us to develop new tools
more suited to this problem. By leveraging monotonicity, we develop new discriminative and generative algorithms for the responder-classification
problem. We explore and discuss connections to
corrupted data and policy learning. We provide
an empirical study with both synthetic and real
datasets to compare these specialized algorithms
to standard benchmarks.

1. Introduction
In many domains where personalization is of interest, such
as healthcare and marketing, a central problem is individuallevel causal inference on treatment effects, which are the
differences in outcome if a treatment is applied and if not
applied. The aim is to learn a function that, given a rich
set of features describing an individual, predicts the causal
effect of an intervention on the individual, such as the ef-

fect of a pharmaceutical drug on their mortality or of an
advertisement on whether they purchase the product. Compared to aggregate average causal effects on a whole population, such fine-grained predictions can better describe
how an intervention would affect a specific individual and
help determine whether it should be applied in their case.
Learning such a function from either experimental or observational data has been the subject of much recent research.
(Künzel et al., 2017; Shalit et al., 2017; Wager & Athey,
2017, among others; see Section 1.4). The key difficulty in
this task arises due to what is often termed the Fundamental
Problem of Causal Inference: that for any individual in the
data, the data only contains the outcome given that the treatment was in fact applied or not, and it does not contain the
counterfactual outcome under the opposite scenario. This
difficulty arises in both experimental and observational data,
although the former has the benefit of a priori eliminating
any potential additional biases due to treatment selection
via randomization.
In many applications, the outcomes of interest are binary.
In medicine, we are often interested in mortality, recovery,
readmission, or disease remission. In advertising, we are
interested in whether or not a user purchases, visits, clicks,
etc. The same holds in many other applications in domains
ranging from criminal justice to education policymaking.
In deciding whether to release a defendant on their own
recognizance (and not require bail), a judge is interested
in whether or not a given defendant will fail to reappear in
court. In designing job training programs, a key outcome
of interest is whether the recipient secures employment afterward or not. Moreover, in many applications and for
many outcomes of interest, the treatment’s effect can only
be monotonic: while it may or may not have any effect,
exposing someone to an advertisement does not make them
less likely to visit; while anticoagulants may have an unknown effect on an individual stroke patient’s mortality, it
can only make the occurrence of a haemorrhage more likely;
and requiring to post bail does not make a defendant less
likely to reappear.

1

School of Operations Research and Information Engineering
and Cornell Tech, Cornell University. Correspondence to: Nathan
Kallus <kallus@cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

When outcomes are binary and effects are monotonic, the
individual-level causal inference question boils down to just
whether a given individual will respond to the treatment or
not. In all of the above settings, either the outcome event
of interest would have happened anyway, not happened

