POPQORN: Quantifying Robustness of Recurrent Neural Networks

Ching-Yun Ko * 1 Zhaoyang Lyu * 2 Tsui-Wei Weng 3 Luca Daniel 3 Ngai Wong 1 Dahua Lin 2

Abstract
The vulnerability to adversarial attacks has been
a critical issue for deep neural networks. Addressing this issue requires a reliable way to evaluate
the robustness of a network. Recently, several
methods have been developed to compute robustness quantification for neural networks, namely,
certified lower bounds of the minimum adversarial perturbation. Such methods, however, were
devised for feed-forward networks, e.g. multilayer perceptron or convolutional networks. It remains an open problem to quantify robustness for
recurrent networks, especially LSTM and GRU.
For such networks, there exist additional challenges in computing the robustness quantification, such as handling the inputs at multiple steps
and the interaction between gates and states. In
this work, we propose POPQORN (Propagatedoutput Quantified Robustness for RNNs), a general algorithm to quantify robustness of RNNs,
including vanilla RNNs, LSTMs, and GRUs. We
demonstrate its effectiveness on different network
architectures and show that the robustness quantification on individual steps can lead to new insights.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has led to remarkable performance gains on
a number of tasks, i.e. image classification, speech recognition, and language processing. Nevertheless, recent literature has demonstrated that adversarial examples broadly exist for deep neural networks in these applications (Szegedy
et al., 2014; Kurakin et al., 2017; Jia & Liang, 2017; Car*

1
Equal contribution
The University of Hong
2
Kong, Hong Kong The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong 3 Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. Source code is available
at https://github.com/ZhaoyangLyu/POPQORN.
Correspondence to: Ching-Yun Ko <cyko@eee.hku.hk>,
Zhaoyang Lyu <lyuzhaoyang@link.cuhk.edu.hk>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

lini & Wagner, 2018). A small perturbation that humans
are mostly immune to can be crafted to mislead a neural
network’s predictions. As deep neural networks have been
widely employed in many safety-critical applications (Sharif
et al., 2016; Kurakin et al., 2017; Eykholt et al., 2018), it is
crucial to know when such models will fail and what can be
done to make them more robust to the adversarial attacks.
Studies on the robustness of neural networks mainly fall in
two categories: (1) Attack-based approaches – researchers
try to design strong adversarial attack algorithms to attack
deep neural networks and the robustness is measured by
the distortion between successful adversarial examples and
the original ones. (2) Verification-based approaches (Katz
et al., 2017; Cheng et al., 2017), which aim to find the minimum distortion of neural networks or its lower bounds that
are agnostic to attack methods. Existing verification-based
methods were mainly devised for feed-forward networks,
such as multi-layer perceptron. Robustness verification for
recurrent neural networks (RNNs), which have been widely
used in speech recognition and natural language processing,
has not been systematically investigated.
To verify the robustness of RNNs, we face several new
challenges: (1) Some popular RNN formulations, including
LSTM and GRU, involve hidden states that are indirectly
determined by three to four gates. These nonlinear gates
are tightly coupled together, which we refer to as crossnonlinearity. This substantially complicates the verification
of robustness. (2) RNNs are widely adopted for applications with sequential inputs, e.g. sentences or time series.
However, previous verification methods typically assume
that the inputs were fed into the network at the bottom layer.
Hence, they are not directly applicable here. (3) For applications with sequential inputs, imperceptible adversarial
examples may correspond to texts with least number of
changed words (Gao et al., 2018). Thus it is critical to evaluate the hardness of manipulating one single word (one input
frame) instead of all words.
In this paper, we tackle the aforementioned problems by
proposing an effective robustness quantification framework called POPQORN (Propagated-output Quantified
Robustness for RNNs) for RNNs. We bound the nonlinear activation function using linear functions. Starting
from the output layer, linear bounds are propagated back to

