Sum-of-Squares Polynomial Flow

Priyank Jaini 1 2 3 Kira A. Selby 1 2 Yaoliang Yu 1 2

Abstract
Triangular map is a recent construct in probability
theory that allows one to transform any source
probability density function to any target density
function. Based on triangular maps, we propose
a general framework for high-dimensional density estimation, by specifying one-dimensional
transformations (equivalently conditional densities) and appropriate conditioner networks. This
framework (a) reveals the commonalities and differences of existing autoregressive and flow based
methods, (b) allows a unified understanding of the
limitations and representation power of these recent approaches and, (c) motivates us to uncover
a new Sum-of-Squares (SOS) flow that is interpretable, universal, and easy to train. We perform
several synthetic experiments on various density
geometries to demonstrate the benefits (and shortcomings) of such transformations. SOS flows
achieve competitive results in simulations and several real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
Neural density estimation methods are gaining popularity
for the task of multivariate density estimation in machine
learning (Kingma et al., 2016; Dinh et al., 2015; 2017; Papamakarios et al., 2017; Uria et al., 2016; Huang et al.,
2018). These generative models provide a tractable way
to evaluate the exact density, unlike generative adversarial
nets (Goodfellow et al., 2014) or variational autoencoders
(Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014). Popular
methods for neural density estimation are autoregressive
models (Neal, 1992; Bengio & Bengio, 1999; Larochelle
& Murray, 2011; Uria et al., 2016) and normalizing flows
(Rezende & Mohamed, 2015; Tabak & Vanden-Eijnden,
2010; Tabak & Turner, 2013). These models aim to learn
an invertible, bijective and increasing transformation T that
1

University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada 2 Waterloo AI Institute, Waterloo, Canada 3 Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to: Yaoliang Yu <yaoliang.yu@uwaterloo.ca>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

pushes forward a (simple) source probability density (or
measure, in general) to a target density such that computing
the inverse T−1 and the Jacobian |T0 | is easy.
In probability theory, it has been rigorously proven that
increasing triangular maps (Bogachev et al., 2005) are universal, i.e. any source density can be transformed into a
target density using an increasing triangular map. Indeed,
the Knothe-Rosenblatt transformation (Ch.1, Villani, 2008)
gives a (heuristic) construction of such a map, which is
unique up to null sets (Bogachev et al., 2005). Furthermore,
by definition the inverse and the Jacobian of a triangular
map can be very efficiently computed through univariate
operations. However, for multivariate densities computing
the exact Knothe-Rosenblatt transform itself is not possible
in practice. Thus, a natural question is: Given a pair of densities, how can we efficiently estimate this unique increasing
triangular map?
This work is devoted to studying these increasing, bijective,
and monotonic triangular maps, in particular how to estimate them in practice. In §2, we precisely formulate the
density estimation problem and propose a general maximum
likelihood framework for estimating densities using triangular maps. We also explore the properties of the triangular
map required to push a source density to a target density.
Subsequently, in §3, we trace back the origins of the triangular map and connect it to many recent works on generative
modelling. We relate our study of increasing, bijective, triangular maps to works on iterative Gaussianization (Chen &
Gopinath, 2001; Laparra et al., 2011) and normalizing flows
Tabak & Vanden-Eijnden (2010); Tabak & Turner (2013);
Rezende & Mohamed (2015). We show that a triangular
map can be decomposed into compositions of one dimensional transformations or equivalently univariate conditional
densities, allowing us to demonstrate that all autoregressive
models and normalizing flows are subsumed in our general density estimation framework. As a by-product, this
framework also reveals that autoregressive models and normalizing flows are in fact equivalent. Using this unified
framework, we study the commonalities and differences of
the various aforementioned models. Most importantly, this
framework allows us to study the universality in a much
cleaner and more streamlined way. We present a unified
understanding of the limitations and representation power of

