Cheap Orthogonal Constraints in Neural Networks:
A Simple Parametrization of the Orthogonal and Unitary Group

Mario Lezcano-Casado 1 David Martı́nez-Rubio 2

Abstract
We introduce a novel approach to perform firstorder optimization with orthogonal and unitary constraints. This approach is based on a
parametrization stemming from Lie group theory
through the exponential map. The parametrization
transforms the constrained optimization problem
into an unconstrained one over a Euclidean space,
for which common first-order optimization methods can be used. The theoretical results presented
are general enough to cover the special orthogonal group, the unitary group and, in general, any
connected compact Lie group. We discuss how
this and other parametrizations can be computed
efficiently through an implementation trick, making numerically complex parametrizations usable
at a negligible runtime cost in neural networks.
In particular, we apply our results to RNNs with
orthogonal recurrent weights, yielding a new architecture called EXPRNN. We demonstrate how
our method constitutes a more robust approach to
optimization with orthogonal constraints, showing faster, accurate, and more stable convergence
in several tasks designed to test RNNs.

1. Introduction
Training deep neural networks presents many difficulties.
One of the most important is the exploding and vanishing
gradient problem, as first observed and studied in (Bengio
et al., 1994). This problem arises from the ill-conditioning
of the function defined by a neural network as the number
of layers increase. This issue is particularly problematic in
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). In RNNs the eigenvalues of the gradient of the recurrent kernel explode or vanish
1

Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Mario Lezcano
Casado <mario.lezcanocasado@maths.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

exponentially fast with the number of time-steps whenever
the recurrent kernel does not have unitary eigenvalues (Arjovsky et al., 2016). This behavior is the same as the one
encountered when computing the powers of a matrix, and
results in very slow convergence (vanishing gradient) or a
lack of convergence (exploding gradient).
In the seminal paper (Arjovsky et al., 2016), they note that
unitary matrices have properties that would solve the exploding and vanishing gradient problems. These matrices
form a group called the unitary group and they have been
studied extensively in the fields of Lie group theory and Riemannian geometry. Optimization methods over the unitary
and orthogonal group have found rather fruitful applications
in RNNs in recent years (cf. Section 2).
In parallel to the work on unitary RNNs, there has been an increasing interest for optimization over the orthogonal group
and the Stiefel manifold in neural networks (Harandi & Fernando, 2016; Ozay & Okatani, 2016; Huang et al., 2017;
Bansal et al., 2018). As shown in these papers, orthogonal
constraints in linear and CNN layers can be rather beneficial
for the generalization of the network as they act as a form
of implicit regularization. The main problem encountered
while using these methods in practice was that optimization with orthogonality constraints was neither simple nor
computationally cheap. We aim to close that bridge.
In this paper we present a simple yet effective way to approach problems that present orthogonality or unitary constraints. We build on results from Riemannian geometry
and Lie group theory to introduce a parametrization of these
groups, together with theoretical guarantees for it.
This parametrization has several advantages, both theoretical and practical:
1. It can be used with general purpose optimizers.
2. The parametrization does not create additional minima
or saddle points in the main parametrization region.
3. It is possible to use a structured initializer to take advantage of the structure of the eigenvalues of the orthogonal matrix.
4. Other approaches need to enforce hard orthogonality
constraints, ours does not.

