Breaking the gridlock in Mixture-of-Experts:
Consistent and Efficient Algorithms
Ashok Vardhan Makkuva 1 Sewoong Oh 2 Sreeram Kannan 3 Pramod Viswanath 1

Abstract
Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) is a widely popular
model for ensemble learning and is a basic building block of highly successful modern neural networks as well as a component in Gated Recurrent
Units (GRU) and Attention networks. However,
present algorithms for learning MoE, including
the EM algorithm and gradient descent, are known
to get stuck in local optima. From a theoretical
viewpoint, finding an efficient and provably consistent algorithm to learn the parameters remains
a long standing open problem for more than two
decades. In this paper, we introduce the first algorithm that learns the true parameters of a MoE
model for a wide class of non-linearities with
global consistency guarantees. While existing
algorithms jointly or iteratively estimate the expert parameters and the gating parameters in the
MoE, we propose a novel algorithm that breaks
the deadlock and can directly estimate the expert
parameters by sensing its echo in a carefully designed cross-moment tensor between the inputs
and the output. Once the experts are known, the
recovery of gating parameters still requires an EM
algorithm; however, we show that the EM algorithm for this simplified problem, unlike the joint
EM algorithm, converges to the true parameters.
We empirically validate our algorithm on both
the synthetic and real data sets in a variety of settings, and show superior performance to standard
baselines.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we study a popular gated neural network architecture known as Mixture-of-Experts (MoE). MoE is a
basic building block of highly successful modern neural
networks like Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) and Attention
networks. A key interesting feature of MoE is the presence of a gating mechanism that allows for specialization
of experts in their respective domains. MoE allows for the
underlying expert models to be simple while allowing to
capture complex non-linear relations between the data. Ever
since their inception more than two decades ago (Jacobs
et al., 1991), they have been a subject of great research interest (Tresp, 2001; Collobert et al., 2002; Ng & Deisenroth,
2014; Theis & Bethge, 2015; Le et al., 2016; Gross et al.,
2017; Sun et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2018) across multiple domains such as computer vision, natural language processing,
speech recognition, finance, and forecasting.
The basic MoE model is the following: let x ∈ Rd be the
input feature vector and y ∈ R be the corresponding label.
Then the discriminative model Py|x for the k-mixture of
experts (k-MoE) in the regression setting is:
Py|x =

k
X

Pi|x Py|x,i

i=1

=

k
X

∗

ehwi ,xi
∗
2
P hw∗ ,xi N (y|g(hai , xi), σ ).
j
e
j
i=1

(1)

Figure 1 details the architecture for k-MoE.
Gating network

y

Softmax
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, IL, USA 2 Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, USA 3 Department
of Electrical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, USA. Correspondence to: Ashok Vardhan Makkuva
<makkuva2@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

x

Expert 1 g(ha∗1 , xi) . . .
x

g(ha∗
k , xi)

Expert k

x

Figure 1: Architecture for k-MoE
The interpretation behind (1) is that for each input x, the
gating network chooses an expert based on the outcome

