Composable Core-sets for Determinant Maximization:
A Simple Near-Optimal Algorithm

Piotr Indyk * 1 Sepideh Mahabadi * 2 Shayan Oveis Gharan * 3 Alireza Rezaei * 3

Abstract
“Composable core-sets” are an efficient framework for solving optimization problems in massive data models. In this work, we consider efficient construction of composable core-sets for the
determinant maximization problem. This can also
be cast as the MAP inference task for determinantal point processes, that have recently gained
a lot of interest for modeling diversity and fairness. The problem was recently studied in (Indyk
et al., 2018), where they designed composable
core-sets with the optimal approximation bound
of Õ(k)k . On the other hand, the more practical Greedy algorithm has been previously used in
similar contexts. In this work, first we provide
2
a theoretical approximation guarantee of O(C k )
for the Greedy algorithm in the context of composable core-sets; Further, we propose to use a
Local Search based algorithm that while being
still practical, achieves a nearly optimal approximation bound of O(k)2k ; Finally, we implement
all three algorithms and show the effectiveness of
our proposed algorithm on standard data sets.

1. Introduction
Given a set of vectors P ⊂ Rd and an integer 1 ≤ k ≤ d,
the goal of the determinant maximization problem is to find
a subset S = {v1 , . . . , vk } of P such that the determinant of
the Gram matrix of the vectors in S is maximized. Geometrically, this determinant is equal to the volume squared of
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Insitiute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA 2 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA
3
Department of Computer Science , University of Washington, Seattle, USA. Correspondence to: Piotr Indyk <indyk@mit.edu>, Sepideh Mahabadi <mahabadi@ttic.edu>,
Shayan Oveis Gharan <shayan@cs.washington.edu>, Alireza
Rezaei <arezaei@cs.washington.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

the parallelepiped spanned by the points in S. This problem
and its variants have been studied extensively over the last
decade. To this date, the best approximation factor is due to
a work of Nikolov (Nikolov, 2015) which gives a factor of
ek , and it is known that the exponential dependence on k is
unavoidable (Civril & Magdon-Ismail, 2013).
The determinant of a subset of points is used as a measure
of diversity in many applications where a small but diverse
subset of objects must be selected as a representative of a
larger population (Mirzasoleiman et al., 2017; Gong et al.,
2014; Kulesza et al., 2012; Chao et al., 2015; Kulesza &
Taskar, 2011; Yao et al., 2016; Lee et al., 2016); recently,
this has been further applied to model fairness (Celis et al.,
2016). The determinant maximization problem can also be
rephrased as the maximum a posteriori probability (MAP)
estimator for determinantal point processes (DPPs). DPPs
are probabilistic models of diversity in which every subset
of k objects is assigned a probability proportional to the
determinant of its corresponding Gram matrix. DPPs have
found several applications in machine learning over the last
few years (Kulesza et al., 2012; Mirzasoleiman et al., 2017;
Gong et al., 2014; Yao et al., 2016). In this context, the
determinant maximization problem corresponds to the task
of finding the most diverse subset of items.
Many of these applications need to handle large amounts of
data and consequently the problem has been considered in
massive data models of computation (Mirzasoleiman et al.,
2017; Wei et al., 2014; Pan et al., 2014; Mirzasoleiman et al.,
2013; 2015; Mirrokni & Zadimoghaddam, 2015; Barbosa
et al., 2015). One strong such model that we consider in this
work, is composable core-set (Indyk et al., 2014) which is
an efficient summary of a data set with the composability
property: union of summaries of multiple data sets should
provably result in a good summary for the union of the
data sets. More precisely, in the context of the determinant
maximization, a mapping function c that maps any point set
to one of its subsets is called an α-composable core-set if it
satisfies the following condition: given any integer m and
any collection of point sets P1 , · · · , Pm ⊂ Rd ,

MAXDETk (

m
[
i=1

c(Pi )) ≥

m
[
1
· MAXDETk ( Pi )
α
i=1

