A Personalized Affective Memory Model for Improving Emotion Recognition

Pablo Barros 1 German I. Parisi 1 2 Stefan Wermter 1

Abstract
Recent models of emotion recognition strongly
rely on supervised deep learning solutions for the
distinction of general emotion expressions. However, they are not reliable when recognizing online and personalized facial expressions, e.g., for
person-specific affective understanding. In this
paper, we present a neural model based on a conditional adversarial autoencoder to learn how to
represent and edit general emotion expressions.
We then propose Grow-When-Required networks
as personalized affective memories to learn individualized aspects of emotion expressions. Our
model achieves state-of-the-art performance on
emotion recognition when evaluated on in-thewild datasets. Furthermore, our experiments include ablation studies and neural visualizations in
order to explain the behavior of our model.

1. Introduction
Automatic facial expression recognition became a popular
topic in the past years due to the success of deep learning techniques. What was once the realm of specialists on
adapting human-made descriptors of facial representations
(Zhao et al., 2003), became one of many visual recognition
tasks for deep learning enthusiasts (Schmidhuber, 2015).
The result is a continuous improvement in the performance
of automatic emotion recognition during the last decade
(Sariyanidi et al., 2015) reflecting the progress of both hardware and different deep learning solutions.
However, the performance of deep learning models for facial
expression recognition has recently stagnated (Soleymani
et al., 2017; Mehta et al., 2018). The most common cause is
the high dependence of such solutions on balanced, strongly
labeled and diverse data. Recent approaches propose to
address these problems by introducing transfer learning
1
Knowledge Technology, Department of Informatics, University of Hamburg, Germany 2 Apprente Inc, Montain View, CA,
USA. Correspondence to: Pablo Barros <barros@informatik.unihamburg.de>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

techniques (Ng et al., 2015; Kaya et al., 2017), neural activation and data distribution regularization (Ding et al., 2017b;
Pons & Masip, 2018), and unsupervised learning of facial
representations (Zen et al., 2014; Kahou et al., 2016). Most
of these models present an improvement of performance
when evaluated on specific datasets. Still, most of these
solutions require strongly supervised training which may
bias their capacity to generalize emotional representations.
Recent neural models based on adversarial learning (Kim
et al., 2017; Saha et al., 2018) overcome the necessity of
strongly labeled data. Such models rely on their ability to
learn facial representations in an unsupervised manner and
present competitive performance on emotion recognition
when compared to strongly supervised models.
Furthermore, it is very hard to adapt end-to-end deep
learning-based models to different emotion recognition scenarios, in particular, real-world applications, mostly due to
very costly training processes. As soon as these models
need to learn a novel emotion representation, they must
be re-trained or re-designed. Such problems occur due to
understanding facial expression recognition as a typical computer vision task instead of adapting the solutions to specific
characteristics of facial expressions (Adolphs, 2002).
We address the problem of learning adaptable emotional
representations by focusing on improving emotion expression recognition based on two facial perception characteristics: the diversity of human emotional expressions and
the personalization of affective understanding. A person
can express happiness by smiling, laughing and/or by moving the eyes depending on who he or she is talking to, for
example (Mayer et al., 1990). The diversity of emotion
expressions becomes even more complex when we take into
consideration inter-personal characteristics such as cultural
background, intrinsic mood, personality, and even genetics
(Russell, 2017). Besides diversity, the adaptation to learn
personalized expressions is also very important. When humans already know a specific person they can adapt their
own perception to how that specific person expresses emotions (Hamann & Canli, 2004). The interplay between recognizing an individual’s facial characteristics, i.e. how they
move certain muscles in their face, mouth and eye positions,
blushing intensity, and clustering them into emotional states
is the key for modeling a human-like emotion recognition
system (Sprengelmeyer et al., 1998).

