Data Shapley: Equitable Valuation of Data for Machine Learning

Amirata Ghorbani 1 James Zou 2

Abstract
As data becomes the fuel driving technological
and economic growth, a fundamental challenge is
how to quantify the value of data in algorithmic
predictions and decisions. For example, in healthcare and consumer markets, it has been suggested
that individuals should be compensated for the
data that they generate, but it is not clear what is
an equitable valuation for individual data. In this
work, we develop a principled framework to address data valuation in the context of supervised
machine learning. Given a learning algorithm
trained on n data points to produce a predictor,
we propose data Shapley as a metric to quantify
the value of each training datum to the predictor performance. Data Shapley uniquely satisfies
several natural properties of equitable data valuation. We develop Monte Carlo and gradient-based
methods to efficiently estimate data Shapley values in practical settings where complex learning
algorithms, including neural networks, are trained
on large datasets. In addition to being equitable,
extensive experiments across biomedical, image
and synthetic data demonstrate that data Shapley
has several other benefits: 1) it is more powerful
than the popular leave-one-out or leverage score
in providing insight on what data is more valuable
for a given learning task; 2) low Shapley value
data effectively capture outliers and corruptions;
3) high Shapley value data inform what type of
new data to acquire to improve the predictor.

1. Introduction
Data is valuable and it is the fuel that powers artificial intelligence. Increasingly in sectors such as health care and
advertising, data generated by individuals is a key compo1
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, USA 2 Department of Biomedical Data Science,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
James Zou <jamesz@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

nent of the market place, similar to labor and capital (Posner
& Weyl, 2018). It has been suggested that certain data constitute individual property, and as such individuals should be
compensated in exchange for these data (Regulation, 2018).
Like labor and capital, a fundamental question is how to
equitably value individual’s data.
We focus on data valuation in the specific setting of supervised machine learning. In order to make sense of data
value, we need three ingredients in our investigation: a
fixed training data set, a learning algorithm, and a performance metric. The training data is a fixed set of n data
points, {xi , yi }n1 , where xi and yi are the features and the
label of point i, respectively. For our purpose, a learning
algorithm A is a procedure that takes an arbitrary training
set and produces a predictor. For example, A could be
the common empirical
risk minimization where it solves
P
θ∗ = arg minθ l(f (xi ; θ), yi ), where l is the loss, θ
parametrizes a family of models and f ( ; θ∗ ) is the predictor. For any predictor f , we also need a performance
metric of V (f ). We can think of V as the test performance
of f on whatever metric of interest.
The two questions that we want to investigate are: 1) what
is an equitable measure of the value of each (xi , yi ) to
the learning algorithm A with respect to the performance
metric V ; and 2) how do we efficiently compute this data
value in practical settings. For example, suppose we have
data from N = 1000 patients and we train a small neural
network to build a heart disease classifier. We also have
some independent metric to assess the performance of the
trained classifier—e.g. its prediction accuracy on a test set.
Then we would like to quantify the value of each patient’s
data to the classifier’s performance on this task.
Note that we do not define a universal value for data. Instead,
the value of each datum depend on the learning algorithm,
the performance metric as well as on other data in the training set. This dependency is reasonable and desirable in
machine learning. Certain data points could be more important if we are training a logistic regression instead of a neural
network. Similarly, if the performance metric changes—e.g.
regressing to the age of heart disease onset instead of heart
disease incidence—then the value of certain patient’s data
should change. Moreover the performance metric could
be computed on a different population/distribution than the

