Diagnosing Bottlenecks in Deep Q-learning Algorithms

Justin Fu * 1 Aviral Kumar * 1 Matthew Soh 1 Sergey Levine 1

Abstract
Q-learning methods are a common class of algorithms used in reinforcement learning (RL).
However, their behavior with function approximation, especially with neural networks, is poorly
understood theoretically and empirically. In this
work, we aim to experimentally investigate potential issues in Q-learning, by means of a ”unit
testing” framework where we can utilize oracles
to disentangle sources of error. Specifically, we
investigate questions related to function approximation, sampling error and nonstationarity, and
where available, verify if trends found in oracle
settings hold true with deep RL methods. We find
that large neural network architectures have many
benefits with regards to learning stability; offer
several practical compensations for overfitting;
and develop a novel sampling method based on
explicitly compensating for function approximation error that yields fair improvement on highdimensional continuous control domains.

1. Introduction
Q-learning algorithms, which are based on approximating
state-action value functions, are an efficient and commonly
used class of RL methods. Q-learning methods have several very appealing properties: they are relatively sampleefficient when compared to policy gradient methods, and
they allow for off-policy learning. This makes them an
appealing choice for a wide range of tasks, from robotic
control (Kalashnikov et al., 2018) and video game AI (Mnih
et al., 2015) to off-policy learning from historical data for
recommender systems (Shani et al., 2005). However, although the basic tabular Q-learning algorithm is convergent
and admits theoretical analysis (Sutton & Barto, 2018), its
counterpart with function approximation is poorly understood. In this paper, we aim to investigate the degree to
*

Equal contribution 1 UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Justin
Fu <justinjfu@eecs.berkeley.edu>, Aviral Kumar
<aviralk@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

which potential issues with Q-learning manifest in practice.
We empirically analyze aspects of the Q-learning method
in a unit testing framework, where we can employ oracle
solvers to obtain ground truth Q-functions and distributions
for exact analysis. We investigate the following questions:
1) What is the effect of function approximation on convergence? Many practical RL problems require function
approximation to handle large or continuous state spaces.
However, the behavior of Q-learning methods under function approximation is not well understood – there are simple
counterexamples where the method diverges (Baird, 1995).
To investigate these problems, we study the convergence behavior of Q-learning methods with function approximation
by varying the function approximator power and analyzing
the quality of the solution found. We find, somewhat surprisingly, that divergence rarely occurs, and that function
approximation error is not a major problem in Q-learning algorithms when the function approximator is powerful. This
makes sense in light of the theory: a high-capacity approximator can perform an accurate projection of the bellman
Backup, thus mitigating potential convergence issues due to
function approximation. (Section 4)
2) What is the effect of sampling error and overfitting?
RL is used to solve problems where we do not have access
to the transition function of the MDP. Thus, Q-learning
methods need to learn by collecting samples in the environment, and minimizing errors on samples potentially leads to
overfitting. We experimentally show that overfitting exists
in practice by performing ablation studies on the number of
gradient steps, and by demonstrating that oracle based early
stopping techniques can be used to improve performance of
Q-learning algorithms. (Section 5).
3) What is the effect of distribution shift and a moving target? The standard formulation of Q-learning prescribes an update rule, with no corresponding objective
function (Sutton et al., 2009a). This results in a process
which optimizes an objective that is non-stationary in two
ways: the target values are updated during training (the
moving target problem), and the distribution under which
the Bellman error is optimized changes, as samples are
drawn from different policies (the distribution shift problem). These properties can make convergence behavior
difficult to understand, and prior works have hypothesized

