Position-aware Graph Neural Networks

Jiaxuan You 1 Rex Ying 1 Jure Leskovec 1

Abstract
Learning node embeddings that capture a node’s
position within the broader graph structure is crucial for many prediction tasks on graphs. However, existing Graph Neural Network (GNN) architectures have limited power in capturing the
position/location of a given node with respect
to all other nodes of the graph. Here we propose Position-aware Graph Neural Networks (PGNNs), a new class of GNNs for computing
position-aware node embeddings. P-GNN first
samples sets of anchor nodes, computes the distance of a given target node to each anchor-set,
and then learns a non-linear distance-weighted aggregation scheme over the anchor-sets. This way
P-GNNs can capture positions/locations of nodes
with respect to the anchor nodes. P-GNNs have
several advantages: they are inductive, scalable,
and can incorporate node feature information. We
apply P-GNNs to multiple prediction tasks including link prediction and community detection. We
show that P-GNNs consistently outperform state
of the art GNNs, with up to 66% improvement in
terms of the ROC AUC score.

1. Introduction
Learning low-dimensional vector representations of nodes in
graphs (Hamilton et al., 2017b) has led to advances on tasks
such as node classification (Kipf & Welling, 2017), link
prediction (Grover & Leskovec, 2016), graph classification
(Ying et al., 2018b) and graph generation (You et al., 2018b),
with successful applications across domains such as social
and information networks (Ying et al., 2018a), chemistry
(You et al., 2018a), and biology (Zitnik & Leskovec, 2017).
Node embedding methods can be categorized into Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) approaches (Scarselli et al., 2009),
1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Jiaxuan You <jiaxuan@cs.stanford.edu>, Jure Leskovec <jure@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

matrix-factorization approaches (Belkin & Niyogi, 2002),
and random-walk approaches (Perozzi et al., 2014). Among
these, GNNs are currently the most popular paradigm,
largely owing to their efficiency and inductive learning capability (Hamilton et al., 2017a). By contrast, random-walk
approaches (Perozzi et al., 2014; Grover & Leskovec, 2016)
are limited to transductive settings and cannot incorporate
node attributes. In the GNN framework, the embedding of a
node is computed by a GNN layer aggregating information
from the node’s network neighbors via non-linear transformation and aggregation functions (Battaglia et al., 2018).
Long-range node dependencies can be captured via stacking
multiple GNN layers, allowing the information to propagate
for multiple-hops (Xu et al., 2018).
However, the key limitation of existing GNN architectures
is that they fail to capture the position/location of the node
within the broader context of the graph structure. For example, if two nodes reside in very different parts of the graph
but have topologically the same (local) neighbourhood structure, they will have identical GNN structure. Therefore, the
GNN will embed them to the same point in the embedding
space (we ignore node attributes for now). Figure 1 gives an
example where a GNN cannot distinguish between nodes
v1 and v2 and will always embed them to the same point because they have isomorphic network neighborhoods. Thus,
GNNs will never be able to classify nodes v1 and v2 into different classes because from the GNN point of view they are
indistinguishable (again, not considering node attributes).
Researchers have spotted this weakness (Xu et al., 2019)
and developed heuristics to fix the issue: augmenting node
features with one-hot encodings (Kipf & Welling, 2017),
or making GNNs deeper (Selsam et al., 2019). However,
models trained with one-hot encodings cannot generalize
to unseen graphs, and arbitrarily deep GNNs still cannot
distinguish structurally isomorphic nodes (Figure 1).
Here we propose Position-aware Graph Neural Networks
(P-GNNs), a new class of Graph Neural Networks for computing node embeddings that incorporate a node’s positional
information with respect to all other nodes in the network,
while also retaining inductive capability and utilizing node
features. Our key observation is that node position can be
captured by a low-distortion embedding by quantifying the
distance between a given node and a set of anchor nodes.
Specifically, P-GNN uses a sampling strategy with theoreti-

