Understanding and Accelerating Particle-Based Variational Inference

Chang Liu 1 Jingwei Zhuo 1 Pengyu Cheng 2 Ruiyi Zhang 2 Jun Zhu 1 Lawrence Carin 2

Abstract
Particle-based variational inference methods
(ParVIs) have gained attention in the Bayesian
inference literature, for their capacity to yield
flexible and accurate approximations. We explore
ParVIs from the perspective of Wasserstein gradient flows, and make both theoretical and practical
contributions. We unify various finite-particle
approximations that existing ParVIs use, and recognize that the approximation is essentially a compulsory smoothing treatment, in either of two
equivalent forms. This novel understanding reveals the assumptions and relations of existing
ParVIs, and also inspires new ParVIs. We propose an acceleration framework and a principled
bandwidth-selection method for general ParVIs;
these are based on the developed theory and leverage the geometry of the Wasserstein space. Experimental results show the improved convergence by
the acceleration framework and enhanced sample
accuracy by the bandwidth-selection method.

1. Introduction
Bayesian inference provides powerful tools for modeling
and reasoning with uncertainty. In Bayesian learning one
seeks access to the posterior distribution p on the support
space X (i.e., the latent space) given data. As p is intractable
in general, various approximations have been developed.
Variational inference methods (VIs) seek to approximate p
within a certain distribution family by minimizing typically
the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence to p. The approximating distribution is commonly chosen to be a member of a
parametric family (Wainwright et al., 2008; Hoffman et al.,
2013), but often it poses a restrictive assumption and the
closeness to p suffers. Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
1

Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center, Tsinghua-Fuzhou Inst. for Data Tech., THBI Lab, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, 100084, China 2 Dept. of Elec. & Comp. Engineering, Duke University, NC, USA. Correspondence to: Jun Zhu
<dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn>, Lawrence Carin <lcarin@duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

methods (Geman & Geman, 1987; Neal et al., 2011; Welling
& Teh, 2011; Ding et al., 2014) aim to directly draw samples from p. Although asymptotically accurate, they often
converge slowly in practice due to undesirable autocorrelation between samples. A relatively large sample size is
needed (Liu & Wang, 2016) for a good result, increasing
the cost for downstream tasks.
Recently, particle-based variational inference methods
(ParVIs) have been proposed. They use a set of samples, or
particles, to represent the approximating distribution (like
MCMC) and deterministically update particles by minimizing the KL-divergence to p (like VIs). ParVIs have greater
non-parametric flexibility than classical VIs, and are also
more particle-efficient than MCMCs, since they make full
use of a finite number of particles by taking particle interaction into account. The availability of optimization-based
update rules also makes them converge faster. Stein Variational Gradient Descent (SVGD) (Liu & Wang, 2016) is
a representative method of this type; it updates particles
by leveraging a proper vector field that minimizes the KLdivergence. Its unique benefits make SVGD popular, with
many variants (Liu & Zhu, 2018; Zhuo et al., 2018; Chen
et al., 2018b; Futami et al., 2018) and applications (Wang &
Liu, 2016; Pu et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2017a; Haarnoja et al.,
2017; Zhang et al., 2018; 2019).
SVGD was later understood as simulating the steepest descending curves, or gradient flows, of the KL-divergence
on a certain kernel-related distribution space PH (X ) (Liu,
2017). Inspired by this, more ParVIs have been developed
by simulating the gradient flow on the Wasserstein space
P2 (X ) (Ambrosio et al., 2008; Villani, 2008) with a finite
set of particles. The particle optimization method (PO)
(Chen & Zhang, 2017) and w-SGLD method (Chen et al.,
2018a) explore the minimizing movement scheme (MMS)
(Jordan et al. (1998); Ambrosio et al. (2008), Def. 2.0.6) of
the gradient flow and make approximations for tractability
with a finite set of particles. The Blob method (originally
called w-SGLD-B) (Chen et al., 2018a) uses the vector field
form of the gradient flow and approximates the update direction with a finite set of particles. Empirical comparisons
of these ParVIs have been conducted, but theoretical understanding on their finite-particle approximations for gradient
flow simulation remains unknown, particularly for the assumption and relation of these approximations. We also

