On the Connection Between Adversarial Robustness and Saliency Map
Interpretability

Christian Etmann * 1 2 Sebastian Lunz * 3 Peter Maass 1 Carola-Bibiane Schönlieb 3

Abstract
Recent studies on the adversarial vulnerability of
neural networks have shown that models trained
to be more robust to adversarial attacks exhibit
more interpretable saliency maps than their nonrobust counterparts. We aim to quantify this behavior by considering the alignment between input image and saliency map. We hypothesize that
as the distance to the decision boundary grows,
so does the alignment. This connection is strictly
true in the case of linear models. We confirm
these theoretical findings with experiments based
on models trained with a local Lipschitz regularization and identify where the non-linear nature
of neural networks weakens the relation.

1. Introduction
Despite impressive results in a variety of classification tasks
(LeCun et al., 2015), even highly accurate neural network
classifiers are plagued by a vulnerability to so-called adversarial perturbations (Szegedy et al., 2014). These adversarial perturbations are small, often visually imperceptible
perturbations to the network’s input, which however result
in the network’s classification decision being changed. Such
vulnerabilities may pose a threat to real-world deployments
of automated recognition systems, especially in securitycritical applications such as autonomous driving or banking.
This has sparked a large number of publications related to
both the creation of adversarial attacks (Goodfellow et al.,
2014; Kurakin et al., 2016; Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016)
as well as defenses against these (see (Schott et al., 2018) for
an overview). Apart from the application-focused viewpoint,
the observed adversarial vulnerability offers non-obvious
*
Equal contribution 1 Center for Industrial Mathematics,
University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany 2 Work done at
DAMTP, Cambridge. 3 DAMTP, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Christian Etmann <cetmann@math.uni-bremen.de>, Sebastian Lunz
<lunz@math.cam.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Figure 1. An image of a dog (left), the saliency maps of a highly
non-adversarially-robust neural network (middle) and of a more
robust network (right). We observe that the robust network gives a
much clearer indication of what the classifier deems to be discriminative features. Details about saliency and the robustification are
given in section 4. Most figures are best viewed on a screen.

insights into the inner workings of neural networks. One
particular method of defense is adversarial training (Madry
et al., 2018), which aims to minimize a modified training
objective. While this method – like all known approaches
of defense – decreases the accuracy of the classifier, it is
also successful in increasing the robustness to adversarial
attacks, i.e. the perturbations need to be larger on average
in order to change the classification decision.
(Tsipras et al., 2019) also notice that networks that are robustified in this way show interesting phenomena, which so
far could not be explained. Neural networks usually exhibit
very unstructured saliency maps (gradients of a classifier
score with respect to the network’s input (Simonyan et al.,
2013)) which barely relate to the input image. On the other
hand, saliency maps of robustified classifiers tend to be far
more interpretable, in that structures in the input image also
emerge in the corresponding saliency map, as exemplified
in Figure 1. (Tsipras et al., 2019) describe this as an ’unexpected benefit’ of adversarial robustness. In order to obtain a
semantically meaningful visualization of the network’s classification decision in non-robustified networks, the saliency
map has to be aggregated over many different points in the
vicinity of the input image. This can be achieved either
via averaging saliency maps of noisy versions of the image
(Smilkov et al., 2017) or by integrating along a path (Sundararajan et al., 2017). Other approaches typically employ
modified backpropagation schemes in order to highlight the
discriminative portions of the image. Examples of this include guided backpropagation (Springenberg et al., 2015)

