Fast Context Adaptation via Meta-Learning

Luisa Zintgraf 1 Kyriacos Shiarlis 1 2 Vitaly Kurin 1 2 Katja Hofmann 3 Shimon Whiteson 1 2

Abstract
We propose CAVIA for meta-learning, a simple
extension to MAML that is less prone to metaoverfitting, easier to parallelise, and more interpretable. CAVIA partitions the model parameters into two parts: context parameters that serve
as additional input to the model and are adapted
on individual tasks, and shared parameters that
are meta-trained and shared across tasks. At test
time, only the context parameters are updated,
leading to a low-dimensional task representation.
We show empirically that CAVIA outperforms
MAML for regression, classification, and reinforcement learning. Our experiments also highlight weaknesses in current benchmarks, in that
the amount of adaptation needed in some cases is
small.

1. Introduction
The challenge of fast adaptation in machine learning is to
learn on previously unseen tasks fast and with little data.
In principle, this can be achieved by leveraging knowledge
obtained in other, related tasks. However, the best way to
do so remains an open question. We are interested in the
meta-learning approach to fast adaptation, i.e., learning how
to learn on unseen problems/datasets within few shots.
One approach for fast adaptation is to use gradient-based
methods: at test time, only one or a few gradient update steps
are performed to solve the new task, using a task-specific
loss function. Model agnostic meta learning (MAML) (Finn
et al., 2017a) is a general and powerful gradient-based metalearning algorithm, which learns a model initialisation that
allows fast adaptation at test time. Given that MAML is
model-agnostic, it can be used with any gradient-based learning algorithm, and a variety of methods build on it (a.o., Lee
& Choi (2018); Li et al. (2017); Al-Shedivat et al. (2018);
Grant et al. (2018)).
1
University of Oxford 2 Latent Logic 3 Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: Luisa Zintgraf <luisa.zintgraf@cs.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

MAML is trained with an interleaved training procedure,
comprised of inner loop and outer loop updates that operate
on a batch of related tasks at each iteration. In the inner
loop, MAML learns task-specific network parameters by
performing one gradient step on a task-specific loss. Then,
in the outer loop, the model parameters from before the
inner loop update are updated to reduce the loss after the
inner loop update on the individual tasks. Hence, MAML
learns a model initialisation that can generalise to a new task
after only a few gradient updates at test time. One drawback
of MAML is meta-overfitting: since the entire network is
updated on just a few data points at test time, it can easily
overfit (Mishra et al., 2018).
In this paper, we propose an alternative to MAML which
is more interpretable and less prone to overfitting, without compromising performance. Our method, fast context
adaptation via meta-learning (CAVIA) learns a single
model that adapts to a new task via gradient descent by
updating only a set of input parameters at test time, instead
of the entire network. These inputs, which we call context parameters φ (see Figure 1), can be interpreted as a
task embedding that modulates the behaviour of the model.
We confirm empirically that the learned context parameters indeed match the latent task structure. Like MAML,
our method is model-agnostic, i.e., it can be applied to any
model that is trained via gradient descent.
CAVIA is trained with an interleaved training procedure
similar to MAML: in the inner loop only the context parameters φ are updated, and in the outer loop the rest of the
model parameters, θ, are updated (which requires backpropagating through the inner-loop update). This allows CAVIA
to explicitly optimise the task-independent parameters θ
for good performance across tasks, while ensuring that the
task-specific parameters φ can quickly adapt to new tasks at
test time.
The separation of parameters into task-specific and taskindependent parts has several advantages. First, the size
of both components can be chosen appropriately for the
task. The network parameters θ can be made expressive
enough without overfitting to a single task in the inner loop,
which MAML is prone to. Furthermore, for many practical
problems we have prior knowledge of which aspects vary
across tasks and hence how much capacity φ should have.

