Efficient On-Device Models using Neural Projections

Sujith Ravi 1

Abstract
Many applications involving visual and language
understanding can be effectively solved using
deep neural networks. Even though these techniques achieve state-of-the-art results, it is very
challenging to apply them on devices with limited
memory and computational capacity such as mobile phones, smart watches and IoT. We propose
a neural projection approach for training compact
on-device neural networks. We introduce projection networks that use locality-sensitive projections to generate compact binary representations
and learn small neural networks with computationally efficient operations. We design a joint
optimization framework where the projection network can be trained from scratch or leverage existing larger neural networks such as feed-forward
NNs, CNNs or RNNs. The trained neural projection network can be directly used for inference on device at low memory and computation
cost. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this as a
general-purpose approach for significantly shrinking memory requirements of different types of
neural networks while preserving good accuracy
on multiple visual and text classification tasks.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep neural networks have resulted
in powerful models that demonstrate high predictive capabilities on a wide variety of tasks from image classification (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) to speech recognition (Hinton
et al., 2012) to sequence-to-sequence learning (Sutskever
et al., 2014) for natural language applications like language
translation (Bahdanau et al., 2014), semantic conversational
understanding (Kannan et al., 2016) and other tasks. These
networks are typically large, comprising multiple layers involving many parameters, and trained on large amounts
1
Google Research, Mountain View, California, USA. Correspondence to: Sujith Ravi <sravi@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

of data to learn useful representations that can be used
to predict outputs at inference time. For efficiency reasons, training these networks is often performed with highperformance distributed computing involving several CPU
cores or graphics processing units (GPUs).
In a similar vein, applications running on devices such as
mobile phones, smart watches and other IoT devices are on
the rise. Increasingly, machine learning models are used to
perform real-time inference directly on these devices—e.g.,
speech recognition on mobile phones (Schuster, 2010), medical devices to provide real-time diagnoses (Lee & Verma,
2013) and Smart Reply on watches (AndroidWear), among
others. However, unlike high-performance clusters running
on the cloud, these devices operate at low-power consumption modes and have significant memory limitations. As
a result, running state-of-the-art deep learning models for
inference on these devices can be very challenging and often prohibitive due to the high computation cost and large
model size requirements that exceed device memory capacity. Delegating the computation-intensive operations from
device to the cloud is not a feasible strategy in many realworld scenarios due to connectivity issues (data cannot be
sent to the server) or privacy reasons (certain types of data
and processing needs to be restricted to a user’s personal
device). In such scenarios, one solution is to take an existing
trained neural network model and then apply compression
techniques like quantization (e.g., reducing floating point
precision (Courbariaux et al., 2014)) to reduce model size.
However, while these techniques are useful in some cases,
applying them post-learning to a complex neural network
tends to dilute the network’s predictive quality and does not
yield sufficiently high performance. An alternate strategy
is to train small models for on-device prediction tasks, but
these can lead to significant drop in accuracies (Chun & Maniatis, 2009) which limits the usability of such models for
practical applications. In particular, feature or vocabulary
pruning techniques commonly applied to limit parameters
in models like recurrent neural networks, while yielding
lower memory footprint, can affect the predicitive capacity
of the network for language applications.
This motivates the learning of efficient on-device machine
learning models with low memory footprint that can be run
directly on device for inference at low computation cost.
The main contributions of the paper are:

