The Natural Language of Actions

Guy Tennenholtz 1 Shie Mannor 1

Abstract
We introduce Act2Vec, a general framework for
learning context-based action representation for
Reinforcement Learning. Representing actions
in a vector space help reinforcement learning algorithms achieve better performance by grouping
similar actions and utilizing relations between
different actions. We show how prior knowledge
of an environment can be extracted from demonstrations and injected into action vector representations that encode natural compatible behavior.
We then use these for augmenting state representations as well as improving function approximation of Q-values. We visualize and test action
embeddings in three domains including a drawing task, a high dimensional navigation task, and
the large action space domain of StarCraft II.

1. Introduction
The question “What is language” has had implications in
the fields of neuropsychology, linguistics, and philosophy.
One definition tells us that language is “a purely human
and non-instinctive method of communicating ideas, emotions, and desires by means of voluntarily produced symbols” (Sapir, 1921). Much like humans adopt languages to
communicate, their interaction with an environment uses
sophisticated languages to convey information. Inspired by
this conceptual analogy, we adopt existing methods in natural language processing (NLP) to gain a deeper understanding of the “natural language of actions” with the ultimate
goal of solving reinforcement learning (RL) tasks.
In recent years, many advances were made in the field of
distributed representations of words (Mikolov et al., 2013b;
Pennington et al., 2014; Zhao et al., 2017). Distributional
methods make use of the hypothesis that words which occur in a similar context tend to have similar meaning (Firth,
1957), i.e., the meaning of a word can be inferred from
1
Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Technion Institute of
Technology, Israel. Correspondence to: Guy Tennenholtz
<guytenn@gmail.com>, Shie Mannor <shie@technion.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Figure 1. A schematic visualization of action pair embeddings in
a navigation domain using a distributional representation method.
Each circle represents an action of two consecutive movements in
the world. Actions that are close have similar contexts. Relations
between actions in the vector space have interpretations in the
physical world.

the distribution of words around it. For this reason, these
methods are called “distributional” methods. Similarly, the
context in which an action is executed holds vital information (e.g., prior knowledge) of the environment. This
information can be transferred to a learning agent through
distributed action representations in a manifold of diverse
environments.
In this paper, actions are represented and characterized by
the company they keep (i.e., their context). We assume the
context in which actions reside is induced by a demonstrator policy (or set of policies). We use the celebrated continuous skip-gram model (Mikolov et al., 2013a) to learn
high-quality vector representations of actions from large
amounts of demonstrated trajectories. In this approach,
each action or sequence of actions is embedded in a ddimensional vector that characterizes knowledge of acceptable behavior in the environment.
As motivation, consider the problem of navigating a robot.
In its basic form, the robot must select a series of primitive
actions of going straight, backwards, left, or right. By reading the words “straight”, “backwards”, “left”, and “right”
the reader already has a clear understanding of their implication in the physical world. Particularly, it is presumed
that moving straight and then left should have higher correlation to moving left and then straight, but for the most part
contrast to moving right and then backwards. Moreover, it

