A Theory of Regularized Markov Decision Processes

Matthieu Geist 1 Bruno Scherrer 2 Olivier Pietquin 1

Abstract
Many recent successful (deep) reinforcement
learning algorithms make use of regularization,
generally based on entropy or Kullback-Leibler divergence. We propose a general theory of regularized Markov Decision Processes that generalizes
these approaches in two directions: we consider
a larger class of regularizers, and we consider
the general modified policy iteration approach,
encompassing both policy iteration and value iteration. The core building blocks of this theory
are a notion of regularized Bellman operator and
the Legendre-Fenchel transform, a classical tool
of convex optimization. This approach allows for
error propagation analyses of general algorithmic
schemes of which (possibly variants of) classical
algorithms such as Trust Region Policy Optimization, Soft Q-learning, Stochastic Actor Critic or
Dynamic Policy Programming are special cases.
This also draws connections to proximal convex
optimization, especially to Mirror Descent.

1. Introduction
Many reinforcement learning algorithms make use of some
kind of entropy regularization, with various motivations,
such as improved exploration and robustness. Trust Region
Policy Optimization (TRPO) (Schulman et al., 2015) is a policy iteration scheme where the greedy step is penalized with
a Kullback-Leibler (KL) penalty between two consecutive
policies. Dynamic Policy Programming (DPP) (Azar et al.,
2012) is a reparametrization of a value iteration scheme
regularized by a KL penalty between consecutive policies.
Soft Q-learning, eg. (Fox et al., 2016; Schulman et al., 2017;
Haarnoja et al., 2017), uses a Shannon entropy regularization in a value iteration scheme, while Soft Actor Critic
(SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018) uses it in a policy iteration
scheme. Value iteration has also been combined with a
1

Google Research, Brain Team. 2 Université de Lorraine, CNRS,
Inria, IECL, F-54000 Nancy, France. Correspondence to: Matthieu
Geist <mfgeist@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Tsallis entropy (Lee et al., 2018), with the motivation of
having a sparse regularized greedy policy. Other approaches
are based on a notion of temporal consistency equation,
somehow extending the notion of Bellman residual to the
regularized case (Nachum et al., 2017; Dai et al., 2018;
Nachum et al., 2018), or on policy gradient (Williams, 1992;
Mnih et al., 2016).
This non-exhaustive set of algorithms share the idea of using regularization, but they are derived from sometimes
different principles, consider each time a specific regularization, and have ad-hoc analysis, if any. Here, we propose
a general theory of regularized Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs). To do so, a key observation is that (approximate)
dynamic programming, or (A)DP, can be derived solely
from the core definition of the Bellman evaluation operator. The framework we propose is built upon a regularized
Bellman operator, and on an associated Legendre-Fenchel
transform. We study the theoretical properties of these regularized MDPs and of the related regularized ADP schemes.
This generalizes many existing theoretical results and provides new ones. Notably, it allows for an error propagation
analysis for many of the aforementioned algorithms. This
framework also draws connections to convex optimization,
especially to Mirror Descent (MD).
A unified view of entropy-regularized MDPs has already
been proposed by Neu et al. (2017). They focus on regularized DP through linear programming for the average
reward case. Our contribution is complementary to this
work (different MDP setting, we do not regularize the same
quantity, we do not consider the same DP approach). Our
use of the Legendre-Fenchel transform is inspired by Mensch & Blondel (2018), who consider smoothed finite horizon DP in directed acyclic graphs. Our contribution is also
complementary to this work, that does not allow recovering aforementioned algorithms nor analyzing them. After
a brief background, we introduce regularized MDPs and
various related algorithmic schemes based on approximate
modified policy iteration (Scherrer et al., 2015), as well as
their analysis. All proofs are provided in the appendix.

2. Background
In this section, we provide the necessary background for
building the proposed regularized MDPs. We write ∆X the

