Learning-to-Learn Stochastic Gradient Descent with Biased Regularization
Giulia Denevi 1 2 Carlo Ciliberto 3 4 Riccardo Grazzi 1 4 Massimiliano Pontil 1 4

Abstract
We study the problem of learning-to-learn: inferring a learning algorithm that works well on a family of tasks sampled from an unknown distribution.
As class of algorithms we consider Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) on the true risk regularized
by the square euclidean distance from a bias vector. We present an average excess risk bound for
such a learning algorithm that quantifies the potential benefit of using a bias vector with respect
to the unbiased case. We then propose a novel
meta-algorithm to estimate the bias term online
from a sequence of observed tasks. The small
memory footprint and low time complexity of our
approach makes it appealing in practice while our
theoretical analysis provides guarantees on the
generalization properties of the meta-algorithm
on new tasks. A key feature of our results is that,
when the number of tasks grows and their variance is relatively small, our learning-to-learn approach has a significant advantage over learning
each task in isolation by standard SGD without
a bias term. Numerical experiments demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach in practice.

1. Introduction
The problem of learning-to-learn (LTL) (Baxter, 2000;
Thrun & Pratt, 1998) is receiving increasing attention in
recent years, due to its practical importance (Finn et al.,
2017; Franceschi et al., 2018; Ravi & Larochelle, 2017)
and the theoretical challenge of statistically principled and
efficient solutions (Alquier et al., 2017; Balcan et al., 2015;
Maurer et al., 2016; Pentina & Lampert, 2014; Denevi et al.,
2018a;b; Gupta & Roughgarden, 2017). The principal aim
of LTL is to design a meta-learning algorithm to select a
supervised learning algorithm that is well suited to learn
1
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genoa, Italy 2 University of
Genoa, Genoa, Italy 3 Imperial College of London, London, United
Kingdom 4 University College London, London, United Kingdom.
Correspondence to: Giulia Denevi <giulia.denevi@iit.it>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

tasks from a prescribed family. To highlight the difference
between the meta-learning algorithm and the learning algorithm, throughout the paper we will refer to the latter as the
inner or within-task algorithm.
The meta-algorithm is trained from a sequence of datasets,
associated with different learning tasks sampled from a metadistribution (also called environment in the literature). The
performance of the selected inner algorithm is measured by
the transfer risk (Baxter, 2000; Maurer, 2005), that is, the
average risk of the algorithm, trained on a random dataset
from the same environment. A key insight is that, when the
learning tasks share specific similarities, the LTL framework
provides a means to leverage such similarities and select an
inner algorithm of low transfer risk.
In this work, we consider environments of linear regression or binary classification tasks and we assume that the
associated weight vectors are all close to a common vector. Because of the increasing interest in low computational
complexity procedures, we focus on the family of withintask algorithms given by Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD)
working on the regularized true risk. Specifically, motivated
by the above assumption on the environment, we consider
as regularizer the square distance of the weight vector to a
bias vector, playing the role of a common mean among the
tasks. Knowledge of this common mean can substantially
facilitate the inner algorithm and the main goal of this paper
is to design a meta-algorithm to learn a good bias that is
supported by both computational and statistical guarantees.
Contributions. The first contribution of this work is to
show that, when the variance of the weight tasks’ vectors
sampled from the environment is small, SGD regularized
with the “right” bias yields a model with smaller error than
its unbiased counterpart. The latter approach does not exploit the relatedness among the tasks, and it corresponds to
learning the tasks in isolation – also known as independent
task learning (ITL). The second and principal contribution
of this work is to propose a meta-algorithm that estimates
the bias term, so that the transfer risk of the corresponding
SGD algorithm is as small as possible. We consider the
setting in which we receive in input a sequence of datasets
and we propose an online meta-algorithm which efficiently
updates the bias term used by the inner SGD algorithm. Our
meta-algorithm consists in applying a (meta) SGD algo-

