Understanding MCMC Dynamics as Flows on the Wasserstein Space

Chang Liu 1 Jingwei Zhuo 1 Jun Zhu 1

Abstract
It is known that the Langevin dynamics used in
MCMC is the gradient flow of the KL divergence
on the Wasserstein space, which helps convergence analysis and inspires recent particle-based
variational inference methods (ParVIs). But no
more MCMC dynamics is understood in this way.
In this work, by developing novel concepts, we
propose a theoretical framework that recognizes
a general MCMC dynamics as the fiber-gradient
Hamiltonian flow on the Wasserstein space of a
fiber-Riemannian Poisson manifold. The “conservation + convergence” structure of the flow gives
a clear picture on the behavior of general MCMC
dynamics. The framework also enables ParVI
simulation of MCMC dynamics, which enriches
the ParVI family with more efficient dynamics,
and also adapts ParVI advantages to MCMCs.
We develop two ParVI methods for a particular
MCMC dynamics and demonstrate the benefits in
experiments.

1

Introduction

Dynamics-based Markov chain Monte Carlo methods
(MCMCs) in Bayesian inference have drawn great attention
because of their wide applicability, efficiency, and scalability for large-scale datasets (Neal et al., 2011; Welling & Teh,
2011; Chen et al., 2014; 2016; Li et al., 2019). They draw
samples by simulating a continuous-time dynamics, or more
precisely, a diffusion process, that keeps the target distribution invariant. However, they often exhibit slow empirical
convergence and relatively small effective sample size, due
to the positive auto-correlation of the samples. Another
type of inference methods, called particle-based variational
inference methods (ParVIs), aim to deterministically update
samples, or particles as they call them, so that the particle
1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center, Tsinghua-Fuzhou Inst. for Data Tech., THBI Lab, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, 100084, China. Correspondence to: Jun Zhu
<dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

distribution minimizes the KL divergence to the target distribution. They fully exploit the approximation ability of a set
of particles by imposing an interaction among them, so they
are more particle-efficient. Optimization-based principle
also makes them convergence faster. Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD) (Liu & Wang, 2016) is the most famous
representative, and the field is under an active development
both in theory (Liu, 2017; Chen et al., 2018b;a; Liu et al.,
2018) and application (Liu et al., 2017; Pu et al., 2017; Zhuo
et al., 2018; Yoon et al., 2018).
The study on the relation between the two families starts
from their interpretations on the Wasserstein space P(M)
supported on some smooth manifold M (Villani, 2008; Ambrosio et al., 2008). It is defined as the space of distributions
P(M) := {q | q is a probability measure on M and
∃x0 ∈ M s.t. Eq(x) [d(x, x0 )2 ] < ∞}
with the well-known Wasserstein distance. It is very general
yet still has necessary structures. With its canonical metric,
the gradient flow (steepest descending curves) of the KL
divergence is defined. It is known that the Langevin dynamics (LD) (Langevin, 1908; Roberts et al., 1996), a particular
type of dynamics in MCMC, simulates the gradient flow on
P(M) (Jordan et al., 1998). Recent analysis reveals that
existing ParVIs also simulate the gradient flow (Chen et al.,
2018a; Liu et al., 2018), so they simulate the same dynamics
as LD. However, besides LD, there are more types of dynamics in the MCMC field that converge faster and produce
more effective samples (Neal et al., 2011; Chen et al., 2014;
Ding et al., 2014), but no ParVI yet simulates them. These
more general MCMC dynamics have not been recognized as
a process on the Wasserstein space P(M), and this poses an
obstacle towards ParVI simulations. On the other hand, the
convergence behavior of LD becomes clear when viewing
LD as the gradient flow of the KL divergence on P(M)
(e.g., Cheng & Bartlett (2017)), which leads distributions to
the target in a steepest way. However, such knowledge on
other MCMC dynamics remains obscure, except a few. In
fact, a general MCMC dynamics is only guaranteed to keep
the target distribution invariant (Ma et al., 2015), but unnecessarily drives a distribution towards the target steepest. So
it is hard for the gradient flow formulation to cover general
MCMC dynamics.
In this work, we propose a theoretical framework that gives

