Accelerated Flow for Probability Distributions

Amirhossein Taghvaei 1 Prashant G. Mehta 1

Abstract
This paper presents a methodology and numerical
algorithms for constructing accelerated gradient
flows on the space of probability distributions. In
particular, we extend the recent variational formulation of accelerated methods in (Wibisono et al.,
2016) from vector valued variables to probability
distributions. The variational problem is modeled
as a mean-field optimal control problem. A quantitative estimate on the asymptotic convergence
rate is provided based on a Lyapunov function
construction, when the objective functional is displacement convex. An important special case is
considered where the objective functional is the
relative entropy. For this case, two numerical
approximations are presented to implement the
Hamilton’s equations as a system of N interacting
particles. The algorithm is numerically illustrated
and compared with the MCMC and Hamiltonian
MCMC algorithms.

1. Introduction
Optimization on the space of probability distributions is important to a number of machine learning models including
variational inference (Blei et al., 2017), generative models (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Arjovsky et al., 2017), and
policy optimization in reinforcement learning (Sutton et al.,
2000). A number of recent studies have considered solution
approaches to these problems based upon a construction of
gradient flow on the space of probability distributions (Liu
& Wang, 2016; Richemond & Maginnis, 2017; Zhang et al.,
2018; Frogner & Poggio, 2018; Chizat & Bach, 2018; Chen
et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2018). Such constructions are useful
for convergence analysis as well as development of numerical algorithms.
1
Department of Mechanical Science and Engineering, Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, Urbana, IL, USA. Correspondence to: Amirhossein
Taghvaei <taghvae2@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

In this paper, we propose a methodology and numerical
algorithms that achieve accelerated gradient flows on the
space of probability distributions. The proposed numerical
algorithms are related to yet distinct from the accelerated
stochastic gradient descent (Jain et al., 2017) and Hamiltonian Markov chain Monte-Carlo (MCMC) algorithms (Neal
et al., 2011; Cheng et al., 2017). The proposed methodology extends the variational formulation of (Wibisono et al.,
2016) from vector valued variables to probability distributions. The original formulation of (Wibisono et al., 2016)
was used to derive and analyze the convergence properties
of a large class of accelerated optimization algorithms, most
significant of which is the continuous-time limit of the Nesterov’s algorithm (Su et al., 2014). In this paper, the limit is
referred to as the Nesterov’s ordinary differential equation.
The extension proposed in our work is based upon a generalization of the formula for the Lagrangian in (Wibisono et al.,
2016): (i) the kinetic energy term is replaced with the expected value of kinetic energy; (ii) the potential energy term
is replaced with a suitably defined functional on the space
of probability distributions. The variational problem is to
obtain a trajectory in the space of probability distributions
that minimizes the action integral of the Lagrangian.
The variational problem is modeled as a mean-field optimal problem (Bensoussan et al., 2013; Carmona & Delarue,
2017). The maximum principle of the optimal control theory
is used to derive the Hamilton’s equations which represent
the first order optimality conditions. The Hamilton’s equations provide a generalization of the Nesterov’s ODE to the
space of probability distributions. A Lyapunov function is
proposed for the convergence analysis of the solution of the
Hamilton’s equations. In this way, quantitative estimates
on convergence rate are obtained for the case when the objective functional is displacement convex (McCann, 1997).
Table 1 provides a summary of the relationship between the
original variational formulation in (Wibisono et al., 2016)
and the extension proposed in this paper.
We also consider the important special case when the objective functional is the relative entropy functional D(ρ|ρ∞ ) defined with respect to a target probability distribution ρ∞ . In
this case, the accelerated gradient flow is shown to be related
to the continuous limit of the Hamiltonian Monte-Carlo
algorithm (Cheng et al., 2017) (Remark 2). The Hamil-

