Correlated bandits or: How to minimize mean-squared error online

Vinay Praneeth Boda 1 Prashanth L.A. 2

Abstract
While the objective in traditional multi-armed
bandit problems is to find the arm with the highest mean, in many settings, finding an arm that
best captures information about other arms is of
interest. This objective, however, requires learning the underlying correlation structure and not
just the means of the arms. Sensors placement for
industrial surveillance and cellular network monitoring are a few applications, where the underlying correlation structure plays an important role.
Motivated by such applications, we formulate the
correlated bandit problem, where the objective is
to find the arm with the lowest mean-squared error (MSE) in estimating all the arms. To this end,
we derive first an MSE estimator, based on sample variances and covariances, and show that our
estimator exponentially concentrates around the
true MSE. Under a best-arm identification framework, we propose a successive rejects type algorithm and provide bounds on the probability of
error in identifying the best arm. Using minmax
theory, we also derive fundamental performance
limits for the correlated bandit problem.

1. Introduction
The traditional multi-armed bandit problem aims to find the
arm with the highest payoff. This is often motivated by
practical applications such as to identify an ad with highest payoff in showing to users, or identifying a strategy
with maximum payoff. In this work, we consider a setting
with the objective being the identification of an arm/node
which best captures the entire information of a system,
i.e., the identification of arm which can best estimate all
the other arms. In contrast to the traditional multi-armed
1

LinkedIn Corp. 2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras. Majority of this
work was done during the authors time at University of Maryland
College Park. Correspondence to: Vinay Praneeth Boda <vpboda@gmail.com>, Prashanth L.A. <prashla@cse.iitm.ac.in>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

bandit problem, this objective involves an estimation of the
correlation structure among the various arms. This is motivated by several practical applications. For instance, in
internet-of-things, sensors are used to take measurements
from multiple locations with the objective of estimating the
underlying parameter, e.g., temperature, over a region. Resource constraints mean that it might not possible to place
sensors at the desired level of granularity. However, an estimate of the underlying distribution enables one to form
an estimate of the parameter at points not measured. This
estimate of the statistics of the underlying randomness is
often formed using limited measurements from multiple
points, before choosing the final location of the sensors.
Another application of interest is in identifying members
who can best approximate the social network. Instances include sensors used for measuring temperature in a region
(Guestrin et al., 2005), thermal sensors on microprocessors (Long et al., 2008), optimizing queries over a sensornet (Deshpande et al., 2004) and placing sensors to detect
contaminants in a water distribution network (Krause et al.,
2008). Problems of similar interest have also been studied
in the realm of information theory in (Boda, 2019; Boda &
Narayan, 2018). In all these applications, the underlying
correlation structure plays an important role.
In this paper, we formulate a variant of the stochastic Karmed bandit problem, where the objective is to identify
the arm that best estimates all the other correlated arms.
We measure how good an arm i ∈ {1, . . . , K} can estimate
other arms using the mean-squared error (MSE) criterion:
K
h
X
2 i
Ei ,
E Xj − E[Xj |Xi ]
.
(1)
j=1

We assume that the arms X1 , . . . , XK are correlated subGaussian random variables (r.v.s). (Paul et al., 2014) consider a celluar network application, where the goal is to
monitor large communication networks with huge traffic.
Since observing every node is computationally intensive,
companies such as AT&T use measurements from various
nodes to identify a subset which best captures the average behavior of the network. The requirement is for an
algorithm that reduces the data acquisition cost by identifying the most-correlated subset of nodes, while using a
minimum number of sample measurements. The authors
in (Paul et al., 2014) show that a model approximating the

