Learning Optimal Linear Regularizers

Matthew Streeter 1

Abstract
We present algorithms for efficiently learning regularizers that improve generalization. Our approach is based on the insight that regularizers
can be viewed as upper bounds on the generalization gap, and that reducing the slack in the
bound can improve performance on test data. For
a broad class of regularizers, the hyperparameters
that give the best upper bound can be computed using linear programming. Under certain Bayesian
assumptions, solving the LP lets us “jump” to the
optimal hyperparameters given very limited data.
This suggests a natural algorithm for tuning regularization hyperparameters, which we show to be
effective on both real and synthetic data.

1. Introduction
Most machine learning models are obtained by minimizing
a loss function, but optimizing the training loss is rarely the
ultimate goal. Instead, the model is ultimately judged based
on information that is unavailable during training, such as
performance on held-out test data. The ultimate value of a
model therefore depends critically on the loss function one
chooses to minimize.
Traditional loss functions used in statistical learning are
the sum of two terms: the empirical training loss and a
regularization penalty. A common regularization penalty is
the `1 or `2 norm of the model parameters. More recently, it
has become common to regularize implicitly by perturbing
the examples, as in dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014), or
perturbing the labels, as in label smoothing (Szegedy et al.,
2016), or by modifying the training algorithm, as in early
stopping (Caruana et al., 2001).
The best choice of regularizer is usually not obvious a priori.
Typically one chooses a regularizer that has worked well
on similar problems, and then fine-tunes it by searching for
the hyperparameter values that give the best performance
1

Google Research. Correspondence to: Matthew Streeter
<mstreeter@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

on a held-out validation set. Though this approach can be
effective, it tends to require a large number of training runs,
and to mitigate this the number of hyperparameters must be
kept fairly small in practice.
In this work, we seek to recast the problem of choosing regularization hyperparameters as a supervised learning problem
which can be solved more efficiently than is possible with
a purely black-box approach. Specifically, we show that
the optimal regularizer is by definition the one that provides
the tightest possible bound on the generalization gap (i.e.,
difference between test and training loss), for a suitable notion of “tightness”. We then present an algorithm that can
find approximately optimal regularization hyperparameters
efficiently via linear programming. Our method applies to
explicit regularizers such as L2, but also in an approximate
way to implicit regularizers such as dropout.
Our algorithm takes as input a small set of models for which
we have computed both training and validation loss, and
produces a set of recommended regularization hyperparameters as output. Under certain Bayesian assumptions, we
show that our algorithm returns the optimal regularization
hyperparameters, requiring data from as few as two training
runs as input. Building on this linear programming algorithm, we present a hyperparameter tuning algorithm and
show that it outperforms state-of-the-art alternatives on real
problems where these assumptions do not hold.
1.1. Definitions and Notation
We consider a general learning problem with an arbitrary
loss function. Our goal is to choose a model θ from a set
Θ, so as to minimize the expected value of a non-negative
loss `(z, θ), where z is an example drawn from an unknown
distribution D. That is, we wish to minimize
L(θ) = Ez∼D [`(z, θ)] .
In a typical supervised learning problem, θ is a parameter
vector, z is a (feature vector, label) pair, and ` is a loss function such as log loss or squared error. In an unsupervised
problem, z might be an unlabeled image or a text fragment.
We assume as input a set {zi | 1 ≤ i ≤ n} of training examples. Where noted, we assume each zi is sampled indepen-

