Training Well-Generalizing Classifiers for Fairness Metrics and Other
Data-Dependent Constraints

Andrew Cotter 1 Maya Gupta 1 Heinrich Jiang 1 Nathan Srebro 2 Karthik Sridharan 3 Serena Wang 1
Blake Woodworth 2 Seungil You 4

Abstract
Classifiers can be trained with data-dependent
constraints to satisfy fairness goals, reduce churn,
achieve a targeted false positive rate, or other policy goals. We study the generalization performance for such constrained optimization problems, in terms of how well the constraints are
satisfied at evaluation time, given that they are satisfied at training time. To improve generalization,
we frame the problem as a two-player game where
one player optimizes the model parameters on a
training dataset, and the other player enforces the
constraints on an independent validation dataset.
We build on recent work in two-player constrained
optimization to show that if one uses this twodataset approach, then constraint generalization
can be significantly improved. As we illustrate
experimentally, this approach works not only in
theory, but also in practice.

1. Introduction
It is useful to train classifiers with data-dependent constraints in order to achieve certain guarantees on the training
set, such as statistical parity or other fairness guarantees,
specified recall, or a desired positive classification rate (e.g.
Scott & Nowak, 2005; Zafar et al., 2015; Goh et al., 2016;
Woodworth et al., 2017; Narasimhan, 2018)). However, a
key question is whether the achieved constraints will generalize. For example: will a classifier trained to produce
80% statistical parity on training examples still achieve 80%
statistical parity at evaluation time?
Unfortunately, the answer is “not quite.” Because such
1

Google AI, Mountain View, CA, USA 2 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA 3 Cornell University,
Computer Science Department, Ithaca, NY, USA 4 Kakao Mobility, Seongnam-si, Geyonggi-do, South Korea. Correspondence to:
Andrew Cotter <acotter@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

constraints are data-dependent, overfitting can occur, and
constraints that were satisfied on the training set should be
expected to be slightly violated on an i.i.d. test set. This
is particularly problematic in the context of fairness constraints, which will typically be chosen based on real-world
requirements (e.g. the 80% rule of some US laws (Biddle,
2005; Vuolo & Levy, 2013; Zafar et al., 2015; Hardt et al.,
2016)). In this paper, we investigate how well constraints
generalize, and propose algorithms to improve the generalization of constraints to new examples.
Specifically, we consider problems that minimize a loss
function subject to data-dependent constraints, expressed in
terms of expectations over a data distribution D:
min Ex∼D [`0 (x; θ)]
θ∈Θ

s.t. Ex∼D [`i (x; θ)] ≤ 0

∀i∈[m]

(1)

where x ∈ X is a feature vector, D is the data distribution
over X , Θ is a space of model parameters for the function
class of interest, and `0 , `1 , . . . , `m : X × Θ → R are losses
associated with the objective and the m constraints∗ . We do
not require these loss functions to be convex. Appendix B†
contains two examples of how Equation 1 can be used to
express certain data-dependent constraints (see Goh et al.
(2016); Narasimhan (2018) for more).
One typically trains a classifier on a finite training set drawn
from D, but the true goal is to satisfy constraints in expectation over D, as in Equation 1. To this end, we build on a
long line of prior work that treats constrained optimization
as a two-player game (e.g. Christiano et al., 2011; Arora
et al., 2012; Rakhlin & Sridharan, 2013; Kearns et al., 2017;
Narasimhan, 2018; Agarwal et al., 2018). The first player
optimizes the model parameters θ, and the second player
enforces the constraints, e.g. using the Lagrangian:
"
#
m
X
L (θ, λ) := Ex∼D `0 (x; θ) +
λi `i (x; θ)
(2)
i=1

In practice, one would approximate the Lagrangian with an
i.i.d. training sample from D, and the first player would
∗
†

Table 5, in the supplementary material, summarizes notation.
Appendices can be found in the supplementary material.

