Partially Linear Additive Gaussian Graphical Models

Sinong Geng 1 Minhao Yan 2 Mladen Kolar 3 Oluwasanmi Koyejo 4

Abstract
We propose a partially linear additive Gaussian
graphical model (PLA-GGM) for the estimation
of associations between random variables distorted by observed confounders. Model parameters are estimated using an L1 -regularized maximal pseudo-profile likelihood
√ estimator (MaPPLE) for which we prove n-sparsistency. Importantly, our approach avoids parametric constraints on the effects of confounders on the estimated graphical model structure. Empirically,
the PLA-GGM is applied to both synthetic and
real-world datasets, demonstrating superior performance compared to competing methods.

1. Introduction
Undirected graphical models are extensively used to study
the conditional independence structure between random
variables (Jordan, 1998; Liu & Page, 2013; Liu et al., 2014).
Important applications include image processing (Mignotte
et al., 2000), finance (Barber & Kolar, 2018) and neuroscience (Zhu & Cribben, 2017), among others. A major
challenge in real world applications is that the underlying conditional independence structure can be distorted by
confounders. Unfortunately, despite the large literature on
graphical model estimation, there is limited work to date on
estimation with observed confounding.
The observed confounding issue is ubiquitous. Consider the
problem of estimating brain functional connectivity from
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) (Biswal
et al., 1995; Fox & Raichle, 2007; Shine et al., 2015; 2016)
data. Here, the connectivity estimate is known to be sus1
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University,
Princeton, New Jersey, USA 2 Charles H. Dyson School of Applied Economics and Management, Ithaca, New York, USA 3
Booth School of Business, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois,
USA 4 Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign,
Champaign, Illinois, USA. Correspondence to: Sinong Geng
<sgeng@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

ceptible to confounding from physiological noise such as
subject motion (Van Dijk et al., 2012; Goto et al., 2016). We
emphasize that although the amount of motion is observed,
the resulting confounding can significantly distort the connectivity matrix when estimated using conventional means,
leading to incorrect scientific inferences (Laumann et al.,
2016). Another example is in social network analysis. The
social contagion (the effects caused by the people close to
each other in a social network) are shown to be confounded
by the effect of an individual’s covariates on his or her behavior or other measurable responses (Shalizi & Thomas,
2011). As a result, a method which is able to recover the
social contagion or the social network structure despite the
individual confounding is clearly useful.
This manuscript is motivated by the question: is it possible to efficiently estimate sparse conditional independence structure between random variables with known
confounders? We provide a positive answer for the important case of jointly Gaussian random variable models.
Although prior works have studied the issue of hidden confounders in generative undirected graphical models (Jordan, 1998), to our knowledge, this manuscript is among
the first to develop the methodology to deal with observed
confounders. We propose a new class of graphical models: the partially linear additive Gaussian graphical models
(PLA-GGMs), whose parameters capture the underlying
relationships of random variables, and where these relationships take a partially linear additive form (Hastie, 2017).
Further, we parametrize the model using two additive components: the target i.e. the non-confounded structure, and
the nuisance structure induced by observed confounders.
Importantly, we do not impose a parametric form on the
nuisance structure – only requiring smoothness to facilitate
nonparametric estimation. This significantly improves on
prior work which has required strong ad-hoc assumptions
like the linear assumption (Van Dijk et al., 2012; Power
et al., 2014) or the zero-expectation assumption (Lee & Liu,
2015; Geng et al., 2018a) on the nuisance parameter. PLAGGMs are applicable as long as not all the observed samples
are highly confounded, so that the proposed procedure can
compare the confounded samples with the non-confounded
ones in order to remove the confounding influence.
We propose a pseudo-profile likelihood (PPL) estimator for

