HOList: An Environment for Machine Learning of Higher-Order Theorem
Proving

Kshitij Bansal * 1 Sarah Loos * 1 Markus Rabe * 1 Christian Szegedy * 1 Stewart Wilcox * 1

Abstract
We present an environment, benchmark, and deep
learning driven automated theorem prover for
higher-order logic. Higher-order interactive theorem provers enable the formalization of arbitrary
mathematical theories and thereby present an interesting, open-ended challenge for deep learning.
We provide an open-source framework based on
the HOL Light theorem prover that can be used
as a reinforcement learning environment. HOL
Light comes with a broad coverage of basic mathematical theorems on calculus and the formal proof
of the Kepler conjecture, from which we derive
a challenging benchmark for automated reasoning. We also present a deep reinforcement learning driven automated theorem prover, DeepHOL,
with strong initial results on this benchmark.

1. Introduction
Formalization of mathematics and the automated creation
of new mathematical content is at the frontier of current
AI techniques. Given the fundamental nature of mathematics and its importance for most scientific disciplines, the
capability for high level formal mathematical reasoning is
both an important practical task as well as one of the most
challenging case studies in AI. However, traditional formal
computer mathematics has been a fragmented domain, exploring various approaches for different logical foundations.
This has led to a large number of incompatible theorem
proving systems, which added extra challenges for AI researchers trying to push the limits of formal reasoning using
machine learning.
Well-defined, large-scale benchmarks were instrumental for
unifying disparate efforts in machine learning research: Lib*
1
Equal contribution
Google Research, Mountain
View, California, USA. Correspondence to:
Sarah
Loos
<smloos@google.com>,
Christian
Szegedy
<szegedy@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

riSpeech (Panayotov et al., 2015) for speech recognition,
the Netflix prize (Bennett et al., 2007) for recommendation, ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) for object recognition,
MSCOCO (Lin et al., 2014) for object detection and segmentation, WMT (Bojar et al., 2014) for machine translation,
and SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016) for question answering
- just to name a couple of examples. Benchmarks have fostered collaboration and competition and provide a means to
measure progress, contributing significantly to accelerated
progress and reproducible science.
This paper provides a benchmark and reinforcement learning environment for theorem proving. The long-term goal
is to enable the automatic formalization of large theories,
and hence we want to start with a theorem proving system
that has a track-record of large-scale formalization efforts
and includes a large corpus of foundational mathematics
for benchmarking and learning. Our choice fell on HOL
Light, the interactive theorem prover (ITP) in which the
proof of the Kepler conjecture (Hales et al., 2017) has been
formalized. The formalization of the proof of the Kepler
conjecture has been a huge effort, taking over 20 personyears to complete, and required formalizing a significant
part of arithmetic, linear algebra, and multivariate analysis.
The resulting benchmark consists of 2199 definitions and
29462 theorems and lemmata, which capture a variety of
interesting mathematics and should be a practical seed for
new (auto-)formalization efforts.
To demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed learning
task, we present an automated theorem prover powered
by deep learning, called DeepHOL. Based on a simple
solver architecture, DeepHOL learns to prove theorems
based on imitating human proofs and improves itself using
reinforcement learning. Given a proof goal (represented as
a string) DeepHOL learns to predict the tactic (and its arguments) that leads to a successful proof. Thereby, DeepHOL
achieves theorem proving capabilities that are comparable
to much more complicated state-of-the-art automated theorem proving systems. In our open-source release, available
at http://deephol.org, we expose the APIs of our
modular theorem prover. This simplifies the development
of new provers significantly and allows researchers to focus
on the machine learning aspects.

