Compressing Gradient Optimizers via Count-Sketches

Ryan Spring 1 * Anastasios Kyrillidis 1 Vijai Mohan 2 Anshumali Shrivastava 1 2

Abstract
Many popular first-order optimization methods
accelerate the convergence rate of deep learning
models. However, these algorithms require auxiliary variables, which cost additional memory
proportional to the number of parameters in the
model. The problem is becoming more severe as
models grow larger to learn from complex, largescale datasets. Our proposed solution is to maintain a linear sketch to compress the auxiliary variables. Our approach has the same performance as
the full-sized baseline, while using less space for
the auxiliary variables. Theoretically, we prove
that count-sketch optimization maintains the SGD
convergence rate, while gracefully reducing memory usage for large-models. We show a rigorous evaluation on popular architectures such as
ResNet-18 and Transformer-XL. On the 1-Billion
Word dataset, we save 25% of the memory used
during training (7.7 GB instead of 10.8 GB) with
minimal accuracy and performance loss. For an
Amazon extreme classification task with over 49.5
million classes, we also reduce the training time
by 38%, by increasing the mini-batch size 3.5×
using our count-sketch optimizer.

1. Introduction
An emerging trend in natural language processing is to train
a language model in an unsupervised fashion on a large
text corpus, and then to fine-tune the model for a specific
task (Radford et al., 2018; Puri et al., 2018; Devlin et al.,
2018). The language model often takes the form of an
LSTM (Jozefowicz et al., 2016) or a Transformer (Vaswani
et al., 2017). These models already contain millions of
parameters and will continue to grow even larger to achieve
better performance.
*
Work completed during an internship at Amazon Search.
Department of Computer Science, Rice University, Houston, TX,
USA 2 Amazon Search, Palo Alto, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
Ryan Spring <rdspring1@rice.edu>.

1

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Training large-scale models efficiently is a challenging task.
There are numerous publications that describe how to leverage multi-GPU data parallelism and mixed precision training effectively (Hoffer et al., 2017; Ott et al., 2018; Micikevicius et al., 2018). A key tool for improving training time
is to increase the batch size, taking advantage of the massive
parallelism provided by GPUs. However, increasing the
batch size also requires significant amounts of memory. A
practitioner will sometimes sacrifice their batch size for a
larger, more expressive model. For example, (Puri et al.,
2018) showed that doubling the dimensionality of a multiplicative LSTM (Krause et al., 2016) from 4096 to 8192
forced them to reduce the batch size per GPU by 4×.
One culprit that aggravates the memory capacity issue is
the auxiliary parameters used by first-order optimization
algorithms. (e.g., Momentum, AdaGrad, Adam) Our proposed solution is to compress the auxiliary parameters of the
optimizer using the count-sketch data structure (Charikar
et al., 2002), freeing up memory for either a more expressive
model or a larger batch size for faster training.
Why Count-Sketches? Here are the two main reasons that
make count-sketches a natural choice for this problem.
1. The update operations for auxiliary variables are linear.
2. We empirically observe that at any iteration, the distribution of magnitudes for the gradients and their auxiliary
variables satisfy power law like behavior. (See Appendix A)
The count-sketch data structure is ideally suited for compressing the auxiliary variables. We can easily tune the capacity of the count-sketch to maintain the optimizer’s performance without increasing the cost of updating or querying
the structure. In Section 4, we formally prove this graceful
memory trade-off by analyzing the convergence rate of our
count-sketch optimizer. Furthermore, the computational
cost associated with the count-sketch scales with gradient
sparsity. We can insert sparse gradients directly into the
count-sketch, and then retrieve the corresponding approximation without accessing the entire auxiliary variable.
Leveraging gradient sparsity is useful for saving additional
memory during training. When the gradient tensor is extremely sparse, majority of the values are zero, which is
an unnecessary waste of memory. Moreover, several algorithms impose sparsity on the Softmax layer to improve
training time significantly. For example, (Shrivastava & Li,

