Invertible Residual Networks
Jens Behrmann * 1 2 Will Grathwohl * 2 Ricky T. Q. Chen 2 David Duvenaud 2 Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen * 2

We show that standard ResNet architectures can
be made invertible, allowing the same model to
be used for classification, density estimation, and
generation. Typically, enforcing invertibility requires partitioning dimensions or restricting network architectures. In contrast, our approach only
requires adding a simple normalization step during training, already available in standard frameworks. Invertible ResNets define a generative
model which can be trained by maximum likelihood on unlabeled data. To compute likelihoods, we introduce a tractable approximation to
the Jacobian log-determinant of a residual block.
Our empirical evaluation shows that invertible
ResNets perform competitively with both stateof-the-art image classifiers and flow-based generative models, something that has not been previously achieved with a single architecture.

Standard ResNet

Invertible ResNet

Output

Output

Input

Input

Depth

Abstract

Figure 1. Dynamics of a standard residual network (left) and invertible residual network (right). Both networks map the interval
[−2, 2] to: 1) noisy x3 -function at half depth and 2) noisy identity function at full depth. Invertible ResNets describe a bijective
continuous dynamics while regular ResNets result in crossing
and collapsing paths (circled in white) which correspond to nonbijective continuous dynamics. Due to collapsing paths, standard
ResNets are not a valid density model.

1. Introduction
One of the main appeals of neural network-based models is
that a single model architecture can often be used to solve
a variety of related tasks. However, many recent advances
are based on special-purpose solutions tailored to particular domains. State-of-the-art architectures in unsupervised
learning, for instance, are becoming increasingly domainspecific (Van Den Oord et al., 2016b; Kingma & Dhariwal,
2018; Parmar et al., 2018; Karras et al., 2018; Van Den Oord
et al., 2016a). On the other hand, one of the most successful feed-forward architectures for discriminative learning
are deep residual networks (He et al., 2016; Zagoruyko &
Komodakis, 2016), which differ considerably from their
generative counterparts. This divide makes it complicated
to choose or design a suitable architecture for a given task.
It also makes it hard for discriminative tasks to benefit from
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Bremen, Center for Industrial Mathematics 2 Vector Institute and University of Toronto. Correspondence to: Jens Behrmann <jensb@uni-bremen.de>, JörnHenrik Jacobsen <j.jacobsen@vectorinstitute.ai>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

unsupervised learning. We bridge this gap with a new class
of architectures that perform well in both domains.
To achieve this, we focus on reversible networks which have
been shown to produce competitive performance on discriminative (Gomez et al., 2017; Jacobsen et al., 2018) and generative (Dinh et al., 2014; 2017; Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018)
tasks independently, albeit in the same model paradigm.
They typically rely on fixed dimension splitting heuristics,
but common splittings interleaved with non-volume conserving elements are constraining and their choice has a
significant impact on performance (Kingma & Dhariwal,
2018; Dinh et al., 2017). This makes building reversible
networks a difficult task. In this work we show that these
exotic designs, necessary for competitive density estimation
performance, can severely hurt discriminative performance.
To overcome this problem, we leverage the viewpoint of
ResNets as an Euler discretization of ODEs (Haber &
Ruthotto, 2018; Ruthotto & Haber, 2018; Lu et al., 2017;
Ciccone et al., 2018) and prove that invertible ResNets (iResNets) can be constructed by simply changing the normalization scheme of standard ResNets.

