Multiplicative Weights Update as a Distributed Constrained Optimization
Algorithm: Convergence to Second-order Stationary Points Almost Always

Ioannis Panageas 1 Georgios Piliouras 1 Xiao Wang 1

Abstract
Non-concave maximization has been the subject
of much recent study in the optimization and machine learning communities, specifically in deep
learning. Recent papers (Ge et al., 2015), (Lee
et al., 2017) and references therein indicate that
first order methods work well and avoid saddle
points. Results as in (Lee et al., 2017), however,
are limited to the unconstrained case or for cases
where the critical points are in the interior of the
feasibility set, which fail to capture some of the
most interesting applications. In this paper we
focus on constrained non-concave maximization.
We analyze a variant of a well-established algorithm in machine learning called Multiplicative
Weights Update (MWU) for the maximization
problem maxx∈D P (x), where P is non-concave,
twice continuously differentiable and D is a product of simplices. We show that MWU converges
almost always for small enough stepsizes to critical points that satisfy the second order KKT conditions, by combining techniques from dynamical
systems as well as taking advantage of a recent
connection between Baum Eagon inequality and
MWU (Palaiopanos et al., 2017).

1. Introduction
The interplay between the structure of saddle points and
the performance of first order algorithms is a critical aspect of non-concave maximization. In the unconstrained
setting, there have been many recent results indicating that
gradient descent (GD) avoids strict saddle points with random initialization (Lee et al., 2017), (see also (Daskalakis
& Panageas, 2018) for the analogue in min-max optimiza1
Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore.
Correspondence to: Ioannis Panageas <ioannis@sutd.edu.sg>, Georgios Piliouras <georgios@sutd.edu.sg>,
Xiao Wang <xiao wang@sutd.edu.sg>.

tion). Moreover by adding noise, it is guaranteed that GD
converges to a local maximum in polynomial time (see (Ge
et al., 2015), (Jin et al., 2017) and references therein). By
adding a non-smooth function in the objective (e.g., the
indicator function of a convex set) it can be shown that
there are stochastic first order methods that converge to a
local minimum point in the constrained case (Allen-Zhu,
2017a) (Allen-Zhu, 2017b)(Allen-Zhu, 2018a)(Allen-Zhu,
2018b) under the assumption of oracle access to the stochastic (sub)gradients. What is less understood is the problem
of convergence to second order stationary points in constrained optimization (under the weaker assumption that
we do not have access to the subgradient of the indicator
of the feasibility set; in other words when projection to the
feasibility set is not a trivial task). In the case of constrained
optimization, we also note that the techniques of (Lee et al.,
2017) are not applicable in a straightforward way.
Non-concave maximization problems with saddle
points/local optima on the boundary are very common. For
example in game theory, it is typical for a Nash equilibrium
not to have full support (and thus to lie on the boundary of
the simplex). In such cases, one natural approach is to use
projected gradient descent, but computing the projection
at every iteration might not be an easy task to accomplish.
Several distributed, concurrent optimization techniques
have been studied in such settings ((Kleinberg et al., 2009),
(Ackermann et al., 2009), (Daskalakis & Panageas, 2019)),
however they are known to work only for very specific
type of optimization problems, i.e., multilinear potential
functions. Moreover, having saddle points/local optima on
the boundary of a closed set that has (Lebesgue) measure
zero compared to the full domain (e.g., simplex with n
variables has measure zero in Rn ) makes impossible to use
as a black box the result in (Lee et al., 2017) in which they
make use of well-known Center-stable manifold theorem
from the dynamical systems literature (see Theorem A.1 in
the supplementary material).
In this paper we focus on solving problems of the form
max P (x),
x∈D

(1)

th

Proceedings of the 36 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

where P is a non-concave, twice continuously differentiable
function and D is some compact set, which will be a prod-

