MetricGAN: Generative Adversarial Networks based Black-box Metric Scores
Optimization for Speech Enhancement

Szu-Wei Fu 1 2 Chien-Feng Liao 1 2 Yu Tsao 2 Shou-De Lin 1

Abstract
Adversarial loss in a conditional generative adversarial network (GAN) is not designed to directly optimize evaluation metrics of a target task,
and thus, may not always guide the generator in
a GAN to generate data with improved metric
scores. To overcome this issue, we propose a
novel MetricGAN approach with an aim to optimize the generator with respect to one or multiple
evaluation metrics. Moreover, based on MetricGAN, the metric scores of the generated data can
also be arbitrarily specified by users. We tested
the proposed MetricGAN on a speech enhancement task, which is particularly suitable to verify
the proposed approach because there are multiple metrics measuring different aspects of speech
signals. Moreover, these metrics are generally
complex and could not be fully optimized by Lp
or conventional adversarial losses.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.,
2014) has shown its powerful generative ability in many
different applications. In particular, for conditional GANs
(CGANs) (Mirza & Osindero, 2014), in addition to the adversarial loss, there is an Lp loss, to guide the learning of
generators. Ideally, the adversarial loss should make generated data indistinguishable from real (target) data. However,
some applications of image (Ledig et al., 2017; Wang et al.,
2018) and speech processing (Pandey & Wang, 2018; Wang
& Chen, 2018; Donahue et al., 2018; Michelsanti & Tan,
2017) show that this loss term provides very marginal improvement (sometimes even degrade the performance) in
terms of objective evaluation scores (in the case of image
processing, the subjective score can be improved). For in1

National Taiwan University, Taiwan 2 Academia Sinica, Taiwan. Correspondence to: Yu Tsao <yu.tsao@citi.sinica.edu.tw>,
Shou-De Lin <sdlin@csie.ntu.edu.tw>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

stance, Donahue et al. (2018) applied CGAN on speech
enhancement (SE) for automatic speech recognition (ASR);
however, the following conclusion was obtained: “Our experiments indicate that, for ASR, simpler regression approaches may be preferable to GAN-based enhancement.”
This may be because the method that the discriminator uses
to judge whether each sample is real or fake is not fully related to the metrics that we consider. In other words, similar
to Lp loss, the way the adversarial loss guides the generator to generate data is still not matched to the evaluation
metrics. We call this problem discriminator-evaluation mismatch (DEM). In this study, we propose a novel MetricGAN
to solve this problem. We tested the proposed approach on
the SE task because the metrics for SE are generally complex and difficult to directly optimize or adjust.
For human perception, the primary goal of SE is to improve the intelligibility and quality of noisy speech (Benesty
et al., 2005). To evaluate an SE model in different aspects,
several objective metrics have been proposed. Among the
human perception-related objective metrics, the perceptual
evaluation of speech quality (PESQ) (Rix et al., 2001) and
short-time objective intelligibility (STOI) (Taal et al., 2011)
are two popular functions to evaluate speech quality and
intelligibility, respectively. The design of these two metrics
considers human auditory perception and has shown higher
correlation to subjective listening tests than simple L1 or L2
distance between clean and degraded speech.
In recent years, various deep learning-based models have
been developed for SE (Lu et al., 2013; Xu et al., 2014;
Wang et al., 2014; Xu et al., 2015; Ochiai et al., 2017;
Luo & Mesgarani, 2018; Grais et al., 2018; Germain et al.,
2018; Chai et al., 2018). Most of these models were trained
in a supervised fashion by preparing pairs of noisy and
clean speeches. The deep models were then optimized by
minimizing the distance between generated speech and clean
speech. However, the distance (objective function) is usually
based on simple Lp loss (where p = 1 or 2), which does not
reflect human auditory perception or ASR accuracy (Bagchi
et al., 2018) well. In fact, several researches have indicated
that an enhanced speech with a smaller Lp distance, does
not guarantee a higher quality or intelligibility score (Fu
et al., 2018b; Koizumi et al., 2018).

