Tensor Variable Elimination for Plated Factor Graphs
Fritz Obermeyer * 1 Eli Bingham * 1 Martin Jankowiak * 1 Justin Chiu 2 Neeraj Pradhan 1 Alexander M. Rush 2
Noah Goodman 1 3

Abstract
A wide class of machine learning algorithms
can be reduced to variable elimination on factor
graphs. While factor graphs provide a unifying
notation for these algorithms, they do not provide
a compact way to express repeated structure when
compared to plate diagrams for directed graphical models. To exploit efficient tensor algebra
in graphs with plates of variables, we generalize
undirected factor graphs to plated factor graphs
and variable elimination to a tensor variable elimination algorithm that operates directly on plated
factor graphs. Moreover, we generalize complexity bounds based on treewidth and characterize the
class of plated factor graphs for which inference
is tractable. As an application, we integrate tensor
variable elimination into the Pyro probabilistic
programming language to enable exact inference
in discrete latent variable models with repeated
structure. We validate our methods with experiments on both directed and undirected graphical
models, including applications to polyphonic music modeling, animal movement modeling, and
latent sentiment analysis.

1. Introduction
Factor graphs (Kschischang et al., 2001) provide a unifying
representation for a wide class of machine learning algorithms as undirected bipartite graphs between variables and
factors. Factor graphs can be used with both directed and
undirected graphical models to represent probabilistic inference algorithms performed by variable elimination (Pearl,
1986; Lauritzen & Spiegelhalter, 1988). In the most common case, variable elimination is performed by sum-product
inference, but other variable elimination algorithms can be
derived through alternative semirings and adjoints.
*

Equal contribution 1 Uber AI Labs 2 Harvard University
Stanford University. Correspondence to: Fritz Obermeyer
<fritzo@uber.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

In recent years researchers have exploited the equivalence
of sum-product on discrete factor graphs and tensor contraction (Hirata, 2003; Smith & Gray, 2018). Standard tensor
contraction can provide efficient implementations of sumproduct inference and the tensor contraction operations can
be generalized to alternate semirings (Kohlas & Wilson,
2008; Belle & De Raedt, 2016; Khamis et al., 2016).
Yet, a major downside of factor graphs as an intermediary
representation is that they discard useful information from
higher-level representations, in particular, repeated structure. Directed graphical models explicitly denote repeated
structure through plate notation (Buntine, 1994). Plates have
not seen widespread use in factor graphs or their inference
algorithms ((Dietz, 2010) being an exception for directed
factor graphs). Nor have plates been exploited by tensor
contraction, despite the highly parallel nature of variable
elimination algorithms. This gap can result in suboptimal
algorithms, since repeated structure can provide information
that can be directly exploited for inference optimizations.
In this work we consider the class of plated factor graphs
and the corresponding tensor variable elimination algorithms. We propose a natural definition for plated factor
graphs and lift a number of classic results and algorithms
from factor graphs to the plated setting. In particular, we
generalize treewidth-based bounds on computational complexity for factor graphs to bounds depending on plate sizes,
and characterize the boundary between plated factor graphs
leading to computational complexity either polynomial or
exponential in the sizes of plates in the factor graph.
We consider several different applications of these techniques. First we describe how plated factor graphs can provide an efficient intermediate representation for generative
models with discrete variables, and incorporate a tensorbased contraction into the Pyro probabilistic programming
language. Next, we develop models for three real-world
problems: polyphonic music modeling, animal movement
modeling, and latent sentiment analysis. These models
combine directed networks (Bayesian networks), undirected
networks (conditional random fields), and deep neural networks. We show how plated factor graphs can be used to
concisely represent structure and provide efficient generalpurpose inference through tensor variable elimination.

