Conditional Independence in Testing Bayesian Networks

Yujia Shen 1 Haiying Huang 1 Arthur Choi 1 Adnan Darwiche 1

Abstract
Testing Bayesian Networks (TBNs) were introduced recently to represent a set of distributions,
one of which is selected based on the given evidence and used for reasoning. TBNs are more expressive than classical Bayesian Networks (BNs):
Marginal queries correspond to multi-linear functions in BNs and to piecewise multi-linear functions in TBNs. Moreover, TBN queries are universal approximators, like neural networks. In
this paper, we study conditional independence
in TBNs, showing that it can be inferred from
d-separation as in BNs. We also study the role
of TBN expressiveness and independence in dealing with the problem of learning with incomplete
models (i.e., ones that miss nodes or edges from
the data-generating model). Finally, we illustrate
our results on a number of concrete examples, including a case study on Hidden Markov Models.

1. Introduction
Testing Bayesian Networks (TBNs) were introduced recently, motivated by an expressiveness gap between
Bayesian and neural networks (Choi & Darwiche, 2018).
The basic observation here is that neural networks are universal approximators, which means that they can approximate
any continuous function to an arbitrary error1 (Hornik et al.,
1989; Cybenko, 1989; Leshno et al., 1993). However, for
Bayesian networks (BNs), a joint marginal query is a multilinear function of evidence and a conditional marginal query
corresponds to a quotient of multi-linear functions.
The main insight behind TBNs is that a TBN represents a set
of distributions instead of just one. Moreover, one of these
distributions is selected based on the given evidence and
1

Computer Science Department, University of California, Los
Angeles, California, USA. Correspondence to: Yujia Shen <yujias@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).
1
Typically, the function is assumed to be defined on a compact
set (i.e., closed and bounded) and hence uniformly continuous.

used for reasoning. As a result, in a TBN, a joint marginal
query corresponds to a piecewise multi-linear function and
a conditional marginal query corresponds to a quotient of
such functions. TBNs were shown to be universal approximators in the following sense. Any continuous function can
be approximated to an arbitrary error by a marginal query on
a carefully crafted TBN (under similar assumptions to those
used in neural networks). Therefore, as function approximators, TBNs are as expressive as neural networks. Moreover,
TBNs are more expressive than BNs as they can capture
some relations between evidence and marginal probabilities
that cannot be captured by BNs.
We further investigate TBNs in this paper from several angles. First, we consider the notion of conditional independence, which is somewhat subtle in TBNs since the addition
of evidence can change the distribution selected by a TBN
for reasoning. In particular, we show that conditional independence can still be inferred from the structure of a TBN
using the classical notion of d-separation despite this more
dynamic behavior. Next, we consider some situations in
discriminative learning where the expressiveness of TBNs
provide an advantage. In particular, we consider learning
with incomplete BNs, which miss some nodes or edges from
the data-generating BN, showing analytically how TBNs
can help alleviate this problem. Finally, we extend and further analyze the mechanism used by TBNs for selecting
distributions based on evidence, which increases the reach
of TBNs and tightens our understanding of their semantics.
This paper is structured as follows. We review TBNs in
Section 2 and then extend their dependence on evidence in
Section 3. We study conditional independence in Section 4,
proving it can be inferred from d-separation as in BNs. We
then consider discriminative learning in Section 5, showing
how TBNs can help alleviate the problem of learning with
incomplete models. We follow by a case study in Section 6
on Hidden Markov Models and the associated problem of
missing temporal dependencies. We finally close with some
concluding remarks in Section 7. Proofs of results are delegated to Appendix in the supplementary material.

2. Testing Bayesian Networks
A Testing Bayesian Network (TBN) is a BN whose CPTs
are selected dynamically based on the given evidence.

