Guided evolutionary strategies:
Augmenting random search with surrogate gradients
Niru Maheswaranathan 1 Luke Metz 1 George Tucker 1 Dami Choi 1 Jascha Sohl-Dickstein 1

Abstract
Many applications in machine learning require
optimizing a function whose true gradient is inaccessible, but where surrogate gradient information (directions that may be correlated with, but
not necessarily identical to, the true gradient) is
available instead. This arises when an approximate gradient is easier to compute than the full
gradient (e.g. in meta-learning or unrolled optimization), or when a true gradient is intractable
and is replaced with a surrogate (e.g. in certain
reinforcement learning applications or training
networks with discrete variables). We propose
Guided Evolutionary Strategies, a method for optimally using surrogate gradient directions along
with random search. We deﬁne a search distribution for evolutionary strategies that is elongated
along a subspace spanned by the surrogate gradients. This allows us to estimate a descent direction which can then be passed to a ﬁrst-order
optimizer. We analytically and numerically characterize the trade-offs that result from tuning how
strongly the search distribution is stretched along
the guiding subspace, and use this to derive a
setting of the hyperparameters that works well
across problems. Finally, we apply our method
to example problems, demonstrating an improvement over both standard evolutionary strategies
and ﬁrst-order methods that directly follow the
surrogate gradient.

1. Introduction
Optimization in machine learning involves minimizing cost
functions where gradient information may or may not be
known. When gradient information is available, ﬁrst-order
1

Google Research, Brain Team, Mountain View, CA,
United States. Correspondence to: Niru Maheswaranathan
<nirum@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

methods such as gradient descent are popular due to their
ease of implementation, memory efﬁciency, and convergence guarantees (Sra et al., 2012). When gradient information is not available, however, we turn to zeroth-order
optimization methods, including random search methods
such as evolutionary strategies (Rechenberg, 1973; Nesterov
& Spokoiny, 2011; Choromanski et al., 2018; Salimans et al.,
2017).
However, what if only partial gradient information is available? That is, what if one has access to surrogate gradients
that are correlated with the true gradient, but may be biased
in some unknown fashion? Naı̈vely, there are two extremal
approaches to optimization with surrogate gradients. On
one hand, you could ignore the surrogate gradient information entirely and perform zeroth-order optimization, using
methods such as evolutionary strategies to estimate a descent direction. These methods exhibit poor convergence
properties when the parameter dimension is large (Duchi
et al., 2015). On the other hand, you could directly feed the
surrogate gradients to a ﬁrst-order optimization algorithm.
However, bias in the surrogate gradients will interfere with
optimizing the target problem (Tucker et al., 2017). Ideally,
we would like a method that combines the complementary strengths of these two approaches: we would like to
combine the unbiased descent direction estimated with evolutionary strategies with the low-variance estimate given by
the surrogate gradient. In this work, we propose a method
for doing this called guided evolutionary strategies (Guided
ES).
The critical assumption underlying Guided ES is that we
have access to surrogate gradient information, but not the
true gradient. This scenario arises in a wide variety of
machine learning problems, which typically fall into two
categories: cases where the true gradient is unknown or not
deﬁned, and cases where the true gradient is hard or expensive to compute. Examples of the former include: models
with discrete stochastic variables (where straight through
estimators (Bengio et al., 2013; van den Oord et al., 2017) or
Concrete/Gumble-Softmax methods (Maddison et al., 2016;
Jang et al., 2016) are commonly used) and learned models
in reinforcement learning (e.g. for Q functions (Watkins &
Dayan, 1992; Mnih et al., 2013; 2015; Lillicrap et al., 2015)

