Relational Pooling for Graph Representations

Ryan L. Murphy 1 Balasubramaniam Srinivasan 2 Vinayak Rao 1 Bruno Ribeiro 2

Abstract
This work generalizes graph neural networks
(GNNs) beyond those based on the WeisfeilerLehman (WL) algorithm, graph Laplacians, and
diffusions. Our approach, denoted Relational
Pooling (RP), draws from the theory of finite
partial exchangeability to provide a framework
with maximal representation power for graphs.
RP can work with existing graph representation
models and, somewhat counterintuitively, can
make them even more powerful than the original WL isomorphism test. Additionally, RP
allows architectures like Recurrent Neural Networks and Convolutional Neural Networks to be
used in a theoretically sound approach for graph
classification. We demonstrate improved performance of RP-based graph representations over
state-of-the-art methods on a number of tasks.

1. Introduction
Applications with relational graph data, such as molecule
classification, social and biological network prediction,
first order logic, and natural language understanding, require an effective representation of graph structures and
their attributes. While representation learning for graph
data has made tremendous progress in recent years, current
schemes are unable to produce so-called most-powerful
representations that can provably distinguish all distinct
graphs up to graph isomorphisms. Consider for instance the
broad class of Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL) based Graph Neural Networks (WL-GNNs) (Duvenaud et al., 2015; Kipf &
Welling, 2017; Gilmer et al., 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017a;
Velickovic et al., 2018; Monti et al., 2017; Ying et al., 2018;
Xu et al., 2019; Morris et al., 2019). These are unable
to distinguish pairs of nonisomorphic graphs on which the
standard WL isomorphism heuristic fails (Cai et al., 1992;
Xu et al., 2019; Morris et al., 2019). As graph neural networks (GNNs) are applied to increasingly more challeng-

ing problems, having a most-powerful framework for graph
representation learning would be a key development in geometric deep learning (Bronstein et al., 2017).
In this work we introduce Relational Pooling (RP), a novel
framework with maximal representation power for any
graph input. In RP, we specify an idealized most-powerful
representation for graphs and a framework for tractably approximating this ideal. The ideal representation can distinguish pairs of nonisomorphic graphs even when the WL
isomorphism test fails, which motivates a straightforward
procedure using approximate RP – we call this RP-GNN –
for making GNNs more powerful.
A key inductive bias for graph representations is invariance to permutations of the adjacency matrix (graph isomorphisms), see Aldous (1981); Diaconis & Janson (2008);
Orbanz & Roy (2015). Our work differs in its focus on
learning representations of finite but variable-size graphs.
In particular, given a finite but arbitrary-sized graph G potentially endowed with vertex or edge features, RP outputs
a representation f (G) ∈ Rdh , dh > 0 , that is invariant to
graph isomorphisms. RP can learn representations for each
vertex in a graph, though to simplify the exposition, we focus on learning one representation of the entire graph.
Contributions. We make the following contributions: (1)
We introduce Relational Pooling (RP), a novel framework
for graph representation that can be combined with any
existing neural network architecture, including ones not
generally associated with graphs such as Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). (2) We prove that RP has maximal representation power for graphs and show that combining WL-GNNs with RP can increase their representation power. In our experiments, we classify graphs that
cannot be distinguished by a state-of-the-art WL-GNN (Xu
et al., 2019). (3) We introduce approximation approaches
that make RP computationally tractable. We demonstrate
empirically that these still lead to strong performance and
can be used with RP-GNN to speed up graph classification
when compared to traditional WL-GNNs.

1

Department of Statistics, and 2 Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA. Correspondence to: Ryan L. Murphy <murph213@purdue.edu>.

2. Relational Pooling

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Notation. We consider graphs endowed with vertex and
edge features. That is, let G = (V, E, X (v) , X(e) ) be a
graph with vertices V , edges E ⊆ V × V , vertex fea-

