Sublinear Quantum Algorithms for Training Linear and
Kernel-based Classifiers
Tongyang Li 1 Shouvanik Chakrabarti 1 Xiaodi Wu 1

Abstract
We investigate quantum algorithms for classification, a fundamental problem in machine learning,
with provable guarantees. Given n d-dimensional
data points, the state-of-the-art (and optimal)
classical algorithm for training classifiers with
constant margin (Clarkson et al., 2012) runs in
Õ(n + d)1 . We design sublinear quantum
algop
p
rithms for the same task running in Õ( n + d),
a quadratic improvement in both n and d. Moreover, our algorithms use the standard quantization
of the classical input and generate the same classical output, suggesting minimal overheads when
used as subroutines for end-to-end applications.
We also demonstrate a tight lower bound (up to
poly-log factors) and discuss the possibility of
implementation on near-term quantum machines.

1. Introduction
Motivations. Classification is a fundamental problem of
supervised learning, which takes a training set of data points
of known classes as inputs and aims to training a model
for predicting the classes of future data points. It is also
ubiquitous due to its broad connections and applications to
computer vision, natural language processing, statistics, etc.
A fundamental case of classification is linear classification,
where we are given n data points X1 , . . . , Xn in Rd and a
label vector y 2 {1, 1}n . The goal is to find a separating
hyperplane, i.e., a unit vector w in Rd , such that
yi · Xi> w

0

8 i 2 [n].

(1.1)

By taking Xi
( 1)yi Xi , it reduces to a maximin problem
>
maxw mini Xi w 0. The approximation version of linear
1

Department of Computer Science, UMIACS, and Joint
Center for Quantum Information and Computer Science, University of Maryland.
Correspondence to: Tongyang Li
<tongyang@cs.umd.edu>, Xiaodi Wu <xwu@cs.umd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).
1
Õ(·), ˜
⌦(·), and ˜
⇥(·) notations hide poly-logarithmic factors.

classification is to find a unit vector w̄ 2 Rd so that
Xi> w̄

max min Xi>0 w

w2Rd i0 2[n]

✏

8 i 2 [n],

(1.2)

i.e., w̄ approximately solves the maximin problem. More
generally, we can regard a (nonlinear) classifier as a kernelbased classifier by replacing Xi by (Xi ) ( being a kernel
function). We will focus on algorithms finding approximate
classifiers (in the sense of (1.2)) with provable guarantees.
The Perceptron Algorithm for linear classification is one of
the oldest algorithms studied in machine learning (Novikoff,
1963; Minsky & Papert, 1988), which runs in time O(nd/✏2 )
for finding an w̄ 2 Rd satisfying (1.2). The state-of-theart classical result along this line (Clarkson et al., 2012)
solves linear classification in time Õ((n + d)/✏2 ). A careful
reader might notice that the input to linear classification
is n d-dimensional vectors with total size O(nd). Hence,
the result of Clarkson et al. (2012) is sub-linear in its input
size. To make it possible, Clarkson et al. (2012) assumes
the following entry-wise input model:
Input model: given any i 2 [n] and j 2 [d], the j-th entry
of Xi can be recovered in O(1) time.
The output of Clarkson et al. (2012) is an efficient classical
representation of w̄ in the sense that every entry of w̄ can
be recovered with Õ(1) cost. It is no surprise that w̄ per se
gives such a representation. However, there could be more
succinct and efficient representations of w̄, which could be
reasonable alternatives of w̄ for sub-linear algorithms that
run in time less the dimension of w̄ (as we will see in the
quantum case). The complexity of Clarkson et al. (2012) is
also optimal (up to poly-logarithmic factors) in the above
input/output model as shown by the same paper.
Recent developments in quantum computation, especially
in the emerging topic of “quantum machine learning” (see
the surveys Biamonte et al. (2017); Arunachalam & de Wolf
(2017); Schuld et al. (2015)), suggest that quantum algorithms might offer significant speed-ups for optimization
and machine learning problems. In particular, a quantum
counterpart of the Perceptron algorithm has been proposed
in Kapoor et al. (2016)
with improved time complexity from
p
O(nd/✏2 ) to Õ( nd/✏2 ) (details in related works). Motivated both by the significance of classification and the

