ME-Net: Towards Effective Adversarial Robustness with Matrix Estimation
Yuzhe Yang 1 Guo Zhang 1 Dina Katabi 1 Zhi Xu 1

Abstract
Deep neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial attacks. The literature is rich with algorithms that can easily craft successful adversarial
examples. In contrast, the performance of defense techniques still lags behind. This paper proposes ME-Net, a defense method that leverages
matrix estimation (ME). In ME-Net, images are
preprocessed using two steps: first pixels are randomly dropped from the image; then, the image
is reconstructed using ME. We show that this process destroys the adversarial structure of the noise,
while re-enforcing the global structure in the original image. Since humans typically rely on such
global structures in classifying images, the process makes the network mode compatible with
human perception. We conduct comprehensive
experiments on prevailing benchmarks such as
MNIST, CIFAR-10, SVHN, and Tiny-ImageNet.
Comparing ME-Net with state-of-the-art defense
mechanisms shows that ME-Net consistently outperforms prior techniques, improving robustness
against both black-box and white-box attacks.

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art deep neural networks (NNs) are vulnerable
to adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2013). By adding
small human-indistinguishable perturbation to the inputs,
an adversary can fool neural networks to produce incorrect
outputs with high probabilities. This phenomena raises
increasing concerns for safety-critical scenarios such as the
self-driving cars where NNs are widely deployed.
An increasing body of research has been aiming to either
generate effective perturbations, or construct NNs that are
robust enough to defend against such attacks. Currently,
many effective algorithms exist to craft these adversarial
examples, but defense techniques seem to be lagging behind.
1
MIT CSAIL, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to:
Yuzhe Yang <yuzhe@mit.edu>, Zhi Xu <zhixu@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

For instance, the state-of-the-art defense can only achieve
less than 50% adversarial accuracy for `∞ perturbations
on datasets such as CIFAR-10 (Madry et al., 2017). Under
recent strong attacks, most defense methods have shown to
break down to nearly 0% accuracy (Athalye et al., 2018).
As adversarial perturbations are carefully generated structured noise, a natural conjecture for defending against them
is to destroy their structure. A naive approach for doing so
would randomly mask (i.e., zero out) pixels in the image.
While such method can eliminate the adversarial structure
within the noise through random information drop, it is almost certain to fail since it equally destroys the information
of the original image, making NN inference even worse.
However, this naive starting point raises an interesting suggestion: instead of simply applying a random mask to the
images, a preferable method should also reconstruct the
images from their masked versions. In this case, the random
masking destroys the crafted structures, but the reconstruction recovers the global structures that characterize the objects in the images. Images contain some global structures.
An image classified as cat should have at least a cat as its
main body. Humans use such global structure to classify
images. In contrast the structure in adversarial perturbation
is more local and defies the human eye. If both training
and testing are performed under the same underlying global
structures (i.e., there is no distributional shift in training and
testing), the network should be generalizable and robust. If
the reconstruction can successfully maintain the underlying
global structure, the masking-and-reconstruction pipeline
can redistribute the carefully constructed adversarial noises
to non-adversarial structures.
In this paper, we leverage matrix estimation (ME) as our
reconstruction scheme. ME is concerned with recovering
a data matrix from noisy and incomplete observations of
its entries, where exact or approximate recovery of a matrix is theoretically guaranteed if the true data matrix has
some global structures (e.g., low rank). We view a masked
adversarial image as a noisy and incomplete realization
of the underlying clean image, and propose ME-Net, a
preprocessing-based defense that reverts a noisy incomplete
image into a denoised version that maintains the underlying
global structures in the clean image. ME-Net realizes adversarial robustness by using such denoised global-structure
preserving representations.

