Adaptive Sensor Placement for Continuous Spaces

James A. Grant 1 2 Alexis Boukouvalas 1 Ryan-Rhys Griffiths 3 David S. Leslie 1 4 Sattar Vakili 1
Enrique Munoz de Cote 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of adaptively placing
sensors along an interval to detect stochasticallygenerated events. We present a new formulation
of the problem as a continuum-armed bandit problem with feedback in the form of partial observations of realisations of an inhomogeneous Poisson process. We design a solution method by
combining Thompson sampling with nonparametric inference via increasingly granular Bayesian
histograms and derive an Õ(T 2/3 ) bound on the
Bayesian regret in T rounds. This is coupled with
the design of an efficent optimisation approach to
select actions in polynomial time. In simulations
we demonstrate our approach to have substantially
lower and less variable regret than competitor algorithms.

1. Introduction
In this paper we consider the problem of adaptively placing
sensors to detect events occurring stochastically according
to a inhomogeneous Poisson process. This is a problem
arising in numerous applications including ecology (Heikkinen & Arjas, 1999), and astronomy (Gregory & Loredo,
1992). Adaptive sequential decision-making that learns an
optimal placement of sensors in response to observations
can lead to detecting many more events than fixed policies
based on an assumed Poisson process rate function. We
study the problem under a simple abstract framework which
encompasses many possible practical scenarios, including
choosing which hours to operate to maximise customer engagement, or choosing placement of mobile base stations to
service as many requests as possible, as well as the classical
1
PROWLER.io Ltd, Cambridge, United Kingdom 2 STOR-i
Centre for Doctoral Training, Lancaster University, Lancaster,
United Kingdom 3 Department of Physics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom 4 Department of Mathematics
and Statistics, Lancaster University, Lancaster, United Kingdom.
Correspondence to: James A. Grant <j.grant@lancaster.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

sensing applications.
Suppose that a decision-maker is tasked with placing a finite
number of sensors along an interval. The decision-maker’s
objective is to maximise, through time, a reward function
which trades off the number of events detected with the
cost of sensing. At each step, each sensor is tasked with
sensing a subinterval, with the cost of sensing depending
on the length of the subinterval. Only the events that occur
in a sensed subinterval are detected. The decision-maker
may update the placement of sensors at regular intervals
creating a sequential problem where the decision-maker
iteratively places sensors and receives feedback on where
events occurred.
The decision-maker therefore faces a classic explorationexploitation dilemma. In each round they will gather information on what was detected in the sensed regions, and
will receive a reward. The most informative action is to
sense the entire interval, but this may not be the rewardmaximising action due to the cost of sensing. Hence the
decision-maker must choose sensor placements to trade off
learning about regions where information is insufficient,
while also capitalising on information they already have to
generate large rewards. This paper develops an algorithm
to tackle this problem with the aim of minimising Bayesian
regret, the difference between the expected reward achieved
by constantly selecting an optimal action and the expected
reward of actions actually taken, where the expectation is
taken with respect to the prior over the reward-generating
parameters.
Multi-armed bandits provide models for sequential decision problems, and our problem most closely resembles the
continuum-armed or X -armed bandit problem (Agrawal,
1995). In a continuum-armed bandit (CAB) problem
a decision-maker sequentially selects points in some ddimensional continuous space and receives reward in the
form of a noisy realisation of some unknown (usually Lipschitz smooth) function on the space. Our sensor placement
problem can map to this framework by considering that the
placement of sensors can be represented by the set of endpoints of the sensors’ subintervals. Note, however, that the
noise and feedback models in the sensor placement problem are more complex than in previous treatments of CAB

