Neural Joint Source-Channel Coding

Kristy Choi 1 Kedar Tatwawadi 2 Aditya Grover 1 Tsachy Weissman 2 Stefano Ermon 1

Abstract
For reliable transmission across a noisy communication channel, classical results from information
theory show that it is asymptotically optimal to
separate out the source and channel coding processes. However, this decomposition can fall short
in the finite bit-length regime, as it requires nontrivial tuning of hand-crafted codes and assumes
infinite computational power for decoding. In this
work, we propose to jointly learn the encoding
and decoding processes using a new discrete variational autoencoder model. By adding noise into
the latent codes to simulate the channel during
training, we learn to both compress and errorcorrect given a fixed bit-length and computational
budget. We obtain codes that are not only competitive against several separation schemes, but
also learn useful robust representations of the data
for downstream tasks such as classification. Finally, inference amortization yields an extremely
fast neural decoder, almost an order of magnitude
faster compared to standard decoding methods
based on iterative belief propagation.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of encoding images as bit-strings
so that they can be reliably transmitted across a noisy communication channel. Classical results from Shannon (1948)
show that for a memoryless communication channel, as
the image size goes to infinity, it is optimal to separately:
1) compress the images as much as possible to remove
redundant information (source coding) and 2) use an errorcorrecting code to re-introduce redundancy, which allows
for reconstruction in the presence of noise (channel coding).
This separation theorem has been studied in a wide variety of contexts and has also enjoyed great success in the
development of new coding algorithms.
1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Kristy Choi <kechoi@cs.stanford.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

However, this elegant decomposition suffers from two critical limitations in the finite bit-length regime. First, without
an infinite number of bits for transmission, the overall distortion (reconstruction quality) is a function of both source
and channel coding errors. Thus optimizing for both: (1) the
number of bits to allocate to each process and (2) the code
designs themselves is a difficult task. Second, maximumlikelihood decoding is in general NP-hard (Berlekamp et al.
(1978)). Thus obtaining the accuracy that is possible in theory is contingent on the availability of infinite computational
power for decoding, which is impractical for real-world systems. Though several lines of work have explored various
relaxations of this problem to achieve tractability (Koetter &
Vontobel (2003), Feldman et al. (2005), Vontobel & Koetter
(2007)), many decoding systems rely on heuristics and early
stopping of iterative approaches for scalability, which can
be highly suboptimal.
To address these challenges we propose Neural Error Correcting and Source Trimming (NECST) codes, a deep learning framework for jointly learning to compress and errorcorrect an input image given a fixed bit-length budget. Three
key steps are required. First, we use neural networks to
encode each image into a suitable bit-string representation, sidestepping the need to rely on hand-designed coding
schemes that require additional tuning for good performance.
Second, we simulate a discrete channel within the model
and inject noise directly into the latent codes to enforce robustness. Third, we amortize the decoding process such that
after training, we obtain an extremely fast decoder at test
time. These components pose significant optimization challenges due to the inherent non-differentiability of discrete
latent random variables. We overcome this issue by leveraging recent advances in unbiased low-variance gradient
estimation for variational learning of discrete latent variable
models, and train the model using a variational lower bound
on the mutual information between the images and their
binary representations to obtain good, robust codes. At its
core, NECST can also be seen as an implicit deep generative model of the data derived from the perspective of the
joint-source channel coding problem (Bengio et al. (2014),
Sohl-Dickstein et al. (2015), Goyal et al. (2017)).
In experiments, we test NECST on several grayscale and
RGB image datasets, obtaining improvements over industrystandard compression (e.g, WebP (Google, 2015)) and error-

