Explaining Deep Neural Networks with a Polynomial Time Algorithm for
Shapley Values Approximation

Marco Ancona 1 Cengiz Öztireli 2 Markus Gross 1 2

Abstract
The problem of explaining the behavior of deep
neural networks has recently gained a lot of attention. While several attribution methods have been
proposed, most come without strong theoretical
foundations, which raises questions about their
reliability. On the other hand, the literature on
cooperative game theory suggests Shapley values
as a unique way of assigning relevance scores
such that certain desirable properties are satisfied.
Unfortunately, the exact evaluation of Shapley values is prohibitively expensive, exponential in the
number of input features. In this work, by leveraging recent results on uncertainty propagation,
we propose a novel, polynomial-time approximation of Shapley values in deep neural networks.
We show that our method produces significantly
better approximations of Shapley values than existing state-of-the-art attribution methods.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have demonstrated enormous potential in solving a variety of problems, growing the
sophistication and impact of machine learning. On the other
hand, while machine learning models are being employed
on an increasing number of fields, the black-box nature of
DNNs is still a barrier to the adoption of these systems for
those tasks where interpretability is a requirement. Recently,
European regulators introduced the legal notion of a right
to explanation (Goodman & Flaxman, 2016), demanding
transparency for any automated decision having a deep impact on the life of the people involved, which affects the
adoption of black-box models like DNNs on some domains.
Since the notion of interpretability is complex, multi-faceted
and not yet fully defined (Doshi-Velez & Kim, 2017; Lip1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
Disney Research Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Marco
Ancona <marco.ancona@inf.ethz.ch>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

ton, 2016), several works have focused on investigating
methods for local interpretability. Contrarily to global interpretability, which aims at explaining the general model
behavior, local interpretability scope is restricted at explaining a particular decision for a given model and input instance
(Doshi-Velez & Kim, 2017).
In the realm of local interpretability, attribution methods
have received particular attention in the last years (Ras et al.,
2018). Consider a model that takes an N-dimensional input
x = [x1 , ..., xN ] ∈ RN and produces a C-dimensional
output f (x) = [f1 (x), ..., fC (x)] ∈ RC , like a DNN with
C output neurons. Depending on the application, the input
features x1 , ..., xN can have a different nature, like pixels for
images or components of a multi-dimensional word vector
representation for natural language processing. Similarly,
each output of the network can represent either a numerical
predicted quantity (regression task) or the probability of a
corresponding class (classification task).
Formally, attribution methods aim at producing explanations by assigning a scalar attribution value, sometimes
also called “relevance” (Bach et al., 2015) or “contribution” (Shrikumar et al., 2017), to each input feature of
a network for a given input sample. In particular, for a
single target output indexed with c, the goal of an attribution method is to determine the contribution Rc (x; fc ) =
c
[R1c (x; fc ), ..., RN
(x; fc )] ∈ RN of each input feature xi
to the output fc (x). For clarity of notation, in the remainder
of the paper, we will simply use Rc whenever possible. For
a classification task, the target output can be chosen to be
the one associated with the highest output probability (to understand which part of the input was mostly relevant for the
prediction) or the one associated with a different class (to
assess whether the input contains evidence that supports or
rejects a different class). Over the last decade, several attribution methods have been specifically developed for neural
networks (Simonyan et al., 2014; Zeiler & Fergus, 2014;
Springenberg et al., 2014; Bach et al., 2015; Ribeiro et al.,
2016; Selvaraju et al., 2016; Shrikumar et al., 2017; Sundararajan et al., 2017; Montavon et al., 2017; Zintgraf et al.,
2017; Lundberg & Lee, 2017; Kindermans et al., 2018).
When an explanation is generated, it should be a natural
requirement to have a clear understanding of how the expla-

