Optimal Transport for structured data with application on graphs

Titouan Vayer 1 Laetitia Chapel 1 Rémi Flamary 2 Romain Tavenard 3 Nicolas Courty 1

Abstract

even images (Bach & Harchaoui, 2007).

This work considers the problem of computing
distances between structured objects such as undirected graphs, seen as probability distributions
in a specific metric space. We consider a new
transportation distance (i.e. that minimizes a
total cost of transporting probability masses) that
unveils the geometric nature of the structured
objects space. Unlike Wasserstein or GromovWasserstein metrics that focus solely and respectively on features (by considering a metric in the
feature space) or structure (by seeing structure
as a metric space), our new distance exploits
jointly both information, and is consequently
called Fused Gromov-Wasserstein (FGW). After discussing its properties and computational
aspects, we show results on a graph classification task, where our method outperforms both
graph kernels and deep graph convolutional networks. Exploiting further on the metric properties
of FGW, interesting geometric objects such as
Fréchet means or barycenters of graphs are illustrated and discussed in a clustering context.

1. Introduction
There is a longstanding line of research on learning from
structured data, i.e. objects that are a combination of a feature and structural information (see for example (Bakir et al.,
2007; Battaglia et al., 2018)). As immediate instances, graph
data are usually ensembles of nodes with attributes (typically Rd vectors) linked by some specific relation. Notable
examples are found in chemical compounds or molecules
modeling (Kriege et al., 2016), brain connectivity (Ktena
et al., 2017), or social networks (Yanardag & Vishwanathan,
2015). This generic family of objects also encompasses
time series (Cuturi & Blondel, 2017), trees (Day, 1985) or
1

2

Univ. Bretagne-Sud, CNRS, IRISA, F-56000 Vannes Univ.
Côte d’Azur, CNRS, OCA Lagrange, F-06000 Nice 3 Univ. Rennes,
CNRS, LETG, F-35000 Rennes. Correspondence to: Titouan
Vayer <titouan.vayer@irisa.fr>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Being able to leverage on both feature and structural information in a learning task is a tedious task, that requires the
association in some ways of those two pieces of information
in order to capture the similarity between the structured
data. Several kernels have been designed to perform this
task (Shervashidze et al., 2011; Vishwanathan et al., 2010).
As a good representative of those methods, the WeisfeilerLehman kernel (Vishwanathan et al., 2010) captures in each
node a notion of vicinity by aggregating, in the sense of
the topology of the graph, the surrounding features. Recent
advances in graph convolutional networks (Bronstein et al.,
2017; Kipf & Welling, 2016; Defferrard et al., 2016) allows
learning end-to-end the best combination of features by relying on parametric convolutions on the graph, i.e. learnable
linear combinations of features. In the end, and in order
to compare two graphs that might have different number
of nodes and connections, those two categories of methods
build a new representation for every graph that shares the
same space, and that is amenable to classification.
A transportation distance between structured data.
Contrasting with those previous methods, we suggest in
this paper to see graphs as probability distributions, embedded in a specific metric space. We propose to define a
specific notion of distance between those probability distributions, that can be used in most of the classical machine
learning approaches. Beyond its mathematical properties,
disposing of a distance between structured data, provided it
is meaningful, is desirable in many ways: i) it can then be
plugged into distance-based machine learning algorithms
such as k-nn or t-SNE ii) its quality is not dependent on the
learning set size, and iii) it allows considering interesting
quantities such as geodesic interpolation or barycenters. To
the best of our knowledge, this is one of the first attempts to
define such a distance on structured data.
Yet, defining this distance is not a trivial task. While features can always be compared using a standard metric, such
as `2 , comparing structures requires a notion of similarity
which can be found via the notion of isometry, since the
graph nodes are not ordered (we define later on which cases
two graphs are considered identical). We use the notion of
transportation distance to compare two graphs represented
as probability distributions. Optimal transport (OT) have

