A Tree-Based Method for Fast Repeated Sampling of
Determinantal Point Processes
Jennifer Gillenwater 1 Alex Kulesza 1 Zelda Mariet 2 3 Sergei Vassilvitskii 1

Abstract
It is often desirable in recommender systems and
other information retrieval applications to provide
diverse results, and determinantal point processes
(DPPs) have become a popular way to capture the
trade-off between the quality of individual results
and the diversity of the overall set. However, sampling from a DPP is inherently expensive: if the
underlying collection contains N items, then generating each DPP sample requires time linear in
N following a one-time preprocessing phase. Additionally, results often need to be personalized to
a user, but standard approaches to personalization
invalidate the preprocessing, making personalized
samples especially expensive. In this work we
address both of these shortcomings. First, we
propose a new algorithm for generating DPP samples in time logarithmic in N , following a slightly
more expensive preprocessing phase. We then extend the algorithm to support arbitrary query-time
feature weights, allowing us to generate samples
customized to individual users while still retaining logarithmic runtime; experiments show our
approach runs over 300 times faster than traditional DPP sampling on collections of 100,000
items for samples of size 10.

1. Introduction
Diverse results are desirable in many applications of information retrieval and recommender systems. For search
engines, diversity can be a way to combat query ambiguity;
for instance, a user querying “TV” might be researching television sets to buy or simply interested in the local listings.
1
Google Research NYC 2 Massachussetts Institute of
Technology 3 Research performed during an internship
at Google.
Correspondence to:
Jennifer Gillenwater
<jengi@google.com>, Alex Kulesza <kulesza@google.com>,
Zelda Mariet <zelda@csail.mit.edu>, Sergei Vassilvitskii
<sergeiv@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

For recommender systems, diversity introduces variety and
increases the chance of engagement with at least one item
(Smyth & McClave, 2001; Herlocker et al., 2004; Ziegler
et al., 2005; Hurley & Zhang, 2011).
Determinantal point processes (DPPs) are probabilistic models of diverse subsets that have often been applied to these
kinds of problems (Krause et al., 2008; Zhou et al., 2010;
Lin & Bilmes, 2012; Chao et al., 2015; Mariet & Sra, 2016a)
and have achieved notable success in practice (Chen et al.,
2017; Wilhelm et al., 2018). At their core, DPPs provide a
formal trade-off between the quality of individual selected
results and the diversity of the overall result set. Unlike
many heuristic approaches to capturing diversity, DPPs define full probability distributions over sets of items. This
means that they can be repeatedly sampled, for instance to
provide the user with a new and diverse set of recommendations each time that they reload a webpage.
However, DPPs suffer from computational limitations that
can make them difficult to use in practice. Existing algorithms for sampling from a DPP are at least linear in the
number of candidate results, which can be prohibitive in
modern applications that may have many thousand or even
millions of items. And when results need to be personalized
according to the preferences of a user, these algorithms can
become even more expensive. In this work we show how
to address both of these limitations, providing a method for
generating DPP samples that runs in time logarithmic in
the number of items and allows for personalization with
minimal additional overhead.
Speed. A DPP defines a probability distribution over possible result sets, giving higher probability to sets that contain
high quality, diverse results. To instantiate a specific set of
results in a recommendation or information retrieval scenario one often samples a set from the DPP. Although DPPs
can be impressively efficient given the exponential number of subsets being modeled (Kulesza & Taskar, 2012),
sampling is often limited by performance in practice. In
particular, the most basic algorithm for sampling a DPP
over a ground set of N items (e.g., a database of N news
articles or videos) requires O(N 3 ) time, dominated by the
eigendecomposition of an N × N matrix. This is rarely
practical when N is more than a few hundred.

