Pareto Optimal Streaming Unsupervised Classification
Soumya Basu 1 Steven Gutstein 2 Brent Lance 2 Sanjay Shakkottai 1

Abstract
We study an online and streaming unsupervised
classification system. Our setting consists of a
collection of classifiers (with unknown confusion
matrices) each of which can classify one sample per unit time, and which are accessed by a
stream of unlabeled samples. Each sample is dispatched to one or more classifiers, and depending
on the labels collected from these classifiers, may
be sent to other classifiers to collect additional
labels. The labels are continually aggregated.
Once the aggregated label has high enough accuracy (pre-specified threshold for accuracy) or the
sample is sent to all the classifiers, the now labeled sample is ejected from the system. For any
given pre-specified accuracy threshold, the objective is to sustain the maximum possible sample arrival rate, such that the number of samples
in memory does not grow unbounded. In this paper, we characterize the Pareto-optimal region of
accuracy and arrival rate, and develop an algorithm that can operate at any point within this region. Our algorithm uses queueing-based routing and scheduling approaches combined with
a novel online tensor decomposition method to
learn the hidden parameters, to Pareto-optimality
guarantees. We finally verify our theoretical
results through simulations on two ensembles
formed using AlexNet, VGG, and ResNet deep
image classifiers.

1. Introduction
Computational outsourcing, via the cloud, is becoming increasingly important. However, the efficacy of cloud computing agents often remains unknown (e.g. task processing on Mechanical Turk, where the human agents have
1

The University of Texas at Austin, USA 2 Army Research Lab, USA. Correspondence to: Soumya Basu <basusoumya@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

unknown efficiencies). Furthermore, ground truth data
needed to evaluate the agents’ performance is often absent.
Such problems must be addressed through an ensemble of
classifiers, operating in an unsupervised setting (i.e. Unsupervised Ensemble Learning—UEL). Over the past three
decades, significant theoretical and empirical research has
been performed in this area (Dawid & Skene, 1979; Li
et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2014; Jain & Oh, 2014; Jaffe et al.,
2016; Shaham et al., 2016). In particular, crowdsourcing,
which focuses on selecting and aggregating a large number of classifiers, has an extensive literature (Karger et al.,
2011; 2014; Ok et al., 2016) culminating in optimal aggregation schemes. The key focuses of most previous works
are 1) from a crowdsourcing perspective, choosing a small
subset of an effectively infinite pool of classifiers for each
sample, and 2) from an unsupervised learning perspective,
offline/one-shot classification of a set of samples (see Section 7 for related work).
We take a somewhat different approach than the traditional
crowdsourcing and UEL. Our system consists of a fixed
ensemble of deterministic classifiers, each of which has
a fixed processing speed. Such classifiers are available in
many emerging fields such as cloud computation or humanin-the-loop computation. As a motivating example, consider an ensemble of both human experts and third party
neural network classifiers, which are jointly tasked to label
images in real time. The individual labeling characteristics
of these classifiers are often unknown; for human agents
because the agents have not been evaluated sufficiently in
the past, and for DNNs, due to contractual or privacy reasons (e.g. the neural network was downloaded from the
web where it was previously trained on an unknown data
set). Importantly, these classifiers are deterministic when
the DNNs have fixed weights and the humans have fixed
opinions (i.e. repeatedly providing the same sample to an
agent will not result in changing labels).
In our streaming model, samples (e.g. images) arrive online and are assigned to an ensemble of expert classifiers.
Each classifier is characterized by a latent confusion matrix and can process one sample per time slot. For each
sample, the labels are continually collected and aggregated
as it sequentially passes through distinct classifiers. During
the process of aggregation once the sample achieves a pre-

