Dimensionality Reduction for Tukey Regression

Kenneth L. Clarkson * 1 Ruosong Wang * 2 David P. Woodruff * 2

Abstract
We give the first dimensionality reduction methods for the overconstrained Tukey regression
P problem. The Tukey loss function kykM = i M (yi )
has M (yi ) ≈ |yi |p for residual errors yi smaller
than a prescribed threshold τ , but M (yi ) becomes
constant for errors |yi | > τ . Our results depend on a new structural result, proven constructively, showing that for any d-dimensional subspace L ⊂ Rn , there is a fixed bounded-size subset of coordinates containing, for every y ∈ L, all
the large coordinates, with respect to the Tukey
loss function, of y. Our methods reduce a given
Tukey regression problem to a smaller weighted
version, whose solution is a provably good approximate solution to the original problem. Our
reductions are fast, simple and easy to implement,
and we give empirical results demonstrating their
practicality, using existing heuristic solvers for
the small versions. We also give exponentialtime algorithms giving provably good solutions,
and hardness results suggesting that a significant
speedup in the worst case is unlikely.

1. Introduction
A number of problems in numerical linear algebra have
witnessed remarkable speedups via the technique of linear
sketching. Such speedups are made possible typically by
reductions in the dimension of the input (here the number of rows of the input matrix), whereby a large scale
optimization problem is replaced by a much smaller optimization problem, and then a slower algorithm is run on
the small problem. It is then argued that the solution to
the smaller problem provides an approximate solution to
the original problem. We refer the reader to several recent
surveys on this topic (Kannan & Vempala, 2009; Mahoney,
*
Equal contribution 1 IBM Research - Almaden, San Jose,
California, USA 2 Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. Correspondence to: Ruosong Wang <ruosongw@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

2011; Woodruff, 2014).
This approach has led to optimal algorithms for approximate
overconstrained least squares regression: given an n × d
matrix A, with n  d, and an n×1 vector b, output a vector
x0 ∈ Rd for which kAx0 − bk2 ≤ (1 + ε) minx kAx − bk2 .
For this problem, one first samples a random matrix S ∈
Rk×n with a small number k of rows, and replaces A with
S · A and b with S · b. Then one solves (or approximately
solves) the small problem minx kSAx − Sbk2 . The goal
of this sketch and solve approach is to choose a distribution S so that if x0 is the minimizer to this latter problem,
then one has that kAx0 − bk2 ≤ (1 + ε) minx kAx − bk2
with high probability. Note that x0 = (SA)+ Sb, where
(SA)+ denotes the pseudoinverse of SA and can be computed in kd2 time, see, e.g., (Woodruff, 2014) for a survey
and further background. Consequently, the overall time
to solve least squares regression is T + kd2 , where T is
the time to compute S · A and S · b. Thus, the goal is to
minimize both the time T and the sketching dimension k.
Using this approach, Sárlos showed (Sarlós, 2006) how to
achieve O(nd log n) + poly(d/ε) overall time, which was
subsequently improved to the optimal nnz(A) + poly(d/ε)
time in (Clarkson & Woodruff, 2013; Meng & Mahoney,
2012; Nelson & Nguyen, 2012).
Recently, a number of works have looked at more robust
versions of regression. Sohler and Woodruff (Sohler &
Woodruff, 2011), building off of earlier work of Clarkson
(Clarkson, 2005) (see also (Dasgupta et al., 2009)), showed
how to use the sketch and solve paradigm to obtain a (1+ε)approximation to `1 regression, namely, to output a vector
x0 ∈ Rd for which kAx0 − bk1 ≤ (1 + ε) minx kAx − bk1 .
This version of regression, also known as least absolute deviations, is known to be less sensitive to outliers than least
squares regression, since one takes the absolute values of
the errors in the residuals rather than their squares, and so
does not try to fit outliers as much. By now, we also have optimal nnz(A)+poly(d/ε) time algorithms for `1 regression
(Li et al., 2013; Clarkson et al., 2016; Woodruff & Zhang,
2013; Clarkson & Woodruff, 2013; Meng & Mahoney, 2012;
Wang & Woodruff, 2019), for the related quantile regression
problem (Yang et al., 2013), and for `p regression for every
p ≥ 1 (Dasgupta et al., 2009; Woodruff & Zhang, 2013;
Cohen & Peng, 2015).

