Safe Grid Search with Optimal Complexity

Eugene Ndiaye 1 Tam Le 1 Olivier Fercoq 2 Joseph Salmon 3 Ichiro Takeuchi 4

Abstract
Popular machine learning estimators involve regularization parameters that can be challenging to
tune, and standard strategies rely on grid search
for this task. In this paper, we revisit the techniques of approximating the regularization path
up to predefined tolerance  in a unified frame√
work and show that its complexity is O(1/ d )
for uniformly
convex loss of order d ≥ 2 and
√
O(1/ ) for Generalized Self-Concordant functions. This framework encompasses least-squares
but also logistic regression, a case that as far as
we know was not handled as precisely in previous works. We leverage our technique to provide
refined bounds on the validation error as well as
a practical algorithm for hyperparameter tuning.
The latter has global convergence guarantee when
targeting a prescribed accuracy on the validation
set. Last but not least, our approach helps relieving the practitioner from the (often neglected) task
of selecting a stopping criterion when optimizing
over the training set: our method automatically
calibrates this criterion based on the targeted accuracy on the validation set.

1. Introduction
Various machine learning problems are formulated as minimization of an empirical loss function f plus a regularization
function Ω whose calibration is controlled by a hyperparameter λ. The choice of λ is crucial in practice since it directly
influences the generalization performance of the estimator,
i.e., its score on unseen data sets. The most popular method
in such a context is cross-validation (or some variant, see
(Arlot & Celisse, 2010) for a detailed review). For simplicity, we investigate here the simplest case, the holdout
version. It consists in splitting the data in two parts: on
1
Riken AIP 2 LTCI, Télécom ParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay
IMAG, Univ Montpellier, CNRS, Montpellier, France 4 Nagoya
Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: E. Ndiaye <eugene.ndiaye@riken.jp>.
3

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

the first part (training set) the method is trained for a predefined collection of candidates ΛT := {λ0 , . . . , λT −1 },
and on the second part (validation set), the best parameter
is selected among the T candidates.
For a piecewise quadratic loss f and a piecewise linear
regularization Ω (e.g., the Lasso estimator), Osborne et al.
(2000); Rosset & Zhu (2007) have shown that the set of
solutions follows a piecewise linear curve w.r.t. to the parameter λ. There are several algorithms that can generate
the full path by maintaining optimality conditions when
the regularization parameter varies. This is what LARS is
performing for Lasso (Efron et al., 2004), but similar approaches exist for SVM (Hastie et al., 2004) or generalized
linear models (GLM) (Park & Hastie, 2007). Unfortunately,
these methods have some drawbacks that can be critical in
many situations:
• their worst case complexity, i.e., the number of linear
segments, is exponential in the dimension p of the problem
(Gärtner et al., 2012) leading to unpractical algorithms. Recently, Li & Singer (2018) have shown that for some specific
design matrix with n observations, a polynomial complexity
of O(n × p6 ) can be obtained. Note that even in a more
favorable cases of linear complexity in p, the exact path can
be expensive to compute when the dimension p is large.
• they suffer from numerical instabilities due to multiple
and expensive inversion of ill-conditioned matrix. As a
result, these algorithms may fail before exploring the entire
path, a common issue for small regularization parameter.
• they lack flexibility when it comes at incorporating different statistical learning tasks because they usually rely on
specific algebra to handle the structure of the regularization
and loss functions. As far as we know, they can be applied
only to a limited number of cases and we are not aware of a
general framework that bypasses these issues.
• they cannot benefit of early stopping. Following Bottou &
Bousquet (2008), it is not necessary to optimize below the
statistical error for suitable generalization. Exact regularization path algorithms need to maintain optimality conditions
as the hyperparameter varies, which is time consuming.
To overcome these issues, an -approximation of the solution path was proposed and optimal complexity was proven
to be O(1/) by (Giesen et al., 2010) in a fairly general

