Low Latency Privacy Preserving Inference

Alon Brutzkus 1
Oren Elisha 2 Ran Gilad-Bachrach 3

Abstract
When applying machine learning to sensitive
data, one has to find a balance between accuracy, information security, and computationalcomplexity. Recent studies combined Homomorphic Encryption with neural networks to make
inferences while protecting against information
leakage. However, these methods are limited by
the width and depth of neural networks that can
be used (and hence the accuracy) and exhibit high
latency even for relatively simple networks. In
this study we provide two solutions that address
these limitations. In the first solution, we present
more than 10× improvement in latency and enable inference on wider networks compared to
prior attempts with the same level of security. The
improved performance is achieved by novel methods to represent the data during the computation.
In the second solution, we apply the method of
transfer learning to provide private inference services using deep networks with latency of ∼ 0.16
seconds. We demonstrate the efficacy of our methods on several computer vision tasks.

1. Introduction
Machine learning is used in several domains such as education, health, and finance in which data may be private or
confidential. Therefore, machine learning algorithms should
preserve privacy while making accurate predictions. The
privacy requirement pertains to all sub-tasks of the learning
process, such as training and inference. For the purpose of
this study, we focus on private neural-networks inference.
In this problem, popularized by the work on CryptoNets
(Dowlin et al., 2016), the goal is to build an inference service that can make predictions on private data. To achieve
this goal, the data is encrypted before it is sent to the pre1

Microsoft Research and Tel Aviv University, Israel 2 Microsoft,
Israel 3 Microsoft Research, Israel. Correspondence to: Ran GiladBachrach <rang@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

diction service, which should be capable of operating on
the encrypted data without having access to the raw data.
Several cryptology technologies have been proposed for
this task, including Secure Multi-Party Computation (MPC)
(Yao, 1982; Goldreich et al., 1987), hardware enclaves, such
as Intel’s Software Guard Extensions (SGX) (McKeen et al.,
2013), Homomorphic Encryption (HE) (Gentry, 2009), and
combinations of these techniques.
The different approaches present different trade-offs in terms
of computation, accuracy, and security. HE presents the
most stringent security model. The security assumption
relies on the hardness of solving a mathematical problem
for which there are no known efficient algorithms, even by
quantum computers (Gentry, 2009; Albrecht et al., 2018).
Other techniques, such as MPC and SGX make additional
assumptions and therefore provide weaker protection to the
data (Yao, 1982; McKeen et al., 2013; Chen et al., 2018;
Koruyeh et al., 2018).
While HE provides the highest level of security it is also
limited in the kind of operations it allows and the complexity
of these operations (see Section 3.1). CryptoNets (Dowlin
et al., 2016) was the first demonstration of a privacy preserving Encrypted Prediction as a Service (EPaaS) solution
(Sanyal et al., 2018) based on HE. CryptoNets are capable
of making predictions with accuracy of 99% on the MNIST
task (LeCun et al., 2010) with a throughput of ∼ 59000
predictions per hour. However, CryptoNets have several
limitations. The first is latency - it takes CryptoNets 205
seconds to process a single prediction request. The second
is the width of the network that can be used for inference.
The encoding scheme used by CryptoNets, which encodes
each node in the network as a separate message, can create
a memory bottleneck when applied to networks with many
nodes. For example, CryptoNets’ approach requires 100’s
of Gigabytes of RAM to evaluate a standard convolutional
network on CIFAR-10. The third limitation is the depth of
the network that can be evaluated. Each layer in the network
adds more sequential multiplication operations which result in increased noise levels and message size growth (see
Section 5). This makes private inference on deep networks,
such as AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), infeasible with
CryptoNets’ approach.

