Actor-Attention-Critic for Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Shariq Iqbal 1 Fei Sha 1 2

Abstract
Reinforcement learning in multi-agent scenarios is important for real-world applications but
presents challenges beyond those seen in singleagent settings. We present an actor-critic algorithm that trains decentralized policies in multiagent settings, using centrally computed critics that share an attention mechanism which selects relevant information for each agent at every
timestep. This attention mechanism enables more
effective and scalable learning in complex multiagent environments, when compared to recent
approaches. Our approach is applicable not only
to cooperative settings with shared rewards, but
also individualized reward settings, including adversarial settings, as well as settings that do not
provide global states, and it makes no assumptions about the action spaces of the agents. As
such, it is flexible enough to be applied to most
multi-agent learning problems.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning has recently made exciting progress
in many domains, including Atari games (Mnih et al., 2015),
the ancient Chinese board game, Go (Silver et al., 2016),
and complex continuous control tasks involving locomotion (Lillicrap et al., 2016; Schulman et al., 2015; 2017;
Heess et al., 2017). While most reinforcement learning
paradigms focus on single agents acting in a static environment (or against themselves in the case of Go), real-world
agents often compete or cooperate with other agents in a dynamically shifting environment. In order to learn effectively
in multi-agent environments, agents must not only learn the
dynamics of their environment, but also those of the other
learning agents present.
To this end, several approaches for multi-agent reinforce1

Department of Computer Science, University of Southern
California (USC) 2 On leave at Google AI (fsha@google.com).
Correspondence to: Shariq Iqbal <shariqiq@usc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

ment learning have been developed. The simplest approach
is to train each agent independently to maximize their individual reward, while treating other agents as part of the
environment. However, this approach violates the basic
assumption underlying reinforcement learning, that the environment should be stationary and Markovian. Any single
agent’s environment is dynamic and nonstationary due to
other agents’ changing policies. As such, standard algorithms developed for stationary Markov decision processes
fail.
At the other end of the spectrum, all agents can be collectively modeled as a single-agent whose action space is the
joint action space of all agents (Buşoniu et al., 2010). While
allowing coordinated behaviors across agents, this approach
is not scalable as the size of action space increases exponentially with respect to the number of agents. It also demands
a high degree of communication during execution, as the
central policy must collect observations from and distribute
actions to the individual agents. In real-world settings, this
demand can be problematic.
Recent work (Lowe et al., 2017; Foerster et al., 2018) attempts to combine the strengths of these two approaches.
In particular, a critic (or a number of critics) is centrally
learned with information from all agents. The actors, however, receive information only from their corresponding
agents. Thus, during testing, executing the policies does
not require the knowledge of other agents’ actions. This
paradigm circumvents the challenge of non-Markovian and
non-stationary environments during learning. Despite these
progresses, however, algorithms for multi-agent reinforcement learning are still far from being scalable (to larger
numbers of agents) and being generically applicable to environments and tasks that are cooperative (sharing a global
reward), competitive, or mixed.
Our approach 1 extends these prior works in several directions. The main idea is to learn a centralized critic with an
attention mechanism. The intuition behind our idea comes
from the fact that, in many real-world environments, it is
beneficial for agents to know what other agents it should pay
attention to. For example, a soccer defender needs to pay
attention to attackers in their vicinity as well as the player
with the ball, while she/he rarely needs to pay attention to
1

Code available at: https://github.com/shariqiqbal2810/MAAC

