HexaGAN: Generative Adversarial Nets for Real World Classification

Tasks

Uiwon Hwang 1 Dahuin Jung 1 Sungroh Yoon 1 2

Abstract
Most deep learning classification studies assume
clean data. However, when dealing with the real
world data, we encounter three problems such as
1) missing data, 2) class imbalance, and 3) missing label problems. These problems undermine
the performance of a classifier. Various preprocessing techniques have been proposed to mitigate
one of these problems, but an algorithm that assumes and resolves all three problems together
has not been proposed yet. In this paper, we propose HexaGAN, a generative adversarial network
framework that shows promising classification
performance for all three problems. We interpret
the three problems from a single perspective to
solve them jointly. To enable this, the framework
consists of six components, which interact with
each other. We also devise novel loss functions
corresponding to the architecture. The designed
loss functions allow us to achieve state-of-theart imputation performance, with up to a 14%
improvement, and to generate high-quality classconditional data. We evaluate the classification
performance (F1-score) of the proposed method
with 20% missingness and confirm up to a 5% improvement in comparison with the performance
of combinations of state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
As deep learning models have achieved super-human performance in image classification tasks (He et al., 2016), there
have been increasing attempts to apply deep learning models to more complicated tasks such as object detection (Ren
et al., 2015), text classification (Zhang et al., 2015), and disease prediction (Hwang et al., 2017). However, real world
data are often dirty, which means that the elements and la1

Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea 2 ASRI, INMC, Institute of Engineering Research, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea. Correspondence
to: Sungroh Yoon <sryoon@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

…

Missing Data Imputation
𝑥1 𝑥2 𝑥3

𝑦

Purifier Mo
𝑥1 𝑥2 𝑥3

𝑦

Imputing missing elements in a data level

Purifying A

Conditional Generation

Targ
𝑥1 𝑥2 𝑥3

𝑦

𝑥1 𝑥2 𝑥3

𝑦

Imputing the entire elements of a sample
conditioned on 𝑦

M

Semi-supervised Learning
𝑥1 𝑥2 𝑥3

𝑦

𝑥1 𝑥2 𝑥3

𝑦

Generating a pseudo-label using a classifier

Figure 1. Tasks for the three main problems in real world classification. We define missing data imputation as a task that fills in
missing data elements. Conditional generation can be defined as a
task that imputes the entire elements in an instance conditioned+
on
a certain class. Semi-supervised learning can be defined as a task
that imputes missing labels.

bels are missing, or there is an imbalance between different
classes of data. This prevents a classifier from being fully
effective, and thus a preprocessing phase is required. Despite a considerable amount of research, no preprocessing
technique has been proposed to address these three problems concurrently. Therefore, we first propose a framework
which deals robustly with dirty data.
The types of data which are typically bedeviled with missing
information include the user data employed in recommender
systems (Koren et al., 2009), and in electronic health records
(Miotto et al., 2016) utilizing deep learning based classifiers.
Rubin (1976) identifies three main types of missing data:
1) Data are missing completely at random (MCAR). This
type of missing data has no pattern which can be correlated with any other variable, whether observed or not. 2)

𝑥1

=

𝑥𝑑

