Teaching a black-box learner

Sanjoy Dasgupta 1 Daniel Hsu 2 Stefanos Poulis 1 3 Xiaojin Zhu 4

Abstract
One widely-studied model of teaching (Goldman
& Kearns, 1995; Shinohara & Miyano, 1991; Anthony et al., 1992) calls for a teacher to provide
the minimal set of labeled examples that uniquely
specifies a target concept. The assumption is that
the teacher knows the learner’s hypothesis class,
which is often not true of real-life teaching scenarios. We consider the problem of teaching a
learner whose representation and hypothesis class
are unknown: that is, the learner is a black box.

a different architecture or representation. To model such
scenarios, several notions of teaching have been developed.
One influential model, introduced independently by Goldman & Kearns (1995), Shinohara & Miyano (1991), and
Anthony et al. (1992), is based on the notion of a teaching
set. To define this, let X be any finite instance space and H
any finite set of concepts on X , so that each h ∈ H is of the
form h : X → {0, 1}. Let h∗ ∈ H denote a target concept.
We say S ⊂ X is a teaching set for (h∗ , H) if h∗ is the only
concept in H that is consistent with the labeled examples
{(x, h∗ (x)) : x ∈ S}. An optimal teacher is then one who
provides the learner with the smallest possible teaching set.

We find that a teacher who does not interact with
the learner can do no better than providing random examples. However, by interacting with the
black-box learner, a teacher can efficiently find a
set of teaching examples that is a provably good
approximation to the optimal set.

This notion of teaching is related to compression. A simple
learner—human or machine—might have difficulty remembering a large set of examples and finding a hypothesis
consistent with them. The teacher helps by identifying a
concise set of examples that conveys the desired concept.

As an illustration, we show how this scheme can
be used to shrink training sets for any family
of classifiers: that is, to find an approximatelyminimal subset of training instances that yields
the same classifier as the entire set.

Consider, for instance, the case of thresholds on the line.
Here data points are real numbers, so X ⊂ R, and the
hypothesis class is H = {hw : w ∈ R}, where

1 if x ≥ w
hw (x) =
0 otherwise

1. Introduction
The theory of machine learning has focused primarily on
situations where training data consists of random samples
from an underlying distribution, as in the statistical learning
framework (Valiant, 1984), or is chosen in an arbitrary and
possibly adversarial manner, as in online learning (Littlestone, 1988). In real life, however, data is often chosen by
a teacher who wishes to help the learner. This is likely to
be the case, for instance, when a human is personalizing an
electronic assistant; or when an intelligent tutoring system
is explaining concepts to a human student; or when one machine is communicating a classifier to another machine with
1

University of California, San Diego 2 Columbia University
NTENT 4 University of Wisconsin–Madison. Correspondence to:
Sanjoy Dasgupta <dasgupta@eng.ucsd.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

For finite X , we need only consider |X | + 1 distinct hypotheses. If the target concept is given by threshold w∗ , the
optimal teaching set consists of the two points in X nearest
w∗ , on either side of it:

In this case, no matter how large X might be, two teaching
examples suffice. Thus the teacher makes learning easier.
This example also illustrates a significant issue with this
notion of teaching: it requires the teacher to know H, the
learner’s hypothesis class. This can be unrealistic in many
scenarios. When teaching a human, one generally has no
idea what the underlying hypotheses might be. And when
teaching a machine, the general type of concept might be
known (a neural net, for instance), but the specifics (number of layers, number of nodes per layers, other parameter
settings) may be opaque; and even if they were known, it is
unclear how they would be used in choosing a teaching set.

