Doubly Robust Joint Learning for Recommendation
on Data Missing Not at Random

Xiaojie Wang 1 Rui Zhang 1 Yu Sun 2 Jianzhong Qi 1

Abstract
In recommender systems, usually the ratings of a
user to most items are missing and a critical problem is that the missing ratings are often missing
not at random (MNAR) in reality. It is widely acknowledged that MNAR ratings make it difficult
to accurately predict the ratings and unbiasedly
estimate the performance of rating prediction. Recent approaches use imputed errors to recover the
prediction errors for missing ratings, or weight
observed ratings with the propensities of being
observed. These approaches can still be severely
biased in performance estimation or suffer from
the variance of the propensities. To overcome
these limitations, we first propose an estimator
that integrates the imputed errors and propensities in a doubly robust way to obtain unbiased
performance estimation and alleviate the effect
of the propensity variance. To achieve good performance guarantees, based on this estimator, we
propose joint learning of rating prediction and
error imputation, which outperforms the state-ofthe-art approaches on four real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Users’ preferences to items in recommender systems are
often represented as binary or multi-scaled ratings (Zhang
et al., 2017). Ratings are often sparse, i.e., only the ratings
to a small portion of items are observed, whereas the ratings
to most of the items are missing (Wang et al., 2018b). Most
studies aim at recommending the items that users may like
based on such sparse ratings (Bell et al., 2007).
Existing studies often assume that the missing ratings are
missing at random (MAR), but usually this assumption does
not hold and the missing ratings are missing not at random
1

University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia. 2 Twitter,
San Francisco, California, United States of America. Correspondence to: Rui Zhang <rui.zhang@unimelb.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

(MNAR). For example, a recent study in song recommendation shows that the probability of a rating being missing
depends on the rating’s value (Marlin et al., 2007). Recent
studies also show that correctly adopting the MNAR assumption helps improve the quality of recommended items (Wang
et al., 2018a). Hence, we aim to address the recommendation problem based on the MNAR assumption. Ratings are
MNAR largely because users are free to choose what items
to rate. Users normally rate an item that they like, and thus
the ratings of a lower value are more likely to be missing.
In other words, the propensities, i.e., the probabilities of
different ratings being observed, are not the same.
MNAR ratings make it difficult to learn a prediction model
that aims at accurately predicting the (true) rating of a user
to an item (Lim et al., 2015). The common practice of using
only observed ratings yields suboptimal prediction models
because the observed ratings are not a representative sample
of all ratings – whether observed or missing. MNAR ratings
also make it difficult to correctly estimate the performance
of a prediction model (Steck, 2011). The performance is
typically defined as the prediction inaccuracy: the average of prediction errors (e.g. squared difference between a
predicted rating and the true rating) for all ratings (Salakhutdinov et al., 2007). Given MNAR ratings, averaging over
only observed ratings can be severely biased: it can over- or
under-estimate the prediction inaccuracy by a large amount,
a.k.a, the bias (Little & Rubin, 2014).
Two recent approaches address the MNAR problem: (1)
The error-imputation-based (EIB) approach computes an
imputed error, i.e., an estimated value of the prediction
error, for each missing rating (Steck, 2013). (2) The inversepropensity-scoring (IPS) approach inversely weights the
prediction error for each observed rating with the propensity
of observing that rating (Schnabel et al., 2016). The EIB
approach often has a large bias due to imputation inaccuracy,
i.e., deviations of the imputed errors from the prediction
errors (Dudı́k et al., 2011). Such inaccuracy will also be
propagated into training a prediction model and increase the
prediction inaccuracy. The IPS approach often suffers from
the high variance of the propensities (Thomas & Brunskill,
2016). The propensities, once inversed, can cause training
losses to oscillate and lead to a poor generalization ability.

