A Persistent Weisfeiler–Lehman Procedure for Graph Classification

Bastian Rieck * 1 Christian Bock * 1 Karsten Borgwardt 1

Abstract
The Weisfeiler–Lehman graph kernel exhibits
competitive performance in many graph classification tasks. However, its subtree features are
not able to capture connected components and
cycles, topological features known for characterising graphs. To extract such features, we leverage propagated node label information and transform unweighted graphs into metric ones. This
permits us to augment the subtree features with
topological information obtained using persistent
homology, a concept from topological data analysis. Our method, which we formalise as a generalisation of Weisfeiler–Lehman subtree features,
exhibits favourable classification accuracy and
its improvements in predictive performance are
mainly driven by including cycle information.

1. Introduction
Graph-structured data sets are ubiquitous in a variety of
different application domains, each of them posing a separate challenge while also requiring different tasks to be
solved. A common task involves graph classification, for
which a variety of methods exists. These methods comprise
convolutional neural networks (Duvenaud et al. 2015), recurrent neural networks (Lei et al. 2017), or Hilbert space
methods (Vishwanathan et al. 2010), the latter also being
referred to as graph kernels. While several approaches for
defining graph kernels exist, the most common one uses the
R-convolution framework (Haussler 1999), which makes
it possible to define the similarity between two graphs as a
function of the similarity of their substructures.
Substructures that have been used for graph classification range from graphlets (Shervashidze et al. 2009), i.e.
small non-isomorphic graphs of fixed size, over shortest
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Biosystems Science and
Engineering, ETH Zurich, 4058 Basel, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Bastian Rieck <bastian.rieck@bsse.ethz.ch>, Karsten
Borgwardt <karsten.borgwardt@bsse.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

paths (Borgwardt & Kriegel 2005), to random walks (Gärtner et al. 2003, Kashima et al. 2003, Sugiyama & Borgwardt 2015). One of the most powerful substructures is the
set of subtree patterns (Ramon & Gärtner 2003), i.e. patterns based on rooted subgraphs of a graph. Their computational complexity made their applicability somewhat limited, until the Weisfeiler–Lehman (WL) graph kernel framework (Shervashidze & Borgwardt 2009, Shervashidze et al.
2011) was developed. Properly trained, it still constitutes
the state-of-the-art method for many graph classification
tasks. The framework is based on the idea of iteratively
propagating (node) label information through a graph, leading to a feature vector representation that can be used to
assess the dissimilarity of two graphs.
One of the disadvantages of this framework is that its relabelling step, i.e. the step in which subtree patterns are
being compressed, is somewhat “brittle”: labels are only
compared with a Dirac kernel, making their dissimilarity a
coarse function. Moreover, the subtree feature vector only
contains counts of compressed labels and can neither account for their relevance with respect to the topology of the
graph nor capture connected components and cycles, both
of which are important and interpretable features for characterising graphs (Rieck et al. 2018, Sizemore et al. 2017).
We thus propose an enhancement of the original WL stabilisation procedure that uses recent advances in topological
data analysis (Munch 2017) to alleviate these issues. Our
contributions are as follows:
- We measure the relevance of topological features (connected components and cycles) in graphs and use them
to define a novel set of WL subtree features, which we
show to be a generalised version of the original ones.
- We develop a topology-based kernel that uses an iterative
variant of the WL stabilisation procedure to classify nonattributed graphs.
- We demonstrate that our proposed features perform
favourably on a range of graph classification benchmark
data sets. In particular, we empirically show that the
inclusion of cycle information yields classification accuracy improvements over state-of-the-art methods.

