Multi-Agent Adversarial Inverse Reinforcement Learning

Lantao Yu 1 Jiaming Song 1 Stefano Ermon 1

Abstract
Reinforcement learning agents are prone to undesired behaviors due to reward mis-specification.
Finding a set of reward functions to properly
guide agent behaviors is particularly challenging in multi-agent scenarios. Inverse reinforcement learning provides a framework to automatically acquire suitable reward functions from expert demonstrations. Its extension to multi-agent
settings, however, is difficult due to the more
complex notions of rational behaviors. In this
paper, we propose MA-AIRL, a new framework
for multi-agent inverse reinforcement learning,
which is effective and scalable for Markov games
with high-dimensional state-action space and unknown dynamics. We derive our algorithm based
on a new solution concept and maximum pseudolikelihood estimation within an adversarial reward learning framework. In the experiments, we
demonstrate that MA-AIRL can recover reward
functions that are highly correlated with ground
truth ones, and significantly outperforms prior
methods in terms of policy imitation.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a general and powerful
framework for decision making under uncertainty. Recent
advances in deep learning have enabled a variety of RL applications such as games (Silver et al., 2016; Mnih et al.,
2015), robotics (Gu et al., 2017; Levine et al., 2016), automated machine learning (Zoph & Le, 2016) and generative
modeling (Yu et al., 2017). RL algorithms are also showing promise in multi-agent systems, where multiple agents
interact with each other, such as multi-player games (Peng
et al., 2017), social interactions (Leibo et al., 2017) and
multi-robot control systems (Matignon et al., 2012). How1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA. Correspondence to: Lantao Yu <lantaoyu@cs.stanford.edu>, Stefano Ermon <ermon@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

ever, the success of RL crucially depends on careful reward
design (Amodei et al., 2016). As reinforcement learning
agents are prone to undesired behaviors due to reward misspecification (Amodei & Clark, 2016), designing suitable
reward functions can be challenging in many real-world
applications (Hadfield-Menell et al., 2017). In multi-agents
systems, since different agents may have completely different goals and state-action representations, hand-tuning
reward functions becomes increasingly more challenging as
we take more agents into consideration.
Imitation learning presents a direct approach to programming agents with expert demonstrations, where agents
learn to produce behaviors similar to the demonstrations.
However, imitation learning algorithms, such as behavior
cloning (Pomerleau, 1991) and generative adversarial imitation learning (Ho & Ermon, 2016; Ho et al., 2016), typically
sidestep the problem of interring an explicit representation
for the underlying reward functions. Because the reward
function is often considered as the most succinct, robust and
transferable representation of a task (Abbeel & Ng, 2004;
Fu et al., 2017), it is important to consider the problem of inferring reward functions from expert demonstrations, which
we refer to as inverse reinforcement learning (IRL). IRL
can offer many advantages compared to direct policy imitation, such as analyzing and debugging an imitation learning
algorithm, inferring agents’ intentions and re-optimizing
rewards in new environments (Ng et al., 2000).
However, IRL is ill-defined, as many policies can be optimal for a given reward and many reward functions can
explain a set of demonstrations. Maximum entropy inverse
reinforcement learning (MaxEnt IRL) (Ziebart et al., 2008)
provides a general probabilistic framework to solve the ambiguity by finding the trajectory distribution with maximum
entropy that matches the reward expectation of the experts.
As MaxEnt IRL requires solving an integral over all possible
trajectories for computing the partition function, it is only
suitable for small scale problems with known dynamics.
Adversarial IRL (Finn et al., 2016a; Fu et al., 2017) scales
MaxEnt IRL to large and continuous problems by drawing
an analogy between a sampling based approximation of
MaxEnt IRL and Generative Adversarial Networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014) with a particular discriminator structure.
However, the approach is restricted to single-agent settings.

