Kernel-Based Reinforcement Learning in Robust Markov Decision Processes

Shiau Hong Lim 1 Arnaud Autef 2

Abstract
The robust Markov Decision Process (MDP)
framework aims to address the problem of parameter uncertainty due to model mismatch, approximation errors or even adversarial behaviors. It
is especially relevant when deploying the learned
policies in real-world applications. Scaling up
the robust MDP framework to large or continuous state space remains a challenging problem.
The use of function approximation in this case
is usually inevitable and this can only amplify
the problem of model mismatch and parameter
uncertainties. It has been previously shown that,
in the case of MDPs with state aggregation, the
robust policies enjoy a tighter performance bound
compared to standard solutions due to its reduced
sensitivity to approximation errors. We extend
these results to the much larger class of kernelbased approximators and show, both analytically
and empirically that the robust policies can significantly outperform the non-robust counterpart.

1. Introduction
We address the problem of learning a robust policy in
Markov decision processes with large or continuous state
spaces. Finding an exact solution is typically infeasible in
such settings and some form of function approximation is
needed. We focus on the approach of kernel-based reinforcement learning (Ormoneit & Sen, 2002; Barreto et al.,
2016) where the reward and the transition functions are approximated through the use of kernel averaging on a set of
training examples. Moreover, we employ a class of linear
approximators called averagers (Gordon, 1995; Tsitsiklis &
van Roy, 1996) to approximate the value function, which
can be seen as an application of the stochastic-factorization
trick (Barreto et al., 2016) in the kernel-based approach.
1

IBM Research, Singapore 2 Applied Mathematics department,
Ecole polytechnique, France. Work accomplished while working
at IBM Research, Singapore. Correspondence to: Shiau Hong Lim
<shonglim@sg.ibm.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

This class includes kernel averaging, k-nearest-neighbor,
weighted k-nearest neighbor, Bezier patches, linear interpolation etc. In particular, state aggregation is also a special
case.
While the motivation of the robust MDP framework (Nilim
& El Ghaoui, 2005; Iyengar, 2005; Wiesemann et al., 2013)
is to deal with model mismatch or parameter uncertainties in the rewards and transitions, in this work we emphasize its use as a way to protect against the inflexibility or
“mismatch” in the value function imposed by the chosen
function approximators. It has been shown (Petrik & Subramanian, 2014) that for the class of approximators based
on state aggregation, the robust solution enjoys a tighter
performance bound compared to standard solutions, with
1
a loss against the optimal policy that scales with O( 1−γ
)
1
instead of O( (1−γ)2 ), where γ ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor for the infinite-horizon discounted total reward. We
extend and derive similar results for the much larger class
of kernel-based approximators that includes state aggregation as a special case. Empirically, we demonstrate that the
better performance bound does translate into solutions that
perform better, especially when there is a model mismatch
between the training and the testing environments.
Our contribution is twofold. Theoretically, we extend the
existing work on the state-aggregation case (Petrik & Subramanian, 2014) to general kernel averagers. In the stateaggregation case, member states of the same aggregate state
share the same action. This no longer holds in the general
case and the extension involves the construction of a new
robust MDP with an expanded action space that allows the
derivation of a performance bound that subsumes the previous bound. Empirically, we present new results on the
performance of robust policies in various benchmark tasks
in reinforcement learning.
1.1. Related works
Until recently, the robust MDP framework has been analyzed under various finite-state settings (Nilim & El Ghaoui,
2005; Iyengar, 2005; Wiesemann et al., 2013). Tamar et al.
(2014) proposed a robust approximate policy iteration algorithm with linear approximation of the value function.
Additional assumptions need to be made on the exploration
policy to ensure convergence. Roy et al. (2017) extended the

