Composing Value Functions in Reinforcement Learning

Benjamin van Niekerk * 1 Steven James * 1 Adam Earle 1 Benjamin Rosman 1 2

Abstract
An important property for lifelong-learning
agents is the ability to combine existing skills
to solve new unseen tasks. In general, however,
it is unclear how to compose existing skills in a
principled manner. Under the assumption of deterministic dynamics, we prove that optimal value
function composition can be achieved in entropyregularised reinforcement learning (RL), and extend this result to the standard RL setting. Composition is demonstrated in a high-dimensional
video game, where an agent with an existing library of skills is immediately able to solve new
tasks without the need for further learning.

1. Introduction
A major challenge in artificial intelligence is creating agents
capable of leveraging existing knowledge for inductive transfer (Taylor & Stone, 2009). Lifelong learning, in particular,
requires that an agent be able to act effectively when presented with new, unseen tasks.
One promising approach is to combine behaviours learned
in various separate tasks to create new skills. This compositional approach allows us to build rich behaviours from
relatively simple ones, resulting in a combinatorial explosion in the agent’s abilities (Saxe et al., 2017).
Additionally, composition allows us to incrementally expand an agent’s abilities—an important property for lifelong
learning. Consider, for example, a robot in a warehouse
that has the ability to pack objects on shelves. Given a new
object, we would want to avoid retraining the robot from
scratch. Rather, we would like the robot to learn the skill of
packing only the new object, and then compose it with its
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa 2 Council for Scientific and Industrial Research,
Pretoria, South Africa. Correspondence to: Benjamin van Niekerk <benjamin.vanniekerk@students.wits.ac.za>, Steven James
<steven.james@wits.ac.za>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

previous abilities.
In reinforcement learning (RL), one existing approach to
composition are linearly-solvable Markov Decision Processes (LMDPs) (Todorov, 2007), which structure the reward function to ensure that the Bellman equation becomes
linear in the exponentiated value function. Todorov (2009)
proves that the optimal value functions of a set of LMDPs
can be composed to produce the optimal value function for
a composite task. This is a particularly attractive property,
since solving new tasks requires no further learning. However, the LMDP framework has so far been restricted to the
tabular case with known dynamics, limiting its usefulness.
Related work has focused on entropy-regularised RL
(Haarnoja et al., 2017; Schulman et al., 2017; Nachum et al.,
2017), where rewards are augmented with an entropy-based
penalty term. This has been shown to lead to improved
exploration and rich, multimodal value functions. Haarnoja
et al. (2018) demonstrate that these value functions can be
composed to approximately solve the intersection of tasks.
We complement these results by proving optimal composition for the union of tasks in the total-reward, absorbingstate setting. Thus, any task that can be expressed as a
combination of a set of base tasks can be solved immediately, without any further learning. We provide a formula for
optimally composing value functions, and demonstrate our
method in a video game. Results show that an agent is able
to compose existing policies learned from high-dimensional
pixel input to generate new, optimal behaviours.

2. Background
A Markov decision process (MDP) is defined by the 4-tuple
(S, A, ρ, r) where (i) the state space S is standard Borel;
(ii) the action space A is finite (and therefore a compact
metric space when equipped with the discrete metric); (iii)
the transition dynamics ρ define a Markov kernel (s, a) 7→
ρ(s,a) from S ×A to S; and (iv) the reward r is a real-valued
function on S × A that is bounded and measurable.
In RL, an agent’s goal is to maximise its utility by making a
sequence of decisions. At each time step, the agent receives
an observation from S and executes an action from A according to its policy. As a consequence of its action, the
agent receives feedback (reward) and transitions to a new

