Flat Metric Minimization with Applications in Generative Modeling

Thomas Möllenhoff 1 Daniel Cremers 1

Abstract
We take the novel perspective to view data not
as a probability distribution but rather as a current. Primarily studied in the field of geometric measure theory, k-currents are continuous linear functionals acting on compactly supported
smooth differential forms and can be understood
as a generalized notion of oriented k-dimensional
manifold. By moving from distributions (which
are 0-currents) to k-currents, we can explicitly
orient the data by attaching a k-dimensional tangent plane to each sample point. Based on the flat
metric which is a fundamental distance between
currents, we derive FlatGAN, a formulation in
the spirit of generative adversarial networks but
generalized to k-currents. In our theoretical contribution we prove that the flat metric between a
parametrized current and a reference current is
Lipschitz continuous in the parameters. In experiments, we show that the proposed shift to k > 0
leads to interpretable and disentangled latent representations which behave equivariantly to the
specified oriented tangent planes.

1. Introduction
This work is concerned with the problem of representation
learning, which has important consequences for many tasks
in artificial intelligence, cf. the work of Bengio et al. (2013).
More specifically, our aim is to learn representations which
behave equivariantly with respect to selected transformations of the data. Such variations are often known beforehand and could for example describe changes in stroke width
or rotation of a digit, changes in viewpoint or lighting in a
three-dimensional scene but also the arrow of time (Pickup
et al., 2014; Wei et al., 2018) in time-series, describing how
a video changes from one frame to the next, see Fig. 1.
1

Department of Informatics, Technical University of Munich,
Garching, Germany. Correspondence to: Thomas Möllenhoff
<thomas.moellenhoff@tum.de>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

from left to right we vary the latent code z1 (time)
Figure 1. Discovering the arrow of time by training a generative
model with the proposed formalism on the tinyvideos dataset (Vondrick et al., 2016). The approach we introduce allows one to learn
latent representations which behave equivariantly to specified tangent vectors (here: difference of two successive video frames).

We tackle this problem by introducing a novel formalism
based on geometric measure theory (Federer, 1969), which
we find to be interesting in itself. To motivate our application in generative modeling, recall the manifold hypothesis
which states that the distribution of real-world data tends to
concentrate nearby a low-dimensional manifold, see Fefferman et al. (2016) and the references therein. Under that hypothesis, a possible unifying view on prominent methods in
unsupervised and representation learning such as generative
adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) and
variational auto-encoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2014;
Rezende et al., 2014) is the following: both approaches aim
to approximate the true distribution concentrating near the
manifold with a distribution on some low-dimensional latent
space Z ⊂ Rl that is pushed through a decoder or generator
g : Z → X mapping to the (high-dimensional) data space
X ⊂ Rd (Genevay et al., 2017; Bottou et al., 2017).
We argue that treating data as a distribution potentially ignores useful available geometric information such as orientation and tangent vectors to the data manifold. Such
tangent vectors describe the aforementioned local variations
or pertubations. Therefore we postulate that data should not
be viewed as a distribution but rather as a k-current.

