Demystifying Dropout

Hongchang Gao 1 2 Jian Pei 3 4 Heng Huang 1 2

Abstract
Dropout is a popular technique to train large-scale
deep neural networks to alleviate the overfitting
problem. To disclose the underlying reason for
its gain, numerous works have tried to explain
it from different perspectives. In this paper, unlike existing works, we explore it from a new
perspective to provide new insight into this line
of research. In detail, we disentangle the forward
and backward pass of dropout. Then, we find that
these two passes need different levels of noise to
improve the generalization performance of deep
neural networks. Based on this observation, we
propose the augmented dropout, which employs
different dropping strategies in the forward and
backward pass, to improve the standard dropout.
Experimental results have verified the effectiveness of our proposed method.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep neural networks have demonstrated superior performance on a wide range of tasks, such as image
classification (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014; He et al., 2016), object detection (Girshick et al.,
2014; Ren et al., 2015), image generation (Goodfellow et al.,
2014; Brock et al., 2018; Miyato et al., 2018; Gao & Huang,
2018), and machine translation (Vaswani et al., 2017). However, deep neural networks face with the overfitting issue
since they usually have an extremely large number of parameters. Then, dropout (Hinton et al., 2012) is proposed
to alleviate this problem. Specifically, dropout randomly
sets some neurons of the network to zero during the training
phase to prevent feature co-adaption. This simple idea has
become a common technique to alleviate overfitting issues
and lift up the generalization performance of deep neural
1

JD Finance America Corporation 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA 3 JD.com 4 School of Computing Science, Simon
Fraser University, Canada. Correspondence to: Heng Huang
<heng.huang@pitt.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

networks in various tasks.
Inspired by the good performance of dropout, a number
of variants have been proposed, promoting the generalization performance of existing network architectures, such
as DropConnect (Wan et al., 2013), maxout(Goodfellow
et al., 2013), DropPath (Larsson et al., 2016), DropBlock
(Ghiasi et al., 2018). Besides, to disclose the success of
dropout, various works (Hinton et al., 2012; Wager et al.,
2013; Bouthillier et al., 2015; Helmbold & Long, 2017;
Jain et al., 2015) have attempted to analyze it from different perspectives. In the seminal paper (Hinton et al., 2012),
dropout is described as an ensemble technique which ensembles many sub-networks with sharing parameters. (Wager
et al., 2013) treats dropout as an adaptive `2 regularization and establishes the connection between dropout and
the adaptive optimization algorithm AdaGrad (Duchi et al.,
2011). While, in (Helmbold & Long, 2017), the difference between weight decay regularization and dropout is
disclosed. Specifically, unlike the traditional weight decay
regularization, dropout is insensitive to the rescaling of input features and the outputs. (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016)
discusses dropout from the Bayesian perspective, treating
it as an approximation to the deep Gaussian process. On
the other hand, some works attempt to theoretically study
the generalization performance for the deep neural network
with dropout. For instance, (Gao & Zhou, 2016) shows
that dropout can help to reduce the Rademacher complexity
of deep neural networks. In particular, dropout pushes the
polynomial reduction for shallow neural networks and the
exponential reduction for deep neural networks. Later, Mou
(Mou et al., 2018) studies the generalization performance
of dropout under the distribution-free setting.
By examining the works above which try to explain dropout,
we find that most of them focus on the forward pass to
attribute the gain of dropout to the model combination or
feature augmentation. For instance, in the original paper
(Hinton et al., 2012), dropout is described to ensemble a
number of sub-networks which are trained on different subsets of features (hidden units). As a result, the authors argue
that dropout can prevent the network from relying on single features. Additionally, (Bouthillier et al., 2015) views
dropout as a kind of data augmentation. However, as we
know, deep neural networks include the forward pass and
the backward pass and they share the same neurons. When

