Dirichlet Simplex Nest and Geometric Inference

Mikhail Yurochkin 1 2 * Aritra Guha 3 * Yuekai Sun 3 XuanLong Nguyen 3

Abstract
We propose Dirichlet Simplex Nest, a class of
probabilistic models suitable for a variety of data
types, and develop fast and provably accurate inference algorithms by accounting for the model’s
convex geometry and low dimensional simplicial
structure. By exploiting the connection to Voronoi
tessellation and properties of Dirichlet distribution, the proposed inference algorithm is shown
to achieve consistency and strong error bound
guarantees on a range of model settings and data
distributions. The effectiveness of our model and
the learning algorithm is demonstrated by simulations and by analyses of text and financial data.1

1. Introduction
For many complex probabilistic models, especially those
with latent variables, the probability distribution of interest
can be represented as an element of a convex polytope in a
suitable ambient space, for which model fitting may be cast
as the problem of finding the extreme points of the polytope.
For instance, a mixture density can be identified as a point
in a convex set of distributions whose extreme points are the
mixture components. In the well-known topic model (Blei
et al., 2003) for text analysis, a document corresponds to
a point drawn from the topic polytope, its extreme points
are the topics to be inferred. This convex geometric viewpoint provides the basis for posterior contraction behavior
analysis of topic models, as well as developing fast geometric inference algorithms (Nguyen, 2015; Tang et al., 2014;
Yurochkin & Nguyen, 2016; Yurochkin et al., 2017).
The basic topic model – the Latent Dirichlet Allocation
(LDA) of Blei et al. (2003), as well as the comparable finite admixtures developed in population genetics (Pritchard
*

Equal contribution 1 IBM Research, Cambridge 2 MITIBM Watson AI Lab 3 Department of Statistics, University of Michigan. Correspondence to: Mikhail Yurochkin
<mikhail.yurochkin@ibm.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).
1
Code: https://github.com/moonfolk/VLAD

et al., 2000) were originally designed for categorical data.
However, there are many real world applications in which
the convex geometric probabilistic modeling continues to
be a sensible approach, even if observed measurements are
no longer discrete-valued, but endowed with a variety of distributions. To expand the scope of admixture modeling for a
variety of data types, we propose to study Dirichlet Simplex
Nest (DSN), a class of probabilistic models that generalizes the LDA, and to develop fast and provably accurate
inference algorithms by accounting for the model’s convex
geometry and its low dimensional simplicial structure.
The generative process given by a DSN is simple to describe: starting from a simplex B of K vertices embedded
in a high-dimensional ambient space S, one draws random
points from the B’s relative interior according to a Dirichlet
distribution. Given each such point, a data point is generated
according to a suitable probability kernel F . For the general simplex nest, S can be any vector space of dimensions
D ≥ K − 1, while the probability kernel F can be taken
to be Gaussian, Multinomial, Poisson, etc, depending on
the nature of the observed data (continuous, categorical or
counts, resp.). If S is standard probability simplex, and F a
Multinomial distribution over categories, then the model is
reduced to the familiar LDA model of Blei et al. (2003).
Although several geometric aspects of the DSN can be found
in a vast array of well-known models in the literature, they
were rarely treated together. First, viewing data as noisy
observations from the low-dimensional affine hull that contains B, our model shares an assumption that can be found
in both classical factor analysis and non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) models (Lee & Seung, 2001), as well as
the work of Anandkumar et al. (2012); Arora et al. (2012b)
arising in topic models. Second, the convex constraints (i.e.,
linear weights of a convex combination are non-negative and
sum to one) are present in all latent variable probabilistic
modeling, even though most dominant computational approaches to inference such as MCMC sampling (Griffiths &
Steyvers, 2004) and variational inference (Blei et al., 2003;
Hoffman et al., 2013; Kucukelbir et al., 2017) do not appear
to take advantage of the underlying convex geometry.
As is the case with topic models, scalable parameter estimation is a key challenge for the Dirichlet Simplex Nest. Thus,
our main contribution is a novel inference algorithm that

