SelectiveNet: A Deep Neural Network with an Integrated Reject Option

Yonatan Geifman 1 Ran El-Yaniv 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of selective prediction
(also known as reject option) in deep neural networks, and introduce SelectiveNet, a deep neural
architecture with an integrated reject option. Existing rejection mechanisms are based mostly on
a threshold over the prediction confidence of a
pre-trained network. In contrast, SelectiveNet
is trained to optimize both classification (or regression) and rejection simultaneously, end-toend. The result is a deep neural network that
is optimized over the covered domain. In our
experiments, we show a consistently improved
risk–coverage trade-off over several well-known
classification and regression datasets, thus reaching new state-of-the-art results for deep selective
classification.

1. Introduction
Detecting and controlling statistical uncertainties in machine
learning processes is essential in many mission-critical machine learning applications such as autonomous driving,
medical diagnosis or home robotics. In selective prediction
our goal is to learn predictive models that know what they
do not know. These models are allowed to abstain whenever
they are not sufficiently confident in their prediction.
The idea of a reject option was already studied over 60
years ago by Chow (1957). Reject option mechanisms have
been considered for many hypothesis classes and learning
algorithms. These mechanisms are mainly driven by two
related ideas. The first is the cost-based model whereby the
selective model is optimized to minimize a loss function
that tracks a user-specified cost for abstention. Other mechanisms are built upon functions that serve as proxies for
prediction confidence. Typical examples of these proxies
are functional margin, distance to nearest neighbor(s), etc.
In this work we focus on selective models for deep neural
1
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology. Correspondence to:
Yonatan Geifman <yonatan.g@cs.technion.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

networks (DNNs). The most recent relevant paper on this
topic is Geifman & El-Yaniv (2017), which shows how to
construct a probabilistically-calibrated selective classifier
using any certainty estimation function for a given (already
trained) model. Interestingly, among the best certainty proxies for a trained network is the simple Softmax Response
(SR) estimator, which is often used by practitioners.
Within an abstention-constrained framework, whereby the
user specifies the desired target coverage, we optimize, endto-end, a neural network with an integrated reject option,
designed to be optimal for the required coverage slice. Our
technique yields effective selective models that consistently
improve all known techniques.
From a learning-theoretic perspective, it is not hard to argue
that learning a specialized rejection model for each coverage
slice is potentially better than rejecting based on confidence
rates extracted from a pre-trained network. To demonstrate
the advantage of such specialized training, consider the
following vignette. Bob and Alice are about to take an
exam at the end of their machine learning course. It is
announced that the exam will contains 10 questions, one for
each of the course topics, but the students will be asked to
choose exactly five questions. Alice decides to cover only
the easiest five topics while Bob’s mom forces him to study
all ten topics. Who do you think is going to get the higher
grade?
The contributions of this paper are:
• A selective loss function that optimizes a specified
coverage slice using a variant of the interior point optimization method (Potra & Wright, 2000).
• SelectiveNet: A three-headed network for end-to-end
learning of selective classification models.
• SelectiveNet for regression: Providing the first alternative to costly methods such as MC-dropout or ensemble
techniques.
• An empirical advantage demonstrated over four
datasets for classification and regression with a significant advantage over MC-dropout and SR.

