Similarity of Neural Network Representations Revisited

Simon Kornblith 1 Mohammad Norouzi 1 Honglak Lee 1 Geoffrey Hinton 1

Abstract
Recent work has sought to understand the behavior of neural networks by comparing representations between layers and between different trained
models. We examine methods for comparing neural network representations based on canonical
correlation analysis (CCA). We show that CCA
belongs to a family of statistics for measuring multivariate similarity, but that neither CCA nor any
other statistic that is invariant to invertible linear
transformation can measure meaningful similarities between representations of higher dimension
than the number of data points. We introduce
a similarity index that measures the relationship
between representational similarity matrices and
does not suffer from this limitation. This similarity index is equivalent to centered kernel alignment (CKA) and is also closely connected to CCA.
Unlike CCA, CKA can reliably identify correspondences between representations in networks
trained from different initializations.

1. Introduction
Across a wide range of machine learning tasks, deep neural
networks enable learning powerful feature representations
automatically from data. Despite impressive empirical advances of deep neural networks in solving various tasks,
the problem of understanding and characterizing the neural network representations learned from data remains relatively under-explored. Previous work (e.g. Advani &
Saxe (2017); Amari et al. (2018); Saxe et al. (2014)) has
made progress in understanding the theoretical dynamics
of the neural network training process. These studies are
insightful, but fundamentally limited, because they ignore
the complex interaction between the training dynamics and
structured data. A window into the network’s representation
can provide more information about the interaction between
machine learning algorithms and data than the value of the
loss function alone.
1

Google Brain. Correspondence to: Simon Kornblith <skornblith@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

This paper investigates the problem of measuring similarities between deep neural network representations. An effective method for measuring representational similarity could
help answer many interesting questions, including: (1) Do
deep neural networks with the same architecture trained
from different random initializations learn similar representations? (2) Can we establish correspondences between
layers of different network architectures? (3) How similar are the representations learned using the same network
architecture from different datasets?
We build upon previous studies investigating similarity between the representations of neural networks (Laakso &
Cottrell, 2000; Li et al., 2015; Raghu et al., 2017; Morcos
et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018). We are also inspired by the
extensive neuroscience literature that uses representational
similarity analysis (Kriegeskorte et al., 2008a; Edelman,
1998) to compare representations across brain areas (Haxby
et al., 2001; Freiwald & Tsao, 2010), individuals (Connolly
et al., 2012), species (Kriegeskorte et al., 2008b), and behaviors (Elsayed et al., 2016), as well as between brains
and neural networks (Yamins et al., 2014; Khaligh-Razavi
& Kriegeskorte, 2014; Sussillo et al., 2015).
Our key contributions are summarized as follows:
• We discuss the invariance properties of similarity indexes and their implications for measuring similarity of
neural network representations.
• We motivate and introduce centered kernel alignment
(CKA) as a similarity index and analyze the relationship
between CKA, linear regression, canonical correlation
analysis (CCA), and related methods (Raghu et al., 2017;
Morcos et al., 2018).
• We show that CKA is able to determine the correspondence between the hidden layers of neural networks
trained from different random initializations and with
different widths, scenarios where previously proposed
similarity indexes fail.
• We verify that wider networks learn more similar representations, and show that the similarity of early layers
saturates at fewer channels than later layers. We demonstrate that early layers, but not later layers, learn similar
representations on different datasets.

