IMEXnet - A Forward Stable Deep Neural Network

Eldad Haber * 1 2 Keegan Lensink * 1 2 Eran Treister 3 Lars Ruthotto 4

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks have revolutionized many machine learning and computer
vision tasks, however, some remaining key challenges limit their wider use. These challenges
include improving the network’s robustness to
perturbations of the input image and the limited
“field of view” of convolution operators. We introduce the IMEXnet that addresses these challenges
by adapting semi-implicit methods for partial differential equations. Compared to similar explicit
networks, such as residual networks, our network
is more stable, which has recently shown to reduce the sensitivity to small changes in the input
features and improve generalization. The addition
of an implicit step connects all pixels in each channel of the image and therefore addresses the field
of view problem while still being comparable to
standard convolutions in terms of the number of
parameters and computational complexity. We
also present a new dataset for semantic segmentation and demonstrate the effectiveness of our
architecture using the NYU Depth dataset.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) have revolutionized many machine learning and vision tasks such as
image classification, segmentation, denoising and deblurring (see (Bengio, 2009; LeCun et al., 2015; Goodfellow
et al., 2016; Hammernik et al., 2017; Avendi et al., 2016)
and references within).
Many different architectures have been proposed and often
tailored to specific tasks. In recent years, residual networks
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Earth, Ocean and Atmospheric Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
Canada 2 Xtract AI, Vancouver, Canada 3 Department of Computer
Science, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Be’er Sheva, Israel 4 Departments of Mathematics and Computer Science, Emory
University, Atlanta, GA, USA. Correspondence to: Eldad Haber
<ehaber@eoas.ubc.ca>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

(ResNets) have shown to be successful in dealing with many
different tasks (Gomez et al., 2017; He et al., 2016b;a; Li
et al., 2018). ResNets have many practical advantages (e.g.,
ease of training and possible reversibility (He, 2017; Chang
et al., 2018)) and are also supported by mathematical theory
due to their link to ordinary differential equations (Weinan,
2017; Chen et al., 2018; Haber & Ruthotto, 2017; Ma et al.,
2018; Lu et al., 2018) and, when dealing with imaging data,
partial differential equations (Ruthotto & Haber, 2018).
The connection between ResNets and differential equations
has highlighted the issue of forward stability of the network.
Roughly speaking, a network is forward stable when it does
not amplify perturbations of the input features due to, for example, noise or adversarial attacks. The examples in (Haber
& Ruthotto, 2017; Chen et al., 2018) also suggest that stable networks train faster and generalize better. Keeping a
network stable requires attention and can be challenging to
control (Haber & Ruthotto, 2017; Ciccone et al., 2018; Ma
et al., 2018).
While it is possible to apply ResNets to many different
vision problems, one should differentiate between problems
that have a small-dimensional output and problems that have
a large-dimensional output.
In a small-dimensional output problem, the image is reduced in dimension to a small vector. For example, in image
classification, a small-dimensional vector in Rn represents
the likelihood of the image to be one of n different classes.
In this case, the network is being used for dimensionality reduction. For these problems, the image is typically
coarsened a number of times before a prediction is made.
The coarsening of the image and the use of convolutions
allows far-away pixels to communicate, utilizing long-range
correlations in the image.
In a large-dimensional output problem, the network generates several different output images and, most commonly,
each output image has at least as many pixels as the input
image. An example of this is image segmentation, where
each output image represents the probability of each pixel
belonging to a certain class. In depth estimation, image
denoising, and image deblurring the output image has the
same dimension as the input image, and in many cases contains high spatial frequencies that are absent in the original
image.

