A Conditional-Gradient-Based Augmented Lagrangian Framework

Alp Yurtsever 1 Olivier Fercoq 2 Volkan Cevher 1

Abstract

This template has a large number of applications in machine learning, signal processing, and computer science;
from unsupervised clustering (Peng and Wei, 2007) to generalized eigenvector problems (Boumal et al., 2018), and
from maximum cut (Goemans and Williamson, 1995) to
phase-retrieval (Candès et al., 2013). We refer the reader
to Section 5 from (Yurtsever et al., 2018) for a detailed
discussion on the special instances and applications of (P ).

This paper considers a generic convex minimization template with affine constraints over a compact domain, which covers key semidefinite programming applications. The existing conditional
gradient methods either do not apply to our template or are too slow in practice. To this end,
we propose a new conditional gradient method,
based on a unified treatment of smoothing and
augmented Lagrangian frameworks. The proposed method maintains favorable properties of
the classical conditional gradient method, such as
cheap linear minimization oracle calls and sparse
representation
of the decision variable. We prove
√
O(1/ k) convergence rate for our method in the
objective residual and the feasibility gap. This
rate is essentially the same as the state of the
art CG-type methods for our problem template,
but the proposed method is arguably superior in
practice compared to existing methods in various
applications.

The conditional gradient method (CGM, a.k.a. Frank-Wolfe
algorithm) is one of the most scalable methods in the literature for solving convex optimization problems over a
structured domain (Yurtsever et al., 2017). The main computational efficiency of CGM comes from the so-called
linear minimization oracles (lmo), the main building blocks
of CGM:
lmoX (v) = arg min x, v .
x∈X

lmo is significantly less expensive than the projection. For
instance, lmo contains a rank-1 solution when X is a nuclear
norm-ball, which can be efficiently approximated via Krylov
subspace methods. Recall that the projection oracle requires
a full singular value decomposition instead.

1. Introduction
In this paper we focus on the following constrained convex
minimization template:
minimize
x

f (x) + g(Bx)

subject to x ∈ X & Ax ∈ K

(P )

where x is the decision variable that lives on the convex
and compact optimization domain X ⊂ Rn with diameter
DX := maxx1 ,x2 ∈X kx1 − x2 k; f : X → R is a convex
differentiable function with Lf -Lipschitz continuous gradient; A : X → Rp and B : X → Rq are known linear maps;
g : Rq → R is a convex function which can be non-smooth
but we assume that it is Lg -Lipchitz continuous; K ⊆ Rp is
a convex set.

The classical CGM is originated by Frank and Wolfe (1956),
but its resurgence in machine learning follows Hazan and
Kale (2012) and Jaggi (2013). Unfortunately, CGM has
restrictive assumptions such as the smoothness of the objective function. Therefore, extending CG-type methods for
broader templates is an active research area (see Section 4
for some recent advancements). In this work, we introduce
the conditional gradient augmented Lagrangian framework
(CGAL) for solving (P ).

LIONS, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland 2 LTCI, Télécom ParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay, France.
Correspondence to: Alp Yurtsever <alp.yurtsever@epfl.ch>.

(P ) is significantly broader in applications in comparison
with the classical CGM template. We can consider the nonsmooth term g(Bx) as a regularizer to promote some known
structures of the solution, or directly as a non-smooth loss
function (e.g., least absolute deviations) for robust optimization. More importantly, (P ) contains an affine inclusion
constraint Ax ∈ K. In particular, it covers the standard
semidefinite programming (SDP) template (with bounded
trace constraint).

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Affine constraints are key for the flexibility of the template,
but they pose substantial computational difficulty in solving
the problem in the primal domain. As a result, primal-

1

