COMIC: Multi-view Clustering Without Parameter Selection

Xi Peng 1 Zhenyu Huang 1 Jianchen Lv 1 Hongyuan Zhu 2 Joey Tianyi Zhou 3

Abstract
In this paper, we study two challenges in clustering analysis, namely, how to cluster multi-view
data and how to perform clustering without parameter selection on cluster size. To this end, we
propose a novel objective function to project raw
data into one space in which the projection embraces the geometric consistency (GC) and the
cluster assignment consistency (CAC). To be specific, the GC aims to learn a connection graph
from a projection space wherein the data points
are connected if and only if they belong to the
same cluster. The CAC aims to minimize the discrepancy of pairwise connection graphs induced
from different views based on the view-consensus
assumption, i.e., different views could produce
the same cluster assignment structure as they are
different portraits of the same object. Thanks to
the view-consensus derived from the connection
graph, our method could achieve promising performance in learning view-specific representation
and eliminating the heterogeneous gaps across
different views. Furthermore, with the proposed
objective, it could learn almost all parameters
including the cluster number from data without
labor-intensive parameter selection. Extensive
experimental results show the promising performance achieved by our method on five datasets
comparing with nine state-of-the-art multi-view
clustering approaches.

1. Introduction
Clustering analysis aims to group unlabeled data into different clusters based on their intrinsic similarities, which is a
fundamental task in machine learning. Traditional singleview clustering methods only consider the data from a sin1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu,
China 2 Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
3
Institute of Performance Computing, A*STAR, Singapore. Correspondence to: J. T. Zhou <joey.tianyi.zhou@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

gle source (Hocking et al., 2011; Elhamifar & Vidal, 2013;
Liu et al., 2016; Flammarion, Nicolas et al., 2017; Shah &
Koltun, 2017; Liu et al., 2019; Peng et al., 2017a; 2018; Liu
et al., 2017), which may be less attractive to some scenarios
due to the heterogeneous properties in data. To be specific,
most real-world data are collected from diverse domains
or obtained from various feature extractors (Zhang et al.,
2019; Liu & Tsang, 2017; Lu et al., 2018). Each domain or
feature extractor is referred to as a particular view, thus leading to the heterogeneous properties of data. In real-world
applications, the heterogeneous properties always take in
variety of multi-view forms, e.g., 1) text + image + voice,
and 2) local binary pattern (LBP) + scale-invariant feature
transform (SIFT). Kumar et al. (2011); Xu et al. (2015);
Zhang et al. (2017); Yang et al. have proven that simply
applying single-view clustering methods cannot narrow the
heterogeneous gap to achieve desirable results because the
clusters may largely differ in each of the data views. Therefore, it is highly expected to develop multi-view clustering
(MvC) methods which could group similar objects into the
same cluster and dissimilar objects into different clusters by
utilizing the available multi-view information.
Based on the way to utilize the multi-view information, existing methods could be roughly classified into the following
categories, namely, canonical correlation analysis (Chaudhuri et al., 2009), multi-view matrix factorization (Zhang
et al., 2018), multi-view subspace clustering/spectral clustering (Kumar et al., 2011; Cao et al., 2015; Lu et al., 2016;
Zhang et al., 2017), and deep multi-view clustering (Andrew et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2015; Zhao et al., 2017). The
core commonality of these methods is encapsulating the
complementary information of different views to learn a
shared/common representation followed by a single-view
clustering approach. Xu et al. (2013) provided a comprehensive survey and we will introduce these works in related
works with more details.
Although numerous works have been conducted and
achieved significant progress in multi-view clustering, most
of them have suffered from parameter selection issue. In
brief, almost all MvC methods have to seek an optimal combination of parameters including expected cluster number so
that a desirable data partition is obtained. To seek the optimal parameters, some evaluation metrics such as normalized
mutual information (NMI) are used as a performance guid-

