Minimal Achievable Sufficient Statistic Learning
Milan Cvitkovic 1 Günther Koliander 2

Abstract
We introduce Minimal Achievable Sufficient
Statistic (MASS) Learning, a machine learning
training objective for which the minima are minimal sufficient statistics with respect to a class
of functions being optimized over (e.g., deep
networks). In deriving MASS Learning, we
also introduce Conserved Differential Information (CDI), an information-theoretic quantity that
— unlike standard mutual information — can be
usefully applied to deterministically-dependent
continuous random variables like the input and
output of a deep network. In a series of experiments, we show that deep networks trained with
MASS Learning achieve competitive performance
on supervised learning, regularization, and uncertainty quantification benchmarks.

1. Introduction
The representation learning approach to machine learning
focuses on finding a representation Z of an input random
variable X that is useful for predicting a random variable Y
(Goodfellow et al., 2016).
What makes a representation Z “useful” is much debated,
but a common assertion is that Z should be a minimal sufficient statistic of X for Y (Adragni, Kofi P. & Cook, R. Dennis, 2009; Shamir et al., 2010; James et al., 2017; Achille &
Soatto, 2018b). That is:
1. Z should be a statistic of X. This means Z = f (X)
for some function f .
2. Z should be sufficient for Y . This means p(X|Z, Y ) =
p(X|Z).
3. Given that Z is a sufficient statistic, it should be minimal with respect to X. This means for any measurable,
1
Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California, USA 2 Acoustics
Research Institute, Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria.
Correspondence to: Milan Cvitkovic <mcvitkov@caltech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

non-invertible function g, g(Z) is no longer sufficient
for Y .1
In other words: a minimal sufficient statistic is a random
variable Z that tells you everything about Y you could ever
care about, but if you do any irreversible processing to Z,
you are guaranteed to lose some information about Y .
Minimal sufficient statistics have a long history in the field
of statistics (Lehmann & Scheffe, 1950; Dynkin, 1951). But
the minimality condition (3, above) is perhaps too strong to
be useful in machine learning, since it is a statement about
any measurable function g, rather than about functions in
a practical hypothesis class like the class of deep neural
networks.
Instead, in this work we consider minimal achievable sufficient statistics: sufficient statistics that are minimal within
some particular set of functions.
Definition 1 (Minimal Achievable Sufficient Statistic). Let
f (X) be a sufficient statistic of X for Y . f (X) is minimal
achievable with respect to a set of functions F if f 2 F
and for any Lipschitz continuous, non-invertible function g,
g(f (X)) is no longer sufficient for Y .
In this work, we give a characterization of minimal achievable sufficient statistics that is applicable to deep neural
networks and show that it can be used to train models with
competitive performance on classification accuracy, uncertainty quantification, and out-of-distribution input detection.
Contributions:
• We introduce Conserved Differential Information (CDI), an information-theoretic quantity that,
unlike mutual information, is meaningful for
deterministically-dependent continuous random
variables, such as the input and output of a deep
network.
• We introduce Minimal Achievable Sufficient Statistic Learning (MASS Learning), a training objective
1
Although this is not the most common phrasing of statistical
minimality, we feel it is more understandable. For the equivalence
of this phrasing and the standard definition see Supplementary
Material 7.1.

