Understanding the Impact of Entropy on Policy Optimization

Zafarali Ahmed 1 2 Nicolas Le Roux 1 3 Mohammad Norouzi 3 Dale Schuurmans 3 4

Abstract
Entropy regularization is commonly used to improve policy optimization in reinforcement learning. It is believed to help with exploration by
encouraging the selection of more stochastic policies. In this work, we analyze this claim using
new visualizations of the optimization landscape
based on randomly perturbing the loss function.
We first show that even with access to the exact
gradient, policy optimization is difficult due to the
geometry of the objective function. We then qualitatively show that in some environments, a policy
with higher entropy can make the optimization
landscape smoother, thereby connecting local optima and enabling the use of larger learning rates.
This paper presents new tools for understanding
the optimization landscape, shows that policy entropy serves as a regularizer, and highlights the
challenge of designing general-purpose policy optimization algorithms.

1. Introduction
Policy optimization is a family of reinforcement learning
(RL) algorithms aiming to directly optimize the parameters
of a policy by maximizing discounted cumulative rewards.
This often involves a difficult non-concave maximization
problem, even when using a simple policy with a linear
state-action mapping.
Contemporary policy optimization algorithms build upon
the R EINFORCE algorithm (Williams, 1992). These algorithms involve estimating a noisy gradient of the optimization objective using Monte-Carlo sampling to enable
stochastic gradient ascent. This estimate can suffer from
high variance and several solutions have been proposed to
address what is often seen as a major issue (Konda & Tsitsik-

lis, 2000; Greensmith et al., 2004; Schulman et al., 2015b;
Tucker et al., 2018).
However, in this work we show that noisy estimates of the
gradient are not necessarily the main issue: The optimization problem is difficult because of the geometry of the
landscape. Given that “high variance” is often the reason
given for the poor performance of policy optimization, it
raises an important question: How do we study the effects
of different policy learning techniques on the underlying
optimization problem?
An answer to this question would guide future research
directions and drive the design of new policy optimization
techniques. Our work makes progress toward this goal by
taking a look at one such technique: entropy regularization.
In RL, exploration is critical to finding good policies during optimization: If the optimization procedure does not
sample a large number of diverse state-action pairs, it may
converge to a poor policy. To prevent policies from becoming deterministic too quickly, researchers use entropy
regularization (Williams & Peng, 1991; Mnih et al., 2016).
Its success has sometimes been attributed to the fact that
it “encourages exploration” (Mnih et al., 2016; Schulman
et al., 2017a;b). Contrary to Q-learning (Watkins & Dayan,
1992) or Deterministic Policy Gradient (Silver et al., 2014)
where the exploration is handled separately from the policy
itself, direct policy optimization relies on the stochasticity
of the policy being optimized for the exploration. However,
policy optimization is a pure maximization problem and any
change in the policy is reflected in the objective. Hence,
any strategy, such as entropy regularization, can only affect
learning in one of two ways: either it reduces the noise in the
gradient estimates or it changes the optimization landscape.
In this work we investigate some of these questions by
controlling the entropy of policies and observing its effect
on the geometry of the optimization landscape. This work
contains the following contributions:

1
Mila, McGill University, Montréal, Canada 2 Work done
while at Google Research 3 Google Research 4 University
of Alberta. Correspondence to: Zafarali Ahmed <zafarali.ahmed@mail.mcgill.ca>.

• We show experimentally that the difficulty of policy
optimization is strongly linked to the geometry of the
objective function.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

• We propose a novel visualization of the objective function that captures local information about gradient and
curvature.

