Non-Asymptotic Analysis of Fractional Langevin Monte Carlo for
Non-Convex Optimization

Thanh Huy Nguyen 1 Umut Şimşekli 1 Gaël Richard 1

Abstract

Recent studies on diffusion-based sampling methods have shown that Langevin Monte Carlo
(LMC) algorithms can be beneficial for nonconvex optimization, and rigorous theoretical
guarantees have been proven for both asymptotic and finite-time regimes. Algorithmically,
LMC-based algorithms resemble the well-known
gradient descent (GD) algorithm, where the GD
recursion is perturbed by an additive Gaussian
noise whose variance has a particular form. Fractional Langevin Monte Carlo (FLMC) is a recently proposed extension of LMC, where the
Gaussian noise is replaced by a heavy-tailed αstable noise. As opposed to its Gaussian counterpart, these heavy-tailed perturbations can incur
large jumps and it has been empirically demonstrated that the choice of α-stable noise can provide several advantages in modern machine learning problems, both in optimization and sampling
contexts. However, as opposed to LMC, only
asymptotic convergence properties of FLMC have
been yet established. In this study, we analyze
the non-asymptotic behavior of FLMC for nonconvex optimization and prove finite-time bounds
for its expected suboptimality. Our results show
that the weak-error of FLMC increases faster than
LMC, which suggests using smaller step-sizes in
FLMC. We finally extend our results to the case
where the exact gradients are replaced by stochastic gradients and show that similar results hold in
this setting as well.

1

LTCI, Télécom ParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay, 75013,
Paris, France.
Correspondence to: Thanh Huy Nguyen
<thanh.nguyen@telecom-paristech.fr>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Diffusion-based Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms aim at generating samples from a distribution that is
only accessible by its unnormalized density function. Recently, they have become increasingly popular due to their
nice scalability properties and theoretical guarantees (Ma
et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2015; Şimşekli et al., 2016; Durmus et al., 2016). In addition to their success in Bayesian
machine learning, they have also been used for analyzing
large-scale non-convex optimization algorithms (Raginsky
et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2018; Şimşekli et al., 2018; Birdal
et al., 2018; Birdal & Şimşekli, 2019) and understanding
the behavior of stochastic gradient descent in deep learning
settings (Jastrzebski et al., 2017; Şimşekli et al., 2019).
One of the most popular approaches in this field is based on
the so-called Langevin diffusion, which is described by the
following stochastic differential equation (SDE):
p
dX(t) = −∇f (X(t))dt + 2/β dB(t), t ≥ 0, (1)
where X(t) ∈ Rd , f is a smooth function which is often
non-convex, β ∈ R+ is called the ‘inverse temperature’
parameter, and B(t) is the standard Brownian motion in Rd .
Under some regularity conditions on f , one can show that
the Markov process (Xt )t≥0 , i.e. the solution of the SDE
(1), is ergodic with its unique invariant measure π, whose
density is proportional to exp(−βf (x)) (Roberts & Stramer,
2002). An important feature of this measure is that, when β
goes to infinity, its density concentrates around the global
minimum x? , arg minx∈Rd f (x) (Hwang, 1980; Gelfand
& Mitter, 1991). This property implies that, if we could
simulate (1) for large enough β and t, the simulated state
X(t) would be close to x? .
This connection between diffusions and optimization, motivates simulating (1) in discrete-time in order to obtain
‘almost global optimizers’. If we use a first-order EulerMaruyama discretization, we obtain a ‘tempered’ version
of the well-known Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm (ULA)
(Roberts & Stramer, 2002):
r
2η
k+1
k
k
WULA = WULA − η∇f (WULA ) +
∆Bk+1 , (2)
β

