Rao-Blackwellized Stochastic Gradients for Discrete Distributions
Runjing Liu 1 Jeffrey Regier 2 Nilesh Tripuraneni 2 Michael I. Jordan 1 2 Jon McAuliffe 1 3

Abstract

the focus of this paper, the exact gradient is computationally
intractable. Thus, in order to optimize L(η), we seek lowvariance stochastic approximations of the gradient.

We wish to compute the gradient of an expectation over a finite or countably infinite sample
space having K ≤ ∞ categories. When K is indeed infinite, or finite but very large, the relevant
summation is intractable. Accordingly, various
stochastic gradient estimators have been proposed.
In this paper, we describe a technique that can
be applied to reduce the variance of any such
estimator, without changing its bias—in particular, unbiasedness is retained. We show that our
technique is an instance of Rao-Blackwellization,
and we demonstrate the improvement it yields on
a semi-supervised classification problem and a
pixel attention task.

The “reparametrization trick” (Spall, 2003; Kingma &
Welling, 2014) provides efficient stochastic gradients when
qη is a continuous distribution, but it does not apply when z
is discrete. Two well-known possibilities in the discrete case
are continuous relaxation (Maddison et al., 2017; Jang et al.,
2017) and REINFORCE (Williams, 1992) (also known as
the score function estimator). The former replaces the discrete random variable with a continuous relaxation so that
the reparametrization trick can be applied. However, it results in biased gradient estimates. The latter is impractical
for most purposes due to its high variance.

1. Introduction
Let z be a discrete random variable over K ≤ ∞ categories,
with distribution qη (z) parameterized by a real vector η and
differentiable in η. We aim to minimize
L(η) := Ez∼qη (z) [fη (z)] =

K
X

qη (k)fη (k),

(1)

k=1

where the real-valued integrand fη also depends differentiably on η. If K is finite and small enough, we can compute
the exact gradient as

∇η Eqη (z) [fη (z)]
K n
o
X
=
[∇η qη (k)] fη (k) + qη (k)∇η fη (k) .

(2)

k=1

On the other hand, K may be infinite, or large relative to the
cost of evaluating qη · fη . In either of these cases, which are
1
Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences,
University of California, Berkeley 3 The Voleon Group. Correspondence to: Runjing Liu <runjing liu@berkeley.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Control variate methodology provides a general framework
for variance reduction. Specific examples include RELAX (Grathwohl et al., 2018), REBAR (Tucker et al., 2017),
NVIL (Mnih & Gregor, 2014), and MuProp (Gu et al., 2016).
These methods provide a mechanism for reducing the variance of REINFORCE, but unfortunately they do not reduce
the variance enough for many applications.
In the current paper, we show how to achieve further variance reduction via a meta-procedure that can be applied to
any discrete-distribution stochastic-gradient procedure (e.g.,
REINFORCE or REINFORCE with control variate). Our
framework reduces variance without changing the bias. In
particular, an unbiased stochastic gradient remains unbiased
after application of our approach. Further, our approach is
“anytime” in the sense that it can reduce stochastic-gradient
variances given any computational budget—the larger the
budget, the greater the variance reduction. Hence it is well
suited to our chosen setting, where K is infinite or very
large, and/or qη · fη is expensive to evaluate.
Our method is particularly apt in the setting where the probability mass qη (z) is concentrated on only a few categories.
For example, in extreme classification, only a few labels out
of many are plausible. In reinforcement learning, only a
few actions in the possible action space are advantageous.
Neither control-variate methods nor continuous-relaxation
techniques take advantage of this “sparsity,” and we show
that the variance reduction of our method in this setting can
be dramatic.
We show that our variance-reduction meta-procedure

