Defending Against Saddle Point Attack in Byzantine-Robust Distributed
Learning

Dong Yin 1 Yudong Chen 2 Kannan Ramchandran 1 Peter Bartlett 1 3

Abstract
We study robust distributed learning that involves
minimizing a non-convex loss function with saddle points. We consider the Byzantine setting
where some worker machines have abnormal or
even arbitrary and adversarial behavior, and in
this setting, the Byzantine machines may create
fake local minima near a saddle point that is far
away from any true local minimum, even when
robust gradient estimators are used. We develop
ByzantinePGD, a robust first-order algorithm that
can provably escape saddle points and fake local
minima, and converge to an approximate true local minimizer with low iteration complexity. As a
by-product, we give a simpler algorithm and analysis for escaping saddle points in the usual nonByzantine setting. We further discuss three robust
gradient estimators that can be used in ByzantinePGD, including median, trimmed mean, and
iterative filtering. We characterize their performance in concrete statistical settings, and argue
for their near-optimality in low and high dimensional regimes.

1. Introduction
Distributed computing becomes increasingly important in
modern data-intensive applications. In many applications,
large-scale datasets are distributed over multiple machines
for parallel processing in order to speed up computation. In
other settings, the data sources are naturally distributed, and
for privacy and efficiency considerations, the data are not
transmitted to a central machine. An example is the recently
proposed Federated Learning paradigm (McMahan & Ramage, 2017; Konečnỳ et al., 2016; 2015), in which the data
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences,
UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA 2 School of Operations Research
and Information Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA
3
Department of Statistics, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Dong Yin <dongyin@eecs.berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

are stored and processed locally in end users’ cellphones
and personal computers.
In a standard worker-server distributed computing framework, a single master machine is in charge of maintaining
and updating the parameter of interest, and a set of worker
machines store the data, perform local computation and
communicate with the master. In this setting, messages
received from worker machines are prone to errors due to
data corruption, hardware/software malfunction, and communication delay and failure. These problems are only
exacerbated in a decentralized distributed architecture such
as Federated Learning, where some machines may be subjected to malicious and coordinated attack and manipulation.
A well-established framework for studying such scenarios is
the Byzantine setting (Lamport et al., 1982), where a subset
of machines behave completely arbitrarily—even in a way
that depends on the algorithm used and the data on the other
machines—thereby capturing the unpredictable nature of
the errors. Developing distributed algorithms that are robust
in the Byzantine setting has become increasingly critical.
In this paper we focus on robust distributed optimization
for statistical learning problems. Here the data points are
generated from some unknown distribution D and stored locally in m worker machines, each storing n data points; the
goal is to minimize a population loss function F : W → R
defined as an expectation over D, where W ⊆ Rd is the
parameter space. We assume that α ∈ (0, 1/2) fraction of
the worker machines are Byzantine; that is, their behavior is
arbitrary. This Byzantine-robust distributed learning problem has attracted attention in a recent line of work (Alistarh
et al., 2018; Blanchard et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2017; Feng
et al., 2014; Su & Vaidya, 2016a;b; Yin et al., 2018a). This
body of work develops robust algorithms that are guaranteed
to output an approximate minimizer of F when it is convex,
or an approximate stationary point in the non-convex case.
However, fitting complicated machine learning models often
requires finding a local minimum of non-convex functions,
as exemplified by training deep neural networks and other
high-capacity learning architectures (Soudry & Carmon,
2016; Ge et al., 2016; 2017). It is well-known that many
of the stationary points of these problems are in fact saddle
points and far away from any local minimum (Kawaguchi,

