Counterfactual Off-Policy Evaluation with
Gumbel-Max Structural Causal Models
Michael Oberst 1 David Sontag 1

Abstract
We introduce an off-policy evaluation procedure
for highlighting episodes where applying a reinforcement learned (RL) policy is likely to have
produced a substantially different outcome than
the observed policy. In particular, we introduce
a class of structural causal models (SCMs) for
generating counterfactual trajectories in finite
partially observable Markov Decision Processes
(POMDPs). We see this as a useful procedure
for off-policy “debugging” in high-risk settings
(e.g., healthcare); by decomposing the expected
difference in reward between the RL and observed
policy into specific episodes, we can identify
episodes where the counterfactual difference in
reward is most dramatic. This in turn can be used
to facilitate review of specific episodes by domain experts. We demonstrate the utility of this
procedure with a synthetic environment of sepsis
management.

1. Introduction
When a patient dies in the hospital, we might ask: Could
it have been avoided, if the clinicians acted differently?
This is impossible to know, because we cannot go back in
time. Nonetheless, there is precedent for trying to answer
these counterfactual questions: In medical malpractice, for
instance, establishing fault requires showing that the injury
would not have occurred “but for” the breach in the standard
of care (Bal, 2009; Encyclopedia, 2008).
When considering the deployment of new technologies in
high-risk environments, such as RL policies in healthcare,
we might worry about a similar counterfactual: If we had
deployed an RL policy, would it have caused the death
of patients who lived under a physician policy? Or more
1

CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Michael Oberst
<moberst@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

optimistically, are there lives which could have been saved?
This question becomes increasingly relevant, with growing
interest in applying RL to everything from HIV therapy
(Parbhoo et al., 2017) to epilepsy (Guez et al., 2008) and
sepsis (Komorowski et al., 2018).
However, evaluation of RL policies with observational data
remains a challenge, albeit a necessary one due to the safety
risk of training an RL agent on real patients. Off-policy evaluation in this context is prone to issues such as confounding,
small effective sample sizes, and lack of introspection as
discussed in Gottesman et al. (2019). Lacking a surefire
solution, a physician might review patient trajectories alongside the suggested actions from an RL policy, and ask: Does
this seem reasonable? What do I think would have happened
if this policy had been followed? Yet, manual inspection of
trajectories is not only inefficient, but difficult to interpret
without more information: If we are to discover new insights
about treatment, shouldn’t there be some disagreement?
This motivates our main conceptual contribution: By flipping the counterfactual question around, and “asking the
algorithm” what would have happened, we aim to highlight the most interesting cases of disagreement, while also
demonstrating implicitly why the learned policy is preferred,
based on the projected differences in trajectories.
More specifically, in the context of model-based RL with
discrete states, we give a post-hoc method to elicit the answers to these questions based on a learned dynamics model.
Our goal is to pair counterfactual trajectories with observed
trajectories, so that domain experts can “sanity-check” a proposed policy, potentially with additional side-information
(e.g., chart review in the case of a patient). In Section 5
we use a synthetic environment of sepsis management to
demonstrate how this type of introspection can highlight
dangerous implicit assumptions of the learned policy, even
when off-policy evaluation is overly optimistic.
Towards generating these counterfactual trajectories, we
have to deal with a fundamental issue of non-identifiability
in the absence of deterministic dynamics. As we show in this
paper, even with a fully-specified finite Markov Decision
Process (MDP), there are multiple parameterizations of a
structural causal model (SCM) which are equally compatible
with the transition and reward distributions, but which sug-

