Adversarial Online Learning with noise

Alon Resler 1 Yishay Mansour 1 2

Abstract
We present and study models of adversarial online learning where the feedback observed by the
learner is noisy, and the feedback is either full
information feedback or bandit feedback. Specifically, we consider binary losses xored with the
noise, which is a Bernoulli random variable. We
consider both a constant noise rate and a variable noise rate. Our main results are tight regret
bounds for learning with noise in the adversarial
online learning model.

1. Introduction
Online learning is a general framework for sequential
decision-making under uncertainty. In each round, a learner
chooses an action from a set of K available actions and suffers a loss associated with that action and observes “some”
feedback about the losses. The losses in each round are
arbitrary, possibly adversarial, and the goal of the learner is
to minimize the cumulative loss over a fix time horizon T .
We measure the performance of the learner using the regret
which is the expected difference between the cumulative
loss of the learner and that of the best fixed action.
Traditionally, there are two main types of feedback: fullinformation feedback and the Bandit feedback. In the fullinformation feedback, often referred to as prediction with
expert advice, in each round the learner observes the losses
of all actions. In the Bandit feedback the learner only observes the loss associated with the action played.
Both models have been extensively studied and received significant practical and theoretical interest.
√ The regret bound
for the full information model is Θ( T ln K) (see (Littlestone & Warmuth, 1994; Freund & Schapire, 1997;
√ Kalai &
Vempala, 2005)), and for the bandit model is Θ( KT ) (see
(Auer et al., 2002; Audibert & Bubeck, 2009; Cesa-Bianchi
*
Equal contribution 1 Blavatnik School of Computer Science,
Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel 2 Google Research, Israel.
Correspondence to: Alon Resler <alonress@gmail.com>, Yishay
Mansour <mansour.yishay@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

& Lugosi, 2006; Bubeck & Cesa-Bianchi, 2012)).
Both models assume that the observed feedback is exact,
namely that we always get the correct ground-truth. In some
real life scenarios, the feedback (ground-truth) might be
corrupted by noise, which is the focus of our work.
For a motivating example, consider an Internet website that
presents one out of K ads to each user, and its goal is to
maximize the number of clicked ads. In real world scenarios,
we might observe an incorrect feedback regarding the realization of the click. This can happen for many reasons: (1)
network connection (from the user to the advertising server,
which is different from the content server), (2) browser issues, including privacy setting, (3) misidentification of the
user (due to multiple users using the same IP address, or
blocking cookies). All those can be modeled as a Bernoulli
noise.
Another important aspect for this web advertising example
to consider are invalid clicks, which can be either malicious
clicks (done by robots, etc) or unintentional clicks. We
would like to maximize the “valid clicks”, and ignore invalid
ones. (In fact, web search companies developed tools to
address such issues.) The invalid clicks, out of the entire
click stream, can be viewed as noise. Some “users” are more
prone to generate invalid clicks, which can be captured by
variable Bernoulli noise across time steps.
In this paper, we present and study settings in which the
feedback is corrupted by random noise. We assume that the
losses are Boolean and that the noise is also Boolean, and the
observation is the xor of the loss and the noise. For the noise
we consider Bernoulli random variable with probability p,
denoted by B(p). We consider a few variations of the noise
model.
For the constant noise rate, we assume that there is a fixed
probability p for the noise (for all actions and rounds). For
the variable noise rate, we assume that there exists a distribution D such that in each round t we draw a vector of
probabilities, where is pi,t the noise of action i in round
t. For both settings, we study both the case that the noise
parameter is known to the learner, and where it is unknown.
Our main contribution is deriving tight regret bounds for
those settings, both upper bounds (algorithms) and lower
bounds (impossibility results). In the following paragraphs

