LatentGNN: Learning Efficient Non-local Relations for Visual Recognition

Songyang Zhang 1 Shipeng Yan 1 Xuming He 1

Abstract
Capturing long-range dependencies in feature representations is crucial for many visual recognition
tasks. Despite recent successes of deep convolutional networks, it remains challenging to model
non-local context relations between visual features. A promising strategy is to model the feature
context by a fully-connected graph neural network
(GNN), which augments traditional convolutional
features with an estimated non-local context representation. However, most GNN-based approaches
require computing a dense graph affinity matrix
and hence have difficulty in scaling up to tackle
complex real-world visual problems. In this work,
we propose an efficient and yet flexible non-local
relation representation based on a novel class of
graph neural networks. Our key idea is to introduce a latent space to reduce the complexity of
graph, which allows us to use a low-rank representation for the graph affinity matrix and to
achieve a linear complexity in computation. Extensive experimental evaluations on three major
visual recognition tasks show that our method
outperforms the prior works with a large margin while maintaining a low computation cost.
For facilitating the future research, code is available: https://github.com/latentgnn/
LatentGNN-V1-PyTorch

1. Introduction
Modeling non-local relations in feature representations is a
fundamental problem in visual recognition, which enables
us to capture long-range dependencies between scene entities and handle feature ambiguity for high-level semantic
understanding tasks (Strat & Fischler, 1991). In particular,
tremendous progress has been made recently in computer
1

School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech
University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Xuming He
<xmhe@shanghaitech.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

vision community by learning hierarchical feature representations of images with deep convolutional networks. Nevertheless, the dominating feature learning strategy in deep
Convnets is through stacking many local operations of convolution and pooling, which are effectively limited to local
receptive fields and short-range context (Luo et al., 2016;
Chen et al., 2017).
There have been several attempts in the literature to tackle
the problem of incorporating non-local context into representations of existing deep models. Early works tend to incorporate recurrent neural network (RNN) module to capture the
long-range dependencies by constructing a directed acyclic
graph model in convolutional feature space (Byeon et al.,
2015; Shuai et al., 2018) or semantic label space (Zheng
et al., 2015). These RNN-based models are typically defined on graphs with local neighborhood or specific edge
functions, which are limited in modeling non-local relations
and computationally expensive. An alternative strategy of
context modeling is to exploit image structure and integrate
a region-based representation with deep convolutional features (Li & Gupta, 2018). Regions and their relations (e.g.,
similarity) are typically modeled as an undirected graph,
which can be learned jointly with convolutional features
to encode long-range dependencies. The region generation (Gould et al., 2009), however, relies on bottom-up
grouping that is sensitive to low-level image cues and may
yield erroneous representations.
More recent efforts have been focused on introducing nonlocal operations into the deep Convnets (Wang et al., 2018;
Yue et al., 2018). In particular, Wang et al. (2018) propose
to augment the convolutional features by a context representation computed from the entire feature map at certain convolution layers. Such non-local operations can be viewed as
a densely-connected graph neural network (GNN) module
with attention mechanism (Velickovic et al., 2018), which
estimates the feature context by a single iteration of message
passing on the underlying graph. This feature augmentation
method allows a flexible way to represent non-local relations
between features and has led to significant improvements in
several vision recognition tasks (Wang et al., 2018). However, despite its successes, the GNN-based non-local neural
network suffers from two major limitations, especially in
the context of visual recognition. First, the graph message
passing requires computing a dense affinity matrix of the

