Maximum Likelihood Estimation for Learning Populations of Parameters

Ramya Korlakai Vinayak 1 Weihao Kong 2 Gregory Valiant 2 Sham Kakade 1

Abstract
Consider a setting with N independent individuals, each with an unknown parameter, pi ∈ [0, 1]
drawn from some unknown distribution P ? . After observing the outcomes of t independent
Bernoulli trials, i.e., Xi ∼ Binomial(t, pi ) per
individual, our objective is to accurately estimate
P ? . This problem arises in numerous domains,
including the social sciences, psychology, healthcare, and biology, where the size of the population under study is usually large while the number of observations per individual is often limited. Our main result shows that, in the regime
where t  N , the maximum likelihood estimator
(MLE) is both statistically minimax optimal and
efficiently computable. Precisely, for sufficiently
large N , the MLE achieves the information theoretic optimal error bound of O( 1t ) for t < c log N ,
with regards to the earth mover’s distance (between the estimated and true distributions). More
generally, in an exponentially large interval of t
beyond c log N , the MLE achieves the minimax
1
error bound of O( √t log
). In contrast, regardN
less of how large N is, the naive "plug-in" estimator for this problem only achieves the sub-optimal
error of Θ( √1t ).

1. Introduction
The problem of learning a distribution of parameters over a
population arises in several domains such as social sciences,
psychology, medicine, and biology (Lord, 1965; Lord &
Cressie, 1975; Millar, 1986; Palmer & Dixon, 1990; Colwell & Coddington, 1994; Bell et al., 2000). While the
number of individuals in the population can be very large,
the number of observations available per individual is often
very limited, which prohibits accurate estimation of the pa1
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Washington, Seattle 2 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford. Correspondence to: Ramya
Korlakai Vinayak <ramya@cs.washington.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

rameter of interest per individual. In such sparse observation
scenarios, how accurately can we estimate the distribution
of parameters over the population?
In the 1960’s F. M. Lord studied the problem of estimating
the distribution of parameters over a population in the context of psychological testing (Lord, 1965; 1969). Consider
a study involving a large number of independent individuals. Each individual has an unknown probability pi of
answering a question correctly. Given the scores of these
individuals on a test with small set of questions, the goal
is to estimate the underlying distribution of pi ’s. Such an
estimated distribution can be used in downstream tasks, like
testing if the distribution of scores is uniform or multimodal,
or comparing two tests of the same psychological trait.
We use the lens of sparse regime analysis for this problem of
learning a population of parameters. Our analysis is inspired
by the recent advances in a related problem of estimating
discrete distributions and their properties such as, entropy
and support size, when the number of observations is much
smaller than the support size of the distribution (Valiant &
Valiant, 2013; Jiao et al., 2015; Wu & Yang, 2015; 2016;
Orlitsky et al., 2016; Acharya et al., 2017; Jiao et al., 2018;
Han et al., 2018). However, we note that our setting is not
the same as estimating a discrete distribution. For instance,
the probabilities sum to 1 for a discrete distribution, where
as, the true parameters in our setting need not sum to 1.
There have been several classical works on non-parametric
mixture models in general (Turnbull, 1976; Simar, 1976;
Laird, 1978; Lindsay, 1983a;b; Böhning, 1989; Lesperance
& Kalbfleisch, 1992) and binomial mixture models in particular (Cressie, 1979; Wood, 1999) which have studied the
geometry of the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE), the
optimality conditions, identifiability, and uniqueness of the
MLE solution, and algorithms for computing the optimal solution to the MLE. However, the statistical analysis of how
accurately the MLE recovers the underlying distribution has
not been addressed. In this paper, we fill this gap, and show
that MLE achieves the optimal error bound with regards
to the earth mover’s distance (or Wasserstein-1 distance,
Definition 3.1) between the estimated and true distributions
(equivalently, the l1 -distance between the CDF’s).

