Challenging Common Assumptions in the Unsupervised Learning of
Disentangled Representations
Francesco Locatello 1 2 Stefan Bauer 2 Mario Lucic 3 Gunnar Rätsch 1 Sylvain Gelly 3 Bernhard Schölkopf 2
Olivier Bachem 3

Abstract
The key idea behind the unsupervised learning
of disentangled representations is that real-world
data is generated by a few explanatory factors of
variation which can be recovered by unsupervised
learning algorithms. In this paper, we provide
a sober look at recent progress in the field and
challenge some common assumptions. We
first theoretically show that the unsupervised
learning of disentangled representations is
fundamentally impossible without inductive
biases on both the models and the data. Then,
we train more than 12 000 models covering most
prominent methods and evaluation metrics in a
reproducible large-scale experimental study on
seven different data sets. We observe that while
the different methods successfully enforce properties “encouraged” by the corresponding losses,
well-disentangled models seemingly cannot be
identified without supervision. Furthermore,
increased disentanglement does not seem to lead
to a decreased sample complexity of learning
for downstream tasks. Our results suggest that
future work on disentanglement learning should
be explicit about the role of inductive biases and
(implicit) supervision, investigate concrete benefits of enforcing disentanglement of the learned
representations, and consider a reproducible
experimental setup covering several data sets.

1. Introduction
In representation learning it is often assumed that real-world
observations x (e.g., images or videos) are generated by
1

ETH Zurich, Department for Computer Science 2 MaxPlanck Institute for Intelligent Systems 3 Google Research,
Brain Team.
Correspondence to: Francesco Locatello
<francesco.locatello@tuebingen.mpg.de>, Olivier Bachem
<bachem@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

a two-step generative process. First, a multivariate latent
random variable z is sampled from a distribution P (z). Intuitively, z corresponds to semantically meaningful factors
of variation of the observations (e.g., content + position of
objects in an image). Then, in a second step, the observation
x is sampled from the conditional distribution P (x|z). The
key idea behind this model is that the high-dimensional data
x can be explained by the substantially lower dimensional
and semantically meaningful latent variable z which is
mapped to the higher-dimensional space of observations
x. Informally, the goal of representation learning is to find
useful transformations r(x) of x that “make it easier to
extract useful information when building classifiers or other
predictors” (Bengio et al., 2013).
A recent line of work has argued that representations that
are disentangled are an important step towards a better
representation learning (Bengio et al., 2013; Peters et al.,
2017; LeCun et al., 2015; Bengio et al., 2007; Schmidhuber,
1992; Lake et al., 2017; Tschannen et al., 2018). They
should contain all the information present in x in a compact
and interpretable structure (Bengio et al., 2013; Kulkarni
et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2016) while being independent
from the task at hand (Goodfellow et al., 2009; Lenc &
Vedaldi, 2015). They should be useful for (semi-)supervised
learning of downstream tasks, transfer and few shot
learning (Bengio et al., 2013; Schölkopf et al., 2012; Peters
et al., 2017). They should enable to integrate out nuisance
factors (Kumar et al., 2017), to perform interventions, and
to answer counterfactual questions (Pearl, 2009; Spirtes
et al., 1993; Peters et al., 2017).
While there is no single formalized notion of disentanglement (yet) which is widely accepted, the key intuition is that
a disentangled representation should separate the distinct,
informative factors of variations in the data (Bengio et al.,
2013). A change in a single underlying factor of variation
zi should lead to a change in a single factor in the learned
representation r(x). This assumption can be extended to
groups of factors as, for instance, in Bouchacourt et al.
(2018) or Suter et al. (2018). Based on this idea, a variety of
disentanglement evaluation protocols have been proposed
leveraging the statistical relations between the learned

