MixHop: Higher-Order Graph Convolutional Architectures
via Sparsified Neighborhood Mixing

Sami Abu-El-Haija 1 Bryan Perozzi 2 Amol Kapoor 2 Nazanin Alipourfard 1 Kristina Lerman 1
Hrayr Harutyunyan 1 Greg Ver Steeg 1 Aram Galstyan 1

Abstract
Existing popular methods for semi-supervised
learning with Graph Neural Networks (such as the
Graph Convolutional Network) provably cannot
learn a general class of neighborhood mixing relationships. To address this weakness, we propose a
new model, MixHop, that can learn these relationships, including difference operators, by repeatedly mixing feature representations of neighbors
at various distances. MixHop requires no additional memory or computational complexity, and
outperforms on challenging baselines. In addition,
we propose sparsity regularization that allows us
to visualize how the network prioritizes neighborhood information across different graph datasets.
Our analysis of the learned architectures reveals
that neighborhood mixing varies per datasets.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) establish state-ofthe-art performance for many Computer Vision applications
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Szegedy et al., 2015). CNNs consist of a series of convolutional layers, each parameterized
by a filter with pre-specified spatial dimensions. CNNs
are powerful because they are able to learn a hierarchy of
translation invariant feature detectors.
The success of CNNs in Computer Vision and other domains
has motivated researchers (Bruna et al., 2014; Defferrard
et al., 2016; Kipf & Welling, 2017) to extend the convolutional operator from regular grids, in which the structure
is fixed and repeated everywhere, to graph-structured data,
where nodes’ neighborhoods can greatly vary in structure
across the graph. Generalizing convolution to graph struc1

Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California 2 Google AI, New York. Correspondence to: Sami
<sami@haija.org>, Bryan <bperozzi@acm.org>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

ÂH (i)

W (i)

H (i+1)

H (i+1)
(i) 1 (i) (i)
H (i+1) = σ Â0H (i)W
Â H W
...
0
1

(
|
| )
(a) Traditional graph convolution. (b) Our mixed feature model.
H (i+1) = σ(ÂH (i)W (i))

Figure 1: Feature propagation in traditional graph convolution methods (a), compared to ours (b). We show the latent
feature for red node in layer i + 1 given node features in
layer i. The traditional graph convolution case only aggregates from immediate neighbors ÂH (i) . In our MixHop the
feature vector H (i+1) is a learned combination of the node’s
neighbors Âj H (i) at multiple distances j.
tures should allow models to learn location-invariant node
and neighborhood features.
Early extensions of the graph convolution (GC) operator
were theoretically motivated (Bruna et al., 2014), but (1)
required quadratic computational complexity in number of
nodes and therefore were not scalable to large graphs, and
(2) required the graph to be completely observed during
training, targeting only the transductive setting. Defferrard et al. (2016) and Kipf & Welling (2017) propose GC
approximations that are computationally-efficient (linear
complexity, in the number of edges), and can be applied in
inductive settings, where the test graphs are not observed
during training.
However, said approximations limit the representational capacity of the model. In particular, if we represent an image
as a graph of pixel nodes, where edges connect adjacent
pixels, GC approximations applied on the pixel graphs will
be unable to learn Gabor-like1 filters. Gabor filters are fundamental to the human visual cognitive system (Daugman,
1980; 1985). Further, these filters are automatically recovered by training CNNs on natural images (see Krizhevsky
et al. (2012); Lee et al. (2009) for visualizations). Their
1

We use “like”, as graph edges are not axis-aligned.

