Inferring Heterogeneous Causal Effects in Presence of Spatial Confounding

Muhammad Osama 1 Dave Zachariah 1 Thomas B. Schön 1

Abstract

1.5

c

We address the problem of inferring the causal
effect of an exposure on an outcome across
space, using observational data. The data is possibly subject to unmeasured confounding variables which, in a standard approach, must be
adjusted for by estimating a nuisance function.
Here we develop a method that eliminates the
nuisance function, while mitigating the resulting
errors-in-variables. The result is a robust and accurate inference method for spatially varying heterogeneous causal effects. The properties of the
method are demonstrated on synthetic as well as
real data from Germany and the US.

1. Introduction
In a wide range of scientific analyses, the quantity of interest is the causal effect of an exposure z on an outcome
y, which may vary across space. Consider, for instance,
the causal effect of fertilizer usage z on crop yield y. The
effect, denoted τ , quantifies how the average crop yield
changes per unit of change of fertilizer quantity. Due to
variations in the soil, τ will vary as a function of spatial
location s.
The goal in this paper is to infer the effect τ from a finite
dataset Dn = {(yi , zi , si )}ni=1 . Unmeasured confounding
variables, however, render this problem non-trivial. Consider a case illustrated in Figure 1a, where there is a positive
association between exposure and outcome yet the causal
effect is zero, i.e., τ ≡ 0. The causal structure underlying
the data-generating process can be expressed using structural equations and summarized by a directed acyclic graph
(DAG) (Peters et al., 2017; Pearl, 2009; Hernán & Robins,
2019). The structure is illustrated in Figure 1b, where c
denotes an unmeasured confounding variable which gives
*
Equal contribution 1 Division of System and Control, Department of Information Technology, Uppsala University. Correspondence to: Muhammad Osama <muhammad.osama@it.uu.se>,
Dave Zachariah <dave.zachariah@it.uu.se>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

y

1
0.5

s

0
-0.5
-0.5

0

0.5
z

(a)

1

1.5

y

z

(b)

Figure 1. Illustration of spatial confounding. (a) Data exhibiting a
clear association between exposure z and outcome y. (b) Causal
structure underlying the data-generating process, summarized as
a DAG where s denotes spatial location and c is an unmeasured
variable. Note that the causal effect of the exposure is zero.

rise to a strong association between z and y despite there
being no causal effect. This situation is referred to as spatial confounding.
The bulk of the existing literature considers a fixed effect
τ across space and, moreover, views c as a residual spatial variation using a spatial random effect (S RE) model
(Cressie, 1992). For example, Reich et al. (2006) estimate
the effect of socioeconomic factors on stomach cancer incidence ratio using a Gaussian prior model for c(s). Such
approaches end up biasing the effect estimates and various
restricted spatial regression techniques attempt to mitigate
these problems, cf. (Hodges & Reich, 2010; Hughes & Haran, 2013; Hanks et al., 2015; Paciorek, 2010; Page et al.,
2017). The geoadditive structural equation model (G S EM)
in Thaden & Kneib (2018) eliminates the bias problem by
exploiting the causal structure underlying the data generating process. Specifically, they employ a linear Gaussian
structural equation model and implicitly remove the spatial
variation in z and y due to c. While it is capable of removing systematic errors, the G S EM method is only applicable
to discrete space and homogeneous or fixed causal effects.
The effect may, however, be heterogeneous with respect to
spatial location. For example, when applying the method
to study the effect of work experience on monthly income
(Thaden & Kneib, 2018), it is quite possible that experience
will have greater effect in regions with dense industries and
high-skilled jobs, as compared to areas dominated by lowskilled jobs.
Existing methods for heterogeneous causal effect build
upon statistical machine learning methods but do not ad-

