Collaborative Channel Pruning for Deep Networks

Hanyu Peng 1 Jiaxiang Wu 2 Shifeng Chen 1 Junzhou Huang 3

Abstract
Deep networks have achieved impressive performance in various domains, but their applications
are largely limited by the prohibitive computational overhead. In this paper, we propose a novel
algorithm, namely collaborative channel pruning
(CCP), to reduce the computational overhead with
negligible performance degradation. The joint
impact of pruned/preserved channels on the loss
function is quantitatively analyzed, and such interchannel dependency is exploited to determine
which channels to be pruned. The channel selection problem is then reformulated as a constrained
0-1 quadratic optimization problem, and the Hessian matrix, which is essential in constructing the
above optimization, can be efficiently approximated. Empirical evaluation on two benchmark
data sets indicates that our proposed CCP algorithm achieves higher classification accuracy with
similar computational complexity than other stateof-the-art channel pruning algorithms.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, deep learning models have been continuously boosting the state-of-the-art performance in various domains, ranging from image classification (He et al.,
2016), segmentation (Chen et al., 2018), and object detection (Ren et al., 2015). However, such performance boost
often comes at the cost of increasing the computational complexity and number of model parameters. This imposes a
great challenge to efficient inference with such complicated
models. Especially, for mobile devices and embedded systems, where the computation resources are rather limited, it
is often infeasible to directly deploy deep networks due to
the high latency and power consumption.
This work was done when Hanyu Peng was an intern at Tencent
AI Lab. 1 Multimedia Laboratory, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced
Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 Tencent AI Lab 3
Department of CSE, The University of Texas at Arlington. Correspondence to: Shifeng Chen <shifeng.chen@siat.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

There are a large collection of research papers focusing on
accelerating and compressing deep networks to improve the
inference efficiency. Among them, approaches based on
channel pruning are proved to be quite effective since they
have no extra requirements for the inference engine (He
et al., 2017; Luo et al., 2017; Zhuang et al., 2018) and can
be easily deployed. The basic idea is to reduce the number of input and/or output channels in convolutional layers
without degrading the performance. Most approaches consider the contribution of each channel to the reconstruction
(or discrimination) loss independently to determine which
channels to be pruned, but the inter-channel relationship is
rarely exploited.
In this paper, we investigate how the inter-channel relationship can be utilized to determine which channels should
be pruned/preserved to minimize the performance degradation. We propose the collaborative channel pruning (CCP)
algorithm to capture the dependency between channels in
convolutional layers. For each convolutional layer, we quantitatively analyze the joint impact of pruned/preserved channels to the final loss function, based the second-order Taylor
expansion. Afterwards, we reformulate the minimization of
loss function as a linearly constrained 0-1 quadratic problem.
The linearly constrained 0-1 quadratic problems involves the
Hessian matrix that is too huge to be efficiently computed or
stored. To tackle this issue, we present an efficient approximation scheme for the Hessian matrix which is applicable to
both regression and classification tasks. The approximated
Hessian matrix can help construct the linearly constrained
0-1 quadratic programming problem without explicitly computing or storing the Hessian matrix. Since this optimization
problem is NP-hard due to binary variables, we relax the
binary constraint and obtain an approximate solution via
sequential quadratic programming (SQP) (Boggs & Tolle,
1995). Finally, we select the top-k entries as preserved channels and prune the remaining channels. We further fine-tune
the resulting compressed model to reduce its performance
degradation.
To the best of our knowledge, collaborative channel pruning is the first to exploit the inter-channel dependency
to determine the optimal combination of preserved channels. We demonstrate that our CCP algorithm outperforms

