Large-Scale Sparse Kernel Canonical Correlation Analysis

Viivi Uurtio 1 2 Sahely Bhadra 3 Juho Rousu 1 2

Abstract
This paper presents gradKCCA, a large-scale
sparse non-linear canonical correlation method.
Like Kernel Canonical Correlation Analysis
(KCCA), our method finds non-linear relations
through kernel functions, but it does not rely on
a kernel matrix, a known bottleneck for scaling
up kernel methods. gradKCCA corresponds to
solving KCCA with the additional constraint that
the canonical projection directions in the kernelinduced feature space have preimages in the original data space. Firstly, this modification allows
us to very efficiently maximize kernel canonical
correlation through an alternating projected gradient algorithm working in the original data space.
Secondly, we can control the sparsity of the projection directions by constraining the `1 norm of
the preimages of the projection directions, facilitating the interpretation of the discovered patterns,
which is not available through KCCA. Our empirical experiments demonstrate that gradKCCA outperforms state-of-the-art CCA methods in terms
of speed and robustness to noise both in simulated
and real-world datasets.

& Livescu, 2016; Uurtio et al., 2018a) and deep learning
(Andrew et al., 2013). The advantages of kernelizing the
CCA problem, or applying a deep neural network, include
the possibility to uncover non-linear multivariate relations.
However, the non-linear CCA formulations generally come
at the expense of losing the information of which of the variables in the original data matrices are relevant, and typically
produce dense models, which hinders interpretability and
predictive performance when the underlying relations are
sparse. For kernel-based CCA, the quadratic size of the kernel matrix in the number of examples also makes scaling up
to big data challenging, although this can be solved through
approximations such as random Fourier features (LopezPaz et al., 2014) and Nyström approximation (Uurtio et al.,
2018a).
This paper proposes a new KCCA variant, named gradKCCA, that is designed for sparse non-linear canonical
correlation analysis in large datasets. The contributions of
the paper are the following:

1. Introduction

• A new model for kernel-based non-linear CCA that
maximizes canonical correlation in the kernel-induced
feature spaces through the gradients of the preimages
of the projection directions, without relying on a kernel matrix. A sparsity-inducing variant of the model
is achieved through controlling the `1 norms of the
preimages of the projection directions.

Canonical correlation analysis (CCA) (Hotelling, 1935;
1936) discovers multivariate relations in two-view datasets,
by finding linear combinations of variables, the canonical
projections, that produce maximum correlation between the
two views (Uurtio et al., 2018b).

• A theoretical analysis of the new model compared to
KCCA showing that in the training set, gradKCCA
correlation can be bounded between the correlation of
KCCA and the correlation achieved by an approximate
preimage for KCCA.

The standard CCA model has been extended to a non-linear
setup by kernel methods (Bach & Jordan, 2002; Hardoon
et al., 2004; Chu et al., 2013; Lopez-Paz et al., 2014; Wang

• An efficient alternating projected gradient algorithm
that has the time-complexity of O((p + q)n) per epoch,
where n is the number training examples and p and q
are the numbers of variables in the two views.

1

Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Espoo,
Finland 2 Helsinki Institute for Information Technology, Helsinki,
Finland 3 Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of
Technology Palakkad, Palakkad, India. Correspondence to: Viivi
Uurtio <viivi.uurtio@aalto.fi>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

• An experimental study including several non-linear
CCA variants demonstrating (a) the superior speed and
scalability of the method on big data, (b) tolerance
to high amounts of irrelevant variables, (c) predictive
performance in line with the state-of-the-art on large
real world datasets.

