Variational Russian Roulette for Deep Bayesian Nonparametrics

Kai Xu 1 Akash Srivastava 1 2 Charles Sutton 1 3 4

Abstract
Bayesian nonparametric models provide a principled way to automatically adapt the complexity
of a model to the amount of the data available, but
computation in such models is difficult. Amortized variational approximations are appealing because of their computational efficiency, but current methods rely on a fixed finite truncation of
the infinite model. This truncation level can be
difficult to set, and also interacts poorly with amortized methods due to the over-pruning problem.
Instead, we propose a new variational approximation, based on a method from statistical physics
called Russian roulette sampling. This allows
the variational distribution to adapt its complexity during inference, without relying on a fixed
truncation level, and while still obtaining an unbiased estimate of the gradient of the original variational objective. We demonstrate this method
on infinite sized variational auto-encoders using a
Beta-Bernoulli (Indian buffet process) prior.

1. Introduction
A major challenge in unsupervised learning is to infer the
complexity of the latent structure, such as the number of
clusters or the size of a continuous representation, that is
necessary to describe a data set. A principled method from
statistics to choose the complexity of a model is provided
by Bayesian nonparametric methods (Walker et al., 1999;
Müller & Quintana, 2004; Orbanz & Teh, 2010; Gershman
& Blei, 2012). Nonparametric methods allow for the size of
the inferred model to automatically adapt to the amount of
data, so that simpler models are preferred for smaller data
sets, and more complex models are preferred for larger data
sets. For example, a latent feature model with an Indian buf1

School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
United Kingdom 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, Cambridge, MA,
United States 3 Google AI, Mountain View, CA, United States
4
Alan Turing Institute, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence
to: Kai Xu <kai.xu@ed.ac.uk>.
th

Proceedings of the 36 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

fet process (IBP) prior is a representation learning method
that infers a latent binary vector for each data point, where
the number of binary features is chosen adaptively based on
the data. Within machine learning, Bayesian nonparametric methods have been applied within models as diverse as
clustering (Antoniak, 1974; Görür & Rasmussen, 2010; Teh
et al., 2005), topic modeling (Teh et al., 2006), and infinite
deep neural networks (Adams et al., 2010).
However, inference in Bayesian nonparametric models can
be computationally challenging. Amortized variational
methods (Kingma & Welling, 2013; Rezende et al., 2014;
Ranganath et al., 2014a; Mnih & Gregor, 2014) are an appealing option, because they exploit the smoothing properties of deep neural networks to accelerate inference. For
Bayesian nonparametric models, however, amortized inference is challenging because the dimensionality of the
latent space is not fixed. Previous methods for variational
inference in such models rely on a truncated approximation, which places an upper bound on the size of the latent
space under the approximate posterior (Blei & Jordan, 2004;
Doshi-Velez et al., 2009). Similarly, recent work on amortized inference in Bayesian non-parametrics relies on truncation, albeit sometimes within an outer loop that searches
over the truncation size (Miao et al., 2017; Nalisnick &
Smyth, 2017; Chatzis, 2014; Singh et al., 2017).
However, the truncated approximation has several drawbacks. If the truncation level is chosen too small, the accuracy of the approximation degrades, whereas if the truncation level is chosen too large, then inference will be slow,
removing one of the main advantages of a variational approximation. Perhaps more fundamentally, the truncation
level can interact poorly with amortized inference, because
of a well-known issue called component collapsing (Dinh &
Dumoulin, 2016; van den Oord et al., 2017), which is also
called over-pruning (Burda et al., 2015; Yeung et al., 2017).
This refers to the problem when the inferred latent representation includes components whose conditional distribution
given a test data point tends to remains very similar to the
prior. These components are useless as they do not help
explain the data.
In this work, we overcome these limitations using a new
dynamic variational approximation, which we call Roulettebased Amortized Variational Expectations (RAVE). The goal

