AUCµ : A Performance Metric for Multi-Class Machine Learning Models

Ross S. Kleiman 1 David Page 1 2

Abstract
The area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) is arguably the most common
metric in machine learning for assessing the quality of a two-class classification model. As the
number and complexity of machine learning applications grows, so too does the need for measures that can gracefully extend to classification
models trained for more than two classes. Prior
work in this area has proven computationally intractable and/or inconsistent with known properties of AUC, and thus there is still a need for an
improved multi-class efficacy metric. We provide
in this work a multi-class extension of AUC that
we call AUCµ that is derived from first principles
of the binary class AUC. AUCµ has similar computational complexity to AUC and maintains the
properties of AUC critical to its interpretation and
use.

1. Introduction
The area under the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC)
curve, commonly referred to as the AUC, is ubiquitous in
machine learning, yet it is limited to classification tasks
with only two classes. There have been a variety of prior
attempts to extend AUC to the multi-class setting but there
is no consensus on the appropriate way to proceed. Multiclass AUC analogs must deal with new challenges in both
computational complexity and decisions of which properties
of the binary AUC are most important to preserve. Current
approaches largely fall into two camps: those that are theoretically rooted and those that are focused on ease of use.
We believe that the community has implicitly stated a preference for practicality, as the most widely used measure,
M , introduced by Hand & Till (2001), is an easy to use
1

Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 2 Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, Wisconsin. Correspondence to: Ross S. Kleiman
<rkleiman@cs.wisc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

multi-class AUC analog. However, in our work we show
that M can fail to return a score of 1 (perfect performance),
even when for every example a model gives the correct label
the highest probability.
In our work we first consider those properties of AUC that
we believe to be most critical to its use and interpretation.
The properties are based on work by (Fawcett, 2006).
Property 1. If a model gives the correct label the highest probability on every example, then AUC = 1
Property 2. Random guessing on examples yields
AUC = 0.5
Property 3. AUC is insensitive to class skew
We note that these three properties are all a consequence
of the relationship between AUC and the Mann Whitney
U-Statistic (Hanley & McNeil, 1982). The U-statistic, and
hence the two-class AUC, is the probability the model will
correctly rank two instances of difference classes. Therefore,
rather than generalizing the ROC curve to handle K > 2
classes as others have done before, we instead turn our
attention to generalizing the U-statistic for K > 2. We
call our measure AUCµ using the Greek letter mu (µ) as
an acronym for “multi-class U-statistic.” While this paper
derives and presents AUCµ in the context of multi-class
models with probabilistic outputs, it is also compatible with
multi-class models that output scores or ranks for query
instances across the K classes.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we present
a survey of prior work performed on extending AUC to the
multi-class setting. In Section 3 we present background on
the U-statistic form of AUC, multi-class AUC, and partition
matrices (a tool we use in computing AUCµ ). In Section 4
we formulate the AUCµ statistic. In Section 5 we provide
several theoretical results for AUCµ and we also demonstrate some special cases for AUCµ . Finally, in Section
6 we provide concluding remarks on the work and some
interesting future directions.

2. Prior Work on Multi-Class AUC
Prior work on extending AUC to the multi-class setting
has focused on both the theoretical aspects of the problem

