Distribution Calibration for Regression

Hao Song 1 Tom Diethe 2 Meelis Kull 3 Peter Flach 1 4

Abstract
We are concerned with obtaining well-calibrated
output distributions from regression models. Such
distributions allow us to quantify the uncertainty
that the model has regarding the predicted target value. We introduce the novel concept of
distribution calibration, and demonstrate its advantages over the existing definition of quantile
calibration. We further propose a post-hoc approach to improving the predictions from previously trained regression models, using multioutput Gaussian Processes with a novel Beta link
function. The proposed method is experimentally
verified on a set of common regression models
and shows improvements for both distributionlevel and quantile-level calibration.

1

Introduction

With recent progress in predictive machine learning, many
models are now capable of providing outstanding performance with respect to certain metrics, such as accuracy in
classification or mean squared error in regression. While
such models are suitable for some tasks, they often cannot
provide well-quantified uncertainties on the target variables.
In this paper we focus on this problem in the regression
setting, extending concepts from the well-established framework of probability calibration for classification.
In a classification task, a probabilistic prediction s ∈ [0, 1]
for the positive class is calibrated if the following condition
holds: among all the instances receiving this same prediction value s, the probability of observing a positive label
is s. Having such calibrated outputs is important as they
can be interpreted as degrees of uncertainty on the class,
hence enabling quantitative approaches towards decision
1
University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom 2 Amazon Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom 3 University of Tartu, Tartu,
Estonia 4 The Alan Turing Institute, London, United Kingdom.
Correspondence to: Hao Song <hao.song@bristol.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

making, such as cost-sensitive classification [33]. However,
from simple models (e.g. Naı̈ve Bayes) to complex ones
(e.g. (deep) Neural Networks (NNs)), poor calibration is
often observed, irrespective of the model’s complexity or its
probabilistic nature [9, 16]. To mitigate this, several techniques have been proposed to apply post-hoc corrections
to the outputs from trained classifiers such as Platt scaling
[23], Isotonic regression [33], and Beta calibration [16].
In the setting of regression, calibration has been traditionally defined through predicted credible intervals [7, 3, 14],
where a 0.95 predicted credible level (e.g. conditional quantile) is calibrated if marginally 95% of the true target values
are below or equal to it. Having a quantile-calibrated regressor is particularly useful for certain forecasting tasks
such as energy usage [7] and supply chain optimisation
[12]. Existing approaches which aim to obtain calibrated
predictions as part of the training, can be loosely divided
into two categories: (i) quantile regression [13], where it
has shown that generalised additive models can be applied
to yield better-calibrated quantiles [3]; (ii) direct application
of conditional density estimators [2, 30, 22] to obtain an estimated cumulative distribution function (CDF), which can
then be used to generate corresponding credible intervals.
While such approaches can be good options when simple
models will suffice, they are less suitable when employing
(possibly extant) specialised models, such as (pre-trained)
deep NN models. Unlike the case of classification, the posthoc calibration approach in regression has been left largely
unexplored. Recently, [14] proposed a post-hoc approach
that applies isotonic regression to match the predicted CDF
and empirical frequency, so that the final results are better
calibrated in the quantile sense.
While quantile-level calibration is useful in certain scenarios, it is defined uniformly over the entire input space and
does not ensure calibration for a particular prediction, unlike
the classification setting. For instance, a quantile-calibrated
regressor cannot always guarantee that all instances receiving an estimated mean of µ and standard deviation σ are
indeed distributed as a Gaussian distribution with the same
moments. In this paper, we focus on a post-hoc method
that aims to achieve distribution-level calibration and hence
gives more accurate uncertainty information for a continuous target variable.

