A Contrastive Divergence for Combining Variational Inference and MCMC

Francisco J. R. Ruiz 1 2 Michalis K. Titsias 3

Abstract
We develop a method to combine Markov chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) and variational inference
(VI), leveraging the advantages of both inference
approaches. Specifically, we improve the variational distribution by running a few MCMC steps.
To make inference tractable, we introduce the variational contrastive divergence (VCD), a new divergence that replaces the standard Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence used in VI. The VCD captures
a notion of discrepancy between the initial variational distribution and its improved version (obtained after running the MCMC steps), and it
converges asymptotically to the symmetrized KL
divergence between the variational distribution
and the posterior of interest. The VCD objective
can be optimized efficiently with respect to the
variational parameters via stochastic optimization.
We show experimentally that optimizing the VCD
leads to better predictive performance on two latent variable models: logistic matrix factorization
and variational autoencoders (VAEs).

1. Introduction
Variational inference (VI) and Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) are two of the main approximate Bayesian inference methods (Bishop, 2006; Murphy, 2012). While MCMC
is asymptotically exact, VI enjoys other advantages: VI is
typically faster, makes it easier to assess convergence, and
enables amortized inference—a way to quickly approximate
the posterior over the local latent variables.
A natural question is whether it is possible to combine
MCMC and VI to leverage the advantages of each inference method. Such topic has attracted a lot of attention in
the recent literature (see, e.g., Salimans et al., 2015; Maddison et al., 2017; Naesseth et al., 2018; Le et al., 2018;
Hoffman, 2017; Li et al., 2017).
1

University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 2 Columbia University, New York, USA 3 DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence
to: Francisco J. R. Ruiz <f.ruiz@columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

We develop a method for combining VI and MCMC that
improves an explicit variational distribution (i.e., with analytic density) by applying MCMC sampling. The method
runs a few iterations of an MCMC chain initialized with a
sample from the explicit distribution, so that each MCMC
step successively improves the initial distribution.
Combining VI and MCMC in this way is challenging.
Specifically, fitting the parameters of the explicit variational distribution is intractable under the standard VI framework. This is because the improved distribution, obtained by
MCMC sampling, is defined implicitly, i.e., its density cannot be evaluated. Thus, we cannot minimize the KullbackLeibler (KL) divergence between the improved variational
distribution and the true posterior of interest.
To address this challenge, we develop a divergence that
allows combining VI and MCMC in a principled manner.
We refer to it as variational contrastive divergence (VCD).
The VCD replaces the standard KL objective of VI, enabling
tractable optimization. The key property of the VCD is that
it is possible to obtain unbiased estimates of its gradient to
perform stochastic optimization (Robbins & Monro, 1951).
The VCD differs from the standard KL in that it captures a
notion of discrepancy between the improved and the initial
variational distributions. The properties of the VCD make
it a valid objective function for Bayesian inference: it is
non-negative and it becomes zero only when the variational
distribution matches the posterior.
Additionally, as the number of MCMC steps increases, the
VCD converges asymptotically to the symmetrized KL between the initial explicit variational distribution and the posterior. This implies that the variational distributions fitted
by minimizing the VCD will exhibit larger variance than the
distributions fitted with the standard KL divergence, even for
moderate values of the number of MCMC iterations.
We fit the variational parameters of the initial distribution
by following stochastic gradients of the VCD. In contrast to
the method of Hoffman (2017) (which optimizes a different
objective), the stochastic gradients of the VCD depend on
the improved MCMC samples; therefore, the MCMC samples provide feedback to the optimization of the variational
parameters. Unlike the method of Li et al. (2017), the VCD
leads to stable optimization regardless of the number of
MCMC steps, since it is a well-defined divergence.

