Taming MAML: Efficient Unbiased Meta-Reinforcement Learning

Hao Liu 1 Richard Socher 1 Caiming Xiong 1

Abstract
While meta reinforcement learning (Meta-RL)
methods have achieved remarkable success, obtaining correct and low variance estimates for
policy gradients remains a significant challenge.
In particular, estimating a large Hessian, poor
sample efficiency and unstable training continue
to make Meta-RL difficult. We propose a surrogate objective function named, Taming MAML
(TMAML), that adds control variates into gradient
estimation via automatic differentiation. TMAML
improves the quality of gradient estimation by reducing variance without introducing bias. We
further propose a version of our method that extends the meta-learning framework to learning the
control variates themselves, enabling efficient and
scalable learning from a distribution of MDPs. We
empirically compare our approach with MAML
and other variance-bias trade-off methods including DICE, LVC, and action-dependent control
variates. Our approach is easy to implement and
outperforms existing methods in terms of the variance and accuracy of gradient estimation, ultimately yielding higher performance across a variety of challenging Meta-RL environments.

1. Introduction
Recent progress in deep reinforcement learning (Deep RL)
has achieved very impressive results in domains ranging
from playing games (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016;
2017; Vinyals et al., 2019), to applications in program synthesis (Liang et al., 2018) and robotics (Andrychowicz et al.,
2018; Gu et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2019). Despite this progress,
Deep RL suffers from high sample complexity in learning
even a single task and often fails to generalize to new situations. In contrast, human intelligence is capable of adapting
to new situations in the face of limited experience. Meta
1
Salesforce Research, Palo Alto, USA. Correspondence to: Hao
Liu <lhao499@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

reinforcement learning (Meta-RL) (Wang et al., 2016; Duan
et al., 2016; Mishra et al., 2018; Finn et al., 2017; Nichol
et al., 2018) aims to mitigate this issue by acquiring inductive bias in a data-driven manner. Specifically, Meta-RL
considers a distribution of different yet related tasks that
differ in, for instance, the reward function or the transition probabilities from one state to another. Its objective is
to enable artificial agents to efficiently learn new tasks by
learning strategies for fast adaptation from prior tasks (a.k.a,
learning to learn) (Schmidhuber, 1987; Thrun & Pratt, 2012).
Recent work demonstrates this approach to be promising
in a diverse range of reinforcement learning tasks including robotics, synthetic rewards, and model-based learning,
among others (Clavera et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2018b).
One particular type of gradient-based Meta-RL is Model
Agnostic Meta Learning (MAML) (Finn et al., 2017), which
directly trains for model parameters that can quickly adapt
to individual tasks with standard gradient descent. This
method allows acceleration of learning to achieve similar
asymptotic performance as learning from scratch on new
tasks. Despite its wide utilization, Meta-RL, in particular gradient-based Meta-RL, suffers from biased and high
variance estimates for policy gradients. This is due to the
small number of samples and the difficulty of calculating
the Hessian, leading to poor sample efficiency and unstable behavior during training. Prior work in gradient-based
Meta-RL mostly used biased gradients, either due to biased
estimation in implementation (Finn et al., 2017), trading off
bias for lower variance estimation (Rothfuss et al., 2019), or
neglecting the complicated dependencies (Al-Shedivat et al.,
2018; Stadie et al., 2018; Nichol et al., 2018). An existing
method for unbiased estimation of Meta-RL gradients (Foerster et al., 2018) suffers from high variance and doesn’t
work well in challenging, continuous control tasks.
To tackle this problem, we focus on the control variate
method, one of the most widely used variance reduction
techniques in policy gradient. The idea of the control variate
method is to subtract a Monte Carlo gradient estimator by a
baseline function that analytically has zero expectation. If
the baseline function is properly chosen such that it cancels
out the variance of the original gradient estimator, it can
achieve a lower variance estimation without introducing bias.
Different variance reduction methods stem from different
control variates. For example, in REINFORCE (Williams,

