Scalable Training of Inference Networks for Gaussian-Process Models

Jiaxin Shi 1 Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan 2 Jun Zhu 1

Abstract
Inference in Gaussian process (GP) models is
computationally challenging for large data, and
often difficult to approximate with a small number
of inducing points. We explore an alternative approximation that employs stochastic inference networks for a flexible inference. Unfortunately, for
such networks, minibatch training is difficult to
be able to learn meaningful correlations over function outputs for a large dataset. We propose an
algorithm that enables such training by tracking
a stochastic, functional mirror-descent algorithm.
At each iteration, this only requires considering a
finite number of input locations, resulting in a scalable and easy-to-implement algorithm. Empirical
results show comparable and, sometimes, superior performance to existing sparse variational GP
methods.

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes (GP) (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006)
and their deep variants (Damianou & Lawrence, 2013)
are powerful nonparametric distributions for both supervised (Williams & Rasmussen, 1996; Bernardo et al., 1998;
Williams & Barber, 1998) and unsupervised machinelearning (Lawrence, 2005; Damianou et al., 2016). Such
processes can generate smooth functions to model complex
data and provide principled approaches for uncertainty quantification. Despite this, their application has been limited
because Bayesian inference for such modeling requires inversion of a matrix which is computationally challenging
(typically O(N 3 ) for N data examples).
Many methods have been proposed to tackle this issue, and
they mostly rely on finding a small number of inducing
1

Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center,
THBI Lab, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 RIKEN Center
for Advanced Intelligence project, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence
to: Jiaxin Shi <shijx15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Jun Zhu <dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Inference networks for GPs are an alternative way to
predict output f ∗ given test inputs x∗ .

points in the input1 space to reduce the cost of matrix inversion (Quiñonero-Candela & Rasmussen, 2005; Titsias,
2009). Methods that employ variational inference to estimate inducing points (Titsias, 2009) can scale well to
large data by minibatch stochastic-gradient methods (Hensman et al., 2013), but the quality of posterior approximations obtained could be limited since the number of inducing points needs to be small, even when the data are
extremely large (Cheng & Boots, 2017). Optimization of
inducing points is another challenging problem when the
objective is nonconvex and stochastic-gradient methods can
get stuck (Bauer et al., 2016).
A relatively less-explored approach is to approximate the GP
posterior distribution by using function approximators, such
as deep neural networks (Sun et al., 2019). By introducing
randomness in the parameters of such inference networks, it
is possible to generate functions similar to those generated
by the posterior distribution, as illustrated in Fig. 1. By
directly approximating the functions, we can obtain more
flexible alternatives to sparse variational approaches. Unfortunately, unlike sparse methods, training with minibatches
is challenging in the function space. The difficulty is to
be able to maintain meaningful correlations over function
outputs while only looking at a handful of examples in each
iteration. Scalable training of such inference networks is extremely important for them to be useful for flexible posterior
inference in GP models.
1
For supervised learning, these can be features, while for unsupervised learning, these could be latent vectors.

