Disentangling Disentanglement in Variational Autoencoders

Emile Mathieu * 1 Tom Rainforth * 1 N. Siddharth * 2 Yee Whye Teh 1

Abstract
We develop a generalisation of disentanglement in
variational autoencoders (VAEs)—decomposition
of the latent representation—characterising it as
the fulfilment of two factors: a) the latent encodings of the data having an appropriate level of
overlap, and b) the aggregate encoding of the data
conforming to a desired structure, represented
through the prior. Decomposition permits disentanglement, i.e. explicit independence between
latents, as a special case, but also allows for a
much richer class of properties to be imposed on
the learnt representation, such as sparsity, clustering, independent subspaces, or even intricate
hierarchical dependency relationships. We show
that the β- VAE varies from the standard VAE predominantly in its control of latent overlap and that
for the standard choice of an isotropic Gaussian
prior, its objective is invariant to rotations of the
latent representation. Viewed from the decomposition perspective, breaking this invariance with
simple manipulations of the prior can yield better
disentanglement with little or no detriment to reconstructions. We further demonstrate how other
choices of prior can assist in producing different decompositions and introduce an alternative
training objective that allows the control of both
decomposition factors in a principled manner.

1. Introduction
An oft-stated motivation for learning disentangled representations of data with deep generative models is a desire to
achieve interpretability (Bengio et al., 2013; Chen et al.,
2017)—particularly the decomposability (see §3.2.1 in Lipton, 2016) of latent representations to admit intuitive explanations. Most work has focused on capturing purely
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics 2 Department of
Engineering, University of Oxford. Correspondence to: Emile
Mathieu <emile.mathieu@stats.ox.ac.uk>, Tom Rainforth <rainforth@stats.ox.ac.uk>, N. Siddharth <nsid@robots.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

independent factors of variation (Alemi et al., 2017; Ansari
and Soh, 2019; Burgess et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2018; 2017;
Eastwood and Williams, 2018; Esmaeili et al., 2019; Higgins et al., 2016; Kim and Mnih, 2018; Xu and Durrett, 2018;
Zhao et al., 2017), typically evaluating this using purposebuilt, synthetic data (Eastwood and Williams, 2018; Higgins
et al., 2016; Kim and Mnih, 2018), whose generative factors
are independent by construction.
This conventional view of disentanglement, as recovering
independence, has subsequently motivated the development
of formal evaluation metrics for independence (Eastwood
and Williams, 2018; Kim and Mnih, 2018), which in turn
has driven the development of objectives that target these
metrics, often by employing regularisers explicitly encouraging independence in the representations (Eastwood and
Williams, 2018; Esmaeili et al., 2019; Kim and Mnih, 2018).
We argue that such an approach is not generalisable, and potentially even harmful, to learning interpretable representations for more complicated problems, where such simplistic
representations cannot accurately mimic the generation of
high dimensional data from low dimensional latent spaces,
and more richly structured dependencies are required.
We posit a generalisation of disentanglement in VAEs—
decomposing their latent representations—that can help
avoid such pitfalls. We characterise decomposition in VAEs
as the fulfilment of two factors: a) the latent encodings of
data having an appropriate level of overlap, and b) the aggregate encoding of data conforming to a desired structure,
represented through the prior. We emphasize that neither of
these factors is sufficient in isolation: without an appropriate
level of overlap, encodings can degrade to a lookup table
where the latents convey little information about data, and
without the aggregate encoding of data following a desired
structure, the encodings do not decompose as desired.
Disentanglement implicitly makes a choice of decomposition: that the latent features are independent of one another.
We make this explicit and exploit it to both provide improvement to disentanglement through judicious choices
of structure in the prior, and to introduce a more general
framework flexible enough to capture alternate, more complex, notions of decomposition such as sparsity, clustering,
hierarchical structuring, or independent subspaces.

