Hierarchically Structured Meta-learning

Huaxiu Yao† 1 Ying Wei 2 Junzhou Huang 2 Zhenhui Li 1

Abstract
In order to learn quickly with few samples, metalearning utilizes prior knowledge learned from
previous tasks. However, a critical challenge in
meta-learning is task uncertainty and heterogeneity, which can not be handled via globally sharing
knowledge among tasks. In this paper, based on
gradient-based meta-learning, we propose a hierarchically structured meta-learning (HSML) algorithm that explicitly tailors the transferable knowledge to different clusters of tasks. Inspired by the
way human beings organize knowledge, we resort
to a hierarchical task clustering structure to cluster tasks. As a result, the proposed approach not
only addresses the challenge via the knowledge
customization to different clusters of tasks, but
also preserves knowledge generalization among
a cluster of similar tasks. To tackle the changing
of task relationship, in addition, we extend the
hierarchical structure to a continual learning environment. The experimental results show that
our approach can achieve state-of-the-art performance in both toy-regression and few-shot image
classification problems.

1. Introduction
Learning quickly with a few samples is one of the key characteristics of human intelligence, while it remains a daunting
challenge for artificial intelligence. Learning to learn (a.k.a.,
meta-learning) (Braun et al., 2010), as a common practice
to address this challenge, leverages the transferable knowledge learned from previous tasks to improve the learning
effectiveness in a new task. There have been several lines
of meta-learning algorithms, including recurrent network
based methods (Ravi & Larochelle, 2016), optimizer based
†

Part of the work was done when the author interned in Tencent AI Lab. 1 College of Information Science and Technology, Pennsylvania State University, PA, USA 2 Tencent AI Lab,
Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Ying Wei <judyweiying@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

methods (Andrychowicz et al., 2016), nearest neighbours
based methods (Snell et al., 2017; Vinyals et al., 2016) and
gradient descent based methods (Finn et al., 2017), which
instantiate the transferable knowledge as latent representations, an optimizer, a metric space, and parameter initialization, respectively.
Despite their early success in few-shot image classification (Ravi & Larochelle, 2016) and machine translation (Gu
et al., 2018), most of the existing meta-learning algorithms
assume the transferable knowledge to be globally shared
across all tasks. As a consequence, they suffer from handling a sequence of tasks originated from different distributions. At the other end of the spectrum, recently, a few
research works (Finn et al., 2018; Yoon et al., 2018a; Lee &
Choi, 2018) try to fix the problem by tailoring the transferable knowledge to each task. Yet the downside of such methods lies in the impaired knowledge generalization among
closely correlated tasks (e.g., the tasks sampled from the
same distribution).
Hence we are motivated to pursue a meta-learning framework to effectively balance generalization and customization. The inspiration comes from a hypothesis which
has been formulated and tested by psychological researchers (Gershman et al., 2010; 2014). The hypothesis
suggests that the key to human beings’ capability of solving
a task with little training data is the way how human beings organize the learned knowledge from tasks. As bits of
tasks impinge on us, we human beings cluster the tasks into
several states based on task similarity, so that the learning
occurs within each cluster instead of across cluster boundaries. Thus, when a new task arrives, it can either quickly
take advantage of the knowledge learned within the cluster
it belongs to or initiate a new cluster if it is wildly different
from any existing clusters.
Inspired by this, we propose a novel meta-learning
framework called Hierarchically Structured Meta-Learning
(HSML). The key idea of the HSML is to enhance the
meta-learning effectiveness by promoting knowledge customization to different clusters of tasks but simultaneously
preserving knowledge generalization among a cluster of
closely related tasks. In this paper, without loss of generality, we ground HSML on a gradient based meta learning
algorithm (Finn et al., 2017) with the transferable knowl-

