Understanding the Origins of Bias in Word Embeddings

Marc-Etienne Brunet 1 2 Colleen Alkalay-Houlihan 1 Ashton Anderson 1 2 Richard Zemel 1 2

Abstract
Popular word embedding algorithms exhibit
stereotypical biases, such as gender bias. The
widespread use of these algorithms in machine
learning systems can thus amplify stereotypes
in important contexts. Although some methods
have been developed to mitigate this problem,
how word embedding biases arise during training
is poorly understood. In this work, we develop
a technique to address this question. Given a
word embedding, our method reveals how perturbing the training corpus would affect the resulting embedding bias. By tracing the origins of
word embedding bias back to the original training documents, one can identify subsets of documents whose removal would most reduce bias.
We demonstrate our methodology on Wikipedia
and New York Times corpora, and find it to be
very accurate.

1. Introduction
As machine learning algorithms play ever-increasing roles
in our lives, there are ever-increasing risks for these algorithms to be systematically biased (Zhao et al., 2018; 2017;
Kleinberg et al., 2016; Dwork et al., 2012; Hardt et al.,
2016). An ongoing research effort is showing that machine
learning systems can not only reflect human biases in the
data they learn from, but also magnify these biases when deployed in practice (Sweeney, 2013). With algorithms aiding
critical decisions ranging from medical diagnoses to hiring
decisions, it is important to understand how these biases are
learned from data.
In recent work, researchers have uncovered an illuminating example of bias in machine learning systems: Popular
word embedding methods such as word2vec (Mikolov et al.,
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada 2 Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence,
Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to: Marc-Etienne Brunet <mebrunet@cs.toronto.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

2013a) and GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014) acquire stereotypical human biases from the text data they are trained on.
For example, they disproportionately associate male terms
with science terms, and female terms with art terms (Angwin
et al., 2016; Caliskan et al., 2017). Deploying these word
embedding algorithms in practice, for example in automated
translation systems or as hiring aids, thus runs the serious
risk of perpetuating problematic biases in important societal
contexts. This problem is especially pernicious because
these biases can be difficult to detect—for example, word
embeddings were in broad industrial use before their stereotypical biases were discovered.
Although the existence of these biases is now established,
their origins—how biases are learned from training data—
are poorly understood. Ideally, we would like to be able
to ascribe how much of the overall embedding bias is due
to any particular small subset of the training corpus—for
example, an author or single document. Naı̈vely, this could
be done directly by removing the document in question, retraining an embedding on the perturbed corpus, then comparing the bias of the original embedding with the bias of
the retrained embedding. The change in bias resulting from
this perturbation could then be interpreted as the document’s
contribution to the overall bias. But this approach comes at
a prohibitive computational cost; completely retraining the
embedding for each document is clearly infeasible.
In this work, we develop an efficient and accurate method
for solving this problem. Given a word embedding trained
on some corpus, and a metric to evaluate bias, our method
approximates how removing a small part of the training
corpus would affect the resulting bias. We decompose this
problem into two main subproblems: measuring how perturbing the training data changes the learned word embedding; and measuring how changing the word embedding
affects its bias. Our central technical contributions solve the
former subproblem (the latter is straightforward for many
bias measures). Our method provides a highly efficient way
of understanding the impact of every document in a training
corpus on the overall bias of a word embedding; therefore,
we can rapidly identify the most bias-influencing documents
in the training corpus. These documents may be used to
manipulate the word embedding’s bias through highly selective pruning of the training corpus, or they may be analyzed
in conjunction with metadata to identify particularly biased

