TarMAC: Targeted Multi-Agent Communication
Abhishek Das 1 ‹ Théophile Gervet 2 Joshua Romoff 2 3
Dhruv Batra 1 3 Devi Parikh 1 3 Michael Rabbat 2 3 Joelle Pineau 2 3

Abstract
We propose a targeted communication architecture for multi-agent reinforcement learning,
where agents learn both what messages to send
and whom to address them to while performing
cooperative tasks in partially-observable environments. This targeting behavior is learnt solely
from downstream task-specific reward without
any communication supervision. We additionally
augment this with a multi-round communication
approach where agents coordinate via multiple
rounds of communication before taking actions
in the environment. We evaluate our approach
on a diverse set of cooperative multi-agent tasks,
of varying difficulties, with varying number of
agents, in a variety of environments ranging from
2D grid layouts of shapes and simulated traffic junctions to 3D indoor environments, and
demonstrate the benefits of targeted and multiround communication. Moreover, we show that
the targeted communication strategies learned by
agents are interpretable and intuitive. Finally, we
show that our architecture can be easily extended
to mixed and competitive environments, leading
to improved performance and sample complexity
over recent state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Effective communication is a key ability for collaboration.
Indeed, intelligent agents (humans or artificial) in realworld scenarios can significantly benefit from exchanging information that enables them to coordinate, strategize, and utilize their combined sensory experiences to
act in the physical world. The ability to communicate
has wide-ranging applications for artificial agents – from
multi-player gameplay in simulated (e.g. DoTA, StarCraft)
or physical worlds (e.g. robot soccer), to self-driving car
networks communicating with each other to achieve safe
1
Georgia Tech 2 McGill University 3 Facebook AI Research.
Work done during an internship at Facebook AI Research.
Correspondence to: Abhishek Das <abhshkdz@gatech.edu>.
‹

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

and swift transport, to teams of robots on search-and-rescue
missions deployed in hostile, fast-evolving environments.
A salient property of human communication is the ability
to hold targeted interactions. Rather than the ‘one-sizefits-all’ approach of broadcasting messages to all participating agents, as has been previously explored (Sukhbaatar
et al., 2016; Foerster et al., 2016; Singh et al., 2019), it can
be useful to direct certain messages to specific recipients.
This enables a more flexible collaboration strategy in complex environments. For example, within a team of searchand-rescue robots with a diverse set of roles and goals, a
message for a fire-fighter (e.g. “smoke is coming from the
kitchen”) is largely meaningless for a bomb-defuser.
We develop TarMAC, a Targeted Multi-Agent Communication architecture for collaborative multi-agent deep reinforcement learning. Our key insight in TarMAC is to allow
each individual agent to actively select which other agents
to address messages to. This targeted communication behavior is operationalized via a simple signature-based soft
attention mechanism: along with the message, the sender
broadcasts a key which encodes properties of agents the
message is intended for, and is used by receivers to gauge
the relevance of the message. This communication mechanism is learned implicitly, without any attention supervision, as a result of end-to-end training using task reward.
The inductive bias provided by soft attention in the communication architecture is sufficient to enable agents to 1)
communicate agent-goal-specific messages (e.g. guide firefighter towards fire, bomb-defuser towards bomb, etc.), 2)
be adaptive to variable team sizes (e.g. the size of the local neighborhood a self-driving car can communicate with
changes as it moves), and 3) be interpretable through predicted attention probabilities that allow for inspection of
which agent is communicating what message and to whom.
Our results however show that just using targeted communication is not enough. Complex real-world tasks might
require large populations of agents to go through multiple rounds of collaborative communication and reasoning, involving large amounts of information to be persistent in memory and exchanged via high-bandwidth communication channels. To this end, our actor-critic framework combines centralized training with decentralized ex-

