Adjustment Criteria for Generalizing Experimental Findings

Juan D. Correa 1 Jin Tian 2 Elias Bareinboim 1

Abstract
Generalizing causal effects from a controlled experiment to settings beyond the particular study
population is arguably one of the central tasks
found in empirical circles. While a proper design
and careful execution of the experiment would
support, under mild conditions, the validity of
inferences about the population in which the experiment was conducted, two challenges make the
extrapolation step to different populations somewhat involved, namely, transportability and sampling selection bias. The former is concerned with
disparities in the distributions and causal mechanisms between the domain (i.e., settings, population, environment) where the experiment is conducted and where the inferences are intended; the
latter with distortions in the sample’s proportions
due to preferential selection of units into the study.
In this paper, we investigate the assumptions and
machinery necessary for using covariate adjustment to correct for the biases generated by both of
these problems, and generalize experimental data
to infer causal effects in a new domain. We derive
complete graphical conditions to determine if a
set of covariates is admissible for adjustment in
this new setting. Building on the graphical characterization, we develop an efficient algorithm that
enumerates all possible admissible sets with polytime delay guarantee; this can be useful for when
some variables are preferred over the others due
to different costs or amenability to measurement.

1. Introduction
Scientific inferences in data-driven disciplines entail some
understanding of the laws of nature and a web of cause and
effect relationships. For instance, policy-makers aiming to
1
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, Indiana, USA 2 Computer Science Department, Iowa State University, IA, USA. Correspondence to: Juan D. Correa <correagr@purdue.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

improve the economical condition of a certain population
need to understand how a tax increase would affect consumers’ behavior and, in turn, economic activity; or, health
scientists trying to develop a new treatment for prostate cancer would have to understand how their new drug interacts
with the body and affects the cancer’s progression (Pearl,
2000; Spirtes et al., 2001; Bareinboim and Pearl, 2016).
Controlled experimentation is one of the most pervasive
methods to probe for such effects, deemed the “gold standard” for scientific research in empirical circles. The main
idea is to generate a controlled environment where the behavior of an outcome variable can be observed under two
regimes: one where a certain condition (e.g., drug A) is
present and another where it isn’t (placebo), under the ceteris paribus condition. If all other factors are held constant,
intuitively, any difference in the outcome can be attributed
to the action, i.e., to a causal relationship between them.
In the medical sciences, this appears under the rubric of
Randomized Controlled Trials (RCTs). In fact, the Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) spends billions of dollars
every year to support systematic, controlled, and large-scale
experimentation (National Academy of Medicine, 2010).
Science is largely about generalization. Most experimental
findings are intended to be generalized to a broader, or even
different, target domain (in other words, population, setting,
environment). In medicine, for instance, some of the most
important pharmaceutical discoveries were first developed
and tested using rats as subjects, while the goal was to use
the results to treat humans. In psychology, college students
are usually the subject of experimentation, so as to answer
questions about human cognition, which, broadly speaking,
include subjects with and without exposure to higher education. In many machine learning settings, agents are trained
by performing actions in simulated environments, where the
goal is to deploy these systems in other, maybe real, environment, which doesn’t match the training ground. In all these
settings, an extrapolation step from the causal distribution
where the experiment was conducted to where the inference
is intended is required. If the source distribution is such that
its conclusions can be extrapolated to the target domain, the
same is said to have external validity.
External validity has been considered one of the main research challenges by the current generation of data (empiri-

