Per-Decision Option Discounting

Anna Harutyunyan 1 2 Peter Vrancx 3 2 Philippe Hamel 1 Ann Nowé 2 Doina Precup 1

Abstract
In order to solve complex problems an agent must
be able to reason over a sufficiently long horizon. Temporal abstraction, commonly modeled
through options, offers the ability to reason at
many timescales, but the horizon length is still
determined by the discount factor of the underlying Markov Decision Process. We propose a
modification to the options framework that naturally scales the agent’s horizon with option length.
We show that the proposed option-step discount
controls a bias-variance trade-off, with larger discounts (counter-intuitively) leading to less estimation variance.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning agents have to solve the problem
of reasoning about actions that improve long-term performance. This objective can be formulated either in the
discounted setting (in which the agent optimizes the expectation of the discounted sum of rewards) or in the
average-reward setting (in which the agent optimizes the
average reward received per step over an infinite amount of
time) (Schwartz, 1993; Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 1996; Mahadevan, 1996). Intuitively, if agents are to have a finite
lifetime (but of unknown duration), the discounted reward
framework is more appropriate. Indeed, an average reward
agent is content to wait arbitrarily long before collecting
rewards, so long as the average over the infinite horizon
is favorable. Discounting, on the other hand, causes the
agent to focus on collecting rewards early on – preferred
behavior if there is a chance of termination. Even in cases
where the average reward performance is the desired target,
it can be approximated arbitrarily well by using a discount
which approaches one (Tsitsiklis & Van Roy, 2002). We
will hence focus on the discounted setting in this paper.
1

DeepMind, London, UK 2 Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels,
Belgium 3 PROWLER.io, Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to:
Anna Harutyunyan <harutyunyan@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

The discount factor γ itself is usually treated as something
in between a mathematical convenience and a meaningful
time horizon parameter. Indeed, the discounted return Gt =
Rt+1 + γRt+2 + γ 2 Rt+3 + . . . corresponds roughly to a
1
time horizon of 1−γ
steps, and the convergence speed of
learning and planning algorithms is strongly related to this
quantity (Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 1996; Jiang et al., 2015).
While we wish for our agents to reason over long temporal
horizons, this coupling makes it challenging for that to be
efficient, and fairly low discounts are favored in practice.
Temporal abstraction is often considered key for reasoning
over long temporal horizons (Sutton et al., 1999). Indeed,
options induce reward and transition models that act as
higher-order analogues of those from the primitive-action
Markov Decision Process. However, the discount factor
remains an integral part of these models – there are in fact
clear parallels between options and multi-step temporal difference methods (Bacon & Precup, 2016; Harutyunyan et al.,
2018). As such, in the classical options framework, an option that takes one hundred steps incurs a discount of γ 100
at termination, and the information about its outcome can
be significantly washed out. So, regardless of how sophisticated the options are, the agent remains at the mercy of the
step-discount, and its high-level plan is unlikely to benefit
from the foresight brought by the options. The temporal
abstraction in the behavior offers little additional temporal
representation power in the model or the value function. The
aim of this work is to overcome this limitation. In particular:
• We generalize the options framework to better express
temporal abstraction. Namely, we (1) decouple the
step-discounts in the reward and transition models, and
(2) introduce per-decision discounting that augments
the transition model irrespectively of duration. This
simple generalization allows for options to extend the
agent’s horizon, a property which can be thought of as
“time dilation”.
• We analyze the properties of planning with the new
framework, and devise novel bias-variance bounds that
apply to the classical options framework as a special
case. Notably, we show that larger discounts in the
transition model can reduce the variance of estimating
values, which is contrary to the familiar intuitions about
e.g. multi-step returns.

