EMI: Exploration with Mutual Information

Hyoungseok Kim * 1 2 Jaekyeom Kim * 1 2 Yeonwoo Jeong 1 2 Sergey Levine 3 Hyun Oh Song 1 2

Abstract
Reinforcement learning algorithms struggle when
the reward signal is very sparse. In these cases,
naive random exploration methods essentially rely
on a random walk to stumble onto a rewarding
state. Recent works utilize intrinsic motivation
to guide the exploration via generative models,
predictive forward models, or discriminative modeling of novelty. We propose EMI, which is an
exploration method that constructs embedding
representation of states and actions that does not
rely on generative decoding of the full observation but extracts predictive signals that can be
used to guide exploration based on forward prediction in the representation space. Our experiments show competitive results on challenging
locomotion tasks with continuous control and on
image-based exploration tasks with discrete actions on Atari. The source code is available at
https://github.com/snu-mllab/EMI.

1. Introduction
The central task in reinforcement learning is to learn policies that would maximize the total reward received from
interacting with the unknown environment. Although recent methods have been demonstrated to solve a range of
complex tasks (Mnih et al., 2015; Schulman et al., 2015;
2017), the success of these methods hinges on whether the
agent constantly receives the intermediate reward feedback
or not. In case of challenging environments with sparse
reward signals, these methods struggle to obtain meaningful
policies unless the agent luckily stumbles into the rewarding
or predefined goal states.
To this end, prior works on exploration generally utilize
some kind of intrinsic motivation mechanism to provide a
*

Equal contribution 1 Seoul National University, Department
of Computer Science and Engineering 2 Neural Processing Research Center 3 UC Berkeley, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences. Correspondence to: Hyun Oh Song
<hyunoh@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

3
8

7

7

1

6

6

2
5

3

2

1
4
5

8

4

Figure 1: Visualization of a sample trajectory in our learned
embedding space.
measure of novelty. These measures can be based on density
estimation via generative models (Bellemare et al., 2016;
Fu et al., 2017; Oh et al., 2015), predictive forward models (Stadie et al., 2015; Houthooft et al., 2016), or discriminative methods that aim to approximate novelty (Pathak
et al., 2017). Methods based on predictive forward models and generative models must model the distribution over
state observations, which can make them difficult to scale
to complex, high-dimensional observation spaces.
Our aim in this work is to devise a method for exploration
that does not require a direct generation of high-dimensional
state observations, while still retaining the benefits of being
able to measure novelty based on the forward prediction. If
exploration is performed by seeking out states that maximize
surprise, the problem, in essence, is in measuring surprise,
which requires a representation where functionally similar
states are close together, and functionally distinct states are
far apart.
In this paper, we propose to learn compact representations
for both the states (φ) and actions (ψ) simultaneously satisfying the following criteria: First, given the representations
of state and the corresponding next state, the uncertainty
of the representation of the corresponding action should be
minimal. Second, given the representations of the state and
the corresponding action, the uncertainty of the representation of the corresponding next state should also be minimal.
Third, the action embedding representation (ψ) should seamlessly support both continuous and discrete actions. Finally,
we impose a linear dynamics model in the representation
space which can also explain the rare irreducible error under
the dynamics model. Given the representation, we guide
the exploration by measuring surprise based on forward

