Towards a Unified Analysis of Random Fourier Features

Zhu Li 1 Jean-François Ton 1 Dino Oglic 2 Dino Sejdinovic 1

Abstract
Random Fourier features is a widely used, simple, and effective technique for scaling up kernel methods. The existing theoretical analysis of
the approach, however, remains focused on specific learning tasks and typically gives pessimistic
bounds which are at odds with the empirical results. We tackle these problems and provide the
first unified risk analysis of learning with random
Fourier features using the squared error and Lipschitz continuous loss functions. In our bounds,
the trade-off between the computational cost and
the expected risk convergence rate is problem specific and expressed in terms of the regularization
parameter and the number of effective degrees
of freedom. We study both the standard random
Fourier features method for which we improve
the existing bounds on the number of features required to guarantee the corresponding minimax
risk convergence rate of kernel ridge regression,
as well as a data-dependent modification which
samples features proportional to ridge leverage
scores and further reduces the required number
of features. As ridge leverage scores are expensive to compute, we devise a simple approximation scheme which provably reduces the computational cost without loss of statistical efficiency.

1. Introduction
Kernel methods are one of the pillars of machine learning
(Schölkopf & Smola, 2001; Schölkopf et al., 2004), as they
give us a flexible framework to model complex functional
relationships in a principled way and also come with wellestablished statistical properties and theoretical guarantees
(Caponnetto & De Vito, 2007; Steinwart & Christmann,
2008). The key ingredient, known as kernel trick, allows
1

Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, United Kingdom 2 Department of Informatics, King’s College London, United
Kingdom. Correspondence to: Zhu Li <zhu.li@stats.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

implicit computation of an inner product between rich feature representations of data through the kernel evaluation
k(x, x0 ) = hϕ(x), ϕ(x0 )iH , while the actual feature mapping ϕ : X → H between a data domain X and some high
and often infinite dimensional Hilbert space H is never computed. However, such convenience comes at a price: due
to operating on all pairs of observations, kernel methods
inherently require computation and storage which is at least
quadratic in the number of observations, and hence often
prohibitive for large datasets. In particular, the kernel matrix
has to be computed, stored, and often inverted. As a result, a
flurry of research into scalable kernel methods and the analysis of their performance emerged (Rahimi & Recht, 2007;
Mahoney & Drineas, 2009; Bach, 2013; Alaoui & Mahoney,
2015; Rudi et al., 2015; Rudi & Rosasco, 2017; Rudi et al.,
2017; Zhang et al., 2015). Among the most popular frameworks for fast approximations to kernel methods are random
Fourier features (RFF) due to Rahimi & Recht (2007). The
idea of random Fourier features is to construct an explicit
feature map which is of a dimension much lower than the
number of observations, but with the resulting inner product
which approximates the desired kernel function k(x, y). In
particular, random Fourier features rely on Bochner’s theorem (Bochner, 1932; Rudin, 2017) which tells us that any
bounded, continuous and shift-invariant kernel is a Fourier
transform of a bounded positive measure, called spectral
measure. The feature map is then constructed using samples
drawn from the spectral measure. Essentially, any kernel
method can then be adjusted to operate on these explicit
feature maps (i.e., primal representations), greatly reducing the computational and storage costs, while in practice
mimicking performance of the original kernel method.
Despite their empirical success, the theoretical understanding of statistical properties of random Fourier features is
incomplete, and the question of how many features are
needed, in order to obtain a method with performance provably comparable to the original one, remains without a
definitive answer. Currently, there are two main lines of
research addressing this question. The first line considers
the approximation error of the kernel matrix itself (e.g.,
see Rahimi & Recht, 2007; Sriperumbudur & Szabó, 2015;
Sutherland & Schneider, 2015, and references therein) and
bases performance guarantees on the accuracy of this approximation. However, all of these works require Ω(n)

