Direct Uncertainty Prediction for Medical Second Opinions

Maithra Raghu * 1 2 Katy Blumer * 2 Rory Sayres 2 Ziad Obermeyer 3 Robert Kleinberg 1
Sendhil Mullainathan 4 Jon Kleinberg 1

Abstract
The issue of disagreements amongst human experts is a ubiquitous one in both machine learning
and medicine. In medicine, this often corresponds
to doctor disagreements on a patient diagnosis. In
this work, we show that machine learning models can be trained to give uncertainty scores to
data instances that might result in high expert
disagreements. In particular, they can identify patient cases that would benefit most from a medical
second opinion. Our central methodological finding is that Direct Uncertainty Prediction (DUP),
training a model to predict an uncertainty score directly from the raw patient features, works better
than Uncertainty Via Classification, the two-step
process of training a classifier and postprocessing
the output distribution to give an uncertainty score.
We show this both with a theoretical result, and
on extensive evaluations on a large scale medical
imaging application.

1. Introduction
In both the practice of machine learning and the practice of
medicine, a serious challenge is presented by disagreements
amongst human labels. Machine learning classification models are typically developed on large datasets consisting of
(xi , yi ) (data instance, label) pairs. These are collected (Russakovsky & Fei-Fei, 2010; Welinder & Perona, 2010) by assigning each raw instance xi to multiple human evaluators,
(1) (2)
(n )
yielding several labels yi , yi , ...yi i . Unsurprisingly,
these labels often have disagreements amongst them and
must be carefully aggregated to give a single target value.
This label disagreement issue becomes a full-fledged clinical problem in the healthcare domain. Despite the human
*

1

Equal contribution Department of Computer Science, Cornell
University 2 Google Brain 3 UC Berkeley School of Public Health
4
Chicago Booth School of Business. Correspondence to: Maithra
Raghu <maithrar@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

labellers now being highly trained medical experts (doctors), disagreements (on the diagnosis) persist (Van Such
et al., 2017; Abrams et al., 1994; AAO, 2002; Gulshan et al.,
2016; Rajpurkar et al., 2017). One example is (Van Such
et al., 2017), where agreement between referral and final
diagnoses in a cohort of two hundred and eighty patients
is studied. Exact agreement is only found in 12% of cases,
but more concerningly, 21% of cases have significant disagreements. This latter group also turns out to be the most
costly to treat. Other examples are given by (Daniel, 2004),
a study of tuberculosis diagnosis, showing that radiologists
disagree with colleagues 25% of the time, and with themselves 20% of the time, and (Elmore et al., 2015), studying
disagreement on cancer diagnosis from breast biopsies.
These disagreements arise not solely from random noise
(Rolnick et al., 2017), but from expert judgment and bias.
In particular, some patient cases xi intrinsically contain
features that result in greater expert uncertainty (e.g. Figure
2.) This motivates applying machine learning to predict
which patients are likely to give rise to the most doctor
disagreement. We call this the medical second opinion
problem. Such a model could be deployed to automatically
identify patients that might need a second doctor’s opinion.
Mathematically, given a patient instance xi , we are interested in assigning a scalar uncertainty score to xi , h(xi )
that reflects the amount of expert disagreement on xi . For
(1) (2)
(n )
each xi , we have multiple labels yi , yi , ...yi i , each
corresponding to a different individual doctor’s grade.
One natural approach is to first train a classifier mapping xi
(j)
to the yi , e.g. via the empirical distribution of labels p̂i .
For ungraded examples, a measure of spread of the output
distribution of the classifier (e.g. variance) could be used
to give a score. We call this Uncertainty via Classification
(UVC).
An alternate approach, Direct Uncertainty Prediction
(DUP), is to learn a function hdup directly mapping xi to
a scalar uncertainty score. The basic contrast with Uncertainty via Classification is illustrated in Figure 1. Our central
methodological finding is that Direct Uncertainty Prediction (provably) works better than the two step process of
Uncertainty via Classification.

