A Wrapped Normal Distribution on Hyperbolic Space
for Gradient-Based Learning

Yoshihiro Nagano 1 Shoichiro Yamaguchi 2 Yasuhiro Fujita 2 Masanori Koyama 2

Abstract
Hyperbolic space is a geometry that is known
to be well-suited for representation learning of
data with an underlying hierarchical structure. In
this paper, we present a novel hyperbolic distribution called hyperbolic wrapped distribution, a
wrapped normal distribution on hyperbolic space
whose density can be evaluated analytically and
differentiated with respect to the parameters. Our
distribution enables the gradient-based learning
of the probabilistic models on hyperbolic space
that could never have been considered before.
Also, we can sample from this hyperbolic probability distribution without resorting to auxiliary
means like rejection sampling. As applications of
our distribution, we develop a hyperbolic-analog
of variational autoencoder and a method of probabilistic word embedding on hyperbolic space.
We demonstrate the efficacy of our distribution
on various datasets including MNIST, Atari 2600
Breakout, and WordNet.

1. Introduction
Recently, hyperbolic geometry is drawing attention as a
powerful geometry to assist deep networks in capturing
fundamental structural properties of data such as a hierarchy. Hyperbolic attention network (Gülçehre et al.,
2019) improved the generalization performance of neural
networks on various tasks including machine translation
by imposing the hyperbolic geometry on several parts of
neural networks. Poincaré embeddings (Nickel & Kiela,
2017) succeeded in learning a parsimonious representation
of symbolic data by embedding the dataset into Poincaré
balls.
1
Department of Complexity Science and Engineering, The
University of Tokyo, Japan 2 Preferred Networks, Inc., Japan.
Correspondence to: Yoshihiro Nagano <nagano@mns.k.utokyo.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

(a) A tree representation of the
training dataset
!!!!!!"

!!!!!""

"!!""!!
"!!!""!
!!"!"!"

!!!!"!"

!!!"!"" !!"!!"" !"!!"!" "!!!"!"

(b) Vanilla VAE (β = 1.0)

(c) Hyperbolic VAE

Figure 1: The visual results of Hyperbolic VAE applied to
an artificial dataset generated by applying random perturbations to a binary tree. The visualization is being done
on the Poincaré ball. The red points are the embeddings
of the original tree, and the blue points are the embeddings
of noisy observations generated from the tree. The pink
× represents the origin of the hyperbolic space. The VAE
was trained without the prior knowledge of the tree structure. Please see 6.1 for experimental details
In the task of data embedding, the choice of the target space
determines the properties of the dataset that can be learned
from the embedding. For the dataset with a hierarchical
structure, in particular, the number of relevant features can
grow exponentially with the depth of the hierarchy. Euclidean space is often inadequate for capturing the structural information (Figure 1). If the choice of the target
space of the embedding is limited to Euclidean space, one
might have to prepare extremely high dimensional space as
the target space to guarantee small distortion. However, the
same embedding can be done remarkably well if the destination is hyperbolic space (Sarkar, 2012; Sala et al., 2018).

