Noisy Dual Principal Component Pursuit

Tianyu Ding * 1 Zhihui Zhu * 2 Tianjiao Ding 3 Yunchen Yang 3 René Vidal 2 Manolis C. Tsakiris 3 Daniel P. Robinson 1

Abstract
Dual Principal Component Pursuit (DPCP) is a
recently proposed non-convex optimization based
method for learning subspaces of high relative
dimension from noiseless datasets contaminated
by as many outliers as the square of the number
of inliers. Experimentally, DPCP has proved to
be robust to noise and outperform the popular
RANSAC on 3D vision tasks such as road plane
detection and relative pose estimation from three
views. This paper extends the global optimality
and convergence theory of DPCP to the case of
data corrupted by noise, and further demonstrates
its robustness using synthetic and real data.

1. Introduction
Dual Principal Component Pursuit (DPCP) is a recently proposed method for learning a linear subspace S ⊂ RD from
a dataset Xe ∈ RD×L contaminated by outliers (Tsakiris &
Vidal, 2015; 2017; 2018a; Zhu et al., 2018a;b). Specifically,
DPCP minimizes an `1 co-sparse objective on the sphere:
min
b

>
Xe b 1 s.t.

b 2 = 1.

(1)

The aim is to estimate a basis for the orthogonal complement of the subspace, hence the attribute dual. As such,
DPCP is ideally suited for subspaces of high relative dimension, i.e., those subspaces with dimension d such that
d/D is close to one. A typical example is the case of hyperplanes (d = D − 1), which very commonly appear in
3D computer vision applications such as detecting planar
structures in 3D point clouds (Geiger et al., 2013; Silberman
et al., 2012) or estimating relative poses in multiple-view
geometry (Hartley & Zisserman, 2000).
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Applied Mathematics &
Statistics, Johns Hopkins University, USA 2 Mathematical Institute
for Data Science, Johns Hopkins University, USA 3 School of
Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University,
China. Correspondence to: Tianyu Ding <tding1@jhu.edu>,
Zhihui Zhu <zzhu29@jhu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

In the high relative dimension regime, state-of-the-art convex optimization based methods relying on sparse and lowrank representations (Xu et al., 2010; Soltanolkotabi &
Candès, 2012; Rahmani & Atia, 2017; You et al., 2017)
typically exhibit a significant decrease in performance. On
the other hand, since its inception almost 40 years ago, the
Random Sampling And Consensus (RANSAC) (Fischler &
Bolles, 1981) algorithm has been one of the most popular
methods in computer vision for the high relative dimension
setting. RANSAC alternates between fitting a subspace to
a randomly sampled minimal number of points (D − 1 in
the case of a hyperplane) and then using the number of datapoints close to the subspace as a measure of the quality of
the subspace. The interplay between four factors governs
when RANSAC is successful: the ambient dimension, the
outlier ratio, the thresholding parameter for determining
when points are considered close to a subspace, and the allocated time budget. In particular, RANSAC can be extremely
effective when the probability of sampling outlier-free samples inside the allocated time budget is large.
Recently (Tsakiris & Vidal, 2018a), it has been shown that
an Iteratively-Reweighted-Least-Squares algorithm (DPCPIRLS) for solving the non-convex DPCP problem (1) can
successfully handle 30%–50% outliers in the three-view geometry problem, while state-of-the-art RANSAC variations
fail when given the running time of DPCP-IRLS as a time
budget. Even more recently (Zhu et al., 2018a), it has been
demonstrated that a certain projected subgradient method
(DPCP-PSGM) solves (1) to global optimality using only
matrix-vector multiplications, and correctly performs road
plane detection from a 3D cloud of approximately O(105 )
points with 50% outliers in just a few hundred milliseconds, a time window in which RANSAC can only perform
a few iterations and thus fails. These results highlight the
significance of DPCP as a potential alternative to RANSAC.
In the terminology of the review paper of Lerman & Maunu
2018, DPCP is in effect a least absolute deviations subspace
learning method. Such methods compute the subspace by
aiming to minimize the sum of the distances between all
points in the dataset and the subspace; this is precisely the
formulation (1) when the subspace is a hyperplane. For
example, REAPER (Lerman et al., 2015) applies a convex
relaxation that is solved via an IRLS scheme (Zhang & Lerman, 2014; Zhang, 2016). Although REAPER is known

