Graph Resistance and Learning from Pairwise Comparisons

Julien M. Hendrickx∗,† Alex Olshevsky† Venkatesh Saligrama†

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning the qualities of a collection of items by performing noisy
comparisons among them. Following the standard
paradigm, we assume there is a fixed “comparison graph” and every neighboring pair of items in
this graph is compared k times according to the
Bradley-Terry-Luce model (where the probability
than an item wins a comparison is proportional
the item quality). We are interested in how the
relative error in quality estimation scales with the
comparison graph in the regime where k is large.
We prove that, after a known transition period,
the relevant graph-theoretic quantity is the square
root of the resistance of the comparison graph.
Specifically, we provide an algorithm that is minimax optimal. The algorithm has a relative error
decay that scales with the square root of the graph
resistance, and provide a matching lower bound
(up to log factors). The performance guarantee of
our algorithm, both in terms of the graph and the
skewness of the item quality distribution, outperforms earlier results.

1. Introduction
This paper considers quality estimation from pairwise comparisons, which is a common method of preference elicitation from users. For example, the preference of a customer
*
Equal contribution . Correspondence to: Alex Olshevsky
<alexols@bu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).
∗
Department of Mathematical Engineering, ICTEAM, UCLouvain, Belgium
†
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Boston
University, USA
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation Grant
CCF 1527618, Office of Naval Research Grant N0014-18-1-2257,
the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Science andTechnology Directorate, Office of University Programs under Grant 2013ST-061-ED0001, Communauté française de Belgique - Actions de
Recherche Concertées,” and a WBI World excellence fellowship.

for one product over another can be thought of as the outcome of a comparison. Because customers are idiosyncratic,
such outcomes will be noisy functions of the quality of the
underlying items. A similar problem arises in crowdsourcing systems, which must strive for accurate inference even
in the presence of unreliable or error-prone participants. Because crowdsourced tasks pay relatively little, errors are
common; even among workers making a genuine effort, inherent ambiguity in the task might lead to some randomness
in the outcome. These considerations make the underlying
estimation algorithm an important part of any crowdsourcing scheme.
Our goal is accurate inference of true item quality from a
collection of outcomes of noisy comparisons. We will use
one of the simplest parametric models for the outcome of
comparisons, the Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) model, which
associates a real-valued quality measure to each item and
posits that customers select an item with a probability that
is proportional to its quality. Given a “comparison graph”
which captures which pairs of items are to be compared,
our goal is to understand how accuracy scales in terms of
this graph when participants make choices according to the
BTL model.
We focus on the regime where we perform many comparisons of each pair of items in the graph. In this regime,
we are able to give a satisfactory answer to the underlying
question. Informally, we prove that, up to various constants
and logarithms, the relative estimation error will scale with
the square root of measures of resistance in the underlying
graph. Specifically, we propose an algorithm whose performance scales with graph resistance, as well as a matching
lower bound. The difference between our upper and lower
bounds depends only on the log of the confidence level and
on the skewness of the item qualities. Additionally, we note
that our performance guarantees scale better in terms of
item skewness as compared to previous work.
1.1. Formal problem statement
We are given an undirected “comparison graph” G(V, E),
where each node i has a positive weight wi . If (i, j) ∈
E, then we perform k comparisons between i and j. The
outcomes of these comparisons are i.i.d. Bernoulli and the
probability that i wins a given comparison according to the

