Sensitivity Analysis of Linear Structural Causal Models

Carlos Cinelli 1 Daniel Kumor 2 Bryant Chen 3 Judea Pearl 1 Elias Bareinboim 2

Abstract
Causal inference requires assumptions about the
data generating process, many of which are unverifiable from the data. Given that some causal
assumptions might be uncertain or disputed, formal methods are needed to quantify how sensitive
research conclusions are to violations of those
assumptions. Although an extensive literature
exists on the topic, most results are limited to specific model structures, while a general-purpose
algorithmic framework for sensitivity analysis is
still lacking. In this paper, we develop a formal,
systematic approach to sensitivity analysis for arbitrary linear Structural Causal Models (SCMs).
We start by formalizing sensitivity analysis as
a constrained identification problem. We then
develop an efficient, graph-based identification
algorithm that exploits non-zero constraints on
both directed and bidirected edges. This allows
researchers to systematically derive sensitivity
curves for a target causal quantity with an arbitrary set of path coefficients and error covariances
as sensitivity parameters. These results can be
used to display the degree to which violations of
causal assumptions affect the target quantity of interest, and to judge, on scientific grounds, whether
problematic degrees of violations are plausible.

1. Introduction
Randomized controlled trials (RCT) are considered the gold
standard for identifying cause-effect relationships in dataintensive sciences (Giffin et al., 2010). In practice, however,
direct randomization is often infeasible or unethical, requiring researchers to combine non-experimental observations
with assumptions about the data generating process in or1

Depts. of Statistics and Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, California, USA. 2 Dept. of Computer Science,
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA. 3 Brex, San Francisco,
CA, USA. Most of this work was conducted while at IBM Research
AI. Correspondence to: Carlos Cinelli <carloscinelli@ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

der to obtain causal claims. These assumptions are usually
encoded as the absence of certain causal relationships, or
as the absence of association between certain unobserved
factors. Conclusions based on causal models are, therefore,
provisional: they depend on the validity of causal assumptions, regardless of the sample size (Pearl, 2000; Spirtes
et al., 2000; Bareinboim & Pearl, 2016).
In many real settings, it is not uncommon that these assumptions are subject to uncertainty or dispute. Scientists may
posit alternative causal models that are equally compatible
with the observed data; or, more mundanely, researchers can
make identification assumptions for convenience, simply
to proceed with estimation.1 Regardless of the motivation,
the provisional character of causal inference behooves us to
formally assess the extent to which causal conclusions are
sensitive to violations of those assumptions.
The importance of such exercises is best illustrated with a
real example, which directly impacted public policy. During
the late 1950s and early 1960s, there was a fierce debate
regarding the causal effect of cigarette smoking on lung
cancer. One of its most notable skeptics was the influential statistician Ronald Fisher, who claimed that, without
an experiment, one cannot rule out unobserved common
causes (e.g. the individual’s genotype) as being responsible
for the observed association (Fisher, 1957; 1958). Technically speaking, Fisher’s statement was accurate; data alone
could not refute his hypothesis. Yet, although no RCT measuring the effect of cigarette smoking on lung cancer was
performed, currently there exists a broad consensus around
the issue. How could such a consensus emerge?
An important step towards the current state of affairs was
a sensitivity analysis performed by Cornfield et al. (1959).
Their investigation consisted of the following hypothetical question: if Fisher’s hypothesis were true, how strong
would the alleged confounder need to be to explain all the
observed association between cigarette smoking and lung
cancer? The analysis concluded that, since smokers had nine
times the risk of nonsmokers for developing lung cancer,
the latent confounder would need to be at least nine times
more common in smokers than in nonsmokers—something
1
As noted by Joffe et al. (2010), “such assumptions are usually
made casually, largely because they justify the use of available
statistical methods and not because they are truly believed”.

