AReS and MaRS - Adversarial and MMD-Minimizing Regression for SDEs

Gabriele Abbati * 1 Philippe Wenk * 2 3 Michael A Osborne 1 Andreas Krause 2 Bernhard Schölkopf 4
Stefan Bauer 4

Abstract
Stochastic differential equations are an important
modeling class in many disciplines. Consequently,
there exist many methods relying on various discretization and numerical integration schemes.
In this paper, we propose a novel, probabilistic
model for estimating the drift and diffusion given
noisy observations of the underlying stochastic
system. Using state-of-the-art adversarial and moment matching inference techniques, we avoid
the discretization schemes of classical approaches.
This leads to significant improvements in parameter accuracy and robustness given random initial
guesses. On four established benchmark systems,
we compare the performance of our algorithms
to state-of-the-art solutions based on extended
Kalman filtering and Gaussian processes.

1. Introduction
Modeling discretely observed time series is a challenging
problem that arises in quantitative sciences and many fields
of engineering. While it is possible to tackle such problems
with difference equations or ordinary differential equations
(ODEs), both approaches suffer from serious drawbacks.
Difference equations are difficult to apply if the observation
times are unevenly distributed. Furthermore, they do not
generalize well across observation frequencies, while natural laws do not care about this artificial construct. ODEs
can deal with these challenges, but fail to incorporate the
inherent stochastic behavior present in many physical, chemical or biological systems. These effects can be captured
by introducing stochasticity in the dynamics model, which
brings to stochastic differential equations (SDEs). In this
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford 2 Learning and Adaptive Systems Group, ETH
Zürich 3 Max Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems 4 Empirical
Inference Group, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems.
Correspondence to: Gabriele Abbati <gabb@robots.ox.ac.uk>,
Philippe Wenk <wenkph@ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

paper, we use exclusively the Itô-form
dx(t) = f (x(t), θ)dt + g(x(t), θ)dw(t),

(1)

where x(t) is the time-dependent vector of states we would
like to model, θ collects the parameters of the model, f is
the drift term, g is the matrix-valued diffusion function and
w(t) is a Wiener-process of the same dimension as the state
vector x.
While SDEs can efficiently capture stochasticity and deal
with unevenly spaced observation times and frequency, inference is rather challenging. Due to the stochasticity of w(t),
the state vector x(t) is itself a random variable. Except
for few special cases, it is not possible to find an analytic
solution for the statistics of x(t) for general drift and diffusion terms. The problem is even more challenging if we
were to condition on or state-estimate some discrete time
observations y (filtering/smoothing) or infer some statistics
for the parameters θ (parameter inference). It is well known
that the parameter inference problem is a difficult task, with
most approaches either being very sensitive to initialization
(Picchini, 2007), strongly dependent on the choice of hyperparameters like the spacing of the integration grid (Bhat
et al., 2015) or using excessive amount of computational
resources even for small scale systems and state-of-the-art
implementation (Ryder et al., 2018).
The difficulty of the parameter estimation problem of estimating parameters of drift and diffusion under observational
noise is readily exemplified by the fact that even major scientific programming environment providers like MATLAB
are still lack an established toolbox for practical use. In this
paper, we will take a step into a novel direction tackling this
open and exciting research question.
1.1. Related Work
While it is impossible to cover all related research efforts, we
would like to give a quick overview by mentioning some of
the most relevant. For a more in-depth discussion, we recommend Tronarp & Särkkä (2018), who provide an excellent
review of the current state-of-the-art smoothing schemes.
Moreover, Sørensen (2004), Nielsen et al. (2000) and Hurn
et al. (2007) provide extensive explanations of the more
traditional approaches.

