Orthogonal Random Forest for Causal Inference
Miruna Oprescu 1 Vasilis Syrgkanis 1 Zhiwei Steven Wu 2

Abstract

unknown nuisance function that also needs to be estimated
from data. Examples include non-parametric regression,
heterogeneous treatment effect estimation, instrumental variable regression, local maximum likelihood estimation and
estimation of structural econometric models.1 The study of
such conditional moment restriction problems has a long
history in econometrics (see e.g. Newey (1993); Ai & Chen
(2003); Chen & Pouzo (2009); Chernozhukov et al. (2015)).

We propose the orthogonal random forest, an algorithm that combines Neyman-orthogonality to
reduce sensitivity with respect to estimation error of nuisance parameters with generalized random forests (Athey et al., 2017)—a flexible nonparametric method for statistical estimation of
conditional moment models using random forests.
We provide a consistency rate and establish
asymptotic normality for our estimator. We show
that under mild assumptions on the consistency
rate of the nuisance estimator, we can achieve the
same error rate as an oracle with a priori knowledge of these nuisance parameters. We show that
when the nuisance functions have a locally sparse
parametrization, then a local `1 -penalized regression achieves the required rate. We apply our
method to estimate heterogeneous treatment effects from observational data with discrete treatments or continuous treatments, and we show that,
unlike prior work, our method provably allows to
control for a high-dimensional set of variables
under standard sparsity conditions. We also provide a comprehensive empirical evaluation of our
algorithm on both synthetic and real data.

In this general estimation problem, the main goal is to estimate the target parameter at a rate that is robust to the estimation error of the nuisance component. This allows the use
of flexible models to fit the nuisance functions and enables
asymptotically valid inference. Almost all prior work on the
topic has focused on two settings: i) they either assume the
target function ✓0 (x) takes a parametric form and allow for a
potentially high-dimensional parametric nuisance function,
e.g. (Chernozhukov et al., 2016; 2017; 2018), ii) or take a
non-parametric stance at estimating ✓0 (x) but do not allow
for high-dimensional nuisance functions (Wager & Athey,
2015; Athey et al., 2017).

1. Introduction
Many problems that arise in causal inference can be formulated in the language of conditional moment models:
given a target feature x find a solution ✓0 (x) to a system of
conditional moment equations
E [ (Z; ✓, h0 (x, W )) | X = x] = 0,

(1)

given access to n i.i.d. samples from the data generating
distribution, where is a known score function and h0 is an
*
Equal contribution 1 Microsoft Research–New England
University of Minnesota–Twin Cities. Correspondence to:
Miruna Oprescu <moprescu@microsoft.com >, Vasilis Syrgkanis
<vasy@microsoft.com>, Zhiwei Steven Wu <zsw@umn.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

We propose Orthogonal Random Forest (ORF), a random forest-based estimation algorithm, which performs
non-parametric estimation of the target parameter while
permitting more complex nuisance functions with highdimensional parameterizations. Our estimator is also asymptotically normal and hence allows for the construction of
asymptotically valid confidence intervals via plug-in or bootstrap approaches. Our approach combines the notion of
Neyman orthogonality of the moment equations with a twostage random forest based algorithm, which generalizes
prior work on Generalized Random Forests (Athey et al.,
2017) and the double machine learning (double ML) approach proposed in (Chernozhukov et al., 2017). To support
our general algorithm, we also provide a novel nuisance estimation algorithm—Forest Lasso—that effectively recovers
high-dimensional nuisance parameters provided they have
locally sparse structure. This result combines techniques
from Lasso theory (Hastie et al., 2015) with concentration
inequalities for U -statistics (Hoeffding, 1963).
As a concrete example and as a main application of our
approach, we consider the problem of heterogeneous treat1
See e.g. Reiss & Wolak (2007) and examples in Chernozhukov
et al. (2016; 2018)

