Automated Model Selection with Bayesian Quadrature

Henry Chai 1 Jean-François Ton 2 Michael A. Osborne 3 4 Roman Garnett 1

Abstract
We present a novel technique for tailoring
Bayesian quadrature (BQ) to model selection. The
state-of-the-art for comparing the evidence of
multiple models relies on Monte Carlo methods,
which converge slowly and are unreliable for computationally expensive models. Although previous research has shown that BQ offers sample
efficiency superior to Monte Carlo in computing
the evidence of an individual model, applying BQ
directly to model comparison may waste computation producing an overly-accurate estimate for the
evidence of a clearly poor model. We propose an
automated and efficient algorithm for computing
the most-relevant quantity for model selection:
the posterior model probability. Our technique
maximizes the mutual information between this
quantity and observations of the models’ likelihoods, yielding efficient sample acquisition across
disparate model spaces when likelihood observations are limited. Our method produces moreaccurate posterior estimates using fewer likelihood evaluations than standard Bayesian quadrature and Monte Carlo estimators, as we demonstrate on synthetic and real-world examples.

1. Introduction
Model selection is a fundamental problem that arises in
the course of scientific inquiry: which of several candidate
models best explains an observed dataset D? The Bayesian
approach to model selection involves computing posterior
model probabilities, the probability that each model generated the observations. This approach requires computing
model evidences, which can be expressed as integrals of the
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis, Saint Louis, MO, USA 2 Department
of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom
3
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom 4 Mind Foundry, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Correspondence to: Henry Chai <hchai@wustl.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

R
form Z = f (D | θ) π(θ) dθ, where θ is a vector of model
parameters, f (D | θ) is a likelihood, and π(θ) is a prior.
Unfortunately, for many real-world model selection tasks,
these integrals are computationally intractable and must
be estimated numerically. Numerous commonly-used techniques to estimate such integrals rely on Monte Carlo estimators (Metropolis et al., 1953; Hastings, 1970). These
methods converge slowly in terms of the number of required
integrand samples as they do not incorporate knowledge
about sample locations. This makes such methods ill-suited
for settings where the integrand is expensive to evaluate.
One alternative is Bayesian quadrature (BQ) (Larkin, 1972;
Diaconis, 1988; O’Hagan, 1991; Rasmussen & Ghahramani,
2003), which relies on a probabilistic belief on the integrand
that can be conditioned on observations to derive a posterior
belief about the value of the integral. The theoretical properties of kernel quadrature methods (including BQ) have
been studied at length: these methods can achieve faster
convergence rates than Monte Carlo estimators (Briol et al.,
2015; Bach, 2017; Karvonen et al., 2018), even when the
underlying model is misspecified (Kanagawa et al., 2016;
2017), a commonly-cited pitfall of kernel-based methods.
There has been significant work investigating how traditional, Monte Carlo based methods can be adapted to efficiently estimate posterior model probabilities for model
selection (Neal, 2001; Green, 1995; Carlin & Chib, 1995;
Meng & Wong, 1996; Godsill, 2001; Skilling, 2004). However, no analogous work has appeared to adapt BQ for this
important task. That is our goal in this work.
We propose a principled adaptation of BQ designed to automate model selection. Specifically, we define a novel acquisition function for active selection of locations to observe
model likelihoods. This acquisition function corresponds to
the mutual information between observations of the model
likelihood and a quantity specifically relevant to the task
of model selection: the posterior model probabilities. This
allows our method to automatically select informative sample locations across multiple model parameter spaces unlike
previous active BQ approaches to model selection (Osborne
et al., 2012; Gunter et al., 2014; Chai & Garnett, 2019),
which focused on accurately estimating individual model evidences. We illustrate the shortcomings of such approaches
using a toy motivating example. Experiments conducted on

