Latent Normalizing Flows for Discrete Sequences

Zachary M. Ziegler 1 Alexander M. Rush 1

Abstract
Normalizing flows are a powerful class of generative models for continuous random variables,
showing both strong model flexibility and the potential for non-autoregressive generation. These
benefits are also desired when modeling discrete
random variables such as text, but directly applying normalizing flows to discrete sequences
poses significant additional challenges. We propose a VAE-based generative model which jointly
learns a normalizing flow-based distribution in
the latent space and a stochastic mapping to an
observed discrete space. In this setting, we find
that it is crucial for the flow-based distribution
to be highly multimodal. To capture this property, we propose several normalizing flow architectures to maximize model flexibility. Experiments consider common discrete sequence tasks
of character-level language modeling and polyphonic music generation. Our results indicate that
an autoregressive flow-based model can match the
performance of a comparable autoregressive baseline, and a non-autoregressive flow-based model
can improve generation speed with a penalty to
performance.

1. Introduction
In the past several years, deep generative models have been
shown to give strong modeling performance across a range
of tasks, including autoregressive models (Bahdanau et al.,
2015), latent variable models (Kingma & Welling, 2014),
implicit generative models (Goodfellow et al., 2014), and
exact-likelihood models based on normalizing flows (Dinh
et al., 2017). These methods provide different tradeoffs
along the axes of sample quality, generation speed, availability of comparative metrics, and interpretability.
1

School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Zachary
M. Ziegler <zziegler@g.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Generative models based on normalizing flows have seen
recent success in problems involving continuous random
variables (Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018). Normalizing flows
represent the joint distribution of a high-dimensional continuous random variable via an invertible deterministic transformation from a base density (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015;
Kingma et al., 2016). Flows have been explored both to
increase the flexibility of the variational posterior in the context of variational autoencoders (VAEs), and directly as a
generative model which is the focus of this work. Within the
class of exact likelihood models, normalizing flows provide
two key advantages: model flexibility and generation speed.
Flows generalize continuous autoregressive models (Papamakarios et al., 2017) and give more distributional flexibility.
Furthermore, normalizing flows can be designed that are
non-autoregressive during sampling (van den Oord et al.,
2018; Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018), enabling fast parallel
generation.
Unfortunately, due to their reliance on parameterized applications of the change-of-variables formula, it is challenging
to directly apply normalizing flows to discrete random variables. Applying related methods, e.g. via discrete change
of variables or a relaxation, is an important line of research
but leads to significant additional challenges.
We study normalizing flows in the discrete setting with a latent normalizing flow within the VAE framework, where the
flow models a continuous representation of the discrete data
via the prior. Previous works have found that using VAEs
with discrete data often leads to posterior collapse, where
the powerful likelihood model ignores the latent code when
learning to model the data (Bowman et al., 2016; Yang et al.,
2017). To ensure that the continuous flow fully captures the
dynamics of the discrete space we use a simple inputless
emission model for the likelihood. Additionally, this is important to ensure that the potential speed benefits of the flow
are not bottle-necked by an autoregressive likelihood.
The key to the success of such a model is the ability of the
flow to capture the high degree of multimodality typically
found in discrete data, such that strong performance can be
achieved without an autoregressive likelihood. The flexibility of normalizing flows allows us to design specific flow
architectures which target this desiderata. To this end, we
propose three normalizing flow architectures designed to

