Hiring Under Uncertainty

Manish Raghavan 1 Manish Purohit 2 Sreenivas Gollapudi 2

Abstract
In this paper we introduce the hiring under uncertainty problem to model the questions faced
by hiring committees in large enterprises and universities alike. Given a set of n eligible candidates, the decision maker needs to choose the
sequence of candidates to make offers so as to
hire the k best candidates. However, candidates
may choose to reject an offer (for instance, due
to a competing offer) and the decision maker has
a time limit by which all positions must be filled.
Given an estimate of the probabilities of acceptance for each candidate, the hiring under uncertainty problem is to design a strategy of making
offers so that the total expected value of all candidates hired by the time limit is maximized. We
provide a 2-approximation algorithm for the setting where offers must be made in sequence, an
8-approximation when offers may be made in parallel, and a 10-approximation for the more general
stochastic knapsack setting with finite probes.

1. Introduction
Hiring is a core activity of any enterprise where the timely
fulfillment of staffing needs is critical to its functioning.
In addition to estimating the quality and suitability of a
candidate, the enterprise also needs to deal with uncertainty
that arises as the result of good candidates rejecting the job
offer. Balancing this trade-off between hiring good quality
candidates while at the same time ensuring that all staffing
needs are met by a deadline is one of the most challenging
aspects of hiring in practice.
A number of algorithmic questions that are inspired by hiring settings have been well-studied in literature (see Section
1.2) including the popular secretary problem and its many
variants. This line of work focuses on the online nature of
1

Department of Computer Science, Cornell University 2 Google
Research.
Correspondence to: Manish Raghavan <manish@cs.cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

the problem and the key question tackled is how to find a
good set of candidates when the pool of future candidates
is unknown. However, this line of research does not model
the other source of uncertainty, i.e., the candidate itself may
choose to reject the job offer (for instance, due to a better
competing offer), which in turn raises the question of hiring
enough candidates by the deadline.
During the hiring process, the “quality” (or value) of a candidate is often estimated by traditional hiring processes such
as resume screening and formal interviews and even via
algorithmic techniques (see Section 1.2). On the other hand,
machine learning models can estimate the probability that
a given candidate will accept a job offer based on various
features such as the candidate’s educational background,
salary expectations, location preferences, and so on. Considering both the value as well as offer acceptance probability
of each candidate leads to a rich collection of optimization
problems. In this paper, we initiate the study of the hiring
under uncertainty problem that aims to tackle the inherent
trade-off at the heart of the hiring process - how should
we make job offers under uncertainty so that all staffing
needs are met by a deadline, and yet hire the best available
candidates?
Formally, we consider the following model as the basis for
all the variants we present in this paper. There is a set of n
candidates, and we need to hire k of them. We do this by
making offers to candidates, which we’ll also refer to more
abstractly as “probing” a candidate. Each candidate i has
a known value vi and probability pi of accepting an offer,
independent of all other candidates. We have a deadline of t
time steps, after which we can’t make any further offers. It
takes one time step to make an offer and receive an answer
from a candidate. Job offers are irrevocable, i.e., once a
candidate accepts an offer, that position is “filled” and we
cannot replace that candidate with a better candidate in the
future. The total value of a chosen set of candidates is simply
the sum of the individual candidate values. Our goal is to
maximize the total expected value of the hired candidates.
We also consider two natural generalizations of this model.
First, we allow making parallel offers to multiple candidates
in a given time step. Second, we consider the knapsack
hiring problem where each candidate i has a size si and
we have a budget B on the total size of hired candidates.

