Nonconvex Variance Reduced Optimization with Arbitrary Sampling

Samuel Horváth 1 Peter Richtárik 1 2 3

Abstract

where x corresponds to the parameters defining a model,
fi (x) is the loss of the model x associated with data point
i, and f is the average (empirical) loss across the entire
training dataset. In this paper we focus on the case when
the functions fi are Li –smooth but non-convex. We assume
the problem has a solution x∗ .

We provide the first importance sampling variants of variance-reduced algorithms for empirical
risk minimization with non-convex loss functions.
In particular, we analyze non-convex versions of
SVRG, SAGA and SARAH. Our methods have the
capacity to speed up the training process by an order of magnitude compared to the state of the art
on real datasets. Moreover, we also improve upon
current mini-batch analysis of these methods by
proposing importance sampling for minibatches
in this setting. Ours are the first optimal samplings
for minibatches in the literature on stochastic optimization. Surprisingly, our approach can in some
regimes lead to superlinear speedup with respect
to the minibatch size, which is not usually present
in stochastic optimization. All the above results
follow from a general analysis of the methods
which works with arbitrary sampling, i.e., fully
general randomized strategy for the selection of
subsets of examples to be sampled in each iteration. Finally, we also perform a novel importance
sampling analysis of SARAH in the convex setting.

One of the most popular algorithms for solving (1) is
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Nemirovsky and Yudin,
1983; Nemirovski et al., 2009). In recent years, tremendous
effort was exerted to improve its performance, leading to
various enhancements which use acceleration (Allen-Zhu,
2016), momentum (Loizou and Richtárik, 2017), minibatching (Takáč et al., 2013), distributed implementation (Ma
et al., 2015; 2017), importance sampling (Zhao and Zhang,
2015; Csiba and Richtárik, 2018; Qu et al., 2015; Chambolle et al., 2018), higher-order information (Qu et al., 2016;
Gower et al., 2016), and a number of other techniques.
1.1. Variance-reduced methods

1. Introduction
Empirical risk minimization (ERM) is a key problem in
machine learning as it plays a key role in training supervised learning models, including classification and regression problems, such as support vector machine, logistic
regression and deep learning. A generic ERM problem has
the finite-sum form
n

min f (x) :=

x∈Rd

1X
fi (x),
n i=1

(1)

1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Saudi
Arabia 2 Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Russia
3
University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Samuel Horváth <samuel.horvath@kaust.edu.sa>, Peter Richtárik
<peter.richtarik@kaust.edu.sa>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

A particularly important recent advance has to do with
the design of variance-reduced (VR) stochastic gradient
methods, such as SAG (Roux et al., 2012), SDCA (ShalevShwartz and Zhang, 2013; Richtárik and Takáč, 2014),
SVRG (Johnson and Zhang, 2013), S2GD (Konečný and
Richtárik, 2017), SAGA (Defazio et al., 2014a), MISO
(Mairal, 2015), FINITO (Defazio et al., 2014b) and SARAH
(Nguyen et al., 2017a), which operate by modifying the classical stochastic gradient direction in each step of the training
process in various clever ways so as to progressively reduce
its variance as an estimator of the true gradient. We note that
SAG and SARAH, historically the oldest and one the newest
VR methods in the list, respectively, use a biased estimator
of the gradient. In theory, all these methods enjoy linear
convergence rates on smooth and strongly convex functions,
which is in contrast with slow sublinear rate of SGD. VR
methods are also easier to implement as they do not rely
on a decreasing learning rate schedule. VR methods were
recently extended to work with (non-strongly) convex losses
by Konečný and Richtárik (2017), and more recently also to
non-convex losses by Reddi et al. (2016b;a); Allen-Zhu and
Hazan (2016); Nguyen et al. (2017b) - in all cases leading
to best current rates for (1) in a given function class.

