Bandit Multiclass Linear Classification:
Efficient Algorithms for the Separable Case

Alina Beygelzimer* 1 Dávid Pál* 1 Balázs Szörényi* 1 Devanathan Thiruvenkatachari* 2 Chen-Yu Wei* 3
Chicheng Zhang* 4

Abstract
We study the problem of efficient online multiclass linear classification with bandit feedback,
where all examples belong to one of K classes
and lie in the d-dimensional Euclidean space.
Previous works have left open the challenge of
designing efficient algorithms with finite mistake
bounds when the data is linearly separable by a
margin γ. In this work, we take a first step towards this problem. We consider two notions of
linear separability, strong and weak.
1. Under the strong linear separability condition, we design an efficient algorithm that
achieves a near-optimal mistake bound of
O K/γ 2 .
2. Under the more challenging weak linear
separability condition, we design an efficient algorithm with a √
mistake bound of
2
e
e
min(2O(K log (1/γ)) , 2O( 1/γ log K) ).1 Our
algorithm is based on kernel Perceptron and
is inspired by the work of Klivans & Servedio (2008) on improperly learning intersection of halfspaces.

1. Introduction
We study the problem of O NLINE M ULTICLASS L INEAR
C LASSIFICATION WITH BANDIT F EEDBACK (Kakade
et al., 2008). The problem can be viewed as a repeated
game between a learner and an adversary. At each time
step t, the adversary chooses a labeled example (xt , yt )
The authors are listed in alphabetical order. 1 Yahoo Research,
New York, NY, USA 2 New York University, New York, NY,
USA 3 University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
4
Microsoft Research, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to:
Dávid Pál <davidko.pal@gmail.com>.

and reveals the feature vector xt to the learner. Upon receiving xt , the learner makes a prediction ybt and receives
feedback. In contrast with the standard full-information
setting, where the feedback given is the correct label yt ,
here the feedback is only a binary indicator of whether the
prediction was correct or not. The protocol of the problem
is formally stated below.
Protocol 1 O NLINE M ULTICLASS L INEAR C LASSIFICA TION WITH BANDIT F EEDBACK
Require: Number of classes K, number of rounds T .
Require: Inner product space (V, h·, ·i).
for t = 1, 2, . . . , T do
Adversary chooses example (xt , yt ) ∈ V ×
{1, 2, . . . , K} where xt is revealed to the learner.
Predict class label ybt ∈ {1, 2, . . . , K}.
Observe feedback zt = 1 [b
yt 6= yt ] ∈ {0, 1}.
The performance of the learner
PT is measured
PT by its cumulative number of mistakes t=1 zt =
yt 6= yt ],
t=1 1 [b
where 1 denotes the indicator function.
In this paper, we focus on the special case when the examples chosen by the adversary lie in Rd and are linearly
separable with a margin. We introduce two notions of linear separability, weak and strong, formally stated in Definition 1. The standard notion of multiclass linear separability (Crammer & Singer, 2003) corresponds to the weak
linear separability. For multiclass classification with K
classes, weak linear separability requires that all examples
from the same class lie in an intersection of K − 1 halfspaces and all other examples lie in the complement of the
intersection of the halfspaces. Strong linear separability
means that examples from each class are separated from
the remaining examples by a single hyperplane.

*

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).
1
We use the notation e
O(f (·)) = O(f (·) polylog(f (·))).

In the full-information feedback setting, it is well known
(Crammer & Singer, 2003) that if all examples have norm
at most R and are weakly linearly separable with a margin
γ, then the M ULTICLASS P ERCEPTRON algorithm makes
at most b2(R/γ)2 c mistakes. It is also known that any
(possibly randomized) algorithm must make 12 (R/γ)2
mistakes in the worst case. The M ULTICLASS P ERCEP TRON achieves an information-theoretically optimal mis-

