On the Spectral Bias of Neural Networks
Nasim Rahaman * 1 2 Aristide Baratin * 1 Devansh Arpit 1 Felix Draxler 2 Min Lin 1 Fred A. Hamprecht 2
Yoshua Bengio 1 Aaron Courville 1

Abstract
Neural networks are known to be a class of highly
expressive functions able to fit even random inputoutput mappings with 100% accuracy. In this
work we present properties of neural networks
that complement this aspect of expressivity. By
using tools from Fourier analysis, we highlight a
learning bias of deep networks towards low frequency functions – i.e. functions that vary globally without local fluctuations – which manifests
itself as a frequency-dependent learning speed.
Intuitively, this property is in line with the observation that over-parameterized networks prioritize learning simple patterns that generalize
across data samples. We also investigate the role
of the shape of the data manifold by presenting
empirical and theoretical evidence that, somewhat
counter-intuitively, learning higher frequencies
gets easier with increasing manifold complexity.

1. Introduction
The remarkable success of deep neural networks at generalizing to natural data is at odds with the traditional notions of
model complexity and their empirically demonstrated ability
to fit arbitrary random data to perfect accuracy (Zhang et al.,
2017a; Arpit et al., 2017). This has prompted recent investigations of possible implicit regularization mechanisms
inherent in the learning process which induce a bias towards
low complexity solutions (Neyshabur et al., 2014; Soudry
et al., 2017; Poggio et al., 2018; Neyshabur et al., 2017).
In this work, we take a slightly shifted view on implicit
regularization by suggesting that low-complexity functions
are learned faster during training by gradient descent. We
*
1
Equal contribution
Mila, Quebec, Canada 2 Image
Analysis and Learning Lab, Ruprecht-Karls-Universität
Heidelberg, Germany.
Correspondence to: Nasim Rahaman <nasim.rahaman@live.com>,
Aristide Baratin
<aristide.baratin@umontreal.ca>, Devansh Arpit <devansharpit@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

expose this bias by taking a closer look at neural networks
through the lens of Fourier analysis. While they can approximate arbitrary functions, we find that these networks
prioritize learning the low frequency modes, a phenomenon
we call the spectral bias. This bias manifests itself not just
in the process of learning, but also in the parameterization of
the model itself: in fact, we show that the lower frequency
components of trained networks are more robust to random
parameter perturbations. Finally, we also expose and analyze the rather intricate interplay between the spectral bias
and the geometry of the data manifold by showing that high
frequencies get easier to learn when the data lies on a lowerdimensional manifold of complex shape embedded in the
input space of the model. We focus the discussion on networks with rectified linear unit (ReLU) activations, whose
continuous piece-wise linear structure enables an analytic
treatment.
Contributions1
1. We exploit the continuous piecewise-linear structure
of ReLU networks to evaluate its Fourier spectrum
(Section 2).
2. We find empirical evidence of a spectral bias: i.e.
lower frequencies are learned first. We also show that
lower frequencies are more robust to random perturbations of the network parameters (Section 3).
3. We study the role of the shape of the data manifold: we
show how complex manifold shapes can facilitate the
learning of higher frequencies and develop a theoretical
understanding of this behavior (Section 4).

2. Fourier analysis of ReLU networks
2.1. Preliminaries
Throughout the paper we call ‘ReLU network’ a scalar function f : Rd 7! R defined by a neural network with L hidden
layers of widths d1 , · · · dL and a single output neuron:
⇣
f (x) = T (L+1)
1

T (L) · · ·

⌘
T (1) (x)

Code: https://github.com/nasimrahaman/SpectralBias

(1)

