SAGA with Arbitrary Sampling

Xun Qian 1 Zheng Qu 2 Peter Richárik 1 3

Abstract
We study the problem of minimizing the average
of a very large number of smooth functions, which
is of key importance in training supervised learning models. One of the most celebrated methods
in this context is the SAGA algorithm of Defazio
et al. (2014). Despite years of research on the
topic, a general-purpose version of SAGA—one
that would include arbitrary importance sampling
and minibatching schemes—does not exist. We
remedy this situation and propose a general and
flexible variant of SAGA following the arbitrary
sampling paradigm. We perform an iteration complexity analysis of the method, largely possible
due to the construction of new stochastic Lyapunov functions. We establish linear convergence
rates in the smooth and strongly convex regime,
and under a quadratic functional growth condition
(i.e., in a regime not assuming strong convexity).
Our rates match those of the primal-dual method
Quartz (Qu et al., 2015) for which an arbitrary
sampling analysis is available, which makes a
significant step towards closing the gap in our
understanding of complexity of primal and dual
methods for finite sum problems.

1. Introduction
We consider a convex composite optimization problem
 n

P
minx∈Rd P (x) :=
λi fi (x) + ψ(x),
(1)
i=1

P

where f := i λi fi is a conic combination (with coefficients λ1 , . . . , λn > 0) of a very large number of smooth
convex functions fi : Rd → R, and ψ : Rd → R ∪ {+∞}
Equal contribution 1 King Abdullah University of Science and
Technology, Thuwal, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 2 University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong 3 Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Moscow Region, Russia. Correspondence
to: Peter Richtárik <peter.richtarik@kaust.edu.sa>.

is a proper closed convex function. We do not assume ψ to
be smooth. In particular, ψ can be the indicator function of
a nonempty closed convex set, turning problem (1) into a
constrained minimization of function f . We are interested
in the regime where n  d, although all our theoretical
results hold without this assumption.
In a typical setup in the literature, λi = 1/n for all
i ∈ [n] := {1, 2, . . . , n}, fi (x) corresponds to the loss
of a supervised machine learning model x on example i
from a training dataset of size n, and f represents the average loss (i.e., empirical risk). Problems of the form (1) are
often called “finite-sum” or regularized empirical risk minimization (ERM) problems, and are of immense importance
in supervised learning, essentially forming the dominant
training paradigm (Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David, 2014).
1.1. Variance-reduced methods
One of the most successful methods for solving ERM
problems is stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Robbins
& Monro, 1951; Nemirovski et al., 2009) and its many variants, including those with minibatches (Takáč et al., 2013),
importance sampling (Needell et al., 2015; Zhao & Zhang,
2015) and momentum (Loizou & Richtárik, 2017a;b).
One of the most interesting developments in recent years
concerns variance-reduced variants of SGD. The first
method in this category is the celebrated1 stochastic average
gradient (SAG) method of Schmidt et al. (2017). Many additional variance-reduced methods were proposed since, including SDCA (Richtárik & Takáč, 2014; Shalev-Shwartz &
Zhang, 2013; Shalev-Shwartz, 2016), SAGA (Defazio et al.,
2014), SVRG (Johnson & Zhang, 2013; Xiao & Zhang,
2014b), S2GD (Konečný & Richtárik, 2017; Konečný et al.,
2016), MISO (Mairal, 2015), JacSketch (Gower et al., 2018)
and SAGD (Bibi et al., 2018).
1.2. SAGA: the known and the unknown

*

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Since the SAG gradient estimator is not unbiased, SAG is
notoriously hard to analyze. Soon after SAG was proposed,
the SAGA method (Defazio et al., 2014) was developed,
obtained by replacing the biased SAG estimator by a simi1

Schmidt et al. (2017) received the 2018 Lagrange Prize in
continuous optimization for their work on SAG.

