Learning to Prove Theorems via Interacting with Proof Assistants

Kaiyu Yang 1 Jia Deng 1

Abstract
Humans prove theorems by relying on substantial high-level reasoning and problem-specific insights. Proof assistants offer a formalism that
resembles human mathematical reasoning, representing theorems in higher-order logic and proofs
as high-level tactics. However, human experts
have to construct proofs manually by entering
tactics into the proof assistant. In this paper,
we study the problem of using machine learning to automate the interaction with proof assistants. We construct CoqGym, a large-scale
dataset and learning environment containing 71K
human-written proofs from 123 projects developed with the Coq proof assistant. We develop
ASTactic, a deep learning-based model that generates tactics as programs in the form of abstract
syntax trees (ASTs). Experiments show that ASTactic trained on CoqGym can generate effective
tactics and can be used to prove new theorems
not previously provable by automated methods.
Code is available at https://github.com/
princeton-vl/CoqGym.

1. Introduction
Given the statement of a theorem, simply push a button, and
the proof comes out. If this fantasy of automated theorem
proving (ATP) were true, it would impact formal mathematics (McCune, 1997), software verification (Darvas et al.,
2005), and hardware design (Kern & Greenstreet, 1999). In
reality, however, state-of-the-art theorem provers are still far
behind human experts on efficiently constructing proofs in
large-scale formal systems.
Consider this theorem: 0+1+2+· · ·+n = n(n+1)
. As hu2
mans, we decide to prove by induction on n. After solving
the trivial case (n = 0), we complete the proof by applying
1

Department of Computer Science, Princeton University. Correspondence to: Kaiyu Yang <kaiyuy@cs.princeton.edu>, Jia
Deng <jiadeng@cs.princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

the induction hypothesis and simplifying the resulting formula. Simple as it is, the proof requires understanding the
concepts (natural numbers, addition), mastering the proof
techniques (induction), as well as problem-specific insights
to drive the decisions we made.
What a typical theorem prover does, however, is to prove by
resolution refutation: It converts the premises and the negation of the theorem into first-order clauses in conjunctive
normal form (CNF). It then keeps generating new clauses by
applying the resolution rule until an empty clause emerges,
yielding a proof consisting of a long sequence of CNFs and
resolutions. While this provides a universal procedure, the
CNF representation of simple formulas can be long, complicated and inscrutable, making it difficult to benefit from the
higher-level abstraction and manipulation that is common
to human mathematical reasoning.
To work around the difficulties of ATP in practical applications, interactive theorem proving (ITP) (Harrison et al.,
2014) incorporates humans in the loop. In ITP, human users
define mathematical objects formally and prove theorems
semi-automatically by entering a sequence of commands
called tactics. The tactics capture high-level proof techniques such as induction, leaving low-level details to the
software referred to as proof assistants. A successful sequence of tactics is essentially a proof written in the language of the proof assistant. It can also be viewed as a
program that is executed by the proof assistant.
ITP relies on humans in the loop, which is labor-intensive
and hinders its wider adoption. However, at the same time,
it is a blessing in disguise, in that it opens up a route to full
automation—human experts have written a large amount
of ITP code, which provides an opportunity to develop
machine learning systems to imitate humans for interacting
with the proof assistant. Indeed, some recent efforts have
attempted to learn to generate tactics from human-written
proofs and have obtained promising results (Gransden et al.,
2015; Gauthier et al., 2018; Bansal et al., 2019).
However, existing approaches to the “auto-ITP” problem
suffer from two limitations. One is the lack of a large-scale
dataset. Prior work was trained and evaluated on no more
than a few thousands of theorems (Gransden et al., 2015;
Gauthier et al., 2018; Huang et al., 2019), likely insufficient
for data-hungry approaches such as deep learning. The other

