Fast and Flexible Inference of Joint Distributions from their Marginals

Charlie Frogner 1 Tomaso Poggio 2

Abstract
Across the social sciences and elsewhere, practitioners frequently have to reason about relationships between random variables, despite lacking
joint observations of the variables. This is sometimes called an “ecological” inference; given samples from the marginal distributions of the variables, one attempts to infer their joint distribution.
The problem is inherently ill-posed, yet only a
few models have been proposed for bringing prior
information into the problem, often relying on
restrictive or unrealistic assumptions and lacking
a unified approach. In this paper, we treat the inference problem generally and propose a unified
class of models that encompasses some of those
previously proposed while including many new
ones. Previous work has relied on either relaxation or approximate inference via MCMC, with
the latter known to mix prohibitively slowly for
this type of problem. Here we instead give a single exact inference algorithm that works for the
entire model class via an efficient fixed point iteration called Dykstra’s method. We investigate
empirically both the computational cost of our
algorithm and the accuracy of the new models on
real datasets, showing favorable performance in
both cases and illustrating the impact of increased
flexibility in modeling enabled by this work.

1. Introduction
Reasoning about relationships between random variables is
fundamental in the sciences and in machine learning and
typically relies on joint observations of the variables simultaneously; supervised learning, for example, relates features
to labels using samples from their joint distribution. There
are settings, however, in which we do not have access to
1
CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 2 Center for Brains, Minds, and Machines, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Correspondence to: Charlie Frogner <frogner@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

joint observations and instead must rely on observations of
the variables taken separately. Political scientists, for example, often attempt to estimate the impact of demographics
on voting behavior, despite census data and vote counts being collected separately. Unsurprisingly, this inference is
ill-posed: many possible relationships exist that can account
for the observed data. Yet, by bringing prior information
into the problem, it is still possible to make meaningful inferences. This is sometimes called cross-level or ecological
inference.
This type of inference appears in a variety of fields, sometimes with substantial social impact. Federal voting rights
cases in the U.S., which prevent the drawing of voting districts that dilute a minority’s vote, depend critically on establishing a relationship between race and political preference, by solving exactly this inference problem (King, 1997;
Greiner, 2006). Such inference is also carried out by epidemiologists (Morgenstern, 1995), biostatisticians (Jackson
et al., 2006; Wakefield, 2008), geographers (Johnston &
Pattie, 2006), ecologists (Martin et al., 2005), economists
(Honaker, 2008), and climate scientists (Piguet, 2010).
Despite its prevalence, only a handful of methods have been
proposed for solving the inference problem. This may be
due to its inherent computational challenges: It is, in fact, a
strict generalization of optimal transport (Villani, 2003),
which arises when one assumes perfectly-observed marginal
distributions and a particular linear cost criterion. Beyond
optimal transport, the few proposed methods rely either
on relaxing the problem (so that the result need not be a
probability distribution, for example) or on approximate
inference via MCMC.
In this paper, we expand the set of available methods substantially, by defining general-purpose inference algorithms
that work across a broad class of probability models. This
model class, in fact, includes some of the previous work as
special cases. Importantly, we show that maximum a posteriori inference within this class requires neither relaxation
nor MCMC, but rather can be done using a single exact
algorithm called Dykstra’s method.
The inference methods we propose are both computationally efficient and applicable to real data, with new models
enabled by this work sometimes achieving more accurate
inferences than those previously available (Section 6).

