Lexicographic and Depth-Sensitive Margins in
Homogeneous and Non-Homogeneous Deep Models

Mor Shpigel Nacson 1 Suriya Gunasekar 2 Jason D. Lee 3 Nathan Srebro 2 Daniel Soudry 1

Abstract
With an eye toward understanding complexity
control in deep learning, we study how infinitesimal regularization or gradient descent optimization lead to margin maximizing solutions in both
homogeneous and non homogeneous models, extending previous work that focused on infinitesimal regularization only in homogeneous models.
To this end we study the limit of loss minimization with a diverging norm constraint (the “constrained path”), relate it to the limit of a “margin path” and characterize the resulting solution.
For non-homogeneous ensemble models, which
output is a sum of homogeneous sub-models, we
show that this solution discards the shallowest
sub-models if they are unnecessary. For homogeneous models, we show convergence to a “lexicographic max-margin solution”, and provide conditions under which max-margin solutions are
also attained as the limit of unconstrained gradient descent.

1. Introduction
Inductive bias introduced through the learning process
plays a crucial role in training deep neural networks and
in the generalization properties of the learned models
(Neyshabur et al., 2015b;a; Zhang et al., 2017; Keskar
et al., 2017; Neyshabur et al., 2017; Wilson et al., 2017;
Hoffer et al., 2017). Deep neural networks used in practice
are typically highly overparameterized, i.e., have far more
trainable parameters than training examples. Thus, using
these models, it is usually possible to fit the data perfectly
and obtain zero training error (Zhang et al., 2017). However, simply minimizing the training loss does not guarantee good generalization to unseen data – many global min1

ima of the training loss indeed have very high test error (Wu
et al., 2017). The inductive bias introduced in our learning
process affects which specific global minimizer is chosen
as the predictor. Therefore, it is essential to understand the
nature of this inductive bias to understand why overparameterized models, and particularly deep neural networks, exhibit good generalization abilities.
A common way to introduce an additional inductive bias
in overparameterized models is via small amounts of regularization, or loose constraints . For example, Rosset et al.
(2004b;a); Wei et al. (2018) show that, in overparameterized classification models, a vanishing amount of regularization, or a diverging norm constraint can lead to maxmargin solutions, which in turn enjoy strong generalization
guarantees.
A second and more subtle source of inductive bias is via
the optimization algorithm used to minimize the underdetermined training objective (Gunasekar et al., 2017; Soudry
et al., 2018b). Common algorithms used in neural network
training, such as stochastic gradient descent, iteratively refine the model parameters by making incremental local updates. For different algorithms, the local updates are specified by different geometries in the space of parameters. For
example, gradient descent uses an Euclidean `2 geometry,
while coordinate descent updates are specified in the `1 geometry. The minimizers to which such local search based
optimization algorithms converge to are indeed very special and are related to the geometry of the optimization algorithm (Gunasekar et al., 2018b) as well as the choice of
model parameterization (Gunasekar et al., 2018a).
In this work we similarly investigate the connection between margin maximization and the limits of
• The “optimization path” of unconstrained, unregularized gradient descent.

Technion, Israel 2 TTI Chicago, USA 3 USC Los Angeles, USA. Correspondence to: Mor Shpigel Nacson <morshpigel@google.com>.

• The “constrained path”, where we optimize with a diverging (increasingly loose) constraint on the norm of
the parameters.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

• The closely related “regularization path”, of solutions
with decreasing penalties on the norm.

