Equivariant Transformer Networks

Kai Sheng Tai 1 Peter Bailis 1 Gregory Valiant 1

Abstract
How can prior knowledge on the transformation invariances of a domain be incorporated
into the architecture of a neural network? We
propose Equivariant Transformers (ETs), a family of differentiable image-to-image mappings
that improve the robustness of models towards
pre-defined continuous transformation groups.
Through the use of specially-derived canonical coordinate systems, ETs incorporate functions that
are equivariant by construction with respect to
these transformations. We show empirically that
ETs can be flexibly composed to improve model
robustness towards more complicated transformation groups in several parameters. On a real-world
image classification task, ETs improve the sample
efficiency of ResNet classifiers, achieving relative improvements in error rate of up to 15% in
the limited data regime while increasing model
parameter count by less than 1%.

1. Introduction
In computer vision, we are often equipped with prior knowledge on the transformation invariances of a domain. Consider, for example, the problem of classifying street signs
in real-world images. In this domain, we know that the
appearance of a sign in an image is subject to various deformations: the sign may be rotated, its scale will depend on its
distance, and it may appear distorted due to perspective in
3D space. Regardless, the identity of the street sign should
remain invariant to these transformations.
With the exception of translation invariance, convolutional
neural network (CNN) architectures typically do not take
advantage of such prior knowledge on the transformation
invariances of the domain. Instead, current standard practice
heuristically incorporates these priors during training via
data augmentation (e.g., by applying a random rotation or
1
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
Kai Sheng Tai <kst@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

scaling to each training image). While data augmentation
typically helps reduce the test error of CNN-based models,
there is no guarantee that transformation invariance will be
enforced for data not seen during training.
In contrast to training time approaches like data augmentation, recent work on group equivariant CNNs (Cohen &
Welling, 2016; Dieleman et al., 2016; Marcos et al., 2017;
Worrall et al., 2017; Henriques & Vedaldi, 2017; Cohen
et al., 2018) has explored new CNN architectures that are
guaranteed to respond predictably to particular transformations of the input. For example, the CNN model family
may be constrained such that a rotation of the input results
in a corresponding rotation of its subsequent representation, a property known as equivariance. However, these
techniques—most commonly designed for rotations and
translations of the input (e.g., Dieleman et al. (2016); Marcos et al. (2017); Worrall et al. (2017))—fail to generalize
to deeper compositions of continuous transformations. This
limits the applicability of these techniques in more complicated real-world scenarios involving continuous transformations in several dimensions, such as the above example of
street sign classification.
To address these shortcomings of group equivariant CNNs,
we propose Equivariant Transformer (ET) layers, a flexible
class of functions that improves robustness towards arbitrary
pre-defined groups of continuous transformations. An ET
layer for a transformation group G is an image-to-image
mapping that satisfies the following local invariance property: for any input image φ and transformation T ∈ G, the
images φ and T φ are both mapped to the same output image. ET layers are differentiable with respect to both their
parameters and input, and thus can be easily incorporated
into existing CNN architectures. Additionally, ET layers
can be flexibly combined to achieve improved invariance
towards more complicated compositions of transformations
(e.g., simultaneous rotation, scale, shear, and perspective
transformations).
Importantly, the invariance property of ETs holds by construction, without any dependence on additional heuristics
during training. We achieve this by using the method of
canonical coordinates for Lie groups (Rubinstein et al.,
1991). The key property of canonical coordinates that we
utilize is their ability to reduce arbitrary continuous transfor-

