Riemannian adaptive stochastic gradient algorithms on matrix manifolds

Hiroyuki Kasai 1 Pratik Jawanpuria 2 Bamdev Mishra 2

Abstract
Adaptive stochastic gradient algorithms in the Euclidean space have attracted much attention lately.
Such explorations on Riemannian manifolds, on
the other hand, are relatively new, limited, and
challenging. This is because of the intrinsic nonlinear structure of the underlying manifold and the
absence of a canonical coordinate system. In machine learning applications, however, most manifolds of interest are represented as matrices with
notions of row and column subspaces. In addition,
the implicit manifold-related constraints may also
lie on such subspaces. For example, the Grassmann manifold is the set of column subspaces. To
this end, such a rich structure should not be lost
by transforming matrices to just a stack of vectors while developing optimization algorithms on
manifolds. We propose novel stochastic gradient
algorithms for problems on Riemannian matrix
manifolds by adapting the row and column subspaces of gradients. Our algorithms are provably
convergent and they achieve
the convergence rate
√
of order O(log(T )/ T ), where T is the number of iterations. Our experiments illustrate the
efficacy of the proposed algorithms on several
applications.

1. Introduction
Large-scale machine learning applications are predominantly trained using stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Bottou et al., 2018) based algorithms today. A (sub)class of such
algorithms that has become increasingly common lately
adapts the learning rate of each coordinate of the gradient
vector based on past iterates (McMahan & Streeter, 2010;
Duchi et al., 2011). A key motivation for this is to have different learning rates for different coordinates (Zeiler, 2012;
Pennington et al., 2014), a feature which vanilla SGD lacks.
1

Graduate School of Informatics and Engineering, The University of Electro-Communications, Tokyo, Japan. 2 Microsoft, India.
Correspondence to: Hiroyuki Kasai <kasai@is.uec.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

ADAM (Kingma & Ba, 2015), arguably the most popular
adaptive gradient method, additionally employs a momentum term to modify the search direction as well. Adaptive
gradient methods have enjoyed varying degrees of success
in various applications (Pennington et al., 2014; Wilson
et al., 2017; Zaheer et al., 2018; Shah et al., 2018).
In this paper, we focus on adaptive stochastic gradient algorithms on Riemannian manifolds. Riemannian geometry is a
generalization of the Euclidean geometry (Lee, 2003). It includes several non-Euclidean spaces such as set of symmetric positive-definite matrices, and set of orthogonal matrices,
to name a few. Numerous machine learning problems can be
cast as an optimization problem on Riemannian manifolds.
Examples include principal component analysis (PCA), matrix completion (Vandereycken, 2013; Mishra & Sepulchre,
2014; Boumal & Absil, 2015; Jawanpuria & Mishra, 2018),
learning taxonomy or latent hierarchies (Nickel & Kiela,
2017; 2018; Ganea et al., 2018), deep metric learning (Harandi et al., 2017a), multi-task learning (Mishra et al., 2019),
applications in computer vision (Kasai & Mishra, 2016;
Harandi et al., 2017b; Nimishakavi et al., 2018), bilingual
lexicon induction (Jawanpuria et al., 2019), among others.
Several Euclidean algorithms, e.g., steepest descent, conjugate gradients, and trust-regions, have been generalized to
Riemannian manifolds (Absil et al., 2008).
Bonnabel (2013) first proposed the Riemannian SGD
(RSGD) algorithm, which is a generalization of the (Euclidean) SGD algorithm to Riemannian manifolds. However, such a generalization of Euclidean adaptive gradient
algorithm is relatively unexplored. A key difficulty in this
regard is the absence of a canonical coordinate system on
manifolds and the inherent non-linear geometry of the manifold. Recent works in this direction compute Euclideanstyle adaptive weights in the Riemannian setting, ignoring
the geometry of the underlying manifold. Roy et al. (2018)
propose a RMSProp-style algorithm for manifolds, viewing
the gradient as a vector and computing a corresponding adaptive weight vector. On the other hand, Cho & Lee (2017);
Bécigneul & Ganea (2019) adapt the step size by computing
a scalar weight instead of directly adapting the gradient in
a momentum-based Riemannian AMSGrad/ADAM-style
algorithm.
We develop a novel approach of adapting the Riemannian

