Variational Inference of Sparse Network from Count Data

Julien Chiquet 1 Mahendra Mariadassou 2 Stéphane Robin 1

Abstract
The problem of network reconstruction from continuous data has been extensively studied and
most state of the art methods rely on variants
of Gaussian Graphical Models (GGM). GGM
are unfortunately badly suited to sparse count
data spanning several orders of magnitude. Most
inference methods for count data (SparCC, REBACCA, SPIEC-EASI, gCoda, etc) first transform counts to pseudo-Gaussian observations before using GGM. We rely instead on a PoissonLogNormal (PLN) model where counts follow
Poisson distributions with parameters sampled
from a latent multivariate Gaussian variable, and
infer the network in the latent space using a variational inference procedure. This model allows us
to (i) control for confounding covariates and differences in sampling efforts and (ii) integrate data
sets from different origins. It is also competitive
in terms of speed and accuracy with state of the
art methods.

1. Introduction
Networks are the de facto mathematical object used to model
and represent pairwise interactions between entities of interest. Examples include air traffic between airports, social
interactions between participants of a conference, trophic
relationships between species, gene regulations, ecological
interactions between microbial species, etc. However, most
networks are not observed directly but must be reconstructed
first from indirect node-level observations using some kind
of statistical procedure. In this perspective, graphical models are popular among statisticians to explore relationships
between nodes in graphs since undirected graphical models
(Lauritzen, 1996), also called Markov random fields (Harris,
2016), are a convenient class of models with sound the1
MIA 518, AgroParitech/INRA, Université Paris-Saclay,
Paris, France 2 MaIAGE, INRA, Université Paris-Saclay, Jouyen-Josas, France.
Correspondence to: Julien Chiquet
<julien.chiquet@agroparistech.fr>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

oretical groundings for capturing conditional dependence
relationships between nodes: i and j are linked in G (noted
i ∼ j) if and only if features i and j are conditionally dependent given all the others. Powerful inference procedures
exist for Gaussian Graphical Models (GGM) for continuous data and Ising or voter models for binary data and
the research field is still active. An informative and nonexhaustive set of seminal papers in this field may include
Yuan & Lin (2007); Banerjee et al. (2008); Ravikumar et al.
(2010); Meinshausen & Bühlmann (2006). GGM have been
successfully used to understand complex genetic regulations
(Moignard et al., 2015; Fiers et al., 2018), to identify direct contacts between protein subunits (Drew et al., 2017)
or to identify functional pathways associated to a disease
(Yu et al., 2015). Unfortunately, we lack similar powerful
procedures for count data, which are the focus of this work.
Count data arise naturally in fields such as ecology (species
count at a given site), transcriptomics (number of transcripts
in a tissue) and quite broadly, all subfields of biology based
on molecular markers and high-througput sequencing. They
also arise in political sciences (voting outcomes), tourism
management (number of visitors to sightseeing spots), etc.
By analogy to the Gaussian graphical setting, many efforts
have been devoted throughout the years to develop multivariate Poisson distribution in order to model dependencies
between count variables (see Inouye et al., 2017, for a review). Unfortunately, there is no satisfying Poisson counterpart to the multivariate Gaussian. Besag (1974) proved
that so-called Poisson Graphical Models (PGM) are limited
to negative dependencies to ensure proper joint distribution. Yang et al. (2012) proposed several variants of PGM
but all of them fail to have both marginal and conditional
Poisson distributions. Similarly, Allen & Liu (2012)’s local
PGM and Gallopin et al. (2013)’s log-normal models both
satisfy the local Markov property but have no proper joint
distribution. Both methods estimate the neighborhood of
a node by performing a generalized linear regression à la
Meinshausen & Bühlmann (2006). Last but not least, the
observed count data often display a variance larger than
expected under the Poisson assumption, so that a model that
induces over-dispersion is highly desirable.
A different and more recent line of work – used for microbial
ecology in SPIEC-EASI (Kurtz et al., 2015), gCoda (Fang
et al., 2017) or BAnoCC (Schwager et al., 2017) – addresses

