Concentration Inequalities for Conditional Value at Risk

Philip S. Thomas 1 Erik Learned-Miller 1

Abstract
In this paper we derive new concentration inequalities for the conditional value at risk (CVaR) of
a random variable, and compare them to the previous state of the art (Brown, 2007). We show
analytically that our lower bound is strictly tighter
than Brown’s, and empirically that this difference
is significant. While our upper bound may be
looser than Brown’s in some cases, we show empirically that in most cases our bound is significantly tighter. After discussing when each upper
bound is superior, we conclude with empirical
results which suggest that both of our bounds will
often be significantly tighter than Brown’s.

1. Introduction
Many standard machine learning algorithms optimize the
expected value (mean) of a random variable that quantifies
performance or loss, for example, the mean squared error
(for regression) or the expected discounted return (for reinforcement learning). However, for some applications the
mean performance of an algorithm does not capture the desired objective. For example, for some medical applications
the mean outcome should not be optimized, since doing so
could increase the number of disastrous outcomes if enough
mediocre outcomes are slightly improved so that the average outcome is still improved. To address this problem, risk
sensitive methods use alternatives to mean performance that
emphasize optimizing for the worst outcomes.
Two popular statistics that are used in risk sensitive machine learning, in place of the mean, are the value at risk
(VaR) and conditional value at risk (CVaR). CVaR is also
called the expected shortfall (ES), average value at risk
(AVaR), and expected tail loss (ETL). Although CVaR has
become popular within the operations research and machine
learning communities (Kashima, 2007; Chen et al., 2009;
*

Equal contribution 1 College of Information and Computer
Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst. Correspondence
to: Philip S. Thomas <pthomas@cs.umass.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Prashanth & Ghavamzadeh, 2013; Chow & Ghavamzadeh,
2014; Tamar et al., 2015; Pinto et al., 2017; Morimura et al.,
2010), it was originally introduced in economics research
as a tool for quantifying the risk associated with a portfolio (Rockafellar & Uryasev, 2000). For an introduction to
CVaR and VaR see, for example, the works of Pflug (2000)
and Acerbi & Tasche (2002).
In machine learning research and applications, it is often
not enough to estimate the performance of a method. Such
estimates usually include some amount of error, and without
quantification of how much error there is in an estimate, it is
not clear how much the estimate can be trusted. It is therefore important that we not only estimate the performance
of an algorithm, but we provide a confidence interval along
with our estimate. That is, if the goal is to optimize for the
expected value of a random variable and we estimate this
expected value from random samples, we should provide a
confidence interval that quantifies how much our estimate
can be trusted. The same applies when the goal is to optimize for CVaR: when estimating the CVaR of a random
variable from samples, we should also provide a confidence
interval.
Confidence intervals on estimates are often given by concentration inequalities: inequalities that describe how far
sample statistics (e.g., estimates of performance) deviate
from the statistics that they approximate (e.g., true performance). There are many concentration inequalities for the
mean of a random variable (Massart, 2007; Student, 1908),
which allow for tight confidence intervals around estimates
of performance that are based on the mean. However, there
are relatively few concentration inequalities for CVaR—to
the best of our knowledge, the current state of the art for
concentration inequalities for CVaR were derived by Brown
(2007).
In this paper we improve upon the concentration inequalities derived by Brown (2007). Specifically, we derive
two new concentration inequalities for the CVaR of a random variable—one provides a high-probability upper bound
on CVaR, and the other provides a high-probability lower
bound on CVaR. Not only are our concentration inequalities
applicable in common settings where Brown’s are not (e.g.,
when the random variable is only bounded above or below,
but not both, or when the random variable is discrete), but

