Learning and Data Selection in Big Datasets

Hossein S. Ghadikolaei 1 Hadi Ghauch 1 2 Carlo Fischione 1 Mikael Skoglund 1

Abstract
Finding a dataset of minimal cardinality to characterize the optimal parameters of a model is of
paramount importance in machine learning and
distributed optimization over a network. This
paper investigates the compressibility of large
datasets. More specifically, we propose a framework that jointly learns the input-output mapping
as well as the most representative samples of the
dataset (sufficient dataset). Our analytical results
show that the cardinality of the sufficient dataset
increases sub-linearly with respect to the original dataset size. Numerical evaluations of real
datasets reveal a large compressibility, up to 95%,
without a noticeable drop in the learnability performance, measured by the generalization error.

1. Introduction
During the last decade, new artificial intelligence methods have offered outstanding prediction performance on
complex tasks including face and speech recognition (Zhao
et al., 2003; Schalkwyk et al., 2010; Hinton et al.,
2012), autonomous driving (Michels et al., 2005), and
medicine (Kourou et al., 2015). To achieve such amazing results, state-of-the-art machine learning methods often need
to be trained on increasingly large datasets. For example,
(MNIST) is a typical dataset for natural image processing
of handwritten digits with more than 70,000 samples, and
(MovieLens) 20M is a typical dataset for recommendation
systems that includes more than 20,000,000 ratings. As we
show throughout this paper, most of the samples in these
datasets are redundant, carrying almost no additional information for the learning task. A fundamental open question
in learning theory is how to characterize and algorithmically
identify a small set of critical samples, hereafter called a
small representative dataset, that best describes an unknown
1
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, KTH
Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden 2 COMELEC
Department, Telecom ParisTech, Paris, France. Correspondence
to: Hossein S. Ghadikolaei <hshokri@kth.se>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

model. Studying its behavior around those critical samples
helps us to better understand the unknown model as well as
the inefficiencies of the sample acquisition process in the
original dataset. For instance, in a multi-agent system, it
may be enough to share these small representative datasets
among the agents instead of the original large ones, leading to a significant reduction in power consumption and
required communication bandwidth (Jiang et al., 2018).
Experiment design (Sacks et al., 1989) or active learning (Settles, 2012) provides algorithmic approaches to obtain a minimal set of samples to be labeled by an “oracle”
(e.g., a human annotator). Active learning is well-motivated
in many modern machine learning applications where obtaining a new labeled training sample is expensive. The main
components of active learning are a parameterized model, a
measure of the model’s uncertainty, and an acquisition function that decides based on the model’s uncertainty the next
sample to be labeled. This approach has several challenges
including lack of scalability to high-dimensional data (Settles, 2012) (which has been partially addressed in some
recent publications (Gal et al., 2017)), lack of theoretical
guarantees, and lack of formal uncertainty measure. More
importantly, the acquisition function is usually greedy in
the sense that it sequentially finds the new samples to be labeled one-by-one. Consequently, the resulting sub-sampled
dataset may not necessarily be a small representative dataset
due to the greedy nature of active learning.
Core-set selection (Tsang et al., 2005) takes a different approach than active learning. Instead of reducing the total
labeling cost (like active learning), it focuses on finding a
small representative set of samples with cardinality K in a
big dataset of labeled samples with cardinality N ( K)?
The existing results, however, are fairly limited to particular
learning algorithms, like support-vector machines. Koh &
Liang (2017) proposed a new approach to quantify the importance/influence of every sample of the training dataset in
a generic learning task. This approach, however, computes
the influence of the training samples one-by-one in isolation,
failing to capture the joint effects of the samples.
In this paper, we investigate the core-set selection problem
and use optimization theory to establish a scalable algorithm
with provable theoretical guarantees to jointly find K most
representative samples. We also show fundamental relations

