PROVEN: Verifying Robustness of Neural Networks with a Probabilistic
Approach

Tsui-Wei Weng 1 Pin-Yu Chen * 2 Lam M. Nguyen * 2 Mark S. Squillante * 2 Akhilan Boopathy 1
Ivan Oseledets 3 Luca Daniel 1

Abstract
We propose a novel framework PROVEN to
PRObabilistically VErify Neural network’s robustness with statistical guarantees. PROVEN
provides probability certificates of neural network robustness when the input perturbation
follow distributional characterization. Notably,
PROVEN is derived from current state-of-theart worst-case neural network robustness verification frameworks, and therefore it can provide
probability certificates with little computational
overhead on top of existing methods such as FastLin, CROWN and CNN-Cert. Experiments on
small and large MNIST and CIFAR neural network models demonstrate our probabilistic approach can tighten up robustness certificate to
around 1.8× and 3.5× with at least a 99.99%
confidence compared with the worst-case robustness certificate by CROWN and CNN-Cert.

1. Introduction
Although deep neural networks have achieved unprecedented performance in many machine learning tasks, their
lack of robustness against adversarial examples (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Biggio & Roli, 2017) has raised serious
concerns by the research communities, as many safetycritical tasks cannot afford the potential risks incurred by
adversarial attempts. Adversarial examples for different applications have been shown to be easily crafted, including
image classification (Szegedy et al., 2013) speech recognition (Cisse et al., 2017), malware detection (Wang et al.,
2017) and sparse regression (Chen et al., 2018).
While there is a relentless arm race in crafting adversarial examples with stronger attacking performance and in
*

Alphabetical order. 1 MIT EECS. 2 IBM Research Yorktown Heights. 3 Skoltech. Correspondence to: Tsui-Wei Weng
<twweng@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

developing effective countermeasures, assessing and verifying robustness properties of neural networks provides a
comprehensive and attack-independent certificate. Given
a well-trained neural network model, we are interested in
measuring its robustness on an arbitrary natural example
x0 by examining if the neighborhood of x0 has the same
prediction results; this serves as a robustness proxy for evaluating the ease with which one can turn x0 into adversarial examples via adversarial manipulations. Conventionally, the concept of neighborhood is characterized by an
ℓp ball centered at x0 with radius ϵ for any p ≥ 1, where
larger ϵ indicates greater robustness. Ideally, we would like
to find the smallest adversarial distortion imposed on x0
that will change the model prediction, which is known as
the minimum adversarial distortion. Unfortunately, computing minimum adversarial distortion on neural networks
with ReLU activations is shown to be an NP-complete problem (Katz et al., 2017; Sinha et al., 2018), and hence formal
verification methods such as Reluplex (Katz et al., 2017)
and Planet (Ehlers, 2017) are computationally demanding
and cannot scale to large realistic networks.
As detailed in Section 2, current robustness verification literature mainly focuses on efficient methods for finding a
tight lower bound on minimum distortion as a certified robustness metric. Here the term certified means that numerical values generated by these approaches are indeed deterministic lower bounds of minimum adversarial distortion.
However, their scope is still limited to the worst-case setting (i.e., no exceptions are allowed), and hence there lacks
proper robustness indication once the perturbation exceeds
the certified range. In particular, in cases when successful adversarial perturbations are rare events (but not totally
unlikely) or when some distributional characterization of
input perturbations are known a priori, a probabilistic certificate on the confidence of certified robustness is more
viable and comprehensive. In this paper, we are interested
in addressing the following questions:
(a) How to provide a confidence level on the robustness
certificate when the input data point is perturbed by
random noises?
(b) How does such probabilistic certificate compare with
the certificate from worst-case analysis?

