Correlated Variational Auto-Encoders
Da Tang 1 Dawen Liang 2 Tony Jebara 1 2 Nicholas Ruozzi 3

Abstract
Variational Auto-Encoders (VAEs) are capable of
learning latent representations for high dimensional data. However, due to the i.i.d. assumption, VAEs only optimize the singleton variational
distributions and fail to account for the correlations between data points, which might be crucial
for learning latent representations from datasets
where a priori we know correlations exist. We
propose Correlated Variational Auto-Encoders
(CVAEs) that can take the correlation structure
into consideration when learning latent representations with VAEs. CVAEs apply a prior based on the
correlation structure. To address the intractability
introduced by the correlated prior, we develop an
approximation by the average of a set of tractable
lower bounds over all maximal acyclic subgraphs
of the undirected correlation graph. Experimental
results on matching and link prediction on public
benchmark rating datasets and spectral clustering
on a synthetic dataset show the effectiveness of
the proposed method over baseline algorithms.

1. Introduction
Variational Auto-Encoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling,
2014; Rezende et al., 2014) are a family of powerful deep
generative models that learns stochastic latent embeddings
for input data. By applying variational inference on deep
generative models, VAEs are able to successfully identify
the latent structures of the data and learn latent distributions
that can potentially extract more compact information that
is not easily or directly obtained from the original data.
VAE s assume each data point is i.i.d.

generated, which
means we do not consider any correlations between the data
points. This is a reasonable assumption under many settings.

However, sometimes we know a priori that data points are
correlated, e.g., in graph-structured datasets (Bruna et al.,
2015; Shi et al., 2014; Kipf & Welling, 2016; Hamilton
et al., 2017) . In these cases, it is more reasonable to assume
the latent representation for each data point also respects
the correlation graph structure.
In this paper, we extend the standard VAEs by encouraging
the latent representations to take the correlation structure
into account, which we term CVAEs. In CVAEs, rather than
a commonly used i.i.d. standard Gaussian prior, we apply a
correlated prior on the latent variables following the structure known a priori. We develop two variations, CVAEind
and CVAEcorr : In CVAEind , we still use a fully-factorized
singleton variational density via amortized inference; while
in CVAEcorr , instead of only learning singleton latent variational density functions, we also incorporate pairwise latent
variational density functions to achieve a better variational
approximation. With a correlated prior, the standard variational inference objective becomes intractable to compute.
We sidestep the challenging objective by considering the
average of a set of tractable lower bounds over all maximal
acyclic subgraphs of the given undirected correlation graph.
The experimental results show that both CVAEind and
CVAEcorr can outperform the baseline methods on three tasks:
matching dual user pairs using the rating records on a movie
recommendation dataset, clustering the vertices with latent
embeddings drawn from a tree-structured undirected graphical model on a synthetic dataset, and predicting links using
the rating records on a product rating dataset.

2. CVAEs on acyclic graphs
In this section, we extends VAEs to fit with a set of latent
variables with an acyclic correlation graph. We start with
acyclic graphs since the prior and posterior approximation
of the latent variables can be expressed exactly for such
correlation structures.

1

Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New
York, New York, USA 2 Netflix Inc., Los Gatos, California, USA
3
Erik Jonsson School of Engineering & Computer Science, University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, Texas, USA. Correspondence
to: Da Tang <datang@cs.columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

2.1. Variational Auto-Encodings
Assume that we have input data x = {x1 , . . . , xn } ⊆ RD .
Standard VAEs assume that each data point xi is generated
independently by the following process: First, generate the
latent variables z = {z1 , . . . , zn } ⊆ Rd (usually d  D)

