Adversarial Examples from Computational Constraints

Sébastien Bubeck 1 Yin Tat Lee 1 2 Eric Price 3 Ilya Razenshteyn 1

Abstract
Why are classifiers in high dimension vulnerable
to “adversarial” perturbations? We show that it
is likely not due to information theoretic limitations, but rather it could be due to computational
constraints. First we prove that, for a broad set of
classification tasks, the mere existence of a robust
classifier implies that it can be found by a possibly exponential-time algorithm with relatively
few training examples. Then we give two particular classification tasks where learning a robust
classifier is computationally intractable. More
precisely we construct two binary classifications
task in high dimensional space which are (i) information theoretically easy to learn robustly for
large perturbations, (ii) efficiently learnable (nonrobustly) by a simple linear separator, (iii) yet are
not efficiently robustly learnable, even for small
perturbations. Specifically, for the first task hardness holds for any efficient algorithm in the statistical query (SQ) model, while for the second task
we rule out any efficient algorithm under a cryptographic assumption. These examples give an
exponential separation between classical learning
and robust learning in the statistical query model
or under a cryptographic assumption. It suggests
that adversarial examples may be an unavoidable
byproduct of computational limitations of learning algorithms.

1. Introduction
The most basic task in learning theory is to learn from a
data set (Xi , f (Xi ))i∈[n] a good approximation to the unknown input-output function f . One is typically interested
in finding a hypothesis function h with small out of sample
probability of error. That is, assuming the Xi ’s are i.i.d.
*
Equal contribution 1 Microsoft Research, Redmond, Washington, USA 2 University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA
3
University of Texas, Austin, Texas, USA. Correspondence to: Ilya
Razenshteyn <ilyaraz@microsoft.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 36 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

from some distribution D, one wishes to approximately
minimize PX∼D (h(X) 6= f (X)). A more challenging task
is to learn a robust hypothesis, that is, one that would minimize the probability of error against adversarially corrupted
examples. More precisely, assume that the input space is
endowed with a norm k · k and let ε > 0 be a fixed robustness parameter. In robust learning the goal is to find h to
minimize:
P (∃ z such that kzk ≤ ε, and h(X + z) 6= f (X + z)) .

X∼D

(1)
Such an input X + z in the above event is colloquially
referred to as an adversarial example1 .
Following Szegedy et al. (2013) there is a rapidly expanding
literature exploring the vulnerability of neural networks to
adversarially chosen perturbations. The surprising observation is that, say in vision applications, for most images
X ∼ D the perturbation can be chosen in a way that is imperceptible to a human yet dramatically changes the output
of state-of-the-art neural networks. This is a particularly
important issue as these neural networks are currently being
deployed in real-world situations. Naturally there is by now
a large literature (in fact going back at least to (Dalvi et al.,
2004; Globerson and Roweis, 2006)) on attacks (finding
adversarial perturbations) and defenses (making classifiers
robust against certain type of attacks).
While we have a sophisticated theory for the classical goal
of minimizing the non-robust probability of error, our understanding of the robust scenario is still very rudimentary.
At the moment, the “attackers” seem to be winning the
arms race against the “defenders”, see e.g., (Athalye et al.,
2018). We identify four mutually exclusive possibilities for
why all known classification algorithms are vulnerable to
adversarial examples:
1. No robust classifier exists.
2. Identifying a robust classifier requires too much training data.
3. Identifying a robust classifier from limited training data
1

In the literature one sometimes uses a more stringent definition
of adversarial examples, where X and z are in addition required
to satisfy f (X + z) = f (X). We ignore this requirement here.

