Sparse Multi-Channel Variational Autoencoder
for the Joint Analysis of Heterogeneous Data

Luigi Antelmi 1 Nicholas Ayache 1 Philippe Robert 2 3 Marco Lorenzi 1
for the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative *

Abstract
Interpretable modeling of heterogeneous data
channels is essential in medical applications, for
example when jointly analyzing clinical scores
and medical images. Variational Autoencoders
(VAE) are powerful generative models that learn
representations of complex data. The flexibility of VAE may come at the expense of lack of
interpretability in describing the joint relationship between heterogeneous data. To tackle this
problem, in this work we extend the variational
framework of VAE to bring parsimony and interpretability when jointly account for latent relationships across multiple channels. In the latent
space, this is achieved by constraining the variational distribution of each channel to a common
target prior. Parsimonious latent representations
are enforced by variational dropout. Experiments
on synthetic data show that our model correctly
identifies the prescribed latent dimensions and
data relationships across multiple testing scenarios. When applied to imaging and clinical data,
our method allows to identify the joint effect of
age and pathology in describing clinical condition
in a large scale clinical cohort.

*

Data used in preparation of this article were obtained
from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative
(ADNI) database (http://adni.loni.usc.edu).
As such, the
investigators within the ADNI contributed to the design and
implementation of ADNI and/or provided data but did not
participate in analysis or writing of this report. A complete listing of ADNI investigators can be found at http:
//adni.loni.usc.edu/wp-content/uploads/
how_to_apply/ADNI_Acknowledgement_List.pdf
1
University of Côte d’Azur, Inria, Epione Project-Team, France.
2
University of Côte d’Azur, CoBTeK, France. 3 Centre Mémoire,
CHU of Nice, France. Correspondence to: Luigi Antelmi
<luigi.antelmi@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Understanding the relationship among heterogeneous data
is essential in medical applications, where performing a
diagnosis, or understanding the dynamics of a pathology
require to jointly analyze multiple data channels, such as
demographic data, medical imaging data, and psychological
tests.
Multivariate methods to jointly analyze heterogeneous data,
such as Partial Least Squares (PLS), Reduced Rank Regression (RRR), or Canonical correlation analysis (CCA)
(Hotelling, 1936) have successfully been applied in biomedical research (Liu & Calhoun, 2014), along with multichannel (Kettenring, 1971; Luo et al., 2015) and non-linear
variants (Huang et al., 2009; Andrew et al., 2013). These
approaches are classified as recognition methods, as their
common formulation consists in projecting the observations
in a latent low dimensional space in which desired characteristics are enforced, such as maximum correlation (CCA),
maximum covariance (PLS), or minimum regression error
(RRR) (Haufe et al., 2014). In their classical formulation
these models are not generative as they do not explicitly
provide a mean to sample observations when the distribution
of latent variables and parameters is known. Bayesian-CCA
(Klami et al., 2013) actually goes in this direction: it is a
generative formulation of CCA, where a transformation of
a latent variable captures the shared variation between data
channels. A limitation of this method for the application in
real data scenarios is scalability, as inference on the posterior distribution results in O(D3 ) complexity, being D the
dimensionality of the data. Consequently, all the practical
applications of Bayesian CCA in the earlier works were limited to very few dimensions and channels (Klami & Kaski,
2007).
Variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2014;
Rezende et al., 2014) are models that couple a recognition
function, or encoder, to infer a lower dimensional representation of the data, with a generative function, or decoder,
which transforms the latent representation back to the original observation space. The VAE is a Bayesian model: the latent variables are inferred by estimating the associated posterior distributions. Inference is efficiently performed through

