Adversarial Examples Are a Natural Consequence of Test Error in Noise

Nicolas Ford * 1 2 Justin Gilmer * 1 Nicholas Carlini 1 Ekin D. Cubuk 1

Abstract
Over the last few years, the phenomenon of adversarial examples — maliciously constructed inputs that fool trained machine learning models —
has captured the attention of the research community, especially when the adversary is restricted
to small modifications of a correctly handled input. Less surprisingly, image classifiers also lack
human-level performance on randomly corrupted
images, such as images with additive Gaussian
noise. In this paper we provide both empirical and
theoretical evidence that these are two manifestations of the same underlying phenomenon. We
establish close connections between the adversarial robustness and corruption robustness research
programs, with the strongest connection in the
case of additive Gaussian noise. This suggests
that improving adversarial robustness should go
hand in hand with improving performance in the
presence of more general and realistic image corruptions. Based on our results we recommend that
future adversarial defenses consider evaluating
the robustness of their methods to distributional
shift with benchmarks such as ImageNet-C.

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art computer vision models can achieve impressive performance on many image classification tasks. Despite this, these same models still lack the robustness of the
human visual system to various forms of image corruptions.
For example, they are distinctly subhuman when classifying
images distorted with additive Gaussian noise (Dodge &
Karam, 2017), they lack robustness to different types of
blur, pixelation, and changes in brightness (Hendrycks &
Dietterich, 2019), lack robustness to random translations
of the input (Azulay & Weiss, 2018), and even make errors when foreign objects are inserted into the field of view
*

Equal contribution 1 Google Brain 2 This work was completed
as part of the Google AI Residency. Correspondence to: Nicolas
Ford <nicf@google.com>, Justin Gilmer <gilmer@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

(Rosenfeld et al., 2018). At the same time, they are also
sensitive to small, worst-case perturbations of the input, socalled “adversarial examples” (Szegedy et al., 2014). This
latter phenomenon has struck many in the machine learning
community as surprising and has attracted a great deal of research interest, while the former has received less attention.
The machine learning community has researchers working
on each of these two types of errors: adversarial example researchers seek to measure and improve robustness to
small-worst case perturbations of the input while corruption
robustness researchers seek to measure and improve model
robustness to distributional shift. In this work we analyze
the connection between these two research directions, and
we see that adversarial robustness is closely related to robustness to certain kinds of distributional shift. In other
words, the existence of adversarial examples follows naturally from the fact that our models have nonzero test error
in certain corrupted image distributions.
We make this connection in several ways. First, in Section 4,
we provide a novel analysis of the error set of an image
classifier. We see that, given the error rates we observe in
Gaussian noise, the small adversarial perturbations we observe in practice appear at roughly the distances we would
expect from a linear model, and that therefore there is no
need to invoke any strange properties of the decision boundary to explain them. This relationship was also explored in
Fawzi et al. (2018b; 2016).
In Section 5, we show that improving an alternate notion of
adversarial robustness requires that error rates under large
additive noise be reduced to essentially zero.
Finally, this suggests that methods which increase the distance to the decision boundary should also improve robustness to Gaussian noise, and vice versa. In Section 6 we
confirm that this is true by examining both adversarially
trained models and models trained with additive Gaussian
noise. We also show that measuring corruption robustness
can effectively distinguish successful adversarial defense
methods from ones that merely cause vanishing gradients.
We hope that this work will encourage both the adversarial and corruption robustness communities to work more
closely together, since their goals seem to be so closely related. In particular, it is not common for adversarial defense

