SELFIE: Refurbishing Unclean Samples for Robust Deep Learning

Hwanjun Song 1 Minseok Kim 1 Jae-Gil Lee 1

Abstract
Owing to the extremely high expressive power
of deep neural networks, their side effect is to
totally memorize training data even when the labels are extremely noisy. To overcome overﬁtting
on the noisy labels, we propose a novel robust
training method called SELFIE. Our key idea is
to selectively refurbish and exploit unclean samples that can be corrected with high precision,
thereby gradually increasing the number of available training samples. Taking advantage of this
design, SELFIE effectively prevents the risk of
noise accumulation from the false correction and
fully exploits the training data. To validate the
superiority of SELFIE, we conducted extensive
experimentation using four real-world or synthetic
data sets. The result showed that SELFIE remarkably improved absolute test error compared with
two state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
As the size of available data sets increases rapidly, deep
neural networks have achieved remarkable performance in
numerous machine learning tasks, such as image classiﬁcation (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and object detection (Redmon
et al., 2016). However, owing to the high capacity to ﬁt any
noisy labels, it is known that a small portion of mislabeled
samples in training data can severely hurt the model performance. In particular, Zhang et al. (2017) have shown that
a standard convolutional neural network can ﬁt the entire
training data with any ratio of noisy labels and eventually
leads to poor generalization on the test data. Thus, the key
issue is how to train the deep neural network robustly even
when mislabeled samples exist within the training data.
A typical method is using “loss correction” that corrects
the loss of training samples based on the estimated noise
1

Graduate School of Knowledge Service Engineering,
KAIST, Daejeon, Korea. Correspondence to: Jae-Gil Lee
<jaegil@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

transition matrix (Zhang et al., 2017; Goldberger & BenReuven, 2017; Patrini et al., 2017; Chang et al., 2017). As
shown in Figure 1(a), the forward or backward losses of all
samples in each mini-batch are corrected and subsequently
back-propagated to update the network. However, owing to
the difﬁculty in estimating the noise transition matrix, it is
inevitable that the network accumulates the error incurred by
the false correction, especially when the number of classes
or the number of mislabeled samples is large (Jiang et al.,
2018; Han et al., 2018).
To be free of the false correction, many recent studies have
adopted “sample selection” that ﬁlters out true-labeled samples from the training data (Kumar et al., 2010; Jiang et al.,
2018; Han et al., 2018). They identiﬁed the clean samples
out of the mini-batch based on their forward losses, and
used them to update the network, as shown in Figure 1(b).
In practice, Han et al. (2018) have shown that training on the
clean samples yields a much better performance than correcting the entire sample on extremely noisy data. However,
focusing on selected clean samples favors easy samples and
thus ignores numerous useful hard samples, which make
the network more accurate and robust (Shrivastava et al.,
2016; Chang et al., 2017; Lin et al., 2018). Therefore, for a
more robust training on noisy labels, we propose to refurbish unclean samples rather than just trash them in order to
enable a full exploration of the training data.
In this paper, we propose a hybrid approach, called SELFIE
(SELectively reFurbIsh unclEan samples), that achieves the
advantages of both “loss correction” and “sample selection”.
As stated above, loss correction allows for a full exploration
of the training data by re-weighting all the losses; however,
it suffers from the correction error. Conversely, sample
selection effectively eliminates the noise accumulation by
discarding all unclean samples but uses only the partial exploration of the training data. Thus, as illustrated in Figure
1(c), our key idea is to use refurbishable samples that can be
corrected with a high precision, together with clean samples.
Speciﬁcally, we selectively correct the losses of the training samples classiﬁed as refurbishable and combine them
with the losses of clean samples to propagate backward. Because the precision of the correction highly depends on the
network performance, the proportion of refurbishable samples increases gradually as the training step progresses, and
eventually covers all samples in the training data. Overall,

