Model-Based Active Exploration
Pranav Shyam 1 Wojciech Jaśkowski 1 Faustino Gomez 1

Abstract
Efficient exploration is an unsolved problem in
Reinforcement Learning which is usually addressed by reactively rewarding the agent for fortuitously encountering novel situations. This paper introduces an efficient active exploration algorithm, Model-Based Active eXploration (MAX),
which uses an ensemble of forward models to
plan to observe novel events. This is carried out
by optimizing agent behaviour with respect to a
measure of novelty derived from the Bayesian perspective of exploration, which is estimated using
the disagreement between the futures predicted
by the ensemble members. We show empirically
that in semi-random discrete environments where
directed exploration is critical to make progress,
MAX is at least an order of magnitude more efficient than strong baselines. MAX scales to highdimensional continuous environments where it
builds task-agnostic models that can be used for
any downstream task.

1. Introduction
Efficient exploration in large, high-dimensional environments is an unsolved problem in Reinforcement Learning
(RL). Current exploration methods (Osband et al., 2016;
Bellemare et al., 2016; Houthooft et al., 2016; Pathak et al.,
2017) are reactive: the agent accidentally observes something “novel” and then decides to obtain more information
about it. Further exploration in the vicinity of the novel state
is carried out typically through an exploration bonus or intrinsic motivation reward, which have to be unlearned once
the novelty has worn off, making exploration inefficient —
a problem we refer to as over-commitment.
However, exploration can also be active, where the agent
seeks out novelty based on its own “internal” estimate of
what action sequences will lead to interesting transitions.
1
NNAISENSE, Lugano, Switzerland. Correspondence to:
Pranav Shyam <pranav@nnaisense.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

This approach is inherently more powerful than reactive exploration, but requires a method to predict the consequences
of actions and their degree of novelty. This problem can
be formulated optimally in the Bayesian setting where the
novelty of a given state transition can be measured by the
disagreement between the next-state predictions made by
probable models of the environment.
This paper introduces Model-Based Active eXploration
(MAX), an efficient algorithm, based on this principle, that
approximates the idealized distribution using an ensemble
of learned forward dynamics models. The algorithm identifies learnable unknowns or uncertainty representing novelty
in the environment by measuring the amount of conflict
between the predictions of the constituent models. It then
constructs exploration policies to resolve those conflicts by
visiting the relevant area. Unlearnable unknowns or risk,
such as random noise in the environment does not interfere
with the process since noise manifests as confusion among
all models and not as a conflict.
In discrete environments, novelty can be evaluated using the
Jensen-Shannon Divergence (JSD) between the predicted
next state distributions of the models in the ensemble. In
continuous environments, computing JSD is intractable, so
MAX instead uses the functionally equivalent Jensen-Rényi
Divergence based on Rényi quadratic entropy (Rényi, 1961).
While MAX can be used in conjunction with conventional
policy learning to maximize external reward, this paper
focuses on pure exploration: exploration disregarding or
in the absence of external reward, followed by exploitation (Bubeck et al., 2009). This setup is more natural in
situations where it is useful to do task-agnostic exploration
and learn models that can later be exploited for multiple
tasks, including those that are not known a priori.
Experiments in the discrete domain show that MAX is significantly more efficient than reactive exploration techniques
which use exploration bonuses or posterior sampling, while
also strongly suggesting that MAX copes with risk. In the
high-dimensional continuous Ant Maze environment, MAX
reaches the far end of a U-shaped maze in just 40 episodes
(12k steps), while reactive baselines are only around the
mid-way point after the same time. In the Half Cheetah
code: https://github.com/nnaisense/max

