Learning Context-Dependent
Label Permutations for Multi-Label Classification
Jinseok Nam 1 Young-Bum Kim 1 Eneldo Loza Mencı́a 2 Sunghyun Park 1 Ruhi Sarikaya 1
Johannes Fürnkranz 2

Abstract
A key problem in multi-label classification is to
utilize dependencies among the labels. Chaining
classifiers are a simple technique for addressing
this problem but current algorithms all assume a
fixed, static label ordering. In this work, we propose a multi-label classification approach which
allows to choose a dynamic, context-dependent
label ordering. Our proposed approach consists of
two sub-components: a simple EM-like algorithm
which bootstraps the learned model, and a more
principled approach based on reinforcement learning. Our experiments on three public multi-label
classification benchmarks show that our proposed
dynamic label ordering approach based on reinforcement learning outperforms recurrent neural
networks with fixed label ordering across both
bipartition and ranking measures on all the three
datasets. As a result, we obtain a powerful sequence prediction-based algorithm for multi-label
classification, which is able to efficiently and explicitly exploit label dependencies.

1. Introduction
Multi-label classification (MLC) is the problem of mapping an instance to a subset of possible labels (Zhang &
Zhou, 2014). Classifier chains (CCs) (Read et al., 2011)
and their probabilistic counterpart, probabilistic classifier
chains (PCCs) (Dembczyński et al., 2010), have proven to
be a simple but powerful MLC method for exploiting label
dependencies. These methods organize the set of possible
labels as a pre-defined sequence and learn to predict each respective next label by including the predictions for previous
labels to the input features of this training set. A drawback
1

Amazon, Seattle, Washington, USA 2 Knowledge Engineering,
TU Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Hessen, Germany. Correspondence to:
Jinseok Nam <jinseo@amazon.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

of CCs is that they require a fixed static ordering of labels,
as has already been noted by Read et al. (2011). Many past
research tried to address this problem by exploring different label ordering strategies (Li & Zhou, 2013; Sucar et al.,
2014; Kumar et al., 2013; Read et al., 2014). However,
projecting label dependencies into a sequential ordering is
non-trivial (Malerba et al., 1997).
A research direction that have been less explored is dynamically choosing a suitable label ordering for individual
instances. Most notably, da Silva et al. (2014) have shown
that an ensemble of PCCs with dynamically chosen label
orderings perform better than one with vanilla PCCs. Its key
idea is to address the error propagation problem of chainbased multi-label prediction methods (Senge et al., 2014). If
base classifiers in the beginning of the chain make errors at
prediction time, those errors are propagated to predictions of
the classifiers at later steps in the chain. Although building
an ensemble of PCCs with different label orders depending
on instances performs consistently better than PCCs with a
single global label ordering, their approach is limited to selecting from a fixed set of label chains used during training
time, and also it is a computationally demanding method
that requires nearest neighbor search at test time. Kulessa &
Loza Mencı́a (2018), in contrast, overcome these difficulties
by employing a special kind of decision trees which allow
to define its prediction objective – predicting the next label
in the sequence – on the fly during test time. However, the
price to pay is its limited predictive performance.
In this work, we propose two techniques for learning contextdependent label sequences, where context can be characterized by input features. Both approaches rely on formulating
MLC as a sequence-prediction problem that can be solved
via recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Nam et al., 2017),
where only relevant labels are predicted in a sequential manner as in (Doppa et al., 2014). In the first approach, we
sample a most probable label sequence for a given instance
using the intermediate stages of RNN during model training.
The sampled target label sequence is complemented by the
corresponding true label subset and then used as if the true
target sequence to update RNN’s parameters. The second
technique performs the exploration in a more structured way
using reinforcement to learn a sequence-generating policy.

