Robustly Disentangled Causal Mechanisms:
Validating Deep Representations for Interventional Robustness
Raphael Suter 1 Dorde Miladinović 1 Bernhard Schölkopf 2 Stefan Bauer 2

Abstract
The ability to learn disentangled representations
that split underlying sources of variation in high
dimensional, unstructured data is important for
data efficient and robust use of neural networks.
While various approaches aiming towards this
goal have been proposed in recent times, a commonly accepted definition and validation procedure is missing. We provide a causal perspective
on representation learning which covers disentanglement and domain shift robustness as special
cases. Our causal framework allows us to introduce a new metric for the quantitative evaluation
of deep latent variable models. We show how
this metric can be estimated from labeled observational data and further provide an efficient estimation algorithm that scales linearly in the dataset
size.

1. Introduction
Learning deep representations in which different semantic
aspects of data are structurally disentangled is of central
importance for training robust machine learning models.
Separating independent factors of variation could pave the
way for successful transfer learning and domain adaptation
(Bengio et al., 2013). Imagine the example of a robot learning multiple tasks by interacting with its environment. For
data efficiency, the robot can learn a generic representation
architecture that maps its high dimensional sensory data
to a collection of general, compact features describing its
surrounding. For each task, only a subset of features will
be required. If the robot is instructed to grasp an object, it
must know the shape and the position of the object, however,
its color is irrelevant. On the other hand, when pointing to
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to: Raphael Suter <rasuter@icloud.com>, Stefan Bauer
<bauers@inf.ethz.ch>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

all red objects is demanded, only position and color are
required.
Having a disentangled representation, where each feature
captures only one factor of variation, allows the robot to
build separate (simple) models for each task based on only a
relevant and stable subselection of these generically learned
features. We argue that robustness of the learned representation is a crucial property when this is attempted in practice.
It has been proposed that features should be selected based
on their robustness or invariance across tasks (e.g., RojasCarulla et al., 2018), we hence do not want them to be
affected by changes in any other factor. In our example,
the robot assigned with the grasping task should be able
to build a model using features well describing shape and
position of the object. For this model to be robust, however,
these features must not be affected by changing color (or
any other nuisance factor).
It is striking that despite the recent popularity of disentangled representation learning approaches, a commonly accepted definition and validation metric is missing (Higgins
et al., 2018). We view disentanglement as a property of a
causal process (Spirtes et al., 1993; Pearl, 2009) responsible
for the data generation, as opposed to only a heuristic characteristic of the encoding. Concretely, we call a causal process
disentangled when the parents of the generated observations
do not affect each other (i.e., there is no total causal effect
between them (Peters et al., 2017, Definition 6.12)). We
call these parents elementary ingredients. In the example
above, we view color and shape as elementary ingredients,
as both can be changed without affecting each other. Still,
there can be dependencies between them if for example our
experimental setup is confounded by the capabilities of the
3D printers that are used to create the objects (e.g., certain
shapes can only be printed in some colors).
Combining these disentangled causal processes with the
encoding allows us to study interventional effects on feature
representations and estimate them from observational data.
This is of interest when benchmarking disentanglement approaches based on ground truth data (Locatello et al., 2018)
or trying to evaluate robustness of a deep representations
w.r.t. known nuisance factors (e.g., domain changes). In the
example of robotics, knowledge about the generative factors

