Submodular Observation Selection and Information Gathering
for Quadratic Models

Abolfazl Hashemi 1 Mahsa Ghasemi 1 Haris Vikalo 1 Ufuk Topcu 1

Abstract
We study the problem of selecting most informative subset of a large observation set to enable
accurate estimation of unknown parameters. This
problem arises in a variety of settings in machine
learning and signal processing including feature
selection, phase retrieval, and target localization.
Since for quadratic measurement models the moment matrix of the optimal estimator is generally
unknown, majority of prior work resorts to approximation techniques such as linearization of
the observation model to optimize the alphabetical optimality criteria of an approximate moment
matrix. Conversely, by exploiting a connection to
the classical Van Trees’ inequality, we derive new
alphabetical optimality criteria without distorting
the relational structure of the observation model.
We further show that under certain conditions on
parameters of the problem these optimality criteria are monotone and (weak) submodular set
functions. These results enable us to develop an
efficient greedy observation selection algorithm
uniquely tailored for quadratic models, and provide theoretical bounds on its achievable utility.

1. Introduction
In many machine learning applications, one needs to efficiently collect the most informative observations from a
potentially significantly larger set of uncertain observations.
The goal of such selection is to reduce the burden on computational and communication resources while still providing
accurate inference of unknown parameters. For instance,
to reduce the computational and communication costs in
sensor and feature selection applications (Joshi and Boyd,
2009; Shamaiah et al., 2010; Bhaskara et al., 2016), the
1

University of Texas at Austin.
Correspondence to:
Abolfazl Hashemi <abolfazl@utexas.edu>, Mahsa Ghasemi
<mahsa.ghasemi@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

goal is to select a small representative subset of observations gathered by different sensing units within a network
of autonomous systems. In sensor placement (Krause et al.,
2008b), the problem is to select a subset of locations in an
environment such that the measurements collected at those
locations enable effective detection of unknown targets. In
Bayesian experimental design, the objective is to select a
subset of experiments from the set of all possible experiments to optimize a statistical metric or expected utility
defined for a specific task such as inference or prediction
of some parameters (Chaloner and Verdinelli, 1995; Wang
et al., 2017; Chamon and Ribeiro, 2017). This selection
is motivated by the desire to reduce experimental cost and
abide to limited resources.
The example applications above belong to a family of problems referred to as observation selection or information
gathering (Krause and Guestrin, 2007). They can be cast
as optimization problems with an objective of maximizing
the information of the selected observations subject to cardinality constraints. Since such optimization problems are
generally NP-hard (Williamson and Shmoys, 2011; Krause
and Golovin, 2014), one often resorts to heuristic schemes
that find a sub-optimal subset of observations. It has been
shown that, when the measurement model is linear, typical
objective functions (e.g., expected utility) are scalarization
of the error covariance matrix and possess a diminishing
return property known as submodularity or weak (i.e. approximate) submodularity. For such objectives, a simple
greedy approximation scheme achieves near-optimal observation selections with provable performance guarantees
(Nemhauser et al., 1978; Krause and Golovin, 2014). Furthermore, since expected utilities are scalarizations of the
error covariance matrix, the selection criteria for linear models have a strong connection to mean square error (MSE), the
desired performance metric in many applications, including
those considered in this paper. These two properties, that is
(weak) submodularity of typical objective functions as well
as a strong connection to MSE, makes linear models appealing. In fact when the measurement model is nonlinear, one
typically resort to linearization of the model or Monte-Carlo
methods to find an approximate utility prior to the actual
observation selection step (Chaloner and Verdinelli, 1995;
Sebastiani and Wynn, 2000; Flaherty et al., 2006; Krause

