Control Regularization for Reduced Variance Reinforcement Learning

Richard Cheng 1 Abhinav Verma 2 Gábor Orosz 3 Swarat Chaudhuri 2 Yisong Yue 1 Joel W. Burdick 1

Abstract
Dealing with high variance is a significant challenge in model-free reinforcement learning (RL).
Existing methods are unreliable, exhibiting high
variance in performance from run to run using
different initializations/seeds. Focusing on problems arising in continuous control, we propose a
functional regularization approach to augmenting
model-free RL. In particular, we regularize the
behavior of the deep policy to be similar to a policy prior, i.e., we regularize in function space. We
show that functional regularization yields a biasvariance trade-off, and propose an adaptive tuning strategy to optimize this trade-off. When the
policy prior has control-theoretic stability guarantees, we further show that this regularization approximately preserves those stability guarantees
throughout learning. We validate our approach
empirically on a range of settings, and demonstrate significantly reduced variance, guaranteed
dynamic stability, and more efficient learning than
deep RL alone.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) focuses on finding an agent’s
policy (i.e. controller) that maximizes long-term accumulated reward. This is done by the agent repeatedly observing
its state, taking an action (according to a policy), and receiving a reward. Over time the agent modifies its policy to
maximize its long-term reward. Amongst other applications,
this method has been successfully applied to control tasks
(Lillicrap et al., 2016; Schulman et al., 2015; Ghosh et al.,
2018), learning to stabilize complex robots.
In this paper, we focus particularly on policy gradient (PG)
RL algorithms, which have become popular in solving continuous control tasks (Duan et al., 2016). Since PG algo1

California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 2 Rice University, Houston, TX 3 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
Correspondence to: Richard Cheng <rcheng@caltech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

rithms focus on maximizing the long-term reward through
trial and error, they can learn to control complex tasks without a prior model of the system. This comes at the cost
of slow, high variance, learning – complex tasks can take
millions of iterations to learn. More importantly, variation
between learning runs can be very high, meaning some runs
of an RL algorithm succeed while others fail depending on
randomness in initialization and sampling. Several studies
have noted this high variability in learning as a significant
hurdle for the application of RL, since learning becomes unreliable (Henderson et al., 2018; Arulkumaran et al., 2017;
Recht, 2019). All policy gradient algorithms face the same
issue.
We can alleviate the aforementioned issues by introducing a control-theoretic prior into the learning process using
functional regularization. Theories and procedures exist to
design stable controllers for the vast majority of real-world
physical systems (from humanoid robots to robotic grasping
to smart power grids). However, conventional controllers
for complex systems can be highly suboptimal and/or require great effort in system modeling and controller design.
It would be ideal then to leverage simple, suboptimal controllers in RL to reliably learn high-performance policies.
In this work, we propose a policy gradient algorithm, CORERL (COntrol REgularized Reinforcement Learning), that
utilizes a functional regularizer around a, typically suboptimal, control prior (i.e. a controller designed from any prior
knowledge of the system). We show that this approach significantly lowers variance in the policy updates, and leads
to higher performance policies when compared to both the
baseline RL algorithm and the control prior. In addition, we
prove that our policy can maintain control-theoretic stability
guarantees throughout the learning process. Finally, we empirically validate our approach using three benchmarks: a
car-following task with real driving data, the TORCS racecar
simulator, and a simulated cartpole problem. In summary,
the main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We introduce functional regularization using a control
prior, and prove that this significantly reduces variance
during learning at the cost of potentially increasing bias.
• We provide control-theoretic stability guarantees throughout learning when utilizing a robust control prior.
• We validate experimentally that our algorithm, CORE-

