Game Theoretic Optimization via Gradient-based Nikaido-Isoda Function

Arvind U. Raghunathan 1 Anoop Cherian 1 Devesh K. Jha 1
(NE). We denote by S N E the set of all NE points, i.e.,
S N E = {x? | (1) holds}. In the absence of convexity for
the functions fi we may not be able to obtain a minimizer
in (1) and have to settle for a first-order stationary point. Accordingly, define S SN P to be the set of all Stationary Nash
Points, i.e., S SN P = {x? | ∇i fi (x? ) = 0; ∀ i = 1, . . . , N }
where ∇i f denotes the derivative of function f w.r.t. xi .

Abstract
Computing Nash equilibrium (NE) of multiplayer games has witnessed renewed interest due
to recent advances in generative adversarial networks. However, computing equilibrium efficiently is challenging. To this end, we introduce
the Gradient-based Nikaido-Isoda (GNI) function which serves: (i) as a merit function, vanishing only at the first-order stationary points of each
player’s optimization problem, and (ii) provides
error bounds to a stationary Nash point. Gradient descent is shown to converge sublinearly to
a first-order stationary point of the GNI function.
For the particular case of bilinear min-max games
and multi-player quadratic games the GNI function is convex. Hence, the application of gradient
descent in this case yields linear convergence to
an NE (when one exists). In our numerical experiments we observe that the GNI formulation always converges to the first-order stationary point
of each player’s optimization problem.

There has been renewed interest in Nash equilibrium computation for games owing to the success of Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014).
GANs have been successful in learning probability distributions and have found application in tasks including imageto-image translation (Isola et al., 2016), domain adaptation (Tzeng et al., 2017), probabilistic inference (Dumoulin
et al., 2016; Mescheder et al., 2017) among others. Despite their popularity, GANs are known to be difficult to
train. In order to stabilize training recent approaches have
resorted to carefully designed models, either by adapting
an architecture (Radford et al., 2015) or by selecting an
easy-to-optimize objective function (Salimans et al., 2016;
Arjovsky et al., 2017; Gulrajani et al., 2017).

1. Introduction
In this work, we consider the general N -player game:
Find x∗ = (x?1 , . . . , x?N ) s.t.
x?i = arg

min

x∈Rn :x−i =x∗
−i

fi (x)

(1)

PN
n
where xi ∈ Rni , n =
→ R, x =
i=1 ni , fi : R
n
(x1 , . . . , xN ) ∈ R denotes the collection of all xj ’s, while
x−i denotes the collection of all xj ’s except for index i, i.e.
x−i = (x1 , . . . , xi−1 , xi+1 , . . . , xN ) ∈ R(n−ni ) . Observe
that the choice of x−i are specified when performing the
minimization in (1) for player i.
A point x? satisfying (1) is called a Nash Equilibrium
1
All authors are with Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs
(MERL), Cambridge, MA. Correspondence to:
Arvind
U. Raghunathan <raghunathan@merl.com>, Anoop Cherian
<cherian@merl.com>, Devesh K. Jha <jha@merl.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

The Nikaido-Isoda (NI) function (Nikaido & Isoda, 1955)
(formally introduced in §3) is popular in equilibrium computation (Uryasev & Rubinstein, 1994; Contreras et al., 2004;
Facchinei & Kanzow, 2007; von Heusinger & Kanzow,
2009a;b) and often used as a merit function for NE. The evaluation of the NI function requires optimizing each player’s
problem globally which can be intractable for non-convex
objectives.
In this paper, we introduce Gradient-based Nikaido-Isoda
(GNI) function which allows us to computationally simplify the original NI formulation. Instead of computing a
globally optimal solution, every player can locally improve
their objectives using the steepest descent direction. The
proposed GNI function simplifies the original NI formulation by relaxing the requirement on optimizing individual
player’s objective globally. We prove that GNI is a valid
merit function for multi-player games and vanishes only at
the first-order stationary points of each player’s optimization problem (§3). The GNI function is shown to be locally
stable in a neighborhood of a stationary Nash point (§3.1)
and convex when the player’s objective function is quadratic
(§3.2). The gradient descent algorithm applied to the GNI

