Error Feedback Fixes SignSGD and other Gradient Compression Schemes

Sai Praneeth Karimireddy 1 Quentin Rebjock 1 Sebastian U. Stich 1 Martin Jaggi 1

Abstract

Algorithm 1 EF - SIGN SGD (SIGN SGD with Error-Feedb.)

Sign-based algorithms (e.g. SIGN SGD) have been
proposed as a biased gradient compression technique to alleviate the communication bottleneck
in training large neural networks across multiple workers. We show simple convex counterexamples where signSGD does not converge to
the optimum. Further, even when it does converge,
signSGD may generalize poorly when compared
with SGD. These issues arise because of the biased nature of the sign compression operator.

1: Input: learning rate γ, initial iterate x0 ∈ Rd , e0 = 0
2: for t = 0, . . . , T − 1 do
3:
gt := stochasticGradient(xt )
4:
pt := γgt + et
. error correction
5:
∆t := (kpt k1 /d) sign(pt )
. compression
6:
xt+1 := xt − ∆t
. update iterate
7:
et+1 := pt − ∆t
. update residual error
8: end for

We then show that using error-feedback, i.e. incorporating the error made by the compression
operator into the next step, overcomes these issues. We prove that our algorithm (EF -SGD)
with arbitrary compression operator achieves the
same rate of convergence as SGD without any
additional assumptions. Thus EF -SGDachieves
gradient compression for free. Our experiments
thoroughly substantiate the theory.

Methods performing updates only based on the sign of each
coordinate of the gradient have recently gaining popularity
for training deep learning models (Seide et al., 2014; Carlson et al., 2015; Wen et al., 2017; Balles & Hennig, 2018;
Bernstein et al., 2018; Zaheer et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2018).
For example, the update step of SIGN SGD is given by:

1. Introduction
Stochastic optimization algorithms (Bottou, 2010) which are
amenable to large-scale parallelization, taking advantage of
massive computational resources (Krizhevsky et al., 2012;
Dean et al., 2012) have been at the core of significant recent
progress in deep learning (Schmidhuber, 2015; LeCun et al.,
2015). One such example is the SIGN SGD algorithm and
its variants, c.f. (Seide et al., 2014; Bernstein et al., 2018;
2019).
To minimize a continuous (possibly) non-convex function
f : Rd → R, the classic stochastic gradient algorithm (SGD)
(Robbins & Monro, 1951) performs iterations of the form

xt+1 := xt − γ sign(gt ) .

(SIGN SGD)

Such sign-based algorithms are particularly interesting since
they can be viewed through two lenses: as i) approximations
of adaptive gradient methods such as ADAM (Balles & Hennig, 2018), and also a ii) communication efficient gradient
compression scheme (Seide et al., 2014). However, we show
that a severe handicap of sign-based algorithms is that they
do not converge in general. To substantiate this claim, we
present in this work simple convex counter-examples where
SIGN SGD cannot converge. The main reasons being that
the sign operator loses information about, i.e. ‘forgets’, i)
the magnitude, as well as ii) the direction of gt . We present
an elegant solution that provably fixes these problems of
SIGN SGD, namely algorithms with error-feedback.

1
EPFL, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Sai Praneeth Karimireddy <sai.karimireddy@epfl.ch>.

Error-feedback. We demonstrate that the aforementioned problems of SIGN SGD can be fixed by i) scaling
the signed vector by the norm of the gradient to ensure the
magnitude of the gradient is not forgotten, and ii) locally
storing the difference between the actual and compressed
gradient, and iii) adding it back into the next step so that
the correct direction is not forgotten. We call our ‘fixed’
method EF - SIGN SGD (Algorithm 1).

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

In Algorithm 1, et denotes the accumulated error from all
quantization/compression steps. This residual error is added
to the gradient step γgt to obtain the corrected direction pt .

xt+1 := xt − γ gt ,

(SGD)

where γ ∈ R is the step-size (or learning-rate) and gt is the
stochastic gradient such that E[gt ] = ∇f (xt ).

