Bridging Theory and Algorithm for Domain Adaptation

Yuchen Zhang * 1 2 Tianle Liu * 1 3 Mingsheng Long 1 2 Michael I. Jordan 4

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of unsupervised
domain adaption from theoretical and algorithmic
perspectives. Existing domain adaptation theories
naturally imply minimax optimization algorithms,
which connect well with the domain adaptation
methods based on adversarial learning. However,
several disconnections still exist and form the gap
between theory and algorithm. We extend previous theories (Mansour et al., 2009c; Ben-David
et al., 2010) to multiclass classification in domain
adaptation, where classifiers based on the scoring
functions and margin loss are standard choices in
algorithm design. We introduce Margin Disparity
Discrepancy, a novel measurement with rigorous
generalization bounds, tailored to the distribution
comparison with the asymmetric margin loss, and
to the minimax optimization for easier training.
Our theory can be seamlessly transformed into an
adversarial learning algorithm for domain adaptation, successfully bridging the gap between theory
and algorithm. A series of empirical studies show
that our algorithm achieves the state of the art accuracies on challenging domain adaptation tasks.

1. Introduction
It is commonly assumed in learning theories that training
and test data are drawn from identical distribution. If the
source domain where we train a supervised learner, is substantially dissimilar to the target domain where the learner
is applied, there are no possibilities for good generalization.
However, we may expect to train a model by leveraging
labeled data from similar yet distinct domains, which is the
key machine learning setting that domain adaptation deals
with (Quionero-Candela et al., 2009; Pan & Yang, 2010).
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Software 2 Research Center for
Big Data, BNRist 3 Department of Mathematical Science, Tsinghua
University, China 4 University of California, Berkeley, USA.
†
Yuchen Zhang <zhangyuc17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>. Correspondence to: Mingsheng Long <mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Remarkable theoretical advances have been achieved in domain adaptation. Mansour et al. (2009c); Ben-David et al.
(2010) provided rigorous learning bounds for unsupervised
domain adaptation, a most challenging scenario in this field.
These earliest theories have later been extended in many
ways, from loss functions to Bayesian settings and regression problems (Mohri & Medina, 2012; Germain et al., 2013;
Cortes et al., 2015). In addition, theories based on weighted
combination of hypotheses have also been developed for
multiple source domain adaptation (Crammer et al., 2008;
Mansour et al., 2009b;a; Hoffman et al., 2018a).
On par with the theoretical findings, there are rich advances
in domain adaptation algorithms. Previous work explored
various techniques for statistics matching (Pan et al., 2011;
Tzeng et al., 2014; Long et al., 2015; 2017) and discrepancy minimization (Ganin & Lempitsky, 2015; Ganin et al.,
2016). Among them, adversarial learning methods come
with relatively strong theoretical insights. Inspired by Goodfellow et al. (2014), these methods are built upon the twoplayer game between the domain discriminator and feature
extractor. Current works explored adversarial learning in
diverse ways, yielding state of the art results on many tasks
(Tzeng et al., 2017; Saito et al., 2018; Long et al., 2018).
While many domain adaptation algorithms can be roughly
interpreted as minimizing the distribution discrepancy in
theories, several disconnections still form non-negligible
gaps between the theories and algorithms. Firstly, domain
adaptation algorithms using scoring functions lack theoretical guarantees since previous works simply studied the 0-1
loss for classification in this setting. Meanwhile, there is a
gap between the widely-used divergences in theories and
algorithms (Ganin & Lempitsky, 2015; Gretton et al., 2012;
Long et al., 2015; Courty et al., 2017).
This work aims to bridge the gaps between the theories and
algorithms for domain adaptation. We present a novel theoretical analysis of classification task in domain adaptation
towards explicit guidance for algorithm design. We extend
existing theories to classifiers based on the scoring functions
and margin loss, which is closer to the choices for real tasks.
We define a new divergence, Margin Disparity Discrepancy,
and provide margin-aware generalization bounds based on
Rademacher complexity, revealing that there is a trade-off
between generalization error and the choice of margin. Our

