A Convergence Theory for Deep Learning via Over-Parameterization

Zeyuan Allen-Zhu * 1 Yuanzhi Li * 2 3 Zhao Song * 4 5 6

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated dominating performance in many fields;
since AlexNet, networks used in practice are going wider and deeper. On the theoretical side, a
long line of works have been focusing on why
we can train neural networks when there is only
one hidden layer. The theory of multi-layer networks remains unsettled. In this work, we prove
simple algorithms such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) can find global minima on the training objective of DNNs in polynomial time. We
only make two assumptions: the inputs do not degenerate and the network is over-parameterized.
The latter means the number of hidden neurons
is sufficiently large: polynomial in L, the number of DNN layers and in n, the number of training samples. As concrete examples, starting from
randomly initialized weights, we show that SGD
attains 100% training accuracy in classification
tasks, or minimizes regression loss in linear convergence speed ε ∝ e−Ω(T ) , with running time
polynomial in n and L. Our theory applies to the
widely-used but non-smooth ReLU activation,
and to any smooth and possibly non-convex loss
functions. In terms of network architectures, our
theory at least applies to fully-connected neural
networks, convolutional neural networks (CNN),
and residual neural networks (ResNet).
*
Equal contribution . Full version and future updates are available at https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.03962.
This paper is a follow up to the recurrent neural network (RNN)
paper (Allen-Zhu et al., 2018b) by the same set of authors. Most
of the techniques used in this paper were already discovered in the
RNN paper, and this paper can be viewed as a simplification (or
to some extent a special case) of the RNN setting in order to reach
out to a wider audience. We compare the difference and mention
our additional contribution in Section 1.2.
1
2
Microsoft
Research
AI
Stanford
University
3
4
Princeton University
UT-Austin 5 University Washington 6 Harvard University.
Correspondence to:
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu <zeyuan@csail.mit.edu>, Yuanzhi Li
<yuanzhil@stanford.edu>, Zhao Song <zhaos@utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

1

Introduction

Neural networks have demonstrated a great success in
numerous machine-learning tasks (Amodei et al., 2016;
Graves et al., 2013; He et al., 2016; Krizhevsky et al., 2012;
Lillicrap et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016; 2017). One of the
empirical findings is that neural networks, trained by firstorder methods from random initialization, have a remarkable ability of fitting training data (Zhang et al., 2017).
From a capacity perspective, the ability to fit training data
may not be surprising: modern neural networks are always
heavily over-parameterized — they have (much) more parameters than the total number of training samples. Thus,
there exists parameter choices to achieve zero training error
as long as data does not degenerate.
Yet, from an optimization perspective, the fact that randomly initialized first-order methods can find optimal solutions on the training data is quite non-trivial: neural networks are often equipped with the ReLU activation, making the training objective not only non-convex, but even
non-smooth. Even the general convergence for finding
approximate critical points of a non-convex, non-smooth
function is not fully understood (Burke et al., 2005), and
appears to be a challenging question on its own. This is in
direct contrast to practice, in which ReLU networks trained
by stochastic gradient descent (SGD) from random initialization almost never face the problem of non-smoothness
or non-convexity, and can converge to even a global minimal over the training set quite easily. This was demonstrated by Goodfellow et al. (2015) using experiments for a
variety of network architectures, and a theoretical justification remains missing to explain this phenomenon.
Recently, there are quite a few papers trying to understand
the success of neural networks from optimization perspective. Many of them focus on the case when the inputs
are random Gaussian, and work only for two-layer neural
networks (Brutzkus & Globerson, 2017; Du et al., 2018b;
Ge et al., 2017; Li & Yuan, 2017; Panigrahy et al., 2018;
Soltanolkotabi, 2017; Tian, 2017; Zhong et al., 2017a;b).
In Li & Liang (2018), it was shown that for a two-layer network with ReLU activation, SGD finds nearly-global optimal (say, 99% classification accuracy) solutions on the
training data, as long as the network is over-parameterized,
meaning that when the number of neurons is polynomi-

