Adversarial Attacks on Node Embeddings via Graph Poisoning

Aleksandar Bojchevski 1 Stephan Günnemann 1

Abstract
The goal of network representation learning is to
learn low-dimensional node embeddings that capture the graph structure and are useful for solving
downstream tasks. However, despite the proliferation of such methods, there is currently no study
of their robustness to adversarial attacks. We provide the first adversarial vulnerability analysis
on the widely used family of methods based on
random walks. We derive efficient adversarial perturbations that poison the network structure and
have a negative effect on both the quality of the
embeddings and the downstream tasks. We further show that our attacks are transferable since
they generalize to many models and are successful
even when the attacker is restricted.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised node embedding (network representation
learning) approaches are becoming increasingly popular
and achieve state-of-the-art performance on many network
learning tasks (Cai et al., 2018). The goal is to embed
each node in a low-dimensional feature space such that
the graph’s structure is captured. The learned embeddings
are subsequently used for downstream tasks such as link
prediction, node classification, community detection, and
visualization. Among the variety of proposed approaches,
techniques based on random walks (RWs) (Perozzi et al.,
2014; Grover & Leskovec, 2016) are often employed since
they incorporate higher-order relational information. Given
the increasing popularity of these methods there is a strong
need for an analysis of their robustness. In particular, we
aim to study the existence and effects of adversarial perturbations. A large body of research shows that both traditional
and deep learning methods can easily be fooled/attacked:
even slight deliberate data perturbations can lead to wrong
results (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Mei & Zhu, 2015; Carlini
1
Technical University of Munich, Germany. Correspondence
to: Aleksandar Bojchvski <a.bojchevski@in.tum.de>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

& Wagner, 2017; Liang et al., 2018; Cissé et al., 2017; Lin
et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2017a).
While adversarial attacks for graph models have been proposed recently (Zügner et al., 2018; Dai et al., 2018a; Zügner
& Günnemann, 2019), they are all limited to the semisupervised learning setting. In contrast, this is the first
work that studies adversarial perturbations for unsupervised
embeddings. This is critical, since especially in domains
where graph embeddings are used (e.g. the web) adversaries
are common and false data is easy to inject: e.g. spammers
can easily create fake followers on social networks. Can
we construct attacks that do no rely on a specific downstream task? Are node embedding methods just as easily
fooled, since compared to semi-supervised models they do
not incorporate a supervision signal that can be exploited?
Barring the few above-mentioned attacks on graphs most
existing works on adversarial attacks perturb the features
of individual instances. In our case however, since we are
operating on plain graph data (no features are available) we
perturb the interactions (edges) between instances instead.
Manipulating the network structure (the graph) is a common
scenario with link spam farms (Gyöngyi & Garcia-Molina,
2005) and Sybil attacks (Yu et al., 2006) as typical examples.
Moreover, since node embeddings are typically trained in
an unsupervised and transductive fashion we cannot rely
on a single end-task that our attack might exploit to find
appropriate perturbations, and we have to handle a challenging poisoning attack where the model is learned after
the attack. That is, the model cannot be assumed to be
static as in most existing attacks. Lastly, since graphs are
discrete, gradient-based approaches (Li et al., 2016; Mei &
Zhu, 2015) for finding adversarial perturbations that were
designed for continuous data are not well suited. In particular, for methods based on random walks the gradient
computation is not directly possible since sampling random
walks is not a differentiable operation. The question is how
to design efficient algorithms that are able to find adversarial perturbations in such a challenging – discrete and
combinatorial – graph domain?
We propose a principled strategy for adversarial attacks on
unsupervised node embeddings. Exploiting results from
eigenvalue perturbation theory (Stewart, 1990) we are able
to efficiently solve a challenging bi-level optimization prob-

