PA-GD: On the Convergence of Perturbed Alternating Gradient Descent to
Second-Order Stationary Points for Structured Nonconvex Optimization

Songtao Lu 1 Mingyi Hong 1 Zhengdao Wang 2

Abstract

There are many ways of solving problem (1), such
as gradient descent (GD), accelerated gradient descent
(AGD), etc. When the problem has some naturally defined
block structures, as given in (2), it is common to adopt the
alternating gradient descent (A-GD) algorithm, or block
coordinate gradient decent (BC-GD). These algorithms
typically solve the (smaller dimensional) subproblems in
a sequential manner, and they enjoy the significant benefit
of fast empirical convergence compared with GD, because
they are able to use much larger stepsizes when updating
each block variables (Jain et al., 2013; Xu & Yin, 2013;
Zhao et al., 2015).

Alternating gradient descent (A-GD) is a simple
but popular algorithm in machine learning,
which updates two blocks of variables in an
alternating manner using gradient descent
steps. In this paper, we consider a smooth
unconstrained nonconvex optimization problem,
and propose a perturbed A-GD (PA-GD) which
is able to converge (with high probability) to
the second-order stationary points (SOSPs) with
a global sublinear rate. Existing analysis on
A-GD type algorithm either only guarantees
convergence to first-order solutions, or converges
to second-order solutions asymptotically
(without rates). To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first alternating type algorithm that
takes √
O(polylog(d)/ϵ2 ) iterations to achieve
an (ϵ, ϵ)-SOSP with high probability, where
polylog(d) denotes the polynomial of the
logarithm with respect to problem dimension d.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider a smooth and unconstrained
nonconvex optimization problem
min f (θ)

θ∈Rd

(1)

where f : Rd → R is twice differentiable (possibly
nonconvex). Suppose θ can be further divided into two
blocks: θ = [x y]T , with d = dx + dy . The
block-structured equivalent form of (1) is then given by
min

x∈Rdx ,y∈Rdy

f (x, y).

(2)

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, MN, USA
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Iowa State
University, Ames, IA, USA. Correspondence to: Songtao Lu
<lus@umn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

More specifically, many machine learning related
applications have the aforementioned “block structure",
such as matrix factorization (Zhao et al., 2015; Lu et al.,
2017), tensor decomposition (Ge et al., 2015), matrix
completion/decomposition (Xu & Yin, 2013; Jain et al.,
2013). Under relatively mild conditions, the convergence
of block structured algorithms such as BC-GD and A-GD
to the first-order stationary points (FOSPs) have been
broadly investigated (Tseng, 2001). In particular, it is
known that under mild conditions, these algorithms also
achieve global sublinear rates (Razaviyayn et al., 2014).
However, despite the popularity of these block-structured
algorithms and significant recent progress in understanding
its behavior, it remains unclear whether, for generic
block-structured nonconvex problems, they can converge
to the set of second-order stationary points (SOSPs) with
a provable global rate, even for the simplest problem with
two blocks of variables.
1.1. Motivation
Algorithms that can escape from strict saddle points – those
stationary points that have negative eigenvalues – have
wide applications. Many recent works have analyzed the
saddle points in machine learning problems (Kawaguchi,
2016). In two-layer porcupine neural networks (PNNs),
it has been shown that most local optima of PNN
optimizations are also global optimizers (Feizi et al., 2018).
Previous work in (Ge et al., 2015) has shown that the
saddle points in tensor decomposition are indeed strict
saddle points. Also, it has been shown that any saddle
points are strict in dictionary learning and phase retrieval

