Incorporating Grouping Information into Bayesian Decision Tree Ensembles

Junliang Du 1 Antonio R. Linero 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of nonparametric regression in the high-dimensional setting in which
P  N . We study the use of overlapping group
structures to improve prediction and variable selection. These structures arise commonly when
analyzing DNA microarray data, where genes can
naturally be grouped according to genetic pathways. We incorporate overlapping group structure
into a Bayesian additive regression trees model using a prior constructed so that, if a variable from
some group is used to construct a split, this increases the probability that subsequent splits will
use predictors from the same group. We refer to
our model as an overlapping group Bayesian additive regression trees (OG-BART) model, and our
prior on the splits an overlapping group Dirichlet
(OG-Dirichlet) prior. Like the sparse group lasso,
our prior encourages sparsity both within and between groups. We study the correlation structure
of the prior, illustrate the proposed methodology
on simulated data, and apply the methodology
to gene expression data to learn which genetic
pathways are predictive of breast cancer tumor
metastasis.

1. Introduction
Modern datasets often have numbers of predictors which
greatly exceed the number of observations. This complicates
traditional tasks, such as identifying important predictors or
forming predictions. To make headway on such problems,
it is essential that the data exhibit some additional structure.
Among such structures is the sparsity structure, in which
the response depends on a small number of predictors (Zou
& Hastie, 2005; Candes & Tao, 2007). When external data
sources are available one can leverage this additional infor*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida. Correspondence to: Antonio R. Linero
<arlinero@stat.fsu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

mation to help learn these structures. For example, when
covariates are associated to known graphical structures, such
as gene regulatory networks, one can use this information
to aid variable selection (Tibshirani & Taylor, 2011; Li &
Zhang, 2010; Chang et al., 2016).
In this paper, we focus on incorporation of grouping information to learn sparse structures. Many tools for utilizing
grouping structures have been developed for linear models; the canonical example is the group lasso (Yuan & Lin,
2006),
p builds a penalty using the grouping structure as
PG which
λ g=1 Pg kβg k2 where βg denotes a collection of regresP
sion coefficients belonging to group g, kxk2 = ( i x2i )1/2
is the `2 norm, and Pg is the number of predictors in group g.
This approach is easily generalized, leading to, e.g., grouped
SCAD estimators (Wang et al., 2007). Selection can be done
at two separate levels: selection of groups and selection of
predictors-within-groups. The group lasso gives selection at
the group level, while the sparse group lasso gives selection
at both levels simultaneously (Simon et al., 2013). Groups
in general can be overlapping (with a predictor belonging to
potentially more than one group) or non-overlapping (with
a predictor belonging to at-most one group). Overlapping
group structures have also been extensively studied in the
context of linear models, leading to tools such as the overlapping group lasso (or SCAD) (Jacob et al., 2009). Bayesian
approaches, which incorporate grouping information into
an informative prior to select both groups and predictorswithin-groups, also abound (Rockova & Lesaffre, 2014; Xu
& Ghosh, 2015; Stingo & Vannucci, 2011).
There has been less attention paid to nonparametric regression models in the literature. In the context of genomic
data, flexible models are of interest due to the fact that
genetic effects are potentially nonlinear and may possess
complex interaction structures (Basu et al., 2018). We take
a Bayesian nonparametric approach to incorporating grouping information by embedding the grouping information
into a suitably-specified prior over the trees in a Bayesian
additive regression trees (BART) ensemble. The BART
framework, which gives a Bayesian variant of the popular
random forests (Breiman, 2001) and boosting (Freund et al.,
1999) algorithms, has become increasingly popular in recent
years due to its ease-of-use and high performance as a general purpose prediction tool. BART has become particularly
popular in causal inference settings, where it consistently

