Why do Larger Models Generalize Better? A Theoretical Perspective via the
XOR Problem
Alon Brutzkus 1 Amir Globerson 1

Abstract
Empirical evidence suggests that neural networks
with ReLU activations generalize better with overparameterization. However, there is currently no
theoretical analysis that explains this observation.
In this work, we provide theoretical and empirical evidence that, in certain cases, overparameterized convolutional networks generalize better
than small networks because of an interplay between weight clustering and feature exploration
at initialization. We demonstrate this theoretically for a 3-layer convolutional neural network
with max-pooling, in a novel setting which extends the XOR problem. We show that this interplay implies that with overparameterization,
gradient descent converges to global minima with
better generalization performance compared to
global minima of small networks. Empirically,
we demonstrate these phenomena for a 3-layer
convolutional neural network in the MNIST task.

1. Introduction
Most successful deep learning models use more parameters
than needed to achieve zero training error. This is typically
referred to as overparameterization. Indeed, it can be argued that overparameterization is one of the key techniques
that has led to the remarkable success of neural networks.
However, there is still no theoretical account for its effectiveness.
One very intriguing observation in this context is that overparameterized networks with ReLU activations, which are
trained with gradient based methods, often exhibit better
generalization error than smaller networks (Neyshabur et al.,
2014; 2019; Novak et al., 2018). In particular, it often
happens that two networks, one with N1 neurons and one
1

Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, Israel. Correspondence to: Alon Brutzkus <alonbrutzkus@mail.tau.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

with N2 > N1 neurons achieve zero training error, but the
larger network has better test error. This somewhat counterintuitive observation suggests that first-order methods which
are trained on overparameterized networks have an inductive bias towards solutions with better generalization performance. Understanding this inductive bias is a necessary step
towards a full understanding of neural networks in practice.
Providing theoretical guarantees for overparameterizatied
networks is extremely challenging. To show a generalization gap between smaller and larger models, one needs to
prove that large networks have better sample complexity
than smaller ones. However, current generalization bounds
that are based on complexity measures do not offer such
guarantees. Furthermore, analyzing the training dynamics
of non-linear neural networks is a major challenge even
for very simple learning tasks. It is thus natural to try and
analyze a simplified scenario, which ideally shares various
features with real-world settings.
In this work we follow this approach and show that a possible explanation for the success of overparameterization is a
combination of two effects: weight exploration and weight
clustering. Weight exploration refers to the fact that larger
models explore the set of possible weights more effectively
since they have more neurons in each layer. Weight clustering is an effect we demonstrate here, which refers to the fact
that weight vectors in the same layer tend to cluster around
a small number of prototypes.
To see informally how these effects act in the case of overparameterization, consider a binary classification problem
and a training set. The training set typically contains multiple patterns that discriminate between the two classes. The
smaller network will find detectors (e.g., convolutional filters) for a subset of these patterns and reach zero training
error, but not generalize because it is missing some of the
patterns. This is a result of an under-exploration effect for
the small net. On the other hand, the larger net has better
exploration and will find more relevant detectors for classification. Furthermore, due to the clustering effect its weight
vectors will be close to a small set of prototypes. Therefore
the effective capacity of the overall model will be restricted,
leading to good generalization.
The contribution of Alon B. is part of Ph.D. thesis research

