Finite-Time Analysis of Distributed TD(0) with Linear Function
Approximation for Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Thinh T. Doan 1 2 Siva Theja Maguluri 1 Justin Romberg 2

Abstract
We study the policy evaluation problem in multiagent reinforcement learning. In this problem, a
group of agents work cooperatively to evaluate
the value function for the global discounted accumulative reward problem, which is composed
of local rewards observed by the agents. Over
a series of time steps, the agents act, get rewarded, update their local estimate of the value
function, then communicate with their neighbors.
The local update at each agent can be interpreted
as a distributed consensus-based variant of the
popular temporal difference learning algorithm
TD(0). While distributed reinforcement learning algorithms have been presented in the literature, almost nothing is known about their convergence rate. Our main contribution is providing
a finite-time analysis for the convergence of the
distributed TD(0) algorithm. We do this when
the communication network between the agents
is time-varying in general. We obtain an explicit
upper bound on the rate of convergence of this
algorithm as a function of the network topology
and the discount factor. Our results mirror what
we would expect from using distributed stochastic
gradient descent for solving convex optimization
problems.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) offers a general paradigm for
learning optimal policies in stochastic control problems
based on simulation (Sutton & Barto, 1998; Bertsekas &
Tsitsiklis, 1999; Szepesvari, 2010). In this context, an agent
seeks to find an optimal policy through interacting with the
1
School of Industrial and Systems Engineering 2 School of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Instiute of Technology, GA, 30332, USA. Correspondence to: Thinh T. Doan
<thinhdoan@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

environment, often modeled as a Markov Decision Process
(MDP), with the goal of optimizing its long-term future
reward (or cost). During the last few years, RL has been
recognized as a crucial solution for solving many challenging practical problems, such as, autonomous driving (Chen
et al., 2015), robotics (Gu et al., 2017), helicopter flight
(Abbeel et al., 2007), board games (Silver et al., 2016), and
power networks (Kar et al., 2013).
A central problem in RL is to estimate the accumulative
reward (value function) for a given stationary policy of an
MDP, often referred to as the policy evaluation problem.
This problem arises as a subproblem in the important policy
iteration method in RL (Sutton & Barto, 1998; Bertsekas &
Tsitsiklis, 1999). Perhaps, the most popular method for solving this problem is temporal-difference learning (TD(λ)),
originally proposed by Sutton (Sutton, 1988) and analyzed
explicitly for various scenarios in (Dayan, 1992; Gurvits
et al., 1994; Pineda, 1997; Tsitsiklis & Roy, 1997; 1999).
This method approximates the long-term future cost as a
function of current state, and depends on a scalar λ ∈ [0, 1]
that controls a trade-off between the accuracy of the approximation and the susceptibility to simulation noise. In this
paper, we focus on the special case λ = 0, i.e., the TD(0)
algorithm with function approximation, which has received
a great success for solving many complicated problems involving a very large state space (Tesauro, 1995; Mnih et al.,
2015; Silver et al., 2016). This algorithm has a straightforward implementation, and can be executed incrementally as
observation are made.
Our interest in this paper is to study the policy evaluation
problem in multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL),
where a group of agents operate in an environment. We are
motivated by broad applications of the multi-agent paradigm
within engineering, for example, mobile sensor networks
(Cortes et al., 2004; Ogren et al., 2004), cell networks (Bennis et al., 2013), and power networks (Kar et al., 2013). In
this context, each agent takes its own action based on the
current state, and consequently a new state is determined.
Moreover, the agents receive different local rewards, which
are the functions of their current state, their new state, and
their action. We assume that each agent only knows its own
local reward. Their goal is to cooperatively evaluate the

