Robust Influence Maximization for Hyperparametric Models

Dimitris Kalimeris 1 Gal Kaplun 1 Yaron Singer 1

Abstract
In this paper we study the problem of robust influence maximization in the independent cascade
model under a hyperparametric assumption. In
social networks users influence and are influenced
by individuals with similar characteristics and
as such they are associated with some features.
A recent surging research direction in influence
maximization focuses on the case where the edge
probabilities on the graph are not arbitrary but are
generated as a function of the features of the users
and a global hyperparameter. We propose a model
where the objective is to maximize the worst-case
number of influenced users for any possible value
of that hyperparameter. We provide theoretical
results showing that proper robust solution in our
model is NP-hard and an algorithm that achieves
improper robust optimization. We make-use of
sampling based techniques and of the renowned
multiplicative weight updates algorithm. Additionally we validate our method empirically and
prove that it outperforms the state-of-the-art robust influence maximization techniques.

1. Introduction
In this paper we study robust influence maximization for hyperparametric diffusion models. First studied by Domingos
and Richardson (Domingos & Richardson, 2001) and later
elegantly formulated in seminal work by Kempe, Kleinberg,
and Tardos (Kempe et al., 2003), influence maximization is
the algorithmic task of selecting a small set of individuals
who can effectively spread information in a network. The
problem we formulate and address in this paper pertains to
influence maximization for cases in which the information
spread model in the network is subject to some uncertainty.
1
Department of Computer Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Dimitris
Kalimeris <kalimeris@g.harvard.edu>, Gal Kaplun <galkaplun@g.harvard.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

The most well studied model for information spread is the
celebrated Independent Cascade (IC) model. In this model
the social network is modeled by a graph and every pair of
nodes u, v that are connected with an edge e = (u, v) ∈ E
are associated with a probability pe that quantifies the probability of u spreading information to v. Information spread in
this model stochastically progresses from a set of nodes that
initiates information to the rest of the nodes in the network
as dictated by the graph topology and probabilities encoded
on the edges. Influence maximization is then the algorithmic
task of selecting a fixed set of individuals that maximize the
expected number of nodes that receive information. More
formally, given a graph G = (V, E, p) where V is the set of
nodes, E is the set of edges, and p ∈ [0, 1]|E| is the vector
of edge probabilities, and a parameter k ≤ |V |, influence
maximization is the optimization problem:
max fp (S)

S:|S|≤k

where fp (S) is the expected number of nodes in the network
that receive information when S is the initial set of nodes
that spreads information.
In their seminal work, Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos proved
that when p is known influence maximization can be reduced to monotone submodular maximization under a cardinality constraint. Consequently, a simple greedy algorithm
that iteratively selects the node whose marginal influence is
approximately maximal obtains a solution that is arbitrarily
close to a 1 − 1/e factor of optimal (Nemhauser et al., 1978).
1.1. Influence maximization under model uncertainty
In recent years there has been a growing concern regarding
the sensitivity of influence maximization to model uncertainty (Goyal et al., 2011; Adiga et al., 2013). In particular,
small perturbations or uncertainty regarding the probability
vector can have dramatic effects on the quality of a solution
(see example illustrated in Figure 1), and even approximating the stability of an instance to small perturbations is
intractable (He & Kempe, 2015).
1.2. Influence maximization under different models
The sensitivity to small errors that we mentioned in the
previous subsection is one issue. The second issue that one
needs to consider is that we might actually have several

