On the statistical rate of nonlinear recovery in generative models with
heavy-tailed data
Xiaohan Wei 1 Zhuoran Yang 2 Zhaoran Wang 3

Abstract
We consider estimating a high-dimensional vector from non-linear measurements where the unknown vector is represented by a generative model
G : Rk ! Rd with k ⌧ d. Such a model
poses structural priors on the unknown vector
without having a dedicated basis, and in particular allows new and efficient approaches solving
recovery problems with number of measurements
far less than the ambient dimension of the vector. While progresses have been made recently
regarding theoretical understandings on the linear Gaussian measurements, much less is known
when the model is possibly misspecified and the
measurements are non-Gaussian. In this paper,
we make a step towards such a direction by considering the scenario where the measurements
are non-Gaussian, subject to possibly unknown
nonlinear transformations and the responses are
heavy-tailed. We then propose new estimators
via score functions based on the first and second
order Stein’s identity, and prove the sample size
bound of m = O(k" 2 log(L/")) achieving an
" error in the form of exponential concentration
inequalities. Furthermore, for the special case
of multi-layer ReLU generative model, we improve the sample bound by a logarithm factor to
m = O(k" 2 log(d)), matching the state-of-art
statistical rate in compressed sensing for estimating k-sparse vectors. On the technical side, we
develop new chaining methods bounding heavytailed processes, which could be of independent
interest.
1

Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 2 Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton,
NJ, USA. 3 Department of Industrial Engineering and Management
Sciences, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA. Correspondence to: Xiaohan Wei <xiaohanw@usc.edu>, Zhuoran Yang
<zy6@princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Consider a random pair (x, y) 2 Rd ⇥ R with the distribution satisfying the following semi-parametrized single index
model:
y = f hx, G(✓⇤ )i, ⇠ ,

(1)

where ✓⇤ 2 Rk , the vector x 2 Rd is a random vector following a probability density p(x), ⇠ is a random noise variable assumed to be independent of x, and y is the response
variable. The function G : Rk ! Rd is an L-Lipschitz
mapping generating a high-dimensional vector G(✓⇤ ) 2 Rd
from a low-dimensional signal ✓⇤ 2 Rk . Such a mapping
can be arbitrary but otherwise fixed generator, which implicitly captures the structural property of the high-dimensional
vector. For example, in neural nets based generative models
such as generative adversarial nets (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al., 2014), the generator is responsible for generating high
dimensional vectors in Rd that resemble the samples in the
training image dataset from a low dimensional representation space via a deep neural network. Since the image
samples are often distributed near a low-dimensional manifold of Rd , a well-trained generative model is able to capture
such a manifold structure, which can be difficult to represent
in canonical basis otherwise.
The non-linear link function f : R2 ! R is unknown.
Throughout the paper, we make no specific assumption
on the form of f (·) apart from differentiability. Our goal
is to recover the high dimensional vector G(✓⇤ ) from a
m
sequence of i.i.d. copies {(xi , yi )}i=1 of (x, y). Since
⇤
1
f hx, G(✓ )i, ⇠ = f a hx, a · G(✓⇤ )i, ⇠ for any a >
0, one can only hope to recover G(✓⇤ ) up to constant scaling.
For simplicity of presentation, we assume that kG(✓⇤ )k2 =
1 throughout the paper.
Despite sharing some similarities with compressed sensing,
computing a consistent estimator of G(✓⇤ ) in such a scenario is challenging mainly because of the coupling of two
aspects: First, in contrast to the classical structured signal
recovery (Hastie et al., 2015; Lecué & Mendelson, 2014;
Candes et al., 2006) which rely on the notion of sparsity
on some chosen basis, the structure of the unknown here
is inherited in the generative model G(·). The proposed
method is expected to capture a complexity measure of G(·)

