Optimal Algorithms for Lipschitz Bandits with Heavy-tailed Rewards

Shiyin Lu 1 Guanghui Wang 1 Yao Hu 2 Lijun Zhang 1

Abstract
We study Lipschitz bandits, where a learner repeatedly plays one arm from an infinite arm set
and then receives a stochastic reward whose expectation is a Lipschitz function of the chosen arm.
Most of existing work assume the reward distributions are bounded or at least sub-Gaussian, and
thus do not apply to heavy-tailed rewards arising
in many real-world scenarios such as web advertising and financial markets. To address this limitation, in this paper we relax the assumption on
rewards to allow arbitrary distributions that have
finite (1 + )-th moments for some  ∈ (0, 1], and
propose algorithms that enjoy
a sublinear regret

e T (dz +1)/(dz ++1) where T is the time
of O
horizon and dz is the zooming dimension. The
key idea is to exploit the Lipschitz property of
the expected reward function by adaptively discretizing the arm set, and employ upper confidence bound policies with robust mean estimators
designed for heavy-tailed distributions. Furthermore, we provide a lower bound for Lipschitz
bandits with heavy-tailed rewards, and show that
our algorithms are optimal in terms of T . Finally,
we conduct numerical experiments to demonstrate
the effectiveness of our algorithms.

1. Introduction

from a fixed but unknown probability distribution associated
with the chosen arm. In order to maximize his gain, the
learner has to balance the trade-off between exploration and
exploitation, i.e., pulling the less pulled arms to acquire
more information while playing the seemingly optimal arms
to obtain more reward. For this problem, the standard metric
is regret, defined as the difference between the cumulative
reward of the learner and that of the best arm in hindsight.
In their seminal paper, Lai & Robbins (1985) established an
Ω(K log T ) lower bound on regret, and various algorithms
matching this lower bound have been developed (Lai &
Robbins, 1985; Agrawal, 1995b; Auer et al., 2002a).
One limitation of the stochastic MAB is that the lower bound
scales linearly with the number of arms K, and thus deteriorates as K goes large and becomes vacuous when the
arm set is infinite. Another limitation is the fully independent setting on arms which is too pessimistic, since in
many real-world scenarios the expected rewards of different
arms could be related. To address these limitations, Kleinberg et al. (2008a) and Bubeck et al. (2009) introduced a
variant of the stochastic MAB—Lipschitz bandits, which
admits infinite arm set and models the relation between the
expected rewards of different arms through a Lipschitz function. More precisely, in this setting the arm set X can be
from any metric space (X , D), and each time after pulling
an arm x ∈ X , the learner receives a reward y sampled
independently from some distribution Px satisfying
E[y|x] = EPx [y] = µ(x)

The multi-armed bandits (MAB) is a powerful framework
for modeling sequential decision-making under uncertainty,
and has found applications in various areas such as medical
trials (Robbins, 1952), news recommendation (Li et al.,
2010), and network routing (Kveton et al., 2015). In the
classic stochastic MAB, there are K independent arms and
a learner. In each round, the learner chooses one of K arms
to play and then obtains a reward drawn i.i.d. over time

where µ is called the expected reward function and is Lipschitz with respect to the metric D, i.e.,
|µ(u) − µ(v)| ≤ D(u, v), ∀u, v ∈ X .
The goal of the learner is to minimize the (pseudo) regret:
R(T ) = T max µ(x) −
x∈X

1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China 2 YouKu Cognitive and
Intelligent Lab, Alibaba Group, Beijing 100102, China. Correspondence to: Lijun Zhang <zhanglj@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.
th

Proceedings of the 36 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

T
X

µ(xt )

t=1

where xt is the arm chosen by the learner in round t.
While the Lipschitz bandits has been extensively studied in
the literature (Bubeck et al., 2011; Kleinberg et al., 2013;
Slivkins, 2014; Magureanu et al., 2014; Locatelli & Carpentier, 2018), most of existing work either assume the rewards

