Distributional Multivariate Policy Evaluation and Exploration with the
Bellman GAN
Dror Freirich 1 Tzahi Shimkin 1 Ron Meir 1 Aviv Tamar 2

Abstract
The recently proposed distributional approach
to reinforcement learning (DiRL) is centered on
learning the distribution of the reward-to-go, often
referred to as the value distribution. In this work,
we show that the distributional Bellman equation,
which drives DiRL methods, is equivalent to a
generative adversarial network (GAN) model. In
this formulation, DiRL can be seen as learning a
deep generative model of the value distribution,
driven by the discrepancy between the distribution of the current value, and the distribution of
the sum of current reward and next value. We use
this insight to propose a GAN-based approach to
DiRL, which leverages the strengths of GANs in
learning distributions of high-dimensional data.
In particular, we show that our GAN approach
can be used for DiRL with multivariate rewards,
an important setting which cannot be tackled with
prior methods. The multivariate setting also allows us to unify learning the distribution of values
and state transitions, allowing us to devise a novel
exploration method that is driven by the discrepancy in estimating both values and states.

1. Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has been applied to
a wide range of problems in robotics and control, where
policies can be learned according to sensory inputs without
assuming a model of the environment (Mnih et al., 2015;
Schulman et al., 2015). Until recent years, most RL methods have relied on estimating the expected future return,
a.k.a. the ‘value function’, for carrying out the next action.
Recent studies (Bellemare et al., 2017; Dabney et al., 2017)
have suggested that a Distributional Reinforcement Learn1

The Viterbi Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Technion - Israel
Institute of Technology 2 Berkeley AI Research Lab, UC Berkeley.
Correspondence to: Dror Freirich <drorfrc@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

ing (DiRL) approach, where the value distribution, rather
than the expectation are learned, leads to improved learning
performance1 .
DiRL algorithms such as C51 (Bellemare et al., 2017) and
Quantile Regression DQN (Dabney et al., 2017) learn a mapping from states to a parametric distribution over the return,
based on a distributional Bellman equation. Empirically, the
distributional perspective to RL has been shown to significantly improve performance on challenging benchmarks
(Bellemare et al., 2017; Hessel et al., 2017).
In this work, we provide a new approach to DiRL, building
on an equivalence between the distributional Bellman equation and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Arjovsky et al., 2017). From this perspective, DiRL can be seen as learning a deep generative model
of the value distribution, driven by the discrepancy between
the distribution of the current value, and the distribution
of the sum of current reward and next value. This view
allows us to leverage GAN techniques for improving DiRL
algorithms. In particular, GANs are known to be effective
models for high-dimensional and correlated data such as
images. We exploit this fact to develop a DiRL method
for multivariate rewards, a setting for which previous DiRL
methods are not suitable.
Multivariate rewards are important for domains where the
natural performance evaluation of a policy depends on several different factors that cannot be easily combined into
a single reward scalar (Vamplew et al., 2011). Here, we
also show that the multivariate reward approach allows us to
unify learning the distribution of future rewards and states
under a common learning framework. We use this combined
framework to develop a novel exploration strategy for RL,
where the signal driving the exploration is the discrepancy
in the learned distribution of states and rewards. We demonstrate the efficiency on high-dimensional test-benches.
In summary, our specific contributions in this work are the
following. (1) Demonstrate an equivalence between the
distributional Bellman equation and GANs, where we con1
While the value is customarily defined as an expectation over
a random variable, namely the return given in (1), we follow (Bellemare et al., 2017) and use the term value distribution for the distribution of the return.

