Improving Model Selection by Employing the Test Data

Max Westphal 1 Werner Brannath 1

Abstract
Model selection and evaluation are usually strictly
separated by means of data splitting to enable an
unbiased estimation and a simple statistical inference for the unknown generalization performance
of the final prediction model. We investigate the
properties of novel evaluation strategies, namely
when the final model is selected based on empirical performances on the test data. To guard
against selection induced overoptimism, we employ a parametric multiple test correction based
on the approximate multivariate distribution of
performance estimates. Our numerical experiments involve training common machine learning algorithms (EN, CART, SVM, XGB) on various artificial classification tasks. At its core, our
proposed approach improves model selection in
terms of the expected final model performance
without introducing overoptimism. We furthermore observed a higher probability for a successful evaluation study, making it easier in practice
to empirically demonstrate a sufficiently high predictive performance.

This is in particular true when labelled data is expensive to
acquire and datasets are thus only of modest size or the employed statistical methodology is inadequate for the particular study design. This issue is even more severe in critical
applications like automated and assisted medical diagnosis
where consequences could be ultimately life-threatening. In
such scenarios, machine learning researches should conduct
a rigorous model evaluation study and in fact may be even
required to do so by regulators (Pepe, 2003; Knottnerus &
Buntinx, 2009). While regulation is mandatory only in a
few domains today, its introduction is heavily discussed in
many environments (Cath et al., 2018; Gómez et al., 2018;
Olhede & Wolfe, 2018; Pesapane et al., 2018; Reed, 2018).
From a statistical viewpoint, an evaluation study seeks to
provide evidence that a novel prediction model has a sufficiently high performance compared to the reference standard
(which provides the true labels). The true performance is of
course unknown in practice and needs to be estimated based
on data. Much can go wrong in this process which is why
across the machine learning literature the following threeway data split is frequently recommended (Friedman et al.,
2009; Japkowicz & Shah, 2011; Zheng, 2015; Goodfellow
et al., 2016; Géron, 2017):
1. Training: used to train all initial candidate models.

1. Motivation
Impressive progress has been made over the last years in
a vast variety of supervised machine learning applications.
End-to-end deep learning approaches have led to steadily
improving results in traditional domains as well as in novel
settings (LeCun et al., 2015; Jiang et al., 2017; Litjens et al.,
2017; Miotto et al., 2017; Ching et al., 2018).
However, several challenges remain. In this work, we consider overfitting issues and overoptimistic claims concerning
the predictive performance which are still common in applied machine learning (Boulesteix, 2009; Boulesteix &
Strobl, 2009; Jelizarow et al., 2010; Boulesteix et al., 2013).

2. Validation: used for algorithm / hyperparameter selection, the final model results from retraining this
algorithm on training and validation data.
3. Evaluation (Test): used to access the performance of
the final model.
A standard approach to address sampling variability of the
empirical test performance, is to conduct (frequentist) statistical inference of the unknown generalization performance
ϑ. This allows the construction of confidence intervals
CI1−α (ϑ) = (ϑl , ϑu )

(1)

1

Institute for Statistics, Faculty 3: Mathematics and Computer
Science, University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany. Correspondence to: Max Westphal <mwestphal@uni-bremen.de>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

based on the test data such that CI1−α (ϑ) covers ϑ with
probability 1 − α. More formally, a test decision for the
hypothesis problem
H0 : ϑ ≤ ϑ0

vs. H1 : ϑ > ϑ0

(2)

