Generalized Approximate Survey Propagation
for High-Dimensional Estimation

Luca Saglietti 1 2 Yue M. Lu 3 Carlo Lucibello 4 1

Abstract
In Generalized Linear Estimation (GLE) problems, we seek to estimate a signal that is observed through a linear transform followed by
a component-wise, possibly nonlinear and noisy,
channel. In the Bayesian optimal setting, Generalized Approximate Message Passing (GAMP) is
known to achieve optimal performance for GLE.
However, its performance can significantly degrade whenever there is a mismatch between the
assumed and the true generative model, a situation frequently encountered in practice. In this
paper, we propose a new algorithm, named Generalized Approximate Survey Propagation (GASP),
for solving GLE in the presence of prior or model
mis-specifications. As a prototypical example, we
consider the phase retrieval problem, where we
show that GASP outperforms the corresponding
GAMP, reducing the reconstruction threshold and,
for certain choices of its parameters, approaching
Bayesian optimal performance. Furthermore, we
present a set of State Evolution equations that exactly characterize the dynamics of GASP in the
high-dimensional limit.

1. Introduction
Approximate message passing (AMP) algorithms have become a well established tool in the study of inference problems (Donoho et al., 2009; Donoho & Montanari, 2016;
Advani & Ganguli, 2016) that can be represented by dense
graphical models. An important feature of AMP is that its
dynamical behavior in the large system limit can be exactly
1

Microsoft Research New England, Cambridge, MA 02142,
USA 2 Italian Institute for Genomic Medicine, Turin, Italy 3 John A.
Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA 4 Bocconi Institute for Data
Science and Analytics, Bocconi University, Milan, Italy. Correspondence to: Carlo Lucibello <carlo.lucibello@unibocconi.it>,
Luca Saglietti <luca.saglietti@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

predicted through a dynamical system involving only scalar
quantities called State Evolution (SE) (Bayati & Montanari, 2011). This relationship paved the way for a series of
rigorous results (Rangan & Fletcher, 2012; Deshpande &
Montanari, 2014; Deshpande et al., 2016). It also helps clarify the connection to several fascinating predictions obtained
through the replica analysis in statistical physics (Mézard
et al., 1987). In the optimal Bayesian setting, where one
has perfect information on the process underlying data generation, AMP has been empirically shown to achieve optimal performances among polynomial algorithms for many
different problems. However, in the more realistic case
of mismatch between the assumed and the true generative
model, i.e. when AMP is not derived on the true posterior
distribution, it may become sub-optimal. A possible source
of problems for the AMP class of algorithms is the outbreak of Replica Symmetry Breaking (Mézard et al., 1987),
a scenario where an exponential number of fixed point and
algorithmic barriers dominate the free energy landscape explored by AMP. This phenomena can be accentuated in case
of model mismatch: a notable example is maximum likelihood estimation (as opposed to estimation by the posterior
mean, which corresponds to the low temperature limit of a
statistical physics model.
These considerations are well known within the physics
community of disordered systems (Krzakala et al., 2016),
where the problem of signal estimation is informally referred to as “crystal hunting”. Estimation problems in high
dimensions are characterized by a complex energy-entropy
competition where the true signal is hidden in a vast and potentially rough landscape. In a wide class of problems, one
observes the presence of a algorithmically “hard” phase for
some range of values for the parameters defining the problem (e.g. signal-to-noise ration). In this regime, all known
polynomial complexity algorithms fail to saturate the information theoretic bound (Ricci-Tersenghi et al., 2019).
While reconstruction is possible in principle, algorithms
are trapped in a region of the configuration space with low
overlap with the signal and many local minima (Antenucci
et al., 2019a; Ros et al., 2019).
In a recent work (Antenucci et al., 2019b), a novel messagepassing algorithm, Approximate Survey Propagation (ASP),

