Kernel Mean Matching for Content Addressability of GANs

Wittawat Jitkrittum * 1 Patsorn Sangkloy * 2 Muhammad Waleed Gondal 1 Amit Raj 2
James Hays 2 Bernhard Schölkopf 1

Abstract
We propose a novel procedure which adds
“content-addressability” to any given unconditional implicit model e.g., a generative adversarial network (GAN). The procedure allows users
to control the generative process by specifying
a set (arbitrary size) of desired examples based
on which similar samples are generated from the
model. The proposed approach, based on kernel
mean matching, is applicable to any generative
models which transform latent vectors to samples, and does not require retraining of the model.
Experiments on various high-dimensional image
generation problems (CelebA-HQ, LSUN bedroom, bridge, tower) show that our approach is
able to generate images which are consistent with
the input set, while retaining the image quality of
the original model. To our knowledge, this is the
first work that attempts to construct, at test time,
a content-addressable generative model from a
trained marginal model.

1. Introduction
Modern high-dimensional, complex generative models take
the form of implicit models: these are models which generate a sample by transforming a latent random vector (also
known as code) with a function given by a deep neural network (Mohamed and Lakshminarayanan, 2016; Nowozin
et al., 2016). A state-of-the-art class of implicit models has
been the generative adversarial networks (GANs, Goodfellow et al., 2014), which have been shown to learn to generate high-resolution realistic natural images (Arjovsky et al.,
2017; Karras et al., 2017; Mescheder et al., 2018).
*
1
Equal contribution
Empirical Inference Department,
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Germany
2
School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of
Technology, USA. Correspondence to:
Wittawat Jitkrittum <wittawat@tuebingen.mpg.de>, Patsorn Sangkloy <patsorn.sangkloy@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

In image generative modeling, it is desirable to have control over how images are generated. An issue with typical
implicit models is that it is unclear how the latent code can
be manipulated to generate images which satisfy a given
description (e.g., outdoor scene containing a red bridge).
In general, without explicitly imposing structure into the
latent space, there is no obvious relationship between the
latent code and the generated images. This problem was
the basis for InfoGAN (Chen et al., 2016) which augments
the GAN loss function with an information-theoretic regularization term to encourage disentangled representation of
the latent code. Different forms of explicit control signals
for image generation were considered in the literature, including class labels of images (Mirza and Osindero, 2014;
Nguyen et al., 2017), text description (Reed et al., 2016; Xu
et al., 2018), visual attributes (Yan et al., 2016), and context
variables (Ren et al., 2016).
Among others, a less explored form of control signal has
been visual content (an image, or a set of images in general). Given an input set of images and a similarity measure, content-based image generation seeks to generate a
diverse set of images that are perceptually or semantically
similar to the given input set. Each output image is expected to contain features of some or all input images. To
take a concrete example, the input set might contain two
face images: one with [light hair, dark skin], and another
with [dark hair, light skin]. If two faces are considered
similar when at least one of these attributes match, then
valid generated faces might be with [light hair, light skin]
or [dark hair, dark skin]. To solve this task, it is crucial to
be able to construct set-level representation by aggregating
features in each input image. We note that we distinguish
this problem from image-to-image translation where certain aspects of one input image are changed in a controlled
manner while keeping other aspects the same (Zhu et al.,
2017). Instances of the image-to-image translation problem
include image colorization (Isola et al., 2017), artistic style
transfer (Gatys et al., 2016; Huang and Belongie, 2017;
Zhu et al., 2017), sketch-to-image conversion (Sangkloy
et al., 2017), and texture completion (Xian et al., 2018).
Only a small number of existing works address contentbased image generation, and the focus has been primarily
on the case when the input set contains only one image i.e.,

