Phaseless PCA: Low-Rank Matrix Recovery from Column-wise Phaseless
Measurements
Seyedehsara Nayer 1 Praneeth Narayanamurthy 1 Namrata Vaswani 1

Abstract
This work proposes the first set of simple, practically useful, and provable algorithms for two
inter-related problems. (i) The first is low-rank
matrix recovery from magnitude-only (phaseless)
linear projections of each of its columns. This
finds important applications in phaseless dynamic
imaging, e.g., Fourier ptychographic imaging of
live biological specimens. Our guarantee shows
that, in the regime of small ranks, the sample
complexity required is only a little larger than the
order-optimal one, and much smaller than what
standard (unstructured) phase retrieval methods
need. (ii) We also study a dynamic extension of
the above which allows the low-dimensional subspace from which each image/signal (each column
of the low-rank matrix) is generated to change
with time. We introduce a simple tracking algorithm that also has a provable guarantee when the
subspace changes are piecewise constant.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been a resurgence of interest in
the classical “phase retrieval (PR)” problem (Fienup, 1982;
Gerchberg & Saxton, 1972). This involves recovering an nlength signal x∗ from the magnitudes of its Discrete Fourier
Transform (DFT) coefficients. While practical PR methods
have existed for a long time, the focus of the recent work
has been on obtaining convergence guarantees for these and
newer algorithms. For this, the generalized PR problem has
been introduced which replaces DFT by inner products with
arbitrary design vectors, ai . Thus, the goal is to recover x∗
from yi := |hai , x∗ i|, i = 1, 2, . . . , m. This line of work includes convex relaxation methods (Candes et al., 2013a;b) as
well as non-convex methods (Netrapalli et al., 2013b; Candes et al., 2015; Chen & Candes, 2015; Zhang et al., 2016;
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Iowa
State University, USA. Correspondence to: Seyedehsara Nayer
<sarana@iastate.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Wang et al., 2016). It is easy to see that, without extra assumptions, PR requires m ≥ n. The best known guarantees
– see (Chen & Candes, 2015) and follow-up works – prove
exact recovery high probability (whp) with order-optimal
number of measurements (samples): m = Cn. Here and
below, C is reused often to refer to a constant more than
one. Much of the above work assumes that the ai ’s are independent and identically distributed (iid) standard Gaussian
vectors. There is also very recent work on guarantees for
PR methods that only need a random initialization (instead
of a carefully designed spectral initialization). Due to lack
of space we do not discuss these here. These need more
than Cn measurements.
A natural approach to reduce the sample complexity is to impose structure on the unknown signal(s). There is little work
on structured PR with the exception of sparse PR which
has been extensively studied e.g., (Jaganathan et al., 2012;
Shechtman et al., 2014; Szameit et al., 2012). Low-rankness
is the other common structure. There seem to be two natural
approaches to exploit it. The first is to consider recovery
from phaseless dense linear projections of the entire lowrank matrix. However, this model implicitly assumes that
the signal/image, whose measurements are available, can
be reshaped into a low-rank matrix. This is an assumption
that is often not valid. A more reasonable (and commonly
used) model is to assume that a set, or a time sequence, of
signals/images together form a low-rank matrix and we have
phaseless linear projections of each signal or image. This
latter model finds applications in many dynamic imaging
problems where the phase cannot be recovered. For example, in Fourier ptychography, it allows for imaging of slowly
changing dynamic scenes such as live biological specimens
in vitro. Similarly, it can also be used for various other
dynamic phaseless imaging problems that occur in X-ray
and sub-diffraction imaging or in astronomy.
We study the above problem: recover a low-rank matrix
from phaseless linear projections of each of its columns. We
also study its dynamic extension, which is a more useful
problem setting when dealing with a long time sequence
of signals/images. Versions of these problems were briefly
studied in (Vaswani et al., 2017; Nayer & Vaswani, 2018;
2019) where a set of heuristics were proposed and experimentally evaluated, along with a partial attempt to analyze

