Disentangled Graph Convolutional Networks

Jianxin Ma 1 Peng Cui 1 Kun Kuang 1 Xin Wang 1 Wenwu Zhu 1

Abstract

their end-to-end nature and adoption of deep architectures.

The formation of a real-world graph typically
arises from the highly complex interaction of
many latent factors. The existing deep learning
methods for graph-structured data neglect the entanglement of the latent factors, rendering the
learned representations non-robust and hardly explainable. However, learning representations that
disentangle the latent factors poses great challenges and remains largely unexplored in the literature of graph neural networks. In this paper, we
introduce the disentangled graph convolutional
network (DisenGCN) to learn disentangled node
representations. In particular, we propose a novel
neighborhood routing mechanism, which is capable of dynamically identifying the latent factor
that may have caused the edge between a node
and one of its neighbors, and accordingly assigning the neighbor to a channel that extracts and
convolutes features specific to that factor. We theoretically prove the convergence properties of the
routing mechanism. Empirical results show that
our proposed model can achieve significant performance gains, especially when the data demonstrate the existence of many entangled factors.

Despite their enormous success, the existing graph neural
networks generally take a holistic approach to representation
learning: the representation learned for a node describes the
node’s neighborhood as a perceptual whole, and the nuances
between the different parts of the neighborhood are ignored.
Yet the formation of a real-world graph typically follows a
complex and heterogeneous process, driven by the interaction of many latent factors. For example, a person in a social
network usually connects with others for various reasons
(e.g., work, school), and therefore possesses a neighborhood
consisting of several different components. The existing
holistic approaches fail to recognize and disentangle the heterogeneous factors. As a result, the representations learned
by them could be non-robust (e.g., prone to overreact to an
irrelevant factor) and hardly explainable.

1. Introduction
Data with a graph structure, e.g., social networks, have
become increasingly prevalent. Recently, graph neural networks (Gori et al., 2005; Scarselli et al., 2009), particularly
graph convolutional networks (Bruna et al., 2014; Henaff
et al., 2015; Defferrard et al., 2016; Kipf & Welling, 2017),
have demonstrated their remarkable ability in learning representations that are highly effective for prediction, thanks to
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology,
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist), Tsinghua University,
Beijing, 100084, China. Correspondence to: Jianxin Ma
<majx13fromthu@gmail.com>, Peng Cui, Xin Wang, Wenwu
Zhu <{cuip,xin wang,wwzhu}@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

More recently, disentangled representation learning has
gained considerable attention, in particular in the field of
image representation learning (Higgins et al., 2016; Chen
et al., 2017; Alemi et al., 2017; Kim & Mnih, 2018). It
aims to learn representations that separate the explanatory
factors of variations behind the data. Such representations
are demonstrated to be more resilient to the complex variants (Bengio et al., 2013), and able to bring enhanced generalization ability as well as improved robustness to adversarial attack (Alemi et al., 2017). Moreover, the disentangled
representations are inherently more interpretable, and thus
can potentially facilitate debugging and auditing (DoshiVelez & Kim, 2017; Lipton, 2018). However, how to learn
representations that disentangle the latent factors behind a
graph remains largely unexplored in the literature of graph
neural networks.
The characteristics of graphs pose great challenges to disentangled representation learning. The complex formation
process of graphs requires the graph neural networks to have
a sophisticated mechanism for inferring the latent factor that
may have caused an edge, based on the limited information
available, such as node attributes or graph structures. In
addition, the mechanism needs to be differentiable so as to
support end-to-end training, and be capable of conducting
inductive learning in order to enable out-of-sample node
processing (Ma et al., 2018; Hamilton et al., 2017) in real
time for real-world deployment.

