Learning from Delayed Outcomes via Proxies with Applications to
Recommender Systems

Timothy A. Mann * 1 Sven Gowal * 1 András György 1 Ray Jiang 1 Huiyi Hu 1 Balaji Lakshminarayanan 1
Prav Srinivasan 1

Abstract
Predicting delayed outcomes is an important problem in recommender systems (e.g., if customers
will finish reading an ebook). We formalize the
problem as an adversarial, delayed online learning problem and consider how a proxy for the
delayed outcome (e.g., if customers read a third
of the book in 24 hours) can help minimize regret,
even though the proxy is not available when making a prediction. Motivated by our regret analysis,
we propose two neural network architectures: Factored Forecaster (FF) which is ideal if the proxy
is informative of the outcome in hindsight, and
Residual Factored Forecaster (RFF) that is robust
to a non-informative proxy. Experiments on two
real-world datasets for predicting human behavior
show that RFF outperforms both FF and a direct
forecaster that does not make use of the proxy.
Our results suggest that exploiting proxies by factorization is a promising way to mitigate the impact of long delays in human-behavior prediction
tasks.

1

Introduction

Predicting delayed outcomes is an important problem in
recommender systems and online advertising. The problem
is aggravated by a stream of new items for recommendation
while successful recommendations are determined by a delayed outcome (e.g., on the order of weeks or months). The
actual time that an outcome is delayed is less important than
the number of times a forecaster is queried for a new item
without receiving any feedback. For example, in a popular
recommender system an outcome delayed by a week might
mean that the forecaster makes millions of predictions for a
popular new item without incorporating any feedback into
*
Equal contribution 1 DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence
to: Timothy A. Mann <timothymann@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

the forecaster’s model.
Motivating Example: Consider an online marketplace for
ebooks. Our problem is to recommend ebooks that a customer will finish within 90 days of its purchase. Similarly
to YouTube video recommendations (Davidson et al., 2010),
when a customer visits, the marketplace (1) generates a
small set of ebook candidates, (2) scores each of the candidates, and (3) presents them in descending order of predicted probability of finishing the book. When an ebook
is purchased, the outcome is unknown for 90 days. The
approach taken by much of the prior work on learning with
delay (Weinberger & Ordentlich, 2002; Mesterharm, 2005;
Joulani et al., 2013; Quanrud & Khashabi, 2015) would
require waiting the whole 90 days to see the outcome. However, new books are added to the marketplace every day.
If we waited 90 days before we can accurately predict the
engagement probability of a new book, the marketplace will
miss out on many potential sales. While generalization can
help to mitigate this problem, per product memorization
is important for large scale recommender systems (Cheng
et al., 2016). A complementary approach could make use of
a less-delayed proxy for the delayed outcome. For example,
one day after a purchase we can define a proxy based on
the furthest page reached in the ebook. Clearly, this proxy
provides some information about the eventual outcome. On
the other hand, we are interested in predicting the eventual
outcome, not the proxy. This leads to the main question
studied in this paper: How can we learn to predict delayed
outcomes via a proxy?
The Problem: We formulate learning from delayed outcomes as a full information online learning problem where
the goal is to minimize regret (Hazan et al., 2016). The
online learning framework is ideal for predicting human
responses (e.g., recommender systems), because it does not
make distributional assumptions about the data. In our motivating example, ebook candidates are not generated by
a fixed distribution, since new books are being added and
the popularity of books changes over time. For these reasons, we model the problem as a delayed, adversarial online
learning problem with less-delayed proxies, where instances
are selected by an oblivious adversary but the proxies and

