CHiVE: Varying Prosody in Speech Synthesis with a Linguistically Driven
Dynamic Hierarchical Conditional Variational Network

Vincent Wan 1 Chun-an Chan 1 Tom Kenter 1 Jakub Vit 2 Rob Clark 1

Abstract
The prosodic aspects of speech signals produced
by current text-to-speech systems are typically
averaged over training material, and as such lack
the variety and liveliness found in natural speech.
To avoid monotony and averaged prosody contours, it is desirable to have a way of modeling
the variation in the prosodic aspects of speech,
so audio signals can be synthesized in multiple
ways for a given text. We present a new, hierarchically structured conditional variational autoencoder to generate prosodic features (fundamental frequency, energy and duration) suitable for
use with a vocoder or a generative model like
WaveNet. At inference time, an embedding representing the prosody of a sentence may be sampled
from the variational layer to allow for prosodic
variation. To efficiently capture the hierarchical
nature of the linguistic input (words, syllables
and phones), both the encoder and decoder parts
of the auto-encoder are hierarchical, in line with
the linguistic structure, with layers being clocked
dynamically at the respective rates. We show in
our experiments that our dynamic hierarchical
network outperforms a non-hierarchical state-ofthe-art baseline, and, additionally, that prosody
transfer across sentences is possible by employing the prosody embedding of one sentence to
generate the speech signal of another.

1. Introduction
Most current text-to-speech (TTS) prosody modeling
paradigms implicitly assume a one-to-one mapping between
text and prosody and fail to recognize the one-to-many nature of the task, i.e., there is a large number of ways in
1

TTS Research, Google UK, London 2 University of West Bohemia, work carried out whilst at Google. Correspondence to: Tom
Kenter <tomkenter@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Prosodic features
Linguistic features

μ
Encoder

sample
σ

Decoder

Predicted prosodic
features

sentence
prosody
embedding

Figure 1. High-level overview of the CHiVE model at training
time.

which a given sequence of words can be spoken. This leads
to an averaging effect and as such a lack of variation and
variety in generated synthetic speech. This work aims to
model prosody in a way that avoids this problem and works
towards allowing mechanisms to control the variation in the
generated prosody in a linguistically motivated way.
Prosody prediction in TTS is usually concerned with providing segment durations and fundamental frequency (F0 )
contours for the utterance being synthesized. These targets
are used to guide unit selection (Fujii et al., 2003), form
the input features to a vocoder (Yoshimura et al., 1999), or
drive a WaveNet-like model (Oord et al., 2016). The way
in which prosody models are traditionally built has a number of inherent problems. Firstly, as stated above, there is
an underlying assumption that there is a unique mapping
from a given text or linguistic specification to a prosodic
realization. Secondly, duration is modeled independently
of F0 , e.g., (Zen et al., 2016). Lastly, modeling techniques
are generally frame- or phone-based and as such, lack the
ability to ensure linguistically valid prosodic contours for
an utterance as a whole.
In this paper we propose a new model to explicitly address
the problems described above. We present a model called a
Clockwork Hierarchical Variational autoEncoder (CHiVE),
that produces F0 and duration and, additionally, c0 (the 0th
cepstrum coefficient) as energy, which is a strong prosodic
correlate. In our work, these predicted prosodic features
are used to drive a WaveNet model (Oord et al., 2016) to
produce the final speech signal.
The CHiVE model is trained as a conditional variational
auto-encoder (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Sohn et al., 2015).
A high-level graphical overview is provided in Figure 1.
The encoder has both linguistic features (a matrix represented by a blue rectangle) and prosodic features (green

