Stay With Me: Lifetime Maximization Through
Heteroscedastic Linear Bandits With Reneging

Ping-Chun Hsieh * 1 Xi Liu * 1 Anirban Bhattacharya 2 P. R. Kumar 1

Abstract
Sequential decision making for lifetime maximization is a critical problem in many real-world
applications, such as medical treatment and portfolio selection. In these applications, a “reneging” phenomenon, where participants may disengage from future interactions after observing an
unsatisfiable outcome, is rather prevalent. To address the above issue, this paper proposes a model
of heteroscedastic linear bandits with reneging,
which allows each participant to have a distinct
“satisfaction level,” with any interaction outcome
falling short of that level resulting in that participant reneging. Moreover, it allows the variance of the outcome to be context-dependent.
Based on this model, we develop a UCB-type policy,p
namely HR-UCB,
and prove that it achieves

O T (log(T ))3 regret. Finally, we validate the
performance of HR-UCB via simulations.

1. Introduction
Sequential decision problems commonly arise in a large
number of real-world applications. To name a few, in treatment to extend the life of people with terminal illnesses,
doctors are required to make decisions on which treatments
are used for patients periodically. In portfolio selection, fund
managers need to decide which portfolios are recommended
to their customers every time. In cloud computing services,
the cloud platform has to determine the resources allocated
to customers given specific requirements of their programs.
Multi-armed Bandits (MAB) (Auer et al., 2002) and one
of its most famous variants “contextual bandits” (AbbasiYadkori et al., 2011) have been extensively used to model
*
1
Equal contribution
Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, Texas A&M University, College
Station, USA 2 Department of Statistics, Texas A&M
University, College Station, USA. Correspondence to:
Ping-Chun Hsieh <pingchun.hsieh@tamu.edu>, Xi Liu
<xiliu.tamu@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

such problems. In the modeling, available choices are referred to as “arms” and a decision is regarded as a “pull” of
the corresponding arm. The decision is evaluated through
rewards that depend on the goal of the interaction.
In the aforementioned applications and services, a phenomenon that participants may disengage from future interactions commonly exist. Such behavior is referred to as
“churn”, “unsubscribe” or “reneging” in literature (Liu et al.,
2018). For instance, patients fail to survive the illnesses or
are unable to take more treatments due to the deterioration
of physical condition (McHugh et al., 2015). In portfolio
selection, fund managers earn money from customer enrollment of the selection service. The return of the selection
may turn out to be loss and thus the customer loses trust to
the manager and stops using the service (Huo & Fu, 2017).
Similarly, in the cloud computing services, the customer
may feel the resource is not well allocated and leads to an
unsatisfied throughput, thus switching to another service
provider (Ding et al., 2013). In other words, the participant
1
of the interaction has a “lifetime” that can be defined as
the total number interactions between the participant and a
service provider until reneging. The larger the number is,
the “longer” participant stay with the provider. Customer
lifetime has been recognized as a critical metric to evaluate
the success of many applications such as all above application as well as the e-commerce (Theocharous et al., 2015).
Moreover, as well known, the acquisition cost for a new customer is much higher than an existing customer (Liu et al.,
2018). Therefore, within the applications and services, one
particular vital goal is to maximize the lifetime of customers.
Our focus in this paper is to learn an optimal decision policy
that maximizes the lifetime of participants in interactions.
We consider reneging behavior based on two observations.
First, in all above scenarios, the decision maker is usually
able to observe the outcome of following their suggestion,
e.g., the physical condition of the patients after the treatment,
the money earned from purchasing the suggested portfolio
in the account, and the throughput rate of running the programs. Second, we observe that the participants in those
applications are willing to reveal their satisfaction level to
1
For simplicity, in this paper, we use the terms participant,
user, customer, and patients interchangeably.

