Submodular Streaming in All Its Glory:
Tight Approximation, Minimum Memory and Low Adaptive Complexity
Ehsan Kazemi 1 Marko Mitrovic 1 Morteza Zadimoghaddam 2 Silvio Lattanzi 2 Amin Karbasi 1

Abstract
Streaming algorithms are generally judged by
the quality of their solution, memory footprint,
and computational complexity. In this paper,
we study the problem of maximizing a monotone submodular function in the streaming setting with a cardinality constraint k. We first
propose S IEVE -S TREAMING++, which requires
just one pass over the data, keeps only O(k) elements and achieves the tight 1/2-approximation
guarantee. The best previously known streaming algorithms either achieve a suboptimal 1/4approximation with ⇥(k) memory or the optimal 1/2-approximation with O(k log k) memory.
Next, we show that by buffering a small fraction
of the stream and applying a careful filtering procedure, one can heavily reduce the number of
adaptive computational rounds, thus substantially
lowering the computational complexity of S IEVE S TREAMING++. We then generalize our results
to the more challenging multi-source streaming
setting. We show how one can achieve the tight
1/2-approximation guarantee with O(k) shared
memory while minimizing not only the required
rounds of computations but also the total number
of communicated bits. Finally, we demonstrate
the efficiency of our algorithms on real-world data
summarization tasks for multi-source streams of
tweets and of YouTube videos.

1. Introduction
Many important problems in machine learning, including
data summarization, network inference, active set selection,
facility location, and sparse regression can be cast as instances of constrained submodular maximization (Krause &
Golovin, 2012). Submodularity captures an intuitive diminishing returns property where the gain of adding an element
to a set decreases as the set gets larger. More formally, a
1
Yale University 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Ehsan
Kazemi <ehsan.kazemi@yale.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

non-negative set function f : 2V ! R 0 is submodular
if for all sets A ✓ B ⇢ V and every element e 2 V \ B,
we have f (A [ {e}) f (A) f (B [ {e}) f (B). The
submodular function f is monotone if for all A ✓ B we
have f (A)  f (B) .

In this paper, we consider the following canonical optimization problem: given a non-negative monotone submodular
function f , find the set S ⇤ of size at most k that maximizes
the function f :
S ⇤ = arg max f (S).
(1)
S✓V,|S|k

We define OPT = f (S ). When the data is relatively small
and it does not change over time, the greedy algorithm
and other fast centralized algorithms provide near-optimal
solutions. Indeed, it is well known that for problem (1)
the greedy algorithm (which iteratively adds elements with
the largest marginal gain) achieves a 1 1/e approximation
guarantee (Nemhauser et al., 1978).
⇤

In many real-world applications, we are dealing with massive streams of images, videos, texts, sensor logs, tweets,
and high-dimensional genomics data which are produced
from different data sources. These data streams have an
unprecedented volume and are produced so rapidly that they
cannot be stored in memory, which means we cannot apply classical submodular maximization algorithms. In this
paper, our goal is to design efficient algorithms for streaming submodular maximization in order to simultaneously
provide the best approximation factor, memory complexity,
running time, and communication cost.
For problem (1), Norouzi-Fard et al. (2018) proved that
any streaming algorithm1 with a memory o(n/k) cannot
provide an approximation guarantee better than 1/2. S IEVE S TREAMING is the first streaming algorithm with a constant
approximation factor (Badanidiyuru et al., 2014). This algorithm guarantees an approximation factor of 1/2 " and memory complexity of O(k log(k)/"). While the approximation
guarantee of their S IEVE -S TREAMING is optimal, the memory complexity is a factor of log(k) away from the desired
lower bound ⇥(k). In contrast, Buchbinder et al. (2015)
1

They assume the submodular function is evaluated only on
feasible sets of cardinality at most k. In this paper, we make the
same natural assumption regarding the feasible queries.

