Deep Factors for Forecasting
Yuyang Wang 1 Alex Smola 1 Danielle C. Maddix 1 Jan Gasthaus 1 Dean Foster 1 Tim Januschowski 1

Abstract
Producing probabilistic forecasts for large collections of similar and/or dependent time series is
a practically relevant and challenging task. Classical time series models fail to capture complex
patterns in the data, and multivariate techniques
struggle to scale to large problem sizes. Their
reliance on strong structural assumptions makes
them data-efficient, and allows them to provide
uncertainty estimates. The converse is true for
models based on deep neural networks, which can
learn complex patterns and dependencies given
enough data. In this paper, we propose a hybrid
model that incorporates the benefits of both approaches. Our new method is data-driven and
scalable via a latent, global, deep component. It
also handles uncertainty through a local classical
model. We provide both theoretical and empirical evidence for the soundness of our approach
through a necessary and sufficient decomposition
of exchangeable time series into a global and a local part. Our experiments demonstrate the advantages of our model both in term of data efficiency,
accuracy and computational complexity.

1. Introduction
Time series forecasting is a key ingredient in the automation
and optimization of business processes. In retail, decisions
about which products to stock, when to (re)order them, and
where to store them depend on forecasts of future demand in
different regions; in (cloud) computing, the estimated future
usage of services and infrastructure components guides capacity planning; regional forecasts of energy consumption
are used to plan and optimize the generation of power; and
workforce scheduling in warehouses and factories depends
on forecasts of the future workload.
The prevalent forecasting methods in statistics and econo1
Amazon Research. Correspondence to: Yuyang Wang
<yuyawang@amazon.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

metrics have been developed in the context of forecasting
individual or small groups of time series. The core of
these methods is formed by comparatively simple (often
linear) models, which require manual feature engineering
and model design by domain experts to achieve good performance (Harvey, 1990). Recently, there has been a paradigm
shift from these model-based methods to fully-automated
data-driven approaches. This shift can be attributed to the
availability of large and diverse time series datasets in a
wide variety of fields, e.g. energy consumption of households, server load in a data center, online user behavior, and
demand for all products that a large retailer offers. These
large datasets make it possible and necessary to learn models from data without significant manual work (Böse et al.,
2017).
A collection of time series can exhibit various dependency
relationships between the individual time series that can be
leveraged in forecasting. These include: (1) local co-variate
relationships (e.g. the price and demand for a product, which
tend to be (negatively) correlated), (2) indirect relationships
through shared latent causes (e.g. demand for multiple products increasing because an advertising campaign is driving
traffic to the site), (3) subtle dependencies through smoothness, temporal dynamics, and noise characteristics of time
series that are measurements of similar underlying phenomena (e.g. product sales time series tend to be similar to each
other, but different from energy consumption time series).
The data in practical forecasting problems typically has all
of these forms of dependencies. Making use of this data
from related time series allows more complex and potentially more accurate models to be fitted without overfitting.
Classical time series models have been extended to address
the above dependencies of types (1) and (2) by allowing
exogenous variables (e.g. the ARIMAX model and control
inputs in linear dynamical systems), and employing multivariate time series models that impose a certain covariance
structure (dynamic factor models), respectively. Neural
network-based models have been recently shown to excel in
extracting complex patterns from large datasets of related
time series by exploiting similar smoothness and temporal
dynamics, and common responses to exogenous input, i.e.
dependencies of type (1) and (3) (Flunkert et al., 2017; Wen
et al., 2017; Mukherjee et al., 2018; Gasthaus et al., 2019).
These models struggle in producing calibrated uncertainty

