Fairness-Aware Learning for Continuous Attributes and Treatments

Jérémie Mary 1 Clément Calauzènes 1 Noureddine El Karoui 1 2

Abstract
We address the problem of algorithmic fairness:
ensuring that the outcome of a classifier is not
biased towards certain values of sensitive variables such as age, race or gender. As common
fairness metrics can be expressed as measures of
(conditional) independence between variables, we
propose to use the Rényi maximum correlation
coefficient to generalize fairness measurement to
continuous variables. We exploit Witsenhausen’s
characterization of the Rényi correlation coefficient to propose a differentiable implementation
linked to f -divergences. This allows us to generalize fairness-aware learning to continuous variables by using a penalty that upper bounds this
coefficient. Theses allows fairness to be extented
to variables such as mixed ethnic groups or financial status without thresholds effects. This penalty
can be estimated on mini-batches allowing to use
deep nets. Experiments show favorable comparisons to state of the art on binary variables and
prove the ability to protect continuous ones 1 .

1. Introduction
Ensuring that sensitive information (e.g. knowledge about
the ethnic group of an individual) does not ”unfairly” influence the outcome of a learning algorithm is receiving
increasing attention with the spread of AI tools in society. To achieve this goal, as discussed with more details
in the related work section 3.1, there are three families of
approaches: first modify a pretrained classifier while minimizing the impact on performance (Hardt et al., 2016; Pleiss
et al., 2017), second enforce fairness during the training
possibly at the cost of convexity (Zafar et al., 2017) and
1
Criteo AI Lab, Paris, France 2 University of California, Berkeley, USA. Correspondence to: J. Mary <j.mary@criteo.com>,
C. Calauzènes <c.calauzenes@criteo.com>, N. El Karoui
<nkaroui@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).
1
Code
available
at
https://github.com/
criteo-research/continuous-fairness

third modify data representation and use classical algorithms
(Zemel et al., 2013; Donini et al., 2018). As formulated by
(Hardt et al., 2016), the core ingredient of algorithmic fairness is the ability to estimate and guarantee (conditional)
independence between two well chosen random variables
– typically involving the decision made by the algorithm
and the variables to protect and the “positive” outcome. We
will call U and V these two random variables in the rest of
this introduction. While in all generality U and V can be
continuous variables – as an example a predicted probability
or a variable such as time – most of the work in fairness has
so far focused on protecting categorical variables. In this
work we relax this assumption.
From an applied perspective this is desirable since it avoids
to consider continuous values as predetermined ”categorical
bins” which are going to present thresholds effects in the
learnt model. Theses thresholds make no real sense when
considering age, ethnic proportions or a gender fluidity measure. Moreover, a smooth and continuous way to describe
fairness constraints - a way that considers also the order of
the elements (e.g. 10 yo < 11 yo) - is important. As an
example from the real world, (Daniels et al., 2000) pointed
the financial status to be a sensitive variable for health care.
From a statistical point of view, given that the dependence
between U and V can be arbitrarily complex, the measure
of dependence is challenging. On one side of the spectrum – the empirical one – simple and tractable correlation
coefficients have been introduced, such as Pearson’s rho,
Spearman’s rank or Kendall’s tau. Sadly, while such correlation coefficients are able to disprove independence, they are
not able to prove it. They only express necessary conditions
for independence. On the opposite side – the theoretical
one – Gebelein (Gebelein, 1941) introduced the HirschfeldGebelein-Rényi Maximum Correlation Coefficient (HGR),
which has the desirable property to prove independence
when evaluated to zero (Rényi, 1959) but is computationally
intractable in the general case. However, HGR is a measure
of dependence which takes value in [0,1] and is independent
of the marginals of U and V , which allows a regulator to
use it with an absolute threshold as a fairness criterion.
Many authors have proposed principled ways to estimate
this coefficient. Early approaches includes Witsenhausen’s
characterization (Witsenhausen, 1975) which provides a

