Quantifying Generalization in Reinforcement Learning
Karl Cobbe 1 Oleg Klimov 1 Chris Hesse 1 Taehoon Kim 1 John Schulman 1

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate the problem of overfitting in deep reinforcement learning. Among
the most common benchmarks in RL, it is customary to use the same environments for both
training and testing. This practice offers relatively little insight into an agent’s ability to generalize. We address this issue by using procedurally generated environments to construct distinct training and test sets. Most notably, we introduce a new environment called CoinRun, designed as a benchmark for generalization in RL.
Using CoinRun, we find that agents overfit to surprisingly large training sets. We then show that
deeper convolutional architectures improve generalization, as do methods traditionally found in
supervised learning, including L2 regularization,
dropout, data augmentation and batch normalization.

1. Introduction
Generalizing between tasks remains difficult for state of the
art deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms. Although
trained agents can solve complex tasks, they struggle to
transfer their experience to new environments. Agents that
have mastered ten levels in a video game often fail catastrophically when first encountering the eleventh. Humans
can seamlessly generalize across such similar tasks, but this
ability is largely absent in RL agents. In short, agents become overly specialized to the environments encountered
during training.
That RL agents are prone to overfitting is widely appreciated, yet the most common RL benchmarks still encourage
training and evaluating on the same set of environments.
We believe there is a need for more metrics that evaluate generalization by explicitly separating training and test
environments. In the same spirit as the Sonic Benchmark
1
OpenAI, San Francisco, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Karl
Cobbe <karl@openai.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

(Nichol et al., 2018), we seek to better quantify an agent’s
ability to generalize.
To begin, we train agents on CoinRun, a procedurally generated environment of our own design, and we report the
surprising extent to which overfitting occurs. Using this
environment, we investigate how several key algorithmic
and architectural decisions impact the generalization performance of trained agents.
The main contributions of this work are as follows:
1. We show that the number of training environments required for good generalization is much larger than the
number used by prior work on transfer in RL.
2. We propose a generalization metric using the CoinRun
environment, and we show how this metric provides a
useful signal upon which to iterate.
3. We evaluate the impact of different convolutional architectures and forms of regularization, finding that
these choices can significantly improve generalization
performance.

2. Related Work
Our work is most directly inspired by the Sonic Benchmark
(Nichol et al., 2018), which proposes to measure generalization performance by training and testing RL agents on
distinct sets of levels in the Sonic the HedgehogTM video
game franchise. Agents may train arbitrarily long on the
training set, but are permitted only 1 million timesteps at
test time to perform fine-tuning. This benchmark was designed to address the problems inherent to “training on the
test set.”
(Farebrother et al., 2018) also address this problem, accurately recognizing that conflating train and test environments has contributed to the lack of regularization in deep
RL. They propose using different game modes of Atari
2600 games to measure generalization. They turn to supervised learning for inspiration, finding that both L2 regularization and dropout can help agents learn more generalizable features.
(Packer et al., 2018) propose a different benchmark to measure generalization using six classic environments, each of

