Topological Data Analysis of Decision Boundaries
with Application to Model Selection

Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy 1 Kush R. Varshney 1 Krishnan Mody 1 2

Abstract
We propose the labeled Čech complex, the plain
labeled Vietoris-Rips complex, and the locally
scaled labeled Vietoris-Rips complex to perform
persistent homology inference of decision boundaries in classification tasks. We provide theoretical conditions and analysis for recovering the homology of a decision boundary from samples. Our
main objective is quantification of deep neural network complexity to enable matching of datasets
to pre-trained models to facilitate the functioning
of AI marketplaces; we report results for experiments using MNIST, FashionMNIST, and CIFAR10.

1. Introduction
In supervised learning, the term model selection usually
refers to the process of using validation data to tune hyperparameters. However, we are moving toward a world in
which model selection refers to marketplaces of pre-trained
deep learning models in which customers select from a vendor’s collection of available models, often without the ability
to run validation data through them or being able to change
their hyperparameters. Such a marketplace paradigm is
sensible because deep learning models have the ability to
generalize from one dataset to another (Arpit et al., 2017;
Kawaguchi et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2016). In the case of
classifier selection, the use of data and decision boundary
complexity measures, such as the critical sample ratio (the
density of data points near the decision boundary), can be a
helpful tool (Arpit et al., 2017; Ho & Basu, 2002).
In this paper, we propose the use of persistent homology
(Edelsbrunner & Harer, 2008), a type of topological data
analysis (TDA) (Carlsson, 2009), to quantify the complexity
1
IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA 2 Courant
Institute, New York University, New York City, NY, USA.
Correspondence to:
Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy
<knatesa@us.ibm.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

of neural network decision boundaries. Persistent homology
involves estimating the number of connected components
and the number of holes of various dimensions that are
present in the underlying manifold that data samples come
from. This complexity quantification can serve multiple
purposes, but we focus how it can be used as an aid for
matching vendor pre-trained models to customer data. To
this end, we must extend the standard conception of TDA on
point clouds of unlabeled data, and develop new techniques
to apply TDA to decision boundaries of labeled data.
The prior works we are aware of on TDA of decision boundaries include our own earlier work (Varshney & Ramamurthy, 2015) and Chen et al. (2019). In our prior work
(Varshney & Ramamurthy, 2015), we use persistent homology to tune hyperparameters of radial basis function
kernels and polynomial kernels. The contributions herein
have greater breadth and theoretical depth as we detail below. Chen et al. (2019) consider the 0−order homology of
level sets of decision boundary function and use it to regularize classifier training. They do not consider higher order
homology groups. A recent preprint also examines TDA of
labeled data (Guss & Salakhutdinov, 2018), but approaches
the problem as standard TDA on separate classes rather than
trying to characterize the topology of the decision boundary.
In Section 2 of the supplementary material (SM), we discuss
how this approach can be fooled by the internal structure
of the classes. There has also been theoretical work using
rank of homology groups, known as Betti numbers, to upper
and lower bound the number of layers and units of a neural network needed for representing a function (Bianchini
& Scarselli, 2014). That work does not deal with data, as
we do here. Moreover, its bounds are quite loose and not
really usable in practice, similar in their looseness to the
bounds for algebraic varieties (Basu et al., 2005; Milnor,
1964) cited in our prior work (Varshney & Ramamurthy,
2015) for polynomial kernel machines.
The main steps in a persistent homology analysis are as follows. We treat each data point as a node in a graph, drawing
edges between nearby nodes— where nearby is according
to a scale parameter. We form complexes from the simplices
formed by the nodes and edges, and examine the topology
of the complexes as a function of the scale parameter. The

