Differentially Private Empirical Risk Minimization with Non-convex Loss
Functions
Di Wang 1 Changyou Chen 1 Jinhui Xu 1

Abstract
We study the problem of Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) with (smooth) non-convex loss
functions under the differential-privacy (DP)
model. We first study the expected excess empirical (or population) risk, which was primarily
used as the utility to measure the quality for convex loss functions. Specifically, we show that the
excess empirical (or population) risk can be upper
̃ 𝑑 log(1∕𝛿)
bounded by 𝑂(
) in the (𝜖, 𝛿)-DP settings,
log 𝑛𝜖 2
where 𝑛 is the data size and 𝑑 is the dimensionality of the space. The log1 𝑛 term in the empirical
1
risk bound can be further improved to 𝑛Ω(1)
(when
𝑑 is a constant) by a highly non-trivial analysis
on the time-average error. To obtain more efficient solutions, we also consider the connection
between achieving differential privacy and finding approximate local minimum. Particularly, we
show that when the size 𝑛 is large enough, there
are (𝜖, 𝛿)-DP algorithms which can find an approximate local minimum of the empirical risk
with high probability in both the constrained and
non-constrained settings. These results indicate
that one can escape saddle points privately.

1. Introduction
Learning from sensitive data is a frequently encountered
challenging task in many data analytic applications. It requires the learning algorithm to not only learn effectively
from the data but also provide a certain level of guarantee
on privacy preserving. As a rigorous notion for statistical
data privacy, differential privacy (DP) has received a great
deal of attentions in the past decade (Dwork et al., 2006).
DP works by injecting random noise into the statistical re1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, State
University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, USA. Emails:
{dwang45,changyou,jinhui}@buffalo.edu. Correspondence to: Di
Wang <dwang45@buffalo.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36𝑡ℎ International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

sults obtained from sensitive data so that the distribution
of the perturbed results is insensitive to any single-record
change in the original dataset. A number of methods with
DP guarantees have been discovered and recently adopted
in industry (Near, 2018; Erlingsson et al., 2014).
As a fundamental supervised-learning model in machine
learning, Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) has been extensively studied in recent years. Previous research on DPERM (i.e., DP version of ERM) mainly focuses on convex
loss functions (Chaudhuri & Monteleoni, 2009) (see more
details in the Related Work section). However, empirical
studies have revealed that non-convex loss functions typically achieve better classification accuracy than the convex
ones (Mei et al., 2018). Furthermore, recent developments
in deep learning (Goodfellow et al., 2016) also suggest that
loss functions are more likely to be non-convex in real world
applications. Thus, there is an urgent need for the research
community to shift our focus from convex to non-convex
loss functions. So far, very few papers (Zhang et al., 2017;
Wang et al., 2017; Wang & Xu, 2019) have considered DPERM with non-convex loss functions. This is probably due
to the fact that finding the global minimum of a non-convex
loss function is NP-hard. Almost all of them (Zhang et al.,
2017; Wang et al., 2017; Wang & Xu, 2019) used the 𝓁2
̂ priv )‖2 , to
gradient-norm of a private estimator, i.e., ‖∇𝐿(𝑤
measure the error bound. Despite some obvious advantages
with such an approach, it also endows a few limitations: 1)
although (Zhang et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2017; Wang & Xu,
2019) showed that the gradient norm tends to 0 as 𝑛 goes to
infinity, there is no guarantee that such an estimator will be
close to any non-degenerate local minimum (Agarwal et al.,
2017); 2) the gradient-norm estimator is not always consistent with the excess empirical (population) risk of the loss
̂ priv ) − 𝐿(𝑤
̂ ∗ ), where 𝑤∗ is the optimal
function, i.e., 𝐿(𝑤
solution (Bassily et al., 2014; Chaudhuri et al., 2011). Thus,
it is difficult to compare the obtained solution with either
the global or local minima. This propels us to the following
interesting question.
Can the excess empirical (population) risk be used to
measure the error of non-convex loss functions under
differential privacy?
Due to the intrinsic challenge of finding global minima, re-

