Linear-Complexity Data-Parallel Earth Mover’s Distance Approximations

Kubilay Atasu 1 Thomas Mittelholzer 2

Abstract
The Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD) is a stateof-the art metric for comparing discrete probability distributions, but its high distinguishability comes at a high cost in computational complexity. Even though linear-complexity approximation algorithms have been proposed to improve its scalability, these algorithms are either
limited to vector spaces with only a few dimensions or they become ineffective when the degree
of overlap between the probability distributions
is high. We propose novel approximation algorithms that overcome both of these limitations,
yet still achieve linear time complexity. All our
algorithms are data parallel, and thus, we take advantage of massively parallel computing engines,
such as Graphics Processing Units (GPUs). On
the popular text-based 20 Newsgroups dataset,
the new algorithms are four orders of magnitude faster than a multi-threaded CPU implementation of Word Mover’s Distance and match its
nearest-neighbors-search accuracy. On MNIST
images, the new algorithms are four orders of
magnitude faster than a GPU implementation of
the Sinkhorn’s algorithm while offering a slightly
higher nearest-neighbors-search accuracy.

1. Introduction
Earth Movers Distance (EMD) was initially proposed in
the image retrieval field to quantify the similarity between
images (Rubner et al., 1998). In the optimization theory,
a more general formulation of EMD, called Wasserstein
distance, has been used extensively to measure the distance between probability distributions (Villani, 2003). In
statistics, an equivalent measure is known as Mallows distance (Levina & Bickel, 2001). This paper uses the EMD
measure for similary search in image and text databases.
1

IBM Research - Zurich 2 HSR Hochschule für Technik, Rapperswil.
Correspondence to:
Kubilay Atasu
<kat@zurich.ibm.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

In the text retrieval domain, an adaptation of EMD, called
Word Movers Distance (WMD), has emerged as a stateof-the-art semantic similarity metric (Kusner et al., 2015).
WMD captures semantic similarity by using the concept
of word embeddings in the computation of EMD. Word
embeddings map words into a high-dimensional vector
space such that the words that are semantically similar are
close to each other. These vectors can be pre-trained in
an unsupervised way, e.g., by running the Word2vec algorithm (Mikolov et al., 2013) on publicly available data
sets. The net effect is that, given two sentences that cover
the same topic, but have no words in common, traditional
methods, such as cosine similarity, fail to detect the similarity. However, WMD detects and quantifies the similarity by
taking the proximity between different words into account.
What makes EMD-based approaches attractive is their high
search and classification accuracy. However, such an accuracy does not come for free. In general, the time complexity
of computing these measures grows cubically in the size of
the input probability distributions. Such a high complexity
renders their use impractical for large datasets. Thus, there
is a need for low-complexity approximation methods.
EMD can be computed in quadratic time complexity when
an L1 ground distance is used (Ling & Okada, 2007;
Gudmundsson et al., 2007). In addition, approximations
of EMD can be computed in linear time by embedding
EMD into Euclidean space (Indyk & Thaper, 2003). However, such embeddings result in high distortions in highdimensional spaces (Naor & Schechtman, 2006). An algorithm for computing EMD in the wavelet domain has
also been proposed (Shirdhonkar & Jacobs, 2008), which
achieves linear time complexity in the size of the input distributions. However, the complexity grows exponentially
in the dimensionality of the underlying vector space. Thus,
both linear-complexity approaches are impractical when
the number of dimensions is more than three or four. For
instance, they are not applicable to WMD because the word
vectors typically have several hundred dimensions.
A linear-complexity algorithm for computing approximate
EMD distances over high-dimensional vector spaces has
also been proposed (Atasu et al., 2017). The algorithm,
called Linear-Complexity Relaxed Word Mover’s Distance
(LC-RWMD), achieves four orders of magnitude improve-

