Contextual Multi-armed Bandit Algorithm for Semiparametric Reward Model

Gi-Soo Kim 1 Myunghee Cho Paik 1

Abstract
Contextual multi-armed bandit (MAB) algorithms
have been shown promising for maximizing cumulative rewards in sequential decision tasks such
as news article recommendation systems, web
page ad placement algorithms, and mobile health.
However, most of the proposed contextual MAB
algorithms assume linear relationships between
the reward and the context of the action. This
paper proposes a new contextual MAB algorithm
for a relaxed, semiparametric reward model that
supports nonstationarity. The proposed method
is less restrictive, easier to implement and faster
than two alternative algorithms that consider the
same model, while achieving a tight regret upper
bound. We prove that the high-probability upper bound of the regret incurred by the proposed
algorithm has the same order as the Thompson
sampling algorithm for linear reward models. The
proposed and existing algorithms are evaluated
via simulation and also applied to Yahoo! news
article recommendation log data.

1. Introduction
The multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem (Robbins, 1952)
formulates the sequential decision problem in which a
learner must choose an action among several actions given
by the environment at each step so as to maximize the cumulative rewards. The actions are often described as the arms
of a bandit slot machine with multiple arms. By choosing
an action or pulling an arm, the learner receives possibly
different rewards. By repeating the process of pulling arms
and receiving rewards, the learner accumulates information
about the reward compensation mechanism, learns from it,
and chooses the arm close to optimal as time elapses. Application areas include the mobile healthcare system (Tewari
and Murphy, 2017), web page ad placement algorithms
1

Department of Statistics, Seoul National University, Seoul,
Korea. Correspondence to: Myunghee Cho Paik <myungheechopaik@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

(Langford et al., 2008), news article placement algorithms
(Li et al., 2010), revenue management (Ferreira et al., 2018),
marketing (Schwartz et al., 2017), and recommendation
systems (Kawale et al., 2015).
For example, the Yahoo! web system uses a news article recommendation algorithm to select one article among a large
pool of available articles and displays it on the Featured tab
of the web page every time a user visits. The user clicks the
article if he or she is interested in the contents. The goal of
the algorithm is to maximize the cumulative number of user
clicks. After each visit, the algorithm reinforces its article
selection strategy based on the past user click feedback. In
this setting, available articles correspond to different actions
and the user click corresponds to a reward. The challenging
part of the MAB problem is that the reward of the action that
the learner has not previously chosen is forever unknown,
i.e., whether the user would have clicked or not remains
missing for the article that is not chosen. Therefore, the
learner should balance between “exploitation”, selecting the
best action based on information accumulated so far, and
“exploration”, choosing an action that will assist in future
choices, although it does not seem to be the best option at
the moment.
The MAB problem was first theoretically analyzed by Lai
and Robbins (1985). The algorithms widely used in mobile
healthcare systems or news article placement algorithms are
of a more extended form, called contextual MAB algorithms.
A contextual MAB algorithm enables at each selection step
the use of side information, called context, about each action given in the form of finite-dimensional covariates. For
example, in the news article recommendation, information
on the visiting user as well as the articles are given in the
form of a context vector. In 2010, the Yahoo! team (Li et al.,
2010) proposed a contextual MAB algorithm that achieved
a 12.5% click lift compared to a context-free MAB algorithm. Nonetheless, the method of Li et al. (2010) and other
existing algorithms rely on rather strong assumptions on the
distribution of rewards. In particular, most of the existing
algorithms assume that the expectation of the reward of a
particular action has a time-invariant linear relationship with
the context vector. This assumption can be restrictive in real
world settings where the rewards typically vary with time.
In this paper, we propose a novel contextual MAB algorithm

