Adaptive and Safe Bayesian Optimization in High Dimensions via
One-Dimensional Subspaces

Johannes Kirschner 1 Mojmı́r Mutný 1 Nicole Hiller 2 Rasmus Ischebeck 2 Andreas Krause 1
5

Bayesian optimization is known to be difficult to
scale to high dimensions, because the acquisition
step requires solving a non-convex optimization
problem in the same search space. In order to
scale the method and keep its benefits, we propose an algorithm (L INE BO) that restricts the
problem to a sequence of iteratively chosen onedimensional sub-problems that can be solved efficiently. We show that our algorithm converges
globally and obtains a fast local rate when the
function is strongly convex. Further, if the objective has an invariant subspace, our method
automatically adapts to the effective dimension
without changing the algorithm. When combined
with the S AFE O PT algorithm to solve the subproblems, we obtain the first safe Bayesian optimization algorithm with theoretical guarantees
applicable in high-dimensional settings. We evaluate our method on multiple synthetic benchmarks,
where we obtain competitive performance. Further, we deploy our algorithm to optimize the
beam intensity of the Swiss Free Electron Laser
with up to 40 parameters while satisfying safe
operation constraints.

4

1. Introduction
Zero-order stochastic optimization problems arise in many
applications such as hyper-parameter tuning of machine
learning models, reinforcement-learning and industrial processes. An example that motivates the present work is parameter tuning of a free electron laser (FEL). FELs are
large-scale physical machines that accelerate electrons in
order to generate bright and shortly pulsed X-ray lasing.
The X-ray pulses then facilitate many experiments in biol1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
Paul Scherrer Institut, Switzerland. Correspondence to:
Johannes Kirschner <jkirschner@inf.ethz.ch>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

FEL Pulse Energy

Abstract

final value

3
2

initial value

1
0
0

500

1000

1500

Figure 1. Left: Inside a free electron laser tunnel. Right: Using
L INE BO to tune the SwissFEL pulse energy with 40 parameters.

ogy, medicine and material science. The accelerator and
the electron beam line of a free electron laser consist of
multiple individual components, each of which has several
parameters that experts adjust to maximize the pulse energy.
Because of different operational modes and parameter drift,
this is a recurrent, time-consuming task which takes away
valuable time for experiments. As a single measurement can
be obtained in less than one second, the task is well suited
for automated optimization with a continuous search space
of about 10-100 parameters. Further, some parameters are
known to physically over-parametrize the objective function,
which leads to invariant subspaces and also local optima.
Additionally, some settings can cause electron losses, which
are required to stay below a pre-defined threshold.
This scenario can be cast as a gradient-free stochastic optimization problem with implicit constraints. The fact that
the constraints are safety critical rules out many commonly
used algorithms. Arguably, the simplest approach is to use a
local optimization method with a conservatively chosen step
size and a term that penalizes constraint violations in the
objective, but such a method might get stuck in local optima.
As an alternative, Bayesian optimization offers a principled, global optimization routine that can also operate under
safety constraints (Sui et al., 2015). When applied to a lowdimensional subset of parameters, Bayesian optimization
has been successfully used on FELs and in similar applications. However, it is well known that standard Bayesian
optimization is difficult to scale to high-dimensional settings, because optimizing the acquisition function becomes
itself an intractable optimization problem.

