Co-Representation Network for Generalized Zero-Shot Learning

Fei Zhang 1 Guangming Shi 1

Abstract
Generalized zero-shot learning is a significant
topic but faced with bias problem, which leads
to unseen classes being easily misclassified into
seen classes. Hence we propose an embedding
model called co-representation network to learn
a more uniform visual embedding space that effectively alleviates the bias problem and helps
with classification. We mathematically analyze
our model and find it learns a projection with high
local linearity, which is proved to cause less bias
problem. The network consists of a cooperation
module for representation and a relation module
for classification. It is simple in structure and can
be easily trained in an end-to-end manner. Experiments show that our method outperforms existing
generalized zero-shot learning methods on several
benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) is an important field in computer
vision. It aims at classifying images of unseen classes
through establishing mathematical relationship between the
semantic space and the visual space. Usually both seen
classes and unseen classes are described through a set of
semantic vectors in the same semantic space, including manually defined attribute vectors (Lampert et al., 2014) and
word embedding vectors (Mikolov et al., 2013). Existing
ZSL researches can be categorized into conventional ZSL
(CZSL) and generalized ZSL (GZSL) according to the classification range: A CZSL task classifies only unseen classes
while a GZSL task classifies both seen and unseen classes.
Our algorithm is dedicated to the more challenging and
practical GZSL task.
Since the the concept of ZSL was first proposed by Lampert
et al. (2009), algorithms for CZSL have been emerging
one after another. During this period, every new algorithm
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, China.
Correspondence to: Guangming Shi <gmshi@xidian.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

broke the records on several benchmark datasets and has
promoted the progress of ZSL. However, CZSL technology
has not got practical applications because of its defects.
In practical scenarios, it is usually necessary to classify
both seen and unseen samples instead of just classifying
the unseen ones. But almost all classic CZSL algorithms
have a strong classification bias towards seen classes when
applying it to a GZSL task (Xian et al., 2017), which is
called bias problem. Therefor, it is significant to study the
GZSL algorithm. At present, effective GZSL algorithms
mostly use generative models (Verma et al., 2018; Xian
et al., 2018). They generate synthetic features of unseen
classes to control the weights of seen classes and unseen
classes so that the bias problem is mitigated.
Generative model is effective in GZSL but usually complex
in structure and not easy to train. Instead of generative
model, in this paper we propose a novel embedding model
called co-representation network (CRnet) for GZSL, which
learns more discriminative visual features and a more uniform embedding space that helps to classify. Our model
achieves a high accuracy on both seen classes and unseen
classes and outperforms existing generative models on most
GZSL benchmark datasets. The model has a simple, intuitive and easy to implement structure with high expandability. It consists of two modules: A cooperation module for
projecting the semantic space to a visual embedding space;
A relation module (Sung et al., 2018) for classification. The
cooperation module consists of several parallel single-layer
perceptrons, each of which learns a linear projection in a
particular direction and is therefore called an expert module.
We mathematically analyze our model and find it learns a
piecewise linear projection with high local linearity, which
is proved to be effective in alleviating the bias problem. We
evaluate our model on five GZSL benchmark datasets including AwA1 (Lampert et al., 2014), AwA2 (Xian et al., 2017),
CUB (Welinder et al., 2010), aPY (Farhadi et al., 2009) and
SUN (Patterson & Hays, 2012), and achieve the state-ofthe-art harmonic mean accuracy on the first four datasets
and a comparable result on SUN. Our main contributions
are summarized as follows:
1. We explore the cause of the bias problem and propose a
reasonable metric, Local Relative Distance, to measure it.
2. We propose a novel CRnet with simple structure to solve

