A Kernel Theory of Modern Data Augmentation

Tri Dao 1 Albert Gu 1 Alexander J. Ratner 1 Virginia Smith 2 Christopher De Sa 3 Christopher Ré 1

Abstract
Data augmentation, a technique in which a training set is expanded with class-preserving transformations, is ubiquitous in modern machine learning pipelines. In this paper, we seek to establish a
theoretical framework for understanding data augmentation. We approach this from two directions:
First, we provide a general model of augmentation
as a Markov process, and show that kernels appear
naturally with respect to this model, even when
we do not employ kernel classification. Next, we
analyze more directly the effect of augmentation
on kernel classifiers, showing that data augmentation can be approximated by first-order feature
averaging and second-order variance regularization components. These frameworks both serve
to illustrate the ways in which data augmentation affects the downstream learning model, and
the resulting analyses provide novel connections
between prior work in invariant kernels, tangent
propagation, and robust optimization. Finally,
we provide several proof-of-concept applications
showing that our theory can be useful for accelerating machine learning workflows, such as reducing the amount of computation needed to train
using augmented data, and predicting the utility
of a transformation prior to training.

1. Introduction
The process of augmenting a training dataset with synthetic
examples has become a critical step in modern machine
learning pipelines. The aim of data augmentation is to
artificially create new training data by applying transformations, such as rotations or crops for images, to input
data while preserving the class labels. This practice has
many potential benefits: Data augmentation can encode
prior knowledge about data or task-specific invariances, act

as regularizer to make the resulting model more robust, and
provide resources to data-hungry deep learning models. As
a testament to its growing importance, the technique has
been used to achieve nearly all state-of-the-art results in
image recognition (Cireşan et al., 2010; Dosovitskiy et al.,
2016; Graham, 2014; Sajjadi et al., 2016), and is becoming
a staple in many other areas as well (Uhlich et al., 2017; Lu
et al., 2006). Learning augmentation policies alone can also
boost the state-of-the-art performance in image classification tasks (Ratner et al., 2017; Cubuk et al., 2018).
Despite its ubiquity and importance to the learning process,
data augmentation is typically performed in an ad-hoc manner with little understanding of the underlying theoretical
principles. In the field of deep learning, for example, data
augmentation is commonly understood to act as a regularizer
by increasing the number of data points and constraining the
model (Goodfellow et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2017). However, even for simpler models, it is not well-understood how
training on augmented data affects the learning process, the
parameters, and the decision surface of the resulting model.
This is exacerbated by the fact that data augmentation is
performed in diverse ways in modern machine learning
pipelines, for different tasks and domains, thus precluding
a general model of transformation. Our results show that
regularization is only part of the story.
In this paper, we aim to develop a theoretical understanding of data augmentation. First, in Section 3, we analyze
data augmentation as a Markov process, in which augmentation is performed via a random sequence of transformations.
This formulation closely matches how augmentation is often
applied in practice. Surprisingly, we show that performing knearest neighbors with this model asymptotically results in
a kernel classifier, where the kernel is a function of the base
augmentations. These results demonstrate that kernels appear naturally with respect to data augmentation, regardless
of the base model, and illustrate the effect of augmentation
on the learned representation of the original data.

1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, California, USA 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pennsylvania, USA 3 Department of
Computer Science, Cornell University, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Tri Dao <trid@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Motivated by the connection between data augmentation
and kernels, in Section 4 we show that a kernel classifier on
augmented data approximately decomposes into two components: (i) an averaged version of the transformed features,
and (ii) a data-dependent variance regularization term. This
suggests a more nuanced explanation of data augmentation—
namely, that it improves generalization both by inducing

