Stochastic Gradient Push for Distributed Deep Learning
Mahmoud Assran 1 2 Nicolas Loizou 1 3 Nicolas Ballas 1 Mike Rabbat 1

Abstract
Distributed data-parallel algorithms aim to accelerate the training of deep neural networks by parallelizing the computation of large mini-batch gradient updates across multiple nodes. Approaches
that synchronize nodes using exact distributed averaging (e.g., via A LL R EDUCE) are sensitive to
stragglers and communication delays. The P USH S UM gossip algorithm is robust to these issues,
but only performs approximate distributed averaging. This paper studies Stochastic Gradient
Push (SGP), which combines P USH S UM with
stochastic gradient updates. We prove that SGP
converges to a stationary point of smooth, nonconvex objectives at the same sub-linear rate as
SGD, and that all nodes achieve consensus. We
empirically validate the performance of SGP on
image classification (ResNet-50, ImageNet) and
machine translation (Transformer, WMT’16 EnDe) workloads.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are the state-of-the art machine learning approach in many application areas, including computer vision (He et al., 2016) and natural language
processing (Vaswani et al., 2017). Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) is the current workhorse for training neural
networks. The algorithm optimizes the network parameters,
x, to minimize a loss function, f (·), through gradient descent, where the loss function’s gradients are approximated
using a subset of training examples (a mini-batch). DNNs
often require large amounts of training data and trainable
parameters, necessitating non-trivial computational requirements (Wu et al., 2016; Mahajan et al., 2018).
Large mini-batch parallel SGD is usually adopted for dis1

Facebook AI Research, Montréal, QC, Canada 2 Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, McGill University,
Montréal, QC, Canada 3 School of Mathematics, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland. Correspondence to: Mahmoud
Assran <mahmoud.assran@mail.mcgill.ca>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

tributed training of deep networks (Goyal et al., 2017; Li
et al., 2014). Worker nodes compute local mini-batch gradients of the loss function on different subsets of the data, and
then calculate an exact inter-node average gradient using
either the A LL R EDUCE communication primitive, in synchronous implementations (Goyal et al., 2017; Akiba et al.,
2017), or using a central parameter server, in asynchronous
implementations (Dean et al., 2012). Using a parameter
server to aggregate gradients introduces a potential bottleneck and a central point of failure (Lian et al., 2017). The
A LL R EDUCE primitive computes the exact average gradient
at all workers in a decentralized manner, avoiding issues associated with centralized communication and computation.
However, exact averaging algorithms like A LL R EDUCE
are not robust in communication-constrained settings, i.e.,
where the network bandwidth is a significant bottleneck.
This issue motivates the investigation of a decentralized and
inexact version of SGD to reduce the communication overhead associated with distributed training. There have been
numerous decentralized optimization algorithms proposed
and studied in the control-systems literature that leverage
gossip-based approaches for the computation of aggregate
information; see the survey of Nedić et al. (2018) and references therein. State-of-the-art gossip-based optimization
methods build on the P USH S UM algorithm for distributed
averaging (Kempe et al., 2003; Nedić et al., 2018). Rather
than computing exact averages (as with A LL R EDUCE), this
line of work uses less-coupled message passing and computes approximate averages. The tradeoff is that approximate distributed averaging also injects additional noise in
the average gradient estimate.
In this work we study Stochastic Gradient Push (SGP), an
algorithm blending parallel SGD and P USH S UM. SGP enables the use of generic communication topologies that may
be directed (asymmetric), sparse, and time-varying. In contrast, existing gossip-based approaches explored in the context of training DNNs (Lian et al., 2017; Jiang et al., 2017)
are constrained to use symmetric communication (i.e., if
node i sends to j, then i must also receive from j before
proceeding) and thus inherently require deadlock-avoidance,
and more synchronization, making them slower and more
sensitive to stragglers. Moreover, SGP can be seen as a generalization of parallel SGD and these previous approaches.

