Rethinking Lossy Compression: The Rate-Distortion-Perception Tradeoff

Yochai Blau 1 Tomer Michaeli 1

Abstract
Lossy compression algorithms are typically designed and analyzed through the lens of Shannon’s rate-distortion theory, where the goal is to
achieve the lowest possible distortion (e.g., low
MSE or high SSIM) at any given bit rate. However, in recent years, it has become increasingly
accepted that “low distortion” is not a synonym
for “high perceptual quality”, and in fact optimization of one often comes at the expense of the
other. In light of this understanding, it is natural to
seek for a generalization of rate-distortion theory
which takes perceptual quality into account. In
this paper, we adopt the mathematical definition
of perceptual quality recently proposed by Blau &
Michaeli (2018), and use it to study the three-way
tradeoff between rate, distortion, and perception.
We show that restricting the perceptual quality
to be high, generally leads to an elevation of the
rate-distortion curve, thus necessitating a sacrifice in either rate or distortion. We prove several
fundamental properties of this triple-tradeoff, calculate it in closed form for a Bernoulli source, and
illustrate it visually on a toy MNIST example.

1. Introduction
Lossy compression techniques are ubiquitous in the modernday digital world, and are regularly used for communicating
and storing images, video and audio. In recent years, lossy
compression is seeing a surge of research, due in part to the
advancements in deep learning and their application in this
domain (Toderici et al., 2016; 2017; Ballé et al., 2016; 2017;
2018; Agustsson et al., 2017; 2018; Rippel & Bourdev,
2017; Minnen et al., 2018; Li et al., 2018; Mentzer et al.,
2018; Johnston et al., 2018; Galteri et al., 2017; Tschannen
et al., 2018; Santurkar et al., 2018; Rott Shaham & Michaeli,
2018). The theoretical foundations of lossy compression
1

Technion–Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Yochai Blau <yochai@campus.technion.ac.il>,
Tomer Michaeli <tomer.m@ee.technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

are rooted in Shannon’s seminal work on rate-distortion
theory (Shannon, 1959), which analyzes the fundamental
tradeoff between the bit rate used for representing data, and
the distortion incurred when reconstructing the data from
its compressed representation (Cover & Thomas, 2012).
The premise in rate-distortion theory is that reduced distortion is a desired property. However, recent works demonstrate that minimizing distortion alone does not necessarily
drive the decoded signals to have good perceptual quality. For example, incorporating generative adversarial type
losses has been shown to lead to significantly better perceptual quality, but at the cost of increased distortion (Tschannen et al., 2018; Agustsson et al., 2018; Santurkar et al.,
2018). This behavior has also been studied in the context
of signal restoration (Blau & Michaeli, 2018), where it was
shown that minimizing distortion causes the distribution
of restored signals to deviate from that of the ground-truth
signals (indicating worse perceptual quality). In light of this
understanding, it is natural to seek for a generalized ratedistortion theory, which also accounts for perception. In
particular, it is of key importance to understand how the best
achievable rate depends not only on the distortion, but also
on the perceptual quality of the algorithm. A preliminary
attempt to incorporate perceptual quality into rate-distortion
theory was briefly reported in (Matsumoto, 2018a;b). Yet,
no theoretical characterization nor practical demonstration
of its effect on the rate-distortion tradeoff was presented.
In this paper, we adopt the mathematical definition of perceptual quality used in (Blau & Michaeli, 2018), and prove
that there is a triple tradeoff between rate, distortion and
perception. Our key observation is that the rate-distortion
function elevates as the perceptual quality is enforced to be
higher (see Fig. 1). In other words, to obtain good perceptual quality, it is necessary to make a sacrifice in either the
distortion or the rate of the algorithm.
Our analysis is based on the definition of a rate-distortionperception function R(D, P ), which characterizes the minimal achievable rate R for any given distortion D and perception index P . We begin by deriving a closed form for this
function in the classical case study of a Bernoulli source,
a simple example which nonetheless nicely illustrates the
typical behavior of the tradeoff. We then prove several general properties of R(D, P ), showing that it is monotone

