On Symmetric Losses for Learning from Corrupted Labels

Nontawat Charoenphakdee 1 2 Jongyeong Lee 1 2 Masashi Sugiyama 2 1

Abstract
This paper aims to provide a better understanding of a symmetric loss. First, we emphasize
that using a symmetric loss is advantageous in
the balanced error rate (BER) minimization and
area under the receiver operating characteristic
curve (AUC) maximization from corrupted labels.
Second, we prove general theoretical properties
of symmetric losses, including a classificationcalibration condition, excess risk bound, conditional risk minimizer, and AUC-consistency condition. Third, since all nonnegative symmetric
losses are non-convex, we propose a convex barrier hinge loss that benefits significantly from the
symmetric condition, although it is not symmetric
everywhere. Finally, we conduct experiments to
validate the relevance of the symmetric condition.

1. Introduction
In the real-world, it is unrealistic to expect that clean
fully-supervised data can always be obtained. Weaklysupervised learning is a learning paradigm to mitigate
this problem (Zhou, 2017). For example, labelers are not
necessarily experts or even human experts can make mistakes. Learning under noisy labels is an example of weaklysupervised learning that relaxes the assumption that labels
are always accurate (Aslam & Decatur, 1996; Biggio et al.,
2011; Cesa-Bianchi et al., 1999; Natarajan et al., 2013).
Other examples of weakly-supervised learning are learning
from positive and unlabeled data (du Plessis et al., 2015;
2014; Kiryo et al., 2017), learning from pairwise similarity
and unlabeled data (Bao et al., 2018), and learning from
complementary labels (Ishida et al., 2017).
A loss function that satisfies a symmetric condition has
1

Department of Computer Science, The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan 2 RIKEN Center of Artificial Intelligence Project,
Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Nontawat Charoenphakdee
<nontawat@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp>, Jongyeong Lee <lee@ms.k.utokyo.ac.jp>, Masashi Sugiyama <sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Examples of losses used in this paper. The zero-one loss,
sigmoid loss, and unhinged loss are symmetric, i.e., `(z) + `(−z)
is a constant. The barrier hinge loss is our proposed loss.

demonstrated its usefulness in weakly-supervised learning,
e.g., one can use a symmetric loss to simplify a risk estimator in learning from positive-unlabeled data (du Plessis et al.,
2014). This simplification allows the use of a cost-sensitive
learning library to implement the risk estimator directly. Not
limited to the simplification of the risk estimator, symmetric
losses are known to be robust in the symmetric label noise
scenarios (Manwani & Sastry, 2013; Ghosh et al., 2015).
However, the symmetric label noise assumption is restrictive
and may not be practical since it assumes that a label of each
pattern may flip independently with the same probability.
This paper elucidates the robustness of symmetric losses in
a more general noise framework called the mutually contaminated distributions or corrupted labels framework (Scott
et al., 2013). Many weakly-supervised learning problems
can be formulated in the corrupted labels framework (Natarajan et al., 2013; Lu et al., 2018). Therefore, the robustness of
learning from corrupted labels is highly desirable for many
real-world applications.
Although it has been shown by Menon et al. (2015) that
BER and AUC optimization from corrupted labels can
be optimized without knowing the noise information, we
point out that the use of non-symmetric losses may degrade
the performance and therefore using a symmetric losses is
preferable. Our experiments show that symmetric losses significantly outperformed many well-known non-symmetric
losses when the given labels are corrupted. Furthermore,
we provide a better understanding of symmetric losses by
elucidating several general theoretical properties of symmetric losses, including a classification-calibration condition, excess risk bound, conditional risk minimizer, and

