Entropic GANs meet VAEs: A Statistical Approach to Compute Sample
Likelihoods in GANs
Yogesh Balaji 1 Hamed Hassani 2 Rama Chellappa 3 Soheil Feizi 1

Abstract
Building on the success of deep learning, two
modern approaches to learn a probability model
from the data are Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) and Variational AutoEncoders
(VAEs). VAEs consider an explicit probability
model for the data and compute a generative distribution by maximizing a variational lower-bound
on the log-likelihood function. GANs, however,
compute a generative model by minimizing a distance between observed and generated probability distributions without considering an explicit
model for the observed data. The lack of having explicit probability models in GANs prohibits
computation of sample likelihoods in their frameworks and limits their use in statistical inference
problems. In this work, we resolve this issue by
constructing an explicit probability model that can
be used to compute sample likelihood statistics
in GANs. In particular, we prove that under this
probability model, a family of Wasserstein GANs
with an entropy regularization can be viewed as
a generative model that maximizes a variational
lower-bound on average sample log likelihoods,
an approach that VAEs are based on. This result
makes a principled connection between two modern generative models, namely GANs and VAEs.
In addition to the aforementioned theoretical results, we compute likelihood statistics for GANs
trained on Gaussian, MNIST, SVHN, CIFAR-10
and LSUN datasets. Our numerical results validate the proposed theory.

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College
Park 2 Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania 3 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park. Correspondence to: Yogesh Balaji <yogesh@cs.umd.edu>, Soheil Feizi
<sfeizi@cs.umd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Learning generative models is an important problem in machine learning and statistics with a wide range of applications in self-driving cars (Santana & Hotz, 2016), robotics
(Hirose et al., 2017), natural language processing (Lee
& Tsao, 2018), domain-transfer (Sankaranarayanan et al.,
2018), computational biology (Ghahramani et al., 2018), etc.
Two modern approaches to deal with this problem are Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.,
2014) and Variational AutoEncoders (VAEs) (Kingma &
Welling, 2013; Makhzani et al., 2015; Rosca et al., 2017;
Tolstikhin et al., 2017; Mescheder et al., 2017b).
VAEs (Kingma & Welling, 2013) compute a generative
model by maximizing a variational lower-bound on average sample log-likelihoods using an explicit probability
distribution for the data. GANs, however, learn a generative model by minimizing a distance between observed and
generated distributions without considering an explicit probability model for the data. Empirically, GANs have been
shown to produce higher-quality generative samples than
that of VAEs (Karras et al., 2017). However, since GANs do
not consider an explicit probability model for the data, we
are unable to compute sample likelihoods using their generative models. Obtaining sample likelihoods and posterior
distributions of latent variables are critical in several statistical inference applications. Inability to obtain such statistics
within GAN’s framework severely limits their applications
in statistical inference problems.
In this paper, we resolve this issue for a general formulation of GANs by providing a theoretically-justified approach to compute sample likelihoods using GAN’s generative model. Our results can facilitate the use of GANs in
massive-data applications such as model selection, sample
selection, hypothesis-testing, etc.
We first state our main results informally without going into
technical details while precise statements of our results are
presented in Section 2. Let Y and Ŷ ∶= G(X) represent the
observed (i.e. real) and generative (i.e. fake or synthetic)
variables, respectively. X (i.e. the latent variable) is the
random vector used as the input to the generator G(.). Consider the following explicit probability model of the data

