Online learning with kernel losses

Aldo Pacchiano * 1 Niladri S. Chatterji * 1 Peter L. Bartlett 1

Abstract
We present a generalization of the adversarial
linear bandits framework, where the underlying
losses are kernel functions (with an associated reproducing kernel Hilbert space) rather than linear
functions. We study a version of the exponential
weights algorithm and bound its regret in this setting. Under conditions on the eigen-decay of the
kernel we provide a sharp characterization of the
regret for this algorithm. When we have polynomial eigen-decay (µj ≤ O(j −β )), we find that
the regret is bounded by Rn ≤ O(nβ/2(β−1) ).
While under the assumption of exponential eigendecay (µj ≤ O(e−βj )) we get an even tighter
bound on the regret Rn ≤ Õ(n1/2 ). When
the eigen-decay is polynomial we also show a
non-matching minimax lower bound on the regret of Rn ≥ Ω(n(β+1)/2β ) and a lower bound
of Rn ≥ Ω(n1/2 ) when the decay in the eigenvalues is exponentially fast.
We also study the full information setting when
the underlying losses are kernel functions and
present an adapted exponential weights algorithm
and a conditional gradient descent algorithm.

1. Introduction
In adversarial online learning, a player interacts with an
unknown and arbitary adversary in a sequence of rounds.
At each round, the player chooses an action from an action
space and incurs a loss associated with that chosen action.
The loss functions are determined by the adversary and
are fixed at the beginning of each round. After choosing
an action the player observes some feedback, which can
help guide the choice of actions in subsequent rounds. The
most common feedback model is the full information model,
where the player has access to the entire loss function at
*

Equal contribution 1 University of California Berkeley. Correspondence to: Aldo Pacchiano <pacchiano@berkeley.edu>,
Niladri S. Chatterji <chatterji@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

the end of each round. Another, more challenging feedback
model is the partial information or bandit feedback model
where the player at the end of the round just observes the
loss associated with the action chosen in that particular
round. There are also other feedback models in between
and beyond the full and bandit information models, many
of which have also been studied in detail. A figure of merit
that is often used to judge online learning algorithms is the
notion of regret, which compares the players actions to the
best single action in hindsight (defined formally in Section
1.2).
When the underlying action space is a continuous and compact (possibly convex) set and the losses are linear or convex
functions over this set; there are many algorithms known
that attain sub-linear and sometimes optimal regret in both
these feedback settings. In this work we present a generalization of the well studied adversarial online linear learning
framework. In our paper, at each round the player selects an
action a ∈ A ⊂ Rd . This action is mapped to an element
in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) generated
by a mapping K(·, ·). The function K(·, ·) is a kernel map,
that is, it can thought as an inner product of an appropriate Hilbert space H. The kernel map can be expressed as
K(x, y) = hΦ(x), Φ(y)iH , where Φ(·) ∈ RD is the associated feature map.
Thus at each round the loss is hΦ(a), wiH , where w ∈ H
is the adversary’s action. In the full information setting,
as feedback, the player has access to the entire adversarial
loss function h·, wiH . In the bandit setting the player is just
presented with the value of the loss, hΦ(a), wiH .
Notice that this class of losses is much more general than
ordinary linear losses and includes potentially non-linear
and non-convex losses like:
1. Linear Losses: ha, wiH = a> w. This loss is well
studied in both the bandit and full information setting.
We shall see that our regret bounds will match the
bounds established in the literature for these losses.
D
E
2. Quadratic Losses: φ(a), Wb
= a> W a + b> a,
H
where W is a symmetric matrix and b is a vector. Convex quadratic losses have been well studied under full
information feedback as the online eigenvector decomposition problem. Our work establishes regret bounds

