Exploring the Landscape of Spatial Robustness

Logan Engstrom * 1 Brandon Tran * 1 Dimitris Tsipras * 1 Ludwig Schmidt 1 Aleksander M ˛
adry 1

Abstract
The study of adversarial robustness has so far
largely focused on perturbations bound in `p norms. However, state-of-the-art models turn
out to be also vulnerable to other, more natural
classes of perturbations such as translations and
rotations. In this work, we thoroughly investigate
the vulnerability of neural network–based classifiers to rotations and translations. While data
augmentation offers relatively small robustness,
we use ideas from robust optimization and testtime input aggregation to significantly improve
robustness. Finally we find that, in contrast to the
`p -norm case, first-order methods cannot reliably
find worst-case perturbations. This highlights spatial robustness as a fundamentally different setting
requiring additional study.

There is a long line of work on methods for constructing
adversarial perturbations in various settings (Szegedy et al.,
2013; Goodfellow et al., 2014; Kurakin et al., 2016a;b;
Sharif et al., 2016; Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016; Carlini
& Wagner, 2016; Papernot et al., 2017; Madry et al., 2017;
Athalye et al., 2017). However, these methods are quite sophisticated, and, since they often rely on having fine-tuned
control over a large number of input pixels or audio samples,
end up creating fairly contrived perturbations. As such, one
may suspect that adversarial examples constitute a problem
only in the presence of a truly malicious attacker and are
unlikely to arise in more benign environments. However,
recent work has shown that neural network–based vision
classifiers are vulnerable to input images that have been
spatially transformed through small rotations, translations,
shearing, scaling, and other natural transformations (Fawzi
& Frossard, 2015; Kanbak et al., 2017; Xiao et al., 2018;
Tramèr & Boneh, 2017). The vulnerability of neural networks to such transformations raises a natural question:
How can we build classifiers robust to such naturally
occurring transformations?

1. Introduction
Neural networks are now widely embraced as dominant
solutions in computer vision (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He
et al., 2016), speech recognition (Graves et al., 2013), and
natural language processing (Collobert & Weston, 2008).
While their accuracy scores often match (and sometimes go
beyond) human-level performance on key benchmarks (He
et al., 2015; Taigman et al., 2014), we still do not understand
how robust neural networks are. A prominent issue in this
context is the existence of so-called adversarial examples,
i.e., inputs that are almost indistinguishable from natural
data to a human but cause state-of-the-art classifiers to make
incorrect predictions with high confidence (Szegedy et al.,
2013; Goodfellow et al., 2014). This raises concerns about
the use of neural networks in contexts where reliability,
dependability, and security are important desiderata.
*

Equal contribution 1 EECS, MIT, Massachusetts, USA. Correspondence to: Logan Engstrom <engstrom@mit.edu>, Brandon
Tran <btran115@mit.edu>, Dimitris Tsipras <tsipras@mit.edu>,
Ludwig Schmidt <ludwigs@mit.edu>, Aleksander M ˛
adry
<madry@mit.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 36 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

We address this question by first performing an in-depth
study of neural network–based classifier robustness to two
basic image transformations: translations and rotations.
While these transformations appear natural to a human,
we show that small rotations and translations alone can
significantly degrade accuracy. These transformations are
particularly relevant for computer vision applications since
real-world objects do not always appear centered and can
often be significantly rotated.
1.1. Our Methodology and Results
We start with standard, near state-of-the-art image classifiers
for the MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998), CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky
& Hinton, 2009), and ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015)
datasets. We find that small rotations and translations consistently and significantly degrade accuracy across these
classifiers in a number of settings, as shown in Figure 1.
We then perform a thorough analysis comparing the abilities
of various adversaries – first-order, random, and grid–based
– to fool models with small rotations and translations. Our
results suggest that classifiers are even more brittle than

