Bias Also Matters: Bias Attribution for Deep Neural Network Explanation

Shengjie Wang * 1 Tianyi Zhou * 1 Jeffery A. Bilmes 2

Abstract
The gradient of a deep neural network (DNN)
w.r.t. the input provides information that can be
used to explain the output prediction in terms of
the input features and has been widely studied
to assist in interpreting DNNs. In a linear model
(i.e., g(x) = wx + b), the gradient corresponds
to the weights w. Such a model can reasonably
locally-linearly approximate a smooth nonlinear
DNN, and hence the weights of this local model
are the gradient. The bias b, however, is usually overlooked in attribution methods. In this
paper, we observe that since the bias in a DNN
also has a non-negligible contribution to the correctness of predictions, it can also play a significant role in understanding DNN behavior. We
propose a backpropagation-type algorithm “bias
back-propagation (BBp)” that starts at the output
layer and iteratively attributes the bias of each
layer to its input nodes as well as combining the
resulting bias term of the previous layer. Together
with the backpropagation of the gradient generating w, we can fully recover the locally linear
model g(x) = wx + b. In experiments, we show
that BBp can generate complementary and highly
interpretable explanations.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have produced good
results for many challenging problems in computer vision,
natural language processing, and speech processing. Deep
learning models, however, are usually designed using
fairly high-level architectural decisions, leading to a final
model that is often seen as a difficult to interpret black box.
DNNs are a highly expressive trainable class of non-linear
*

Equal contribution 1 Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering 2 Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, USA. Correspondence to: Shengjie Wang <wangsj@uw.edu>, Tianyi Zhou <tianyizh@uw.edu>, Jeffery A. Bilmes <bilmes@uw.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

functions, utilizing multi-layer architectures and a rich set
of possible hidden non-linearities, making interpretation by
a human difficult. This restricts the reliability and usability
of DNNs especially in mission-critical applications where
a good understanding of the model’s behavior is necessary.
The gradient is a useful starting point for understanding
and generating explanations for the behavior of a complex
DNN. Having the same dimension as the input data, the
gradient can reflect the contribution to the DNN output of
each input dimension. Not only does the gradient yield
attribution information for every data point, but also it helps
us understand other aspects of DNNs, such as the highly
celebrated adversarial examples and defense methods
against such attacks (Szegedy et al., 2013).
When a model is linear, the gradient recovers the weight
vector. Since a linear model locally approximates any
sufficiently smooth non-linear model, the gradient can also
be seen as the weight vector of that local linear model for
a given DNN at a given data point. For a piecewise linear
DNN (e.g., a DNN with activation functions such as ReLU,
LeakyReLU, PReLU, and hard tanh) the gradient is exactly
the weights of the local linear model1 .
Although the gradient of a DNN has been shown to be helpful in understanding the behavior of a DNN, the other part of
the locally linear model, i.e., the bias term, to the best of our
knowledge, has not been studied explicitly and is often overlooked. If only considering one linear model within a small
region, the bias, as a scalar, seems to contain less information than the weight vector. However, this scalar is the result
of complicated processing of bias terms over every neuron
and every layer based on the activations, the non-linearity
functions, as well as the weight matrices of the network. Uncovering the bias’s nature could potentially reveal a rich vein
of attribution information complementary to the gradient.
For classification tasks, it can be the case that the gradient part of the linear model contributes to only a negligible
portion of the target label’s output probability (or even a negative logit value), and only with a large bias term does the
target label’s probability becomes larger than that of other
1
This is true except when the gradient is evaluated at an input
on the boundary of the polyhedral region within which the DNN
equals to the local linear model. In such case, subgradients are
appropriate.

