Collective Model Fusion for Multiple Black-Box Experts

Quang Minh Hoang * 1 Trong Nghia Hoang * 2 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low 3 Carl Kingsford 1

Abstract
Model fusion is a fundamental problem in collective machine learning (ML) where independent
experts with heterogeneous learning architectures
are required to combine expertise to improve predictive performance. This is particularly challenging in information-sensitive domains where
experts do not have access to each other’s internal
architecture and local data. This paper presents
the first collective model fusion framework for
multiple experts with heterogeneous black-box architectures. The proposed method will enable this
by addressing the key issues of how black-box
experts interact to understand the predictive behaviors of one another; how these understandings
can be represented and shared efficiently among
themselves; and how the shared understandings
can be combined to generate high-quality consensus prediction. The performance of the resulting
framework is analyzed theoretically and demonstrated empirically on several datasets.

1. Introduction
Practical scenarios that involve learning in complex environments often require the collaboration of multiple experts
operating concurrently on different sub-domains. Motivated
under this context, collective learning (Hoang et al., 2019)
is an emerging study of a distributed paradigm where each
local expert learns independently from its data and exchange
knowledge with others to achieve better performance.
Existing collective learning literature (Gifford, 2009; Yahya
et al., 2017; Hoang et al., 2019), however, usually assumes
perfect clarity of local expert models, which entails fully
transparent model architectures and publicly accessible local data used to train these experts. To facilitate model
*
Equal contribution 1 Carnegie Mellon University 2 MIT-IBM
Watson AI Lab, IBM Research Cambridge 3 National University of Singapore. Correspondence to: Quang Minh Hoang
<qhoang@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

fusion, local experts are further expected to have employed
a homogeneous design with limited freedom in their choices
of parameters. Despite enabling collective learning, these
restrictive assumptions have imposed a rigidity on the algorithmic level that is generally undesirable for practical
purposes. For example, applications learning from private
medical records are often prohibited from publicizing sensitive patient information; model architectures in confidential
domains such as financial forecasting are preferably kept
undisclosed to guard against adversarial attacks. As such,
it is unrealistic for a collaboration scheme among these
experts to presume prior understanding of their behaviors,
much less subjecting them to conceptual homogeneity.
Another central issue of collective learning, as pointed out
by Hoang et al. (2019), is the computational and communication bottleneck arising from having one single or a few
central servers to coordinate the collective agents. In practice, such a centralized collective architecture also often
leads to having undesirable choke points of failure in the
system. To avoid this, Hoang et al. (2019) proposed moving
towards a decentralized learning paradigm where collective
agents only exchange information with their neighbor in a
communication network. The collective learning framework
of Hoang et al. (2019), however, is not designed to work with
heterogeneous, black-box models because it assumes perfect
knowledge and availability of the agent models. This is often not true in practice, especially for information-sensitive
domains where collaboration occurs in a transactional basis
(i.e., short-term collaboration) and may not get prioritized
over data and model privacy.
This paper thus presents a novel collective learning platform for black-box fusion that addresses the following challenges: (a) performing fusion without access to the blackbox training data and architectures, (b) performing fusion
when the black-box models are not permanently available,
and (c) avoiding centralized bottlenecks and risk of failure
for large-scale fusion with numerous black-box experts.
To achieve this, we first develop a collective fusion paradigm
that allows black-box experts to interact and learn the predictive behaviors of one another, which are then succinctly
encoded into information summaries with constant memoryfootprint for efficient communication and assimilation. A
decentralized communication algorithm is further developed

