Power k-Means Clustering

Jason Xu 1 Kenneth Lange 2

Abstract
Clustering is a fundamental task in unsupervised
machine learning. Lloyd’s 1957 algorithm for kmeans clustering remains one of the most widely
used due to its speed and simplicity, but the greedy
approach is sensitive to initialization and often
falls short at a poor solution. This paper explores
an alternative to Lloyd’s algorithm that retains
its simplicity and mitigates its tendency to get
trapped by local minima. Called power k-means,
our method embeds the k-means problem in a
continuous class of similar, better behaved problems with fewer local minima. Power k-means
anneals its way toward the solution of ordinary
k-means by way of majorization-minimization
(MM), sharing the appealing descent property and
low complexity of Lloyd’s algorithm. Further, our
method complements widely used seeding strategies, reaping marked improvements when used
together as demonstrated on a suite of simulated
and real data examples.

1. Introduction
Clustering is a foundational task in unsupervised learning
and data analysis, and plays a key role in countless applications. Its purpose is to partition n objects into k similarity
classes based on a measure of similarity between pairs of
objects. Recent advances based on spectral formulations
(Ng et al., 2002), Bayesian and nonparametric approaches
(Heller & Ghahramani, 2005; Kulis & Jordan, 2012), message passing (Frey & Dueck, 2007), subspace clustering
(Vidal, 2011), and continuous optimization (Chi & Lange,
2015; Shah & Koltun, 2017) continue to contribute to a
vast literature. A more complete overview is provided by
Mirkin (1998), Jain (2010), and Everitt et al. (2011). After
decades of innovation, none of these advances have managed to displace k-means clustering and Lloyd’s algorithm
1

Department of Statistical Science, Duke University
Departments of Biomathematics, Statistics, and Human Genetics,
UCLA. Correspondence to: Jason Xu <jason.q.xu@duke.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

for implementing it (Steinhaus, 1956; Lloyd, 1982). Lloyd’s
algorithm alternates between two steps of membership reassignment and cluster recentering. Unfortunately, it is
NP-hard to optimally partition n points in d-dimensional
Euclidean space into k sets (Aloise et al., 2009; Dasgupta &
Freund, 2009). Lloyd’s algorithm suffers well-documented
shortcomings such as sensitivity to initialization and deterioration in high dimensions. Nonetheless, it persists because
of its speed and simplicity. In settings appropriate for kmeans, many competing algorithms underperform or offer
only marginal improvements while incurring higher computational cost, additional hyperparameters, or more opaque
objectives.
In this paper, we propose a generalization of Lloyd’s algorithm that a) makes it more robust to initialization, b)
enhances its performance in high dimensions, and c) retains its speed and simplicity. Power k-means embeds the
k-means problem in a continuum of better behaved problems. These smoothed intermediate problems have flatter
objective functions that tend to guide clustering toward the
global minimum of the k-means objective. Our method enjoys the same O(nkd) per-iteration complexity as Lloyd’s
algorithm. Steady and stable progress along the solution
path is ensured by a majorization-minimization algorithm
(Lange, 2016), which guarantees a decrease in the k-means
objective at each step.
Our method can be considered an extension of the kharmonic means (KHM) algorithm of Zhang and colleagues
(Zhang et al., 1999). We give a proof of the descent property
for both the KHM algorithm and our extension of it. In
contrast to KHM, which implicitly replaces the k-means
objective by a proxy, our algorithm ultimately seeks to optimize the same measure of quality. Instead, we simply anneal
our way to its minimum. In targeting the original k-means
objective, the considerable and growing body of theory relevant to analyzing k-means applies to understanding our
method. These include recent developments such as new
fast learning rates (Dinh et al., 2016), empirical risk bounds
(Bachem et al., 2017), and statistical guarantees (Lu & Zhou,
2016). Power k-means addresses the algorithmic drawbacks
of Lloyd’s algorithm by proposing internal improvements
from an optimization perspective. On the other hand, external “wrapper” methods such as well-designed initializations
for k-means (Arthur & Vassilvitskii, 2007; Celebi et al.,

