Convolutional Poisson Gamma Belief Network
Chaojie Wang 1 Bo Chen 1 Sucheng Xiao 1 Mingyuan Zhou 2

Abstract
For text analysis, one often resorts to a lossy representation that either completely ignores word
order or embeds each word as a low-dimensional
dense feature vector. In this paper, we propose
convolutional Poisson factor analysis (CPFA)
that directly operates on a lossless representation that processes the words in each document
as a sequence of high-dimensional one-hot vectors. To boost its performance, we further propose the convolutional Poisson gamma belief
network (CPGBN) that couples CPFA with the
gamma belief network via a novel probabilistic
pooling layer. CPFA forms words into phrases
and captures very specific phrase-level topics, and
CPGBN further builds a hierarchy of increasingly
more general phrase-level topics. For efficient
inference, we develop both a Gibbs sampler and
a Weibull distribution based convolutional variational auto-encoder. Experimental results demonstrate that CPGBN can extract high-quality text
latent representations that capture the word order information, and hence can be leveraged as a
building block to enrich a wide variety of existing
latent variable models that ignore word order.

1. Introduction
A central task in text analysis and language modeling is to
effectively represent the documents to capture their underlying semantic structures. A basic idea is to represent the
words appearing in a document with a sequence of one-hot
vectors, where the vector dimension is the size of the vocabulary. This preserves all textual information but results
in a collection of extremely large and sparse matrices for a
text corpus. Given the memory and computation constraints,
1

National Laboratory of Radar Signal Processing, Collaborative
Innovation Center of Information Sensing and Understanding, Xidian University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China. 2 McCombs School of Business, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, USA.
Correspondence to: Bo Chen <bchen@mail.xidian.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

it is very challenging to directly model this lossless representation. Thus existing methods often resort to simplified
lossy representations that either completely ignore word
order (Blei et al., 2003), or embed the words into a lower
dimensional feature space (Mikolov et al., 2013).
Ignoring word order, each document is simplified as a bagof-words count vector, the vth element of which represents
how many times the vth vocabulary term appears in that document. With a text corpus simplified as a term-document
frequency count matrix, a wide array of latent variable models (LVMs) have been proposed for text analysis (Deerwester et al., 1990; Papadimitriou et al., 2000; Lee & Seung,
2001; Blei et al., 2003; Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2009; Zhou
et al., 2012). Extending “shallow” probabilistic topic models such as latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) (Blei et al.,
2003) and Poisson factor analysis (PFA) (Zhou et al., 2012),
steady progress has been made in inferring multi-stochasticlayer deep latent representations for text analysis (Gan et al.,
2015; Zhou et al., 2016; Ranganath et al., 2015; Zhang et al.,
2018). Despite the progress, completely ignoring word order could still be particularly problematic on some common
text-analysis tasks, such as spam detection and sentiment
analysis (Pang et al., 2002; Tang et al., 2014).
To preserve word order, a common practice is to first convert each word in the vocabulary from a high-dimensional
sparse one-hot vector into a low-dimensional dense wordembedding vector. The word-embedding vectors can be
either trained as part of the learning (Kim, 2014; Kalchbrenner et al., 2014), or pre-trained by some other methods on an
additional large corpus (Mikolov et al., 2013). Sequentially
ordered word embedding vectors have been successfully
combined with deep neural networks to address various
problems in text analysis and language modeling. A typical
combination method is to use the word-embedding layer
as part of a recurrent neural network (RNN), especially
long short-term memory (LSTM) and its variants (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Chung et al., 2014), achieving
great success in numerous tasks that heavily rely on having
high-quality sentence representation. Another popular combination method is to apply a convolutional neural network
(CNN) (Lecun et al., 1998) directly to the embedding representation, treating the word embedding layer as an image
input; it has been widely used in systems for entity search,
sentence modeling, product feature mining, and so on (Xu

