Random Matrix Improved Covariance Estimation for a Large Class of Metrics

Malik Tiomoko 1 2 Florent Bouchard 3 Guillaume Ginolhac 3 Romain Couillet 2 1

Abstract
Relying on recent advances in statistical estimation of covariance distances based on random
matrix theory, this article proposes an improved
covariance and precision matrix estimation for a
wide family of metrics. The method is shown
to largely outperform the sample covariance matrix estimate and to compete with state-of-the-art
methods, while at the same time being computationally simpler and faster. Applications to linear
and quadratic discriminant analyses also show
significant gains, therefore suggesting practical
interest to statistical machine learning.

1. Introduction
Covariance and precision matrix estimation is a fundamental and simply posed, yet still largely considered, key problem of statistical data analysis, with countless applications
in statistical inference. In machine learning, it is notably
at the core of elementary methods as linear (LDA) and
quadratic discriminant analysis (QDA) (McLachlan, 2004).
Estimation of the covariance matrix C ∈ Rp×p based on
n independent (say zero mean) samples x1 , . . . , xn ∈ Rp
is conventionally performed
Pn using the sample covariance
matrix (SCM) Ĉ ≡ n1 i=1 xi xT
i (and its inverse using
−1
Ĉ ). The estimate is, however, only consistent for n  p
and only invertible for n ≥ p. Treating the important practical cases where n ∼ p and even n  p has recently
spurred a series of parallel lines of research. These directions rely either on structural constraints, such as “toeplitzification” procedures for Toeplitz covariance models (particularly convenient for time series) (Bickel et al., 2008; Wu
& Pourahmadi, 2009; Vinogradova et al., 2015), on sparse
1

CentraleSupélec, University ParisSaclay, France 2 GIPSAlab, University Grenoble-Alpes, France 3 LISTIC, University
Savoie Mont-Blanc, France.
Correspondence to: Malik
Tiomoko <malik.tiomoko@gipsa-lab.grenoble-inp.fr>, Florent
Bouchard <florent.bouchard@univ-smb.fr>, Guillaume Ginholac <guillaume.ginolhac@univ-smb.fr>, Romain Couillet
<romain.couillet@gipsa-lab.grenoble-inp.fr>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

constraints with LASSO and graphical LASSO-based approaches (Friedman et al., 2008) or, more interestingly for
the present article, on exploiting the statistical independence in the entries of the vectors xi .
(Ledoit & Wolf,p2004) proposes to linearly “shrink” Ĉ as
Ĉ(ρ) ≡ ρIp + 1 − ρ2 Ĉ for ρ > 0 chosen to minimize
the expected Frobenius distance E[kC − Ĉ(ρ)kF ] in the
asymptotic p, n → ∞ limit with p/n → c > 0. Basic
results from random matrix theory (RMT) are used here
to estimate ρ consistently. This procedure is simple and
quite flexible and has been generalized in various directions
(e.g., in (Couillet & McKay, 2014) with a robust statistics
approach). However, the method only applies a naive homothetic map to each λi (Ĉ) of Ĉ in order to better estimate λi (C). A strong hope to recover a better approximation of the λi (C)’s then arose from (Silverstein & Bai,
1995; Silverstein & Choi, 1995) that provide a random matrix result relating directly the limiting eigenvalue distributions of C and Ĉ. Unfortunately, while estimating the
λi (Ĉ)’s from the λi (C)’s is somewhat immediate, estimating the λi (C)’s backward from the λi (Ĉ)’s is a difficult
task. (El Karoui et al., 2008) first proposed an optimization algorithm to numerically solve this problem, however,
with little success as the method is quite unstable and has
rarely been efficiently reproduced. (Mestre, 2008) later offered a powerful idea, based on contour
Pnintegral, to consistently estimate linear functionals n1 i=1 f (λi (C)) from
the λi (Ĉ)’s. But f is constrained to be very smooth (complex analytic) which prevents the estimation of the individual λi (C)’s. Recently, Ledoit and Wolf took over the work
of El Karoui, which they engineered to obtain a more efficient numerical method, named QuEST (Ledoit & Wolf,
2015). Rather than inverting the Bai–Silverstein equations,
the authors also proposed, with the same approach, to estimate the λi (C)’s by minimizing a Frobenius norm distance
(Ledoit & Wolf, 2015) (named QuEST1 in the present article) or a Stein loss (Ledoit et al., 2018) (QuEST2 here).
These methods, although more stable than El Karoui’s initial approach, however, suffer several shortcomings: (i)
they are still algorithmically involved as they rely on a series of fine-tuned optimization schemes, and (ii) they are
only adaptable to few error metrics (Frobenius, Stein).
Inspired by Mestre’s approach and the recent work (Couil-

