Optimal Minimal Margin Maximization with Boosting

Allan Grønlund * 1 Kasper Green Larsen * 1 Alexander Mathiasen * 1

Abstract
Boosting algorithms iteratively produce linear
combinations of more and more base hypotheses
and it has been observed experimentally that the
generalization error keeps improving even after
achieving zero training error. One popular explanation attributes this to improvements in margins.
A common goal in a long line of research, is to
maximize the smallest margin using as few base
hypotheses as possible, culminating with the AdaBoostV algorithm by (Rätsch & Warmuth, 2005).
The AdaBoostV algorithm was later conjectured
to yield an optimal trade-off between number of
hypotheses trained and the minimal margin over
all training points (Nie et al., 2013). Our main
contribution is a new algorithm refuting this conjecture. Furthermore, we prove a lower bound
which implies that our new algorithm is optimal.

PT
structs a linear combination classifier sign( t=1 αt ht (x)),
where ht is the base hypothesis learned in the t’th iteration
and αt is the corresponding weight.
It has been proven that AdaBoost decreases the training error
exponentially fast if each base hypothesis is slightly better
than random guessing on the weighed data set it is trained on
(Freund et al., 1999). Concretely, if t is the error of ht on
the weighed data set used to learn ht thenP
the linear combinaT
tion has training error at most exp(−2 t=1 (1/2 − t )2 ).
If each t is at most a half minus a fixed constant, then
the training error is less than 1/n after O(lg n) rounds
which means the all training points are classified correctly.
Quite surprisingly, experiments show that continuing the
AdaBoost algorithm even after the training data is perfectly
classified, making the model more and more complex, continues to improve generalization (Schapire et al., 1998).
The most prominent approach to explaining this generalization phenomenon considers margins (Schapire et al., 1998).
The margin of a point xi is

1. Introduction
Boosting is one of the most famous and succesful ideas
in learning. Boosting algorithms are meta algorithms
that produce highly accurate predictors by combining already existing less accurate predictors. Probably the most
famous boosting algorithm is AdaBoost by Freund and
Schapire (Freund & Schapire, 1995), who won the 2003
Gödel Prize for their work.

margin(xi ) =

yi

PT

t=1 αt ht (xi )

PT

t=1 |αt |

.

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Aarhus, Denmark. Correspondence to: Kasper Green
Larsen <larsen@cs.au.dk>.

For binary classification, if each ht (x) ∈ [−1, +1], then the
margin of a point is a number between -1 and +1. Notice that
a point has positive margin if it is classified correctly and
negative margin if it is classified incorrectly. It has been observed experimentally that the margins of the training points
usually increase when training, even after perfectly classifying the training data. This has inspired several bounds
on generalization error that depend on the distribution of
margins (Schapire et al., 1998; Breiman, 1999; Koltchinskii
et al., 2001; Wang et al., 2008; Gao & Zhou, 2013). The
conceptually simplest of these bounds depend only on the
minimal margin, which is the margin of the point xi with
minimal margin. The point xi with minimal margin can be
interpreted as the point the classifier struggles the most with.
This has inspired a series of algorithms with guarantees on
the minimal margin (Breiman, 1999; Grove & Schuurmans,
1998; Bennett et al., 2000; Rätsch & Warmuth, 2002; 2005).

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

These algorithms have the following goal: Let H be the
(possibly infinite) set of all base hypotheses that may be
returned by the base learning algorithm. Suppose the best

AdaBoost was designed for binary classification and works
by combining base hypotheses learned by a given base
learning algorithm into a weighted sum that represents
the final classifier. This weighed set of base hypotheses
is constructed iteratively in rounds, each round constructing a new base hypothesis that focuses on the training
data misclassified by the previous base hypotheses constructed. More precisely, AdaBoost takes training data
D = {(xi , yi ) | xi ∈ Rd , yi ∈ {−1, +1}}ni=1 and con*

