Online Learning to Rank with Features

Shuai Li 1 Tor Lattimore 2 Csaba Szepesvári 2

Abstract
We introduce a new model for online ranking in
which the click probability factors into an examination and attractiveness function and the attractiveness function is a linear function of a feature
vector and an unknown parameter. Only relatively
mild assumptions are made on the examination
function. A novel algorithm for this setup is analysed, showing that the dependence on the number
of items is replaced by a dependence on the dimension, allowing the new algorithm to handle a large
number of items. When reduced to the orthogonal
case, the regret of the algorithm improves on the
state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Let L be a large set of items to be ranked. For example, a
database of movies, news articles or search results. We consider a sequential version of the ranking problem where in
each round the learner chooses an ordered list of K distinct
items from L to show the user. We assume the feedback
comes in the form of clicks and the learner’s objective is
to maximise the expected number of clicks over T rounds.
Our focus is on the case where L is large (perhaps millions)
and K is relatively small (fifty or so). There are two main
challenges that arise in online ranking problems:
(a) The number of rankings grows exponentially in K,
which makes learning one parameter for each ranking a
fruitless endeavour. Click models may be used to reduce the
dimensionality of the learning problem, but balancing generality of the model with learnability is a serious challenge.
The majority of previous works on online learning to rank
have used unstructured models, which are not well suited to
our setting where L is large.
(b) Most click models depend on an unknown attractiveness
function that endows the item set with an order. This yields
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 DeepMind. Correspondence to: Shuai Li <shuaili@cse.cuhk.edu.hk>, Tor Lattimore <lattimore@google.com>, Csaba Szepesvári <szepi@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

a model with at least |L| parameters, which is prohibitively
large in the applications we have in mind.
The first challenge is tackled by adapting the flexible click
models introduced in (Zoghi et al., 2017; Lattimore et al.,
2018) to our setting. For the second we follow previous
works on bandits with large action sets by assuming the
attractiveness function can be written as a linear function of
a relatively small number of features.
Contribution We make several contributions:
• A new model for ranking problems with features is proposed that generalises previous work (Li et al., 2016;
Zong et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2018) by relaxing the relatively restrictive assumptions on the probability that a
user clicks on an item. The new model is strictly more
robust than previous works focusing on regret analysis
for large item sets.
• We introduce a novel polynomial-time algorithm called
RecurRank. The algorithm operates recursively over
an increasingly fine set of partitions of [K]. Within
each partition the algorithm balances exploration and
exploitation, subdividing the partition once it becomes
sufficiently certain about the suboptimality of a subset
of items.
• A regret analysis shows that the cumulative
regret of
p
RecurRank is at most RT = O(K dT log(LT ),
where K is the number of positions, L is the number of
items and d is the dimension of the feature space. Even
in the non-feature case where L =
√d this improves on
the state-of-the-art by a factor of K.
A comparison with most related work is shown in Table 1.
Related work Online learning to rank has seen an explosion of research in the last decade and there are multiple
ways of measuring the performance of an algorithm. One
view is that the clicks themselves should be maximised,
which we take in this article. An alternative is to assume an
underlying relevance of all items in a ranking that is never
directly observed, but can be inferred in some way from
the observed clicks. In all generality this latter setting falls
into the partial monitoring framework (Rustichini, 1999),

