Discriminative Regularization for Latent Variable Models
with Applications to Electrocardiography

Andrew C. Miller 1 Ziad Obermeyer 2 John P. Cunningham 3 Sendhil Mullainathan 4

Abstract
Generative models often use latent variables to
represent structured variation in high-dimensional
data, such as images and medical waveforms.
However, these latent variables may ignore subtle,
yet meaningful features in the data. Some features
may predict an outcome of interest (e.g. heart
attack) but account for only a small fraction of variation in the data. We propose a generative model
training objective that uses a black-box discriminative model as a regularizer to learn representations
that preserve this predictive variation. With
these discriminatively regularized latent variable
models, we visualize and measure variation in the
data that influence a black-box predictive model,
enabling an expert to better understand each
prediction. With this technique, we study models
that use electrocardiograms to predict outcomes
of clinical interest. We measure our approach on
synthetic and real data with statistical summaries
and an experiment carried out by a physician.

1. Introduction
Machine learning research has led to extraordinary prediction results across many data types but less success in deriving human-level insight from (or incorporating that insight
into) our models. Two such problems include model diagnosis: using expert human knowledge to understand and
improve upon model shortcomings; and model-based discovery: understanding what human-interpretable features
drive predictive performance. To be concrete, consider these
biomedical applications:
(a) A newly trained model detects a common heart condi1

Data Science Institute, Columbia University, New York, NY,
USA. 2 School of Public Health, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA.
3
Department of Statistics, Columbia University, New York, NY,
USA. 4 Booth School of Business, University of Chicago, Chicago,
IL, USA.. Correspondence to: ACM <am5171@columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

tion (e.g. atrial fibrillation or afib, a condition observable
in an EKG) with reasonable accuracy, but below the
level of a skilled cardiologist. How can we use human
expertise to diagnose model shortcomings?
(b) By contrast, using EKG waveforms as inputs to a blackbox predictor can outperform a cardiologist in predicting future cardiac events, such as heart attacks. It is
critical to understand what EKG features that predictor
is using, insight which can be used to motivate future
experiments, treatments, and care protocols.
Though these scenarios are specific, they raise a general
problem. Given a black-box predictive model m(x) (e.g. a
neural network) that converts a high-dimensional signal x
(e.g. an EKG) into a prediction score of output y (e.g. afib),
we would like to show domain experts what the algorithm
“sees” — what variation in x influences predictions of y.
In recent years, model interpretability has received considerable attention (Ribeiro et al., 2016; Doshi-Velez & Kim,
2017; Kindermans et al., 2017; Narayanan et al., 2018). One
way to interrogate a predictive model is to examine perturbations of an input x that influence the prediction the most.1
For example, we can compute the gradient of m(x) with respect to model input (e.g. pixels) at point some data point x.
This will produce a saliency map that identifies which parts
of the input most influence the outcome of interest (Baehrens
et al., 2010; Simonyan et al., 2013). One shortcoming of this
approach is that the gradient contains only local information;
for high-dimensional structured inputs, following the gradient flow for any moderate distance will produce meaningless
inputs that bear little resemblance to real observations.
We can improve upon saliency maps by restricting our perturbations to remain on the “data manifold.” For instance,
the activation maximization approach uses a deep generative
model to represent the space of natural images with a latent
variable z (Nguyen et al., 2016). To interrogate an input, a
new observation is synthesized by finding the z that maximizes the prediction score for some classifier of interest.
This data manifold constraint enables the visualization of
realistic image features that influence the prediction.
1

For clarity, we will always use the term prediction to refer to
the output of m(x). Further, we assume the discriminative model
m(x) has been given to us — its parameters have been fit and fixed.

