Learning to Groove with Inverse Sequence Transformations

Jon Gillick 1 2 Adam Roberts 2 Jesse Engel 2 Douglas Eck 2 David Bamman 1

Abstract
We explore models for translating abstract musical ideas (scores, rhythms) into expressive performances using Seq2Seq and recurrent variational
Information Bottleneck (VIB) models. Though
Seq2Seq models usually require painstakingly
aligned corpora, we show that it is possible to
adapt an approach from the Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) literature (e.g., Pix2Pix (Isola
et al., 2017) and Vid2Vid (Wang et al., 2018a)) to
sequences, creating large volumes of paired data
by performing simple transformations and training generative models to plausibly invert these
transformations. Music, and drumming in particular, provides a strong test case for this approach
because many common transformations (quantization, removing voices) have clear semantics, and
models for learning to invert them have real-world
applications. Focusing on the case of drum set
players, we create and release a new dataset for
this purpose, containing over 13 hours of recordings by professional drummers aligned with finegrained timing and dynamics information. We
also explore some of the creative potential of these
models, including demonstrating improvements
on state-of-the-art methods for Humanization (instantiating a performance from a musical score).

1. Introduction
A performance can be viewed as a translation of an idea
conceived in the mind to a finished piece on the stage, the
screen, or the speakers. The long-standing goal of many
creative technologies is to enable users to render realistic,
compelling content that brings an idea to life; in so doing,
finding a balance between realism and control is important.
This balance has proved difficult to achieve when work1

School of Information, University of California, Berkeley, CA,
U.S.A 2 Google AI, Mountain View, CA, U.S.A. Correspondence
to: Jon Gillick <jongillick@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

ing with deep generative models, motivating recent work
on conditional generation in several modalities including
images (Yan et al., 2016), speech (Shen et al., 2018), and
music (Simon et al., 2018). In this work, rather than generating new content conditioned on one of a fixed set of classes
like rock or jazz, we are interested in learning to translate
ideas from representations that are more easily expressed
(musical abstractions such as scores) into instantiations of
those ideas that would otherwise be producible only by those
skilled in a particular instrument (performances).
We use the metaphor of translation from idea to finished
work as a starting point for our modeling choices, adapting
and modifying Seq2Seq models typically used in machine
translation (Sutskever et al., 2014). While musical scores
and performances can be thought of as different expressions of the same idea, our setting differs from translation
in that musical scores are designed to be compressed representations; the additional information needed to create a
performance comes from the musician. In this work, we
set up a data collection environment in which a score can
be deterministically extracted from the performance in a
manner consistent with the conventions of western music
notation, effectively yielding a parallel corpus. Furthermore, though western music notation is well established as
one compressed representation for music, our data allows
us to explore other representations that are compressed in
different ways; we propose and explore two such transformations in this work, which we call Infilling and Tap2Drum.
Learning to map from these reduced versions of musical
sequences to richer ones holds the potential for creative
application in both professional and amateur music composition, production, and performance environments.
We focus in this work specifically on drums; though drums
and percussion are essential elements in many styles of
modern music, creating expressive, realistic sounding digital drum performances is challenging and time consuming.
Humanization functions have been embedded in industry
standard music production software for many years, but
despite evidence that the current methods used in professional toolkits (randomly jittering note timings and dynamics with Gaussian noise) have little effect on listener preferences (Senn et al., 2018), machine learning based methods
have not yet made their way into many mainstream environments to replace them. We hope that our data, models, and

