Noise2Self: Blind Denoising by Self-Supervision

Joshua Batson * 1 Loic Royer * 1

Abstract
We propose a general framework for denoising
high-dimensional measurements which requires
no prior on the signal, no estimate of the noise,
and no clean training data. The only assumption
is that the noise exhibits statistical independence
across different dimensions of the measurement,
while the true signal exhibits some correlation.
For a broad class of functions (“J -invariant”), it
is then possible to estimate the performance of
a denoiser from noisy data alone. This allows
us to calibrate J -invariant versions of any parameterised denoising algorithm, from the single
hyperparameter of a median filter to the millions
of weights of a deep neural network. We demonstrate this on natural image and microscopy data,
where we exploit noise independence between
pixels, and on single-cell gene expression data,
where we exploit independence between detections of individual molecules. This framework
generalizes recent work on training neural nets
from noisy images and on cross-validation for
matrix factorization.

1. Introduction
We would often like to reconstruct a signal from highdimensional measurements that are corrupted, undersampled, or otherwise noisy. Devices like high-resolution
cameras, electron microscopes, and DNA sequencers are
capable of producing measurements in the thousands to millions of feature dimensions. But when these devices are
pushed to their limits, taking videos with ultra-fast frame
rates at very low-illumination, probing individual molecules
with electron microscopes, or sequencing tens of thousands
of cells simultaneously, each individual feature can become
quite noisy. Nevertheless, the objects being studied are often very structured and the values of different features are
*

Equal contribution 1 Chan-Zuckerberg Biohub. Correspondence to: Joshua Batson <joshua.batson@czbiohub.org>, Loic
Royer <loic.royer@czbiohub.org>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

highly correlated. Speaking loosely, if the “latent dimension” of the space of objects under study is much lower than
the dimension of the measurement, it may be possible to
implicitly learn that structure, denoise the measurements,
and recover the signal without any prior knowledge of the
signal or the noise.
Traditional denoising methods each exploit a property of
the noise, such as Gaussianity, or structure in the signal,
such as spatiotemporal smoothness, self-similarity, or having low-rank. The performance of these methods is limited
by the accuracy of their assumptions. For example, if the
data are genuinely not low rank, then a low rank model
will fit it poorly. This requires prior knowledge of the signal structure, which limits application to new domains and
modalities. These methods also require calibration, as hyperparameters such as the degree of smoothness, the scale of
self-similarity, or the rank of a matrix have dramatic impacts
on performance.
In contrast, a data-driven prior, such as pairs (xi , yi ) of
noisy and clean measurements of the same target, can be
used to set up a supervised learning problem. A neural
net trained to predict yi from xi may be used to denoise
new noisy measurements (Weigert et al., 2018). As long
as the new data are drawn from the same distribution, one
can expect performance similar to that observed during
training. Lehtinen et al. demonstrated that clean targets are
unnecessary (2018). A neural net trained on pairs (xi , x0i )
of independent noisy measurements of the same target will,
under certain distributional assumptions, learn to predict the
clean signal. These supervised approaches extend to image
denoising the success of convolutional neural nets, which
currently give state-of-the-art performance for a vast range
of image-to-image tasks. Both of these methods require an
experimental setup in which each target may be measured
multiple times, which can be difficult in practice.
In this paper, we propose a framework for blind denoising
based on self-supervision. We use groups of features whose
noise is independent conditional on the true signal to predict
one another. This allows us to learn denoising functions
from single noisy measurements of each object, with performance close to that of supervised methods. The same
approach can also be used to calibrate traditional image denoising methods such as median filters and non-local means,

