Are Generative Classifiers More Robust to Adversarial Attacks?
Yingzhen Li 1 John Bradshaw 2 3 Yash Sharma 4

Abstract
There is a rising interest in studying the robustness of deep neural network classifiers against
adversaries, with both advanced attack and defence techniques being actively developed. However, most recent work focuses on discriminative
classifiers, which only model the conditional distribution of the labels given the inputs. In this
paper, we propose and investigate the deep Bayes
classifier, which improves classical naive Bayes
with conditional deep generative models. We further develop detection methods for adversarial
examples, which reject inputs with low likelihood
under the generative model. Experimental results suggest that deep Bayes classifiers are more
robust than deep discriminative classifiers, and
that the proposed detection methods are effective
against many recently proposed attacks.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have been shown to be vulnerable
to adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow
et al., 2015). The latest attack techniques can easily fool a
deep net with imperceptible perturbations (Goodfellow et al.,
2015; Papernot et al., 2016b; Carlini & Wagner, 2017a; Kurakin et al., 2016; Madry et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2018),
even in the black-box case, where the attacker does not have
access to the network’s weights (Papernot et al., 2017b;
Chen et al., 2017; Brendel et al., 2018; Athalye et al., 2018;
Alzantot et al., 2018a; Uesato et al., 2018). Adversarial
attacks are serious security threats to machine learning systems, threatening applications beyond image classification
(Carlini & Wagner, 2018; Alzantot et al., 2018b).
To address this outstanding security issue, researchers have
proposed defence mechanisms against adversarial attacks.

Adversarial training, which augments the training data with
adversarially perturbed inputs, has shown moderate success
at defending against recently proposed attack techniques
(Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2015; Tramèr et al.,
2018; Madry et al., 2018). In addition, recent advances in
Bayesian neural networks have demonstrated that uncertainty estimates can be used to detect adversarial attacks
(Li & Gal, 2017; Feinman et al., 2017; Louizos & Welling,
2017; Smith & Gal, 2018). Another notable category of
defence techniques involves the usage of generative models.
For example, Gu & Rigazio (2014) used an auto-encoder
to denoise the inputs before feeding them to the classifier.
This denoising approach has been extensively investigated,
and the “denoisers” in usage include generative adversarial
networks (Samangouei et al., 2018), PixelCNNs (Song et al.,
2018) and denoising auto-encoders (Kurakin et al., 2018).
These developments rely on the “off-manifold” conjecture –
adversarial examples are far away from the data manifold,
although Gilmer et al. (2018) has challenged this idea with
a synthetic “sphere classification” example.
Surprisingly, much less recent work has investigated the
robustness of generative classifiers (Ng & Jordan, 2002)
against adversarial attacks, where such classifiers explicitly
model the conditional distribution of the inputs given labels. Typically, a generative classifier produces predictions
by comparing between the likelihood of the labels for a
given input, which is closely related to the “distance” of the
input to the data manifold associated with a class. Therefore, generative classifiers should be robust to many recently
proposed adversarial attacks if the “off-manifold” conjecture holds for many real-world applications. Unfortunately,
many generative classifiers in popular use, including naive
Bayes and linear discriminant analysis (Fisher, 1936), perform poorly on natural image classification tasks, making
it difficult to verify the “off-manifold” conjecture and the
robustness of generative classifiers with these tools.

1
Microsoft Research Cambridge, UK 2 University of Cambridge, UK 3 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Germany
4
Eberhard Karls University of Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to: Yingzhen Li <Yingzhen.Li@microsoft.com>.

Are generative classifiers more robust to recently proposed
adversarial attack techniques? To answer this, we improve
the naive Bayes algorithm by using deep generative models, and evaluate the conjecture on the proposed generative
classifier. In summary, our contributions include:

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

• We propose deep Bayes which models the (conditional)
distribution of an input by a deep latent variable model
(LVM). We learn the LVM with the variational auto-

