Greedy Layerwise Learning Can Scale to ImageNet

Eugene Belilovsky 1 Michael Eickenberg 2 Edouard Oyallon 3

Abstract
Shallow supervised 1-hidden layer neural networks have a number of favorable properties that
make them easier to interpret, analyze, and optimize than their deep counterparts, but lack their
representational power. Here we use 1-hidden
layer learning problems to sequentially build deep
networks layer by layer, which can inherit properties from shallow networks. Contrary to previous
approaches using shallow networks, we focus on
problems where deep learning is reported as critical for success. We thus study CNNs on image
classification tasks using the large-scale ImageNet
dataset and the CIFAR-10 dataset. Using a simple
set of ideas for architecture and training we find
that solving sequential 1-hidden-layer auxiliary
problems lead to a CNN that exceeds AlexNet
performance on ImageNet. Extending this training methodology to construct individual layers
by solving 2-and-3-hidden layer auxiliary problems, we obtain an 11-layer network that exceeds
several members of the VGG model family on
ImageNet, and can train a VGG-11 model to the
same accuracy as end-to-end learning. To our
knowledge, this is the first competitive alternative
to end-to-end training of CNNs that can scale to
ImageNet. We illustrate several interesting properties of these models and conduct a range of
experiments to study the properties this training
induces on the intermediate representations.

1. Introduction
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) trained on
large-scale supervised data via the back-propagation algorithm have become the dominant approach in most computer
vision tasks (Krizhevsky et al., 2012). This has motivated
successful applications of deep learning in other fields such
1
Mila, University of Montreal 2 University of California,
Berkeley 3 CentraleSupelec, University of Paris-Saclay / INRIA Saclay. Correspondence to: Eugene Belilovsky <eugene.belilovsky@umontreal.ca>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

as speech recognition (Chan et al., 2016), natural language
processing (Vaswani et al., 2017), and reinforcement learning (Silver et al., 2017). Training procedures and architecture choices for deep CNNs have become more and more
entrenched, but which of the standard components of modern pipelines are essential to the success of deep CNNs is
not clear. Here we ask: do CNN layers need to be learned
jointly to obtain high performance? We will show that even
for the challenging ImageNet dataset the answer is no.
Supervised end-to-end learning is the standard approach
to neural network optimization. However it has potential
issues that can be valuable to consider. First, the use of a
global objective means that the final functional behavior of
individual intermediate layers of a deep network is only indirectly specified: it is unclear how the layers work together
to achieve high-accuracy predictions. Several authors have
suggested and shown empirically that CNNs learn to implement mechanisms that progressively induce invariance to
complex, but irrelevant variability (Mallat, 2016; Yosinski
et al., 2015) while increasing linear separability (Zeiler &
Fergus, 2014; Oyallon, 2017; Jacobsen et al., 2018) of the
data. Progressive linear separability has been shown empirically but it is unclear whether this is merely the consequence
of other strategies implemented by CNNs, or if it is a sufficient condition for the high performance of these networks.
Secondly, understanding the link between shallow Neural
Networks (NNs) and deep NNs is difficult: while generalization, approximation, or optimization results (Barron, 1994;
Bach, 2014; Venturi et al., 2018; Neyshabur et al., 2018;
Pinkus, 1999) for 1-hidden layer NNs are available, the same
studies conclude that multiple-hidden-layer NNs are much
more difficult to tackle theoretically. Finally, end-to-end
back-propagation can be inefficient (Jaderberg et al., 2016;
Salimans et al., 2017) in terms of computation and memory
resources and is considered not biologically plausible.
Sequential learning of CNN layers by solving shallow supervised learning problems is an alternative to end-to-end
back-propagation. This classic (Ivakhnenko & Lapa, 1965)
learning principle can directly specify the objective of every
layer. It can encourage the refinement of specific properties
of the representation (Greff et al., 2016), such as progressive
linear separability. The development of theoretical tools for
deep greedy methods can naturally draw from the theoretical understanding of shallow sub-problems. Indeed, (Arora

