Limitations of Adversarial Robustness: Strong No Free Lunch Theorem

Elvis Dohmatob 1

Abstract
This manuscript presents some new impossibility results on adversarial robustness in machine
learning, a very important yet largely open problem. We show that if conditioned on a class label
the data distribution satisfies the W2 Talagrand
transportation-cost inequality (for example, this
condition is satisfied if the conditional distribution has density which is log-concave; is the uniform measure on a compact Riemannian manifold with positive Ricci curvature; etc.) any classifier can be adversarially fooled with high probability once the perturbations are slightly greater
than the natural noise level in the problem. We
call this result The Strong ”No Free Lunch” Theorem as some recent results (Tsipras et al. 2018,
Fawzi et al. 2018, etc.) on the subject can be
immediately recovered as very particular cases.
Our theoretical bounds are demonstrated on both
simulated and real data (MNIST). We conclude
the manuscript with some speculation on possible future research directions.

1. Introduction
An adversarial attack operates as follows:
• A classifier is trained and deployed (e.g the road traffic
sign recognition system on a self-driving car).
• At test / inference time, an attacker may submit
queries to the classifier by sampling a data point x
with true label k, and modifying it x → xadv according
to a prescribed threat model. For example, modifying
a few pixels on a road traffic sign (Su et al., 2017),
modifying intensity of pixels by a limited amount determined by a prescribed tolerance level  (Tsipras
et al., 2018), etc. , on it.
1
Criteo, Paris, France.. Correspondence to: Elvis Dohmatob
<e.dohmatob@criteo.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

• The goal of the attacker is to fool the classifier into
classifying xadv as label different from k.
• A robust classifier tries to limit this failure mode, at a
prescribed tolerance .
1.1. A toy example illustrating the fundamental issue
To motivate things, consider the following ”toy” problem
from (Tsipras et al., 2018), which consists of classifying a
target Y ∼ Bern(1/2, {±1}) based on p ≥ 2 explanatory
variables X := (X 1 , X 2 , . . . , X p ) given by
(
+Y, w.p 70%,
1
X |Y =
−Y, w.p 30%,
and X j |Y ∼ N (ηY, 1), for j = 2, . . . , p, where η ∼ p−1/2
is a fixed scalar which (as we wll see) controls the difficulty of the problem. Now, as was shown in (Tsipras
et al., 2018), the above problem can be solved perfectly
with generalization accuracy ≈ 100%, but the ”champion”
estimator can also be fooled, perfectly! Indeed, the linear estimator given by havg (x) := sign(wT x) with w =
(0, 1/(p − 1), . . . , 1/(p − 1)) ∈ Rp , where we allow an
attacked to modify each feature by an amount at moust
 ≈ 2η, has the afore-mentioned properties. Indeed, using basic tail bounds for the Gaussian distributions, one can
show that for any δ ∈ (0, 1] the following hold
• The standard accuracy
p of the linear model havg is at
least 1 − δ if η ≥ 2 log(1/δ)/(p − 1), and
• This same model’s
adversarial accuracy is at most δ
p
for  ≥ η + 2 log(1/δ)/(p − 1)
See (Tsipras et al., 2018) for details (or see supplemental).
By the way, we note that an optimal adversarial attack can
be done by taking ∆x1 = 0 and ∆xj = −y for all j =
2, . . . , p.
An autopsy of what is going on. Recall that the√entropy
of a univariate Gaussian is Ent(N (µ, σ)) = ln( 2πσe)
nats. Now, for j = 2, 3, . . . P
, p, the distribution of feature
X j is a Gaussian mixture 12 Y =±1 N (ηY, 1) and so one

