Mixture Models for Diverse Machine Translation: Tricks of the Trade
Tianxiao Shen * 1 Myle Ott * 2 Michael Auli 2 Marc’Aurelio Ranzato 2

Abstract
Mixture models trained via EM are among the
simplest, most widely used and well understood
latent variable models in the machine learning
literature. Surprisingly, these models have been
hardly explored in text generation applications
such as machine translation. In principle, they provide a latent variable to control generation and produce a diverse set of hypotheses. In practice, however, mixture models are prone to degeneracies—
often only one component gets trained or the latent variable is simply ignored. We find that disabling dropout noise in responsibility computation is critical to successful training. In addition,
the design choices of parameterization, prior distribution, hard versus soft EM and online versus
offline assignment can dramatically affect model
performance. We develop an evaluation protocol
to assess both quality and diversity of generations
against multiple references, and provide an extensive empirical study of several mixture model
variants. Our analysis shows that certain types of
mixture models are more robust and offer the best
trade-off between translation quality and diversity compared to variational models and diverse
decoding approaches.1

1. Introduction
Machine translation (MT) is a challenging task not only
because of the large and structured output space, but also because it is inherently a one-to-many mapping. There are often many plausible and semantically equivalent translations
due to information asymmetry between different languages,
e.g., translating from a language without grammatical gender to a language that has grammatical gender leads to two
valid translation options, as well as different translation
*
Equal contribution 1 MIT CSAIL 2 Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to: Tianxiao Shen <tianxiao@csail.mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).
1
Code to reproduce the results in this paper is available at
https://github.com/pytorch/fairseq

styles such as formal/informal, literal/not literal, etc. This
raises the question of how to model such multi-modal output
distributions and how to evaluate these models.
Our first contribution is a better evaluation protocol that uses
multiple references during evaluation to measure both the
quality of translation and diversity of a generated hypothesis
set. The second contribution of this paper is an in-depth empirical analysis of mixture models for machine translation,
although we conjecture that the findings are general and
might apply to other text generation tasks, such as dialogue,
summarization, image captioning, etc.
Conditional mixture models, also known as mixture of experts (MoE) (Jacobs et al., 1991), are in principle well suited
to generating diverse hypotheses which can be achieved
through different mixture components. However, they have
been largely overlooked in favor of models with richer latent
structure (Zhang et al., 2016; Kaiser et al., 2018). There has
been some previous work on mixture models for sequence to
sequence learning (Shazeer et al., 2017; He et al., 2018), but
these did not evaluate generations in terms of both quality
and diversity, or they focus on a particular model variant.
There is a lack of consensus whether mixture models are
competitive with more complex models that rely on approximate Bayesian inference, whether they are plagued by the
same “posterior collapse” degeneracy as variational models (Bowman et al., 2016), how model configurations affect
performance and which one works best in practice.
This work considers all the major design choices involved
in the construction of mixture models, including hard versus soft EM training, different parameterizations of mixture
components, the choice of conditional prior, update frequency of responsibilities (also called membership weights),
and how regularization noise is injected. We experiment on
the large scale WMT English to German benchmark with
a state-of-the-art model architecture and the results demonstrate intricate dependencies between these design choices.
They also reveal that some ingredients are key to successful
training of mixture models.
First, we show that mixture models are prone to degeneracies when trained with dropout noise, but that this can be
mitigated by turning off dropout in the computation of responsibilities. The key to the specialization of experts is to
make consistent use of them, and even a small amount of

