A Framework for Bayesian Optimization in Embedded Subspaces

Alexander Munteanu 1 * Amin Nayebi 2 * Matthias Poloczek 3 2

Abstract
We present a theoretically founded approach for
high-dimensional Bayesian optimization based
on low-dimensional subspace embeddings. We
prove that the error in the Gaussian process model
is bounded tightly when going from the original high-dimensional search domain to the lowdimensional embedding. This implies that the
optimization process in the low-dimensional embedding proceeds essentially as if it were run directly on an unknown active subspace of low dimensionality. The argument applies to a large
class of algorithms and GP models, including
non-stationary kernels. Moreover, we provide
an efficient implementation based on hashing
and demonstrate empirically that this subspace
embedding achieves considerably better results
than the previously proposed methods for highdimensional BO based on Gaussian matrix projections and structure-learning.

1. Introduction
Bayesian optimization (BO) has recently emerged as powerful technique for the global optimization of expensive-toevaluate black-box functions (Brochu et al., 2010; Shahriari
et al., 2016; Frazier, 2018). Here ‘black-box’ means that we
may evaluate the objective at any point to observe its value,
possibly with noise but without derivative information. The
advantages of Bayesian optimization are sample-efficiency,
convergence to a global optimum, and a low computational
overhead. A critical limitation is the number of parameters
that BO can optimize. The limit is usually seen around
15 parameters for the most common form of BO that uses
Gaussian process (GP) regression as a surrogate model for
*
Equal contribution 1 Dortmund Data Science Center, Faculties of Statistics and Computer Science, TU Dortmund, Dortmund, Germany 2 Department of Systems and Industrial Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA 3 Uber AI Labs,
San Francisco, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Matthias Poloczek
<poloczek@uber.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

the objective function. Thus, it is not surprising that expanding BO to higher-dimensional search spaces is widely
acknowledged as one of the most important goals in the
field. For example, Frazier (2018, p. 16) states that “developing Bayesian optimization methods that work well in high
dimensions is of great practical and theoretical interest”.
This paper advances the field in the theory of highdimensional Bayesian optimization and improves the practical performance. Specifically, the contributions are:
1. A theoretically founded framework for Bayesian optimization based on subspace embeddings. The core is a
rigorous proof that any GP-based BO algorithm proceeds
on the embedded space as it would if it was run directly on
an unknown active subspace of low dimensionality.
2. An extension of this result to large classes of parametrized
GP models. Note that the argument is agnostic to the acquisition criterion used by the BO algorithm and thus can
be easily combined with many state-of-the-art methods, including batch acquisition, multifidelity modeling, network
architecture search, and many more.
3. The Hashing-enhanced Subspace BO (HeSBO) method
for high-dimensional problems has i) strong accuracy guarantees and ii) low computational overhead, while being iii)
conceptually simple. In particular, it avoids complex corrections of projections that caused complications previously.
4. An experimental evaluation that demonstrates state-ofthe-art performance when the proposed embedding is combined with a low-dimensional BO algorithm, e.g., Knowledge Gradient (KG) (Frazier et al., 2009) or BLOSSOM (BM)
(McLeod et al., 2018).
Related Work. Bayesian optimization has recently received significant interest for the optimization of expensiveto-evaluate black-box functions. We refer to (Brochu et al.,
2010; Shahriari et al., 2016; Frazier, 2018) for an overview.
Aside of the general setting of optimizing an objective blackbox function, several extensions have been studied, including constrained (Gardner et al., 2014; Hernández-Lobato
et al., 2015; Picheny et al., 2016) and multifidelity optimization (Kennedy & O’Hagan, 2000; Huang et al., 2006;
Swersky et al., 2013; Kandasamy et al., 2016; Poloczek
et al., 2017), expensive functions with derivative information (Wu et al., 2017; Eriksson et al., 2018), and neural

