Estimate Sequences for Variance-Reduced Stochastic Composite Optimization

Andrei Kulunchakov 1 Julien Mairal 1

Abstract

While the finite-sum setting is a particular case of expectation, the deterministic nature of the resulting cost function
drastically changes the performance guarantees an optimization method may achieve to solve (1). In particular, when an
algorithm is only allowed to access unbiased measurements
of the objective and gradient, it may be shown that the worstcase convergence rate in expected function value cannot be
better than O(1/k) in general, where k is the number of
iterations (Nemirovski et al., 2009; Agarwal et al., 2012).

In this paper, we propose a unified view of
gradient-based algorithms for stochastic convex
composite optimization by extending the concept of estimate sequence introduced by Nesterov.
This point of view covers the stochastic gradient descent method, variants of the approaches
SAGA, SVRG, and has several advantages: (i)
we provide a generic proof of convergence for the
aforementioned methods; (ii) we show that this
SVRG variant is adaptive to strong convexity; (iii)
we naturally obtain new algorithms with the same
guarantees; (iv) we derive generic strategies to
make these algorithms robust to stochastic noise,
which is useful when data is corrupted by small
random perturbations. Finally, we show that this
viewpoint is useful to obtain new accelerated algorithms in the sense of Nesterov.

1. Introduction
We consider convex optimization problems of the form
min {F (x) := f (x) + ψ(x)} ,

x∈Rp

(1)

where f is µ-strongly convex and L-smooth (differentiable
with L-Lipschitz continuous gradient), and ψ is convex
lower-semicontinuous. For instance, ψ may be the `1 -norm
but may also be the indicator function of a convex set C for
constrained problems (Hiriart-Urruty & Lemaréchal, 1996).
More specifically, we focus on stochastic objectives,
where f is an expectation or a finite sum of convex functions
n
h
i
1X
f (x) = Eξ f˜(x, ξ) or f (x) =
fi (x).
(2)
n i=1
On the left, ξ is a random variable representing a data point
drawn according to some distribution and f˜(x, ξ) measures
the fit of some model parameter x to the data point ξ.

Even though this pessimistic result applies to the general
stochastic case, linear convergence rates can be obtained
for deterministic finite sums. For instance, linear rates are
achieved by SAG (Schmidt et al., 2017), SAGA (Defazio
et al., 2014), SVRG (Johnson & Zhang, 2013; Xiao &
Zhang, 2014), SDCA (Shalev-Shwartz & Zhang, 2016),
MISO (Mairal, 2015), Katyusha (Allen-Zhu, 2017), MiG
(Zhou et al., 2018), SARAH (Nguyen et al., 2017), accelerated SAGA (Zhou, 2019) or Lan & Zhou (2018a). In the
non-convex case, a recent focus has been on improving convergence rates for finding first-order stationary points (Lei
et al., 2017; Paquette et al., 2018; Fang et al., 2018), which
is however beyond the scope of our paper. A common interpretation is to see these algorithms as performing SGD steps
with an estimate of the gradient that has lower variance.
In this paper, we are interested in providing a unified view of
such stochastic optimization algorithms, but we also want to
investigate their robustness to random pertubations. Specifically, we consider objective functions with an explicit finitesum structure such as (2) when only noisy estimates of the
gradients ∇fi (x) are available. Such a setting may occur for
various reasons. Perturbations may be injected during training to achieve better generalization (Srivastava et al., 2014),
perform stable feature selection (Meinshausen & Bühlmann,
2010), for privacy-aware learning (Wainwright et al., 2012)
or to improve model robustness (Zheng et al., 2016).
Each point indexed by i is then corrupted by a random
perturbation ρi and the function f may be written as

1

Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK,
38000 Grenoble, France. Correspondence to: Julien Mairal
<julien.mairal@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

f (x) =

n
h
i
1X
fi (x) with fi (x) = Eρi f˜i (x, ρi ) . (3)
n i=1

Since the exact gradients ∇fi (x) cannot be computed, all
the aforementioned variance-reduction methods do not apply and the standard approach is to use SGD. Typically, the

