Screening Rules for Lasso with Non-Convex Sparse Regularizers

Alain Rakotomamonjy 1 2 Gilles Gasso 1 Joseph Salmon 3

Abstract
Leveraging on the convexity of the Lasso problem, screening rules help in accelerating solvers
by discarding irrelevant variables, during the optimization process. However, because they provide better theoretical guarantees in identifying
relevant variables, several non-convex regularizers for the Lasso have been proposed in the literature. This work is the first that introduces a
screening rule strategy into a non-convex Lasso
solver. The approach we propose is based on a
iterative majorization-minimization (MM) strategy that includes a screening rule in the inner
solver and a condition for propagating screened
variables between iterations of MM. In addition
to improve efficiency of solvers, we also provide guarantees that the inner solver is able to
identify the zeros components of its critical point
in finite time. Our experimental analysis illustrates the significant computational gain brought
by the new screening rule compared to classical
coordinate-descent or proximal gradient descent
methods.

1. Introduction
Sparsity-inducing penalties are classical tools in statistical machine learning, especially in settings where the data
available for learning is scarce and of high-dimension. In
addition, when the solution of the learning problem is
known to be sparse, using those penalties yield to models
that can leverage this prior knowledge. The Lasso (Tibshirani, 1996) and the Basis pursuit (Chen et al., 2001; Chen
& Donoho, 1994) where the first approaches that have employed `1 -norm penalty for inducing sparsity.
1

LITIS, Normandy University, University of Rouen Normandie, INSA Rouen Normadie, France 2 Criteo AI Lab,
Paris, France 3 IMAG, Univ Montpellier, CNRS, Montpellier, France.
Correspondence to: Alain Rakotomamonjy
<alain.rakotomamonjy@univ-rouen.fr>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

While the Lasso has had a great impact on machine learning and signal processing communities given some success
stories (Shevade & Keerthi, 2003; Donoho, 2006; Lustig
et al., 2008; Ye & Liu, 2012) it also comes with some
theoretical drawbacks (e.g., biased estimates of large coefficient of the model). Hence, several authors have proposed non-convex penalties that approximate better the `0 (pseudo)norm, the later being the original measure of sparsity though it leads to NP-hard learning problem. The most
commonly used non-convex penalties are the Smoothly
Clipped Absolute Deviation (SCAD) (Fan & Li, 2001), the
Log Sum penalty (LSP) (Candès et al., 2008), the capped`1 penalty (Zhang, 2010b), the Minimax Concave Penalty
(MCP) (Zhang, 2010a). We refer the interested reader to
(Soubies et al., 2017) for a discussion on the pros and cons
of such non-convex formulations.
From an optimization point of view, the Lasso can benefit from a large palette of algorithms ranging from blockcoordinate descent (Friedman et al., 2007; Fu, 1998) to (accelerated) proximal gradient approaches (Beck & Teboulle,
2009). In addition, by leveraging convex optimization theory, some of these algorithms can be further accelerated by
combining them with sequential or dynamic safe screening
rules (El Ghaoui et al., 2012; Bonnefoy et al., 2015; Fercoq
et al., 2015), which allow to safely set some useless variables to 0 before terminating (or even sometimes before
starting) the algorithm.
While learning sparse models with non-convex penalties are seemingly more challenging to address, blockcoordinate descent algorithms (Breheny & Huang, 2011;
Mazumder et al., 2011) or iterative shrinkage thresholding (Gong et al., 2013) algorithms can be extended to
those learning problems. Another popular way of handling
non-convexity is to consider the majorization-minimization
(MM) (Hunter & Lange, 2004) principle which consists
in iteratively minimizing a majorization of a (non-convex)
objective function. When applied to non-convex sparsity
enforcing penalty, the MM scheme leads to solving a sequence of weighted Lasso problems (Candès et al., 2008;
Gasso et al., 2009; Mairal, 2013).
In this paper, we propose a screening strategy that can be
applied when dealing with non-convex penalties. As far
as we know, this work is the first attempt in that direction.

