Trajectory-Based Off-Policy Deep Reinforcement Learning

Andreas Doerr 1 2 3 Michael Volpp 1 Marc Toussaint 3 Sebastian Trimpe 2
Christian Daniel 1

Abstract
Policy gradient methods are powerful reinforcement learning algorithms and have been demonstrated to solve many complex tasks. However,
these methods are also data-inefficient, afflicted
with high variance gradient estimates, and frequently get stuck in local optima. This work addresses these weaknesses by combining recent
improvements in the reuse of off-policy data and
exploration in parameter space with deterministic behavioral policies. The resulting objective
is amenable to standard neural network optimization strategies like stochastic gradient descent or
stochastic gradient Hamiltonian Monte Carlo. Incorporation of previous rollouts via importance
sampling greatly improves data-efficiency, whilst
stochastic optimization schemes facilitate the escape from local optima. We evaluate the proposed
approach on a series of continuous control benchmark tasks. The results show that the proposed
algorithm is able to successfully and reliably learn
solutions using fewer system interactions than
standard policy gradient methods.

1. Introduction
Policy search methods are amongst the few successful Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton et al., 2000) methods
which are applicable to high-dimensional or continuous control problems, such as the ones typically encountered in
robotics (Peters & Schaal, 2008b; Deisenroth et al., 2013).
One particular class of policy search methods directly estimates the gradient of the expected return with respect to the
parameters of a differentiable policy. These Policy Gradient
(PG) algorithms have achieved impressive results on highly
complex tasks (Schulman et al., 2015; 2017). However,
1

Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Renningen, Germany.
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Stuttgart/Tübingen,
Germany. 3 Machine Learning and Robotics Lab, University of
Stuttgart, Germany. Correspondence to: Andreas Doerr <andreasdoerr@gmx.net>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

standard algorithms are vastly data-inefficient and rely on
millions of data points to achieve the aforementioned results. Typical applications are therefore limited to simulated
problems where policy rollouts can be cheaply obtained.
Algorithms based on stochastic policy gradients, like REINFORCE (Williams, 1992) and G(PO)MDP (Baxter &
Bartlett, 2001), typically estimate the policy gradient based
on a batch of trajectories, which are obtained by executing
the current policy on the system (i.e. based on on-policy
samples). In the next step, all previous experience is discarded and new trajectories are sampled using the updated
policy. This scheme holds true also for more recent methods, like PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) or POIS (Metelli
et al., 2018), where a surrogate objective is constructed,
which can be optimized till convergence. Typically, Importance Sampling (IS) techniques are employed to evaluate a
target policy based on rollouts obtained from behavioural
policies (i.e. from off-policy samples). Albeit these offpolicy evaluation schemes, in these algorithms, no data
is shared between iterations. Prominent examples of offpolicy offline algorithms typically employ actor-critic architectures (Silver et al., 2014), where the parametric critic
model, typically a value function, is updated to summarize
all knowledge gathered so far. In contrast, we proposed the
model-free Deep Deterministic Off-Policy Gradient method
(DD-OPG)1 , which incorporates previously gathered rollout
data by sampling from a trajectory replay buffer. This effectively enables backtracking to promising solutions, whilst
requiring only minimal assumptions to construct the surrogate model.
Next to the inefficient use of available data, stochasticity in
both the policy and the environment causes highly variable
gradient estimates and therefore slow convergence. When
executing the probabilistic policy on the system, noise is
injected into the policy gradient in each time step, leading
to a variance, which linearly increases with the length of
the horizon (Munos, 2006). Additive Gaussian noise is typically employed as source of exploration. Additionally, PG
methods built around the likelihood ratio trick intrinsically
require probabilistic policies. Only then, policies can be updated to increase the likelihood of actions, which have been
1

https://github.com/boschresearch/DD_OPG

