Scale-free adaptive planning for deterministic dynamics & discounted rewards

Peter L. Bartlett 1 Victor Gabillon 2 Jennifer Healey 3 Michal Valko 4

Abstract
We address the problem of planning in an environment with deterministic dynamics and stochastic discounted rewards under a limited numerical budget where the ranges of both rewards and
noise are unknown. We introduce PlaTγPOOS, an
adaptive, robust, and efficient alternative to the
OLOP (open-loop optimistic planning) algorithm.
Whereas OLOP requires a priori knowledge of the
ranges of both rewards and noise, PlaTγPOOS
dynamically adapts its behavior to both. This allows PlaTγPOOS to be immune to two vulnerabilities of OLOP: failure when given underestimated
ranges of noise and rewards and inefficiency when
these are overestimated. PlaTγPOOS additionally
adapts to the global smoothness of the value function. PlaTγPOOS acts in a provably more efficient
manner vs. OLOP when OLOP is given an overestimated reward and show that in the case of no
noise, PlaTγPOOS learns exponentially faster.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of planning in a general stochastic
environment with deterministic dynamics and discounted
rewards. Our goal is to recommend the best first action for
an agent to take from a given state. We envision that the
discount factor γ is known and that our learner has a limited
allocation of n interactions to spend querying a generative
model of the environment. The objective is to maximize the
sum of discounted rewards of the best sequence of actions
following from the recommended first action. This is equivalent to minimizing the simple regret. We introduce the
algorithm PlaTγPOOS, Planning wiTh γ Plus an Online Optimization Strategy, as a robust and efficient scale-free alternative to the OLOP algorithm (open-loop optimistic planning,
Bubeck & Munos, 2010; Leurent & Maillard, 2019) for this
1
University of California, Berkeley, USA 2 Noah’s Ark Lab,
Huawei Technologies, London, UK 3 Adobe Research, San Jose,
USA 4 SequeL team, INRIA Lille - Nord Europe, France. Correspondence to: Victor Gabillon <victor.gabillon@huawei.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

setting. Our algorithm implements a scale-free function optimization strategy similar to SequOOL (Bartlett et al., 2019)
rather than an upper-confidence-bound approach which allows us to efficiently adapt to the problem space without
prior knowledge of the ranges of the noise or the rewards.
Planning in a stochastic environment is an important setting
often modeled by Markov decision processes (MDPs, Puterman, 1994; Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 1996). One approach
to solving these settings is to find the optimal policy that
maximizes the expected sum of rewards and then generate
an action recommendation according to that optimal policy. Unfortunately, in most practical settings where we are
limited by computational resources, finding this optimal
policy is often not possible, especially when the state space
becomes large. Therefore, instead of trying to estimate the
optimal policy of the MDP, we focus only on finding the
best first action given our budget. We evaluate the performance of the recommendation in terms of the simple regret,
the difference in reward between choosing the optimal first
action vs. choosing our recommended first action and then
in both cases choosing an optimal sequence of actions following the first action. This metric is often used to evaluate
planning strategies that optimize numeric budgets (Bubeck
& Munos, 2010; Buşoniu & Munos, 2012; Grill et al., 2016),
in contrast to the cumulative regret where we are penalized
during the search for querying sub-optimal actions. Once
the agent takes the first action and moves to the next state,
our evaluation can be repeated with a new budget allocation
and the following best first action can be recommended.
This allows us to approximately follow an optimal policy,
action by action, in an online way. Previously, there have
been several strategies proposed on how to efficiently allocate a numeric budget to search for an optimal value in a
stochastic space. Many of these have been successfully implemented using methods based on upper confidence bounds
(UCBs) such as UCT (Upper Confidence Trees, Kocsis &
Szepesvári, 2006). This approach has been proven to be
very efficient in practice (Coulom, 2007; Gelly et al., 2006;
Silver et al., 2016), however, UCT can badly misbehave on
some problems (Coquelin & Munos, 2007) and more theoretically sound approaches have been proposed (Hren &
Munos, 2008; Bubeck & Munos, 2010; Buşoniu & Munos,
2012; Feldman & Domshlak, 2014; Szörényi et al., 2014;
Kaufmann & Koolen, 2017; Shah et al., 2019). Some of

