Nonlinear Stein Variational Gradient Descent
for Learning Diversified Mixture Models
Dilin Wang 1 Qiang Liu 1

Abstract
Diversification has been shown to be a powerful
mechanism for learning robust models in nonconvex settings. A notable example is learning mixture models, in which enforcing diversity between the different mixture components
allows us to prevent the model collapsing phenomenon and capture more patterns from the observed data. In this work, we present a variational approach for diversity-promoting learning,
which leverages the entropy functional as a natural mechanism for enforcing diversity. We develop a simple and efficient functional gradientbased algorithm for optimizing the variational
objective function, which provides a significant
generalization of Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD). We test our method on various
challenging real world problems, including deep
embedded clustering and deep anomaly detection. Empirical results show that our method
provides an effective mechanism for diversitypromoting learning, achieving substantial improvement over existing methods.

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning abounds with challenging nonconvex optimization. A typical source of non-convexity
comes from learning composite models consisting of symmetric units, such as latent variable or mixture models, ensemble models and additive models. In these problems,
we are asked to estimate an un-ordered list of parameters,
denoted by ⇥ := {✓i }m
i=1 , by maximizing a permutationinvariant objective function that does not depend on the order of the elements of ⇥:
max F ({✓1 , . . . , ✓m }),
⇥

1
Department of Computer Science, UT Austin. Correspondence to: Dilin Wang <dilin@cs.utexas.edu>, Qiang Liu
<lqiang@cs.utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

where ✓i can be the component parameters in mixture models or additive models, or the posterior samples in Bayesian
ensemble prediction; F (·) can be the log-likelihood function or negative loss function on the training data.
Due to the non-convex nature of the objective function, directly solving these problems with standard local search
methods, such as gradient ascent, suffers from the risk
of obtaining sub-optimal solutions. A common degenerate case is when multiple elements of ✓i converge to similar values (a.k.a. mode collapsing), while other important
modes are missed due to insufficient exploration. In practice, it was found that this problem can be alleviated by
adding diversification constraints to encourage the diversity
among {✓i }, which can yield better and more robust empirical performance (e.g., Kwok & Adams, 2012; Mariet &
Sra, 2016; Cogswell et al., 2015; Xie et al., 2016b; 2017).
However, because repulsive regularization functions are inherently highly non-convex, directly adding them into the
objective function casts additional difficulty in the optimization problem.
Main Algorithm We propose a simple yet powerful
functional approach for learning diversified parameters.
Our main practical result is a general “diversified gradient
ascent” algorithm that learns the parameters by iteratively
updating ⇥ := {✓i }m
i=1 in parallel by
✓i

✓i + "

m 
X
j=1

↵
r✓j F (⇥) k(✓j , ✓i ) +
r✓ k(✓j , ✓i ) ,
m | j {z
| {z }
}
gradient

repulsive

(1)

where k(✓, ✓0 ) is any positive definite kernel that specifies
the similarity between ✓ and ✓0 . The two terms of update
(1) yield intuitive interpretations: the first term performs
an (averaged) gradient ascent update to increase the value
of the objective F , while the second term corresponds to
a repulsive force that enforces {✓i } to be mutually different, which theoretically corresponds to a functional entropy
regularization, as we show in the sequel. The balance of
these two terms is controlled by a coefficient ↵, which correlates to a temperature parameter of the entropy regularization.

