Learning Structured Decision Problems with Unawareness

Craig Innes 1 Alex Lascarides 1

Abstract
Structured models of decision making often assume an agent is aware of all possible states and
actions in advance. This assumption is sometimes
untenable. In this paper, we learn influence diagrams from both domain exploration and expert
assertions in a way which guarantees convergence
to optimal behaviour, even when the agent starts
unaware of actions or belief variables that are critical to success. Our experiments show that our
agent learns optimal behaviour on small and large
decision problems, and that allowing an agent to
conserve information upon discovering new possibilities results in faster convergence.

1. Introduction
Probabilistic graphical models have proven useful in representing richly-structured decision tasks (Koller, 2009).
Many techniques exist to learn a model’s structure and parameters from experience (Tsamardinos et al., 2006; Bartlett
& Cussens, 2017) and expert advice (Masegosa & Moral,
2013). Unfortunately, all such methods assume the way
the domain is conceptualized—the belief and action variables used to describe the problem—is completely known
in advance. Often, this assumption does not hold.
In medicine, for example, suppose an agent prescribes a
drug, but later a senior pharmacologist objects to the prescription based on a reason unforeseen by the agent—the
patient carries a newly discovered genetic trait, and the drug
produces harmful side effects in its carriers. Further, this
discovery may occur after the agent has already learned a lot
about how other (foreseen) factors impact the drug’s effectiveness. As Coenen et al. (2017) point out, such scenarios
are common in human discussion—the answer to a question may not only provide information about which of the
questioner’s existing hypotheses are likely, but also reveal
unforeseen hypotheses not yet considered. This example
1
University of Edinburgh, UK. Correspondence to: Craig Innes
<craig.innes@ed.ac.uk>, Alex Lascarides <alex@inf.ed.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

also shows that while it may be infeasible for an agent to
gather all relevant factors of a problem before learning, it
may be easy for an expert to offer contextually relevant
advice during learning. Another example is in robotic skill
learning. Methods like Cakmak & Thomaz (2012) teach a
robot how to perform a new action it was unaware of, but
not how to integrate it into an existing decision model.
Current learning and decision making models don’t address
these issues; they assume the task is to use data to refine
a distribution over a fixed hypothesis space. The above
examples, however, illustrate a sort of reverse bayesianism
(Karni & Viero, 2013), where the hypothesis space expands
over time.
Rather than overcoming unawareness of states and actions,
we could instead represent unawareness as an infinite number of hidden variables (Wood et al., 2006), or abandon
learning a structured model and use densely connected hidden layers to implicitly learn structure from raw sensory
input (Mnih et al., 2015). Both approaches have drawbacks.
First, neither currently addresses how to adapt what one
has learned when a new action is discovered. More importantly, the hidden layers/variables are not tied to grounded
concepts with explicit meaning, so an agent cannot easily
justify its decisions to a user, or articulate the limits of its
current understanding to solicit help from others.
We instead propose an agent which explicitly overcomes
its unawareness, and constructs an interpretable model of
the problem. This paper makes three contributions: First,
an algorithm which incrementally learns all components
of a decision problem as a Influence Diagram (ID). This
includes the reward function and probabilistic dependencies
between variables, but also the set of belief and action variables themselves (Sections 2, 3.2). Second, an agent-expert
communication protocol (Section 3.1) which interleaves
contextual advice with learning, and guarantees our agent
converges to optimal behaviour despite starting unaware of
factors critical to success. Third, experiments on decision
tasks of varying sizes showing our agent successfully learns
optimal behaviour in practice (Section 4). Such contributions should be most relevant in interactive task learning
(Laird et al., 2017), where agents must learn the underlying
concepts which define a task.

