Compressed Factorization: Fast and Accurate
Low-Rank Factorization of Compressively-Sensed Data

Vatsal Sharan * 1 Kai Sheng Tai * 1 Peter Bailis 1 Gregory Valiant 1

Abstract
What learning algorithms can be run directly on
compressively-sensed data? In this work, we consider the question of accurately and efficiently
computing low-rank matrix or tensor factorizations given data compressed via random projections. We examine the approach of first performing factorization in the compressed domain, and
then reconstructing the original high-dimensional
factors from the recovered (compressed) factors.
In both the matrix and tensor settings, we establish conditions under which this natural approach
will provably recover the original factors. While
it is well-known that random projections preserve
a number of geometric properties of a dataset,
our work can be viewed as showing that they can
also preserve certain solutions of non-convex, NPHard problems like non-negative matrix factorization. We support these theoretical results with
experiments on synthetic data and demonstrate
the practical applicability of compressed factorization on real-world gene expression and EEG
time series datasets.

1

Introduction

We consider the setting where we are given data that has
been compressed via random projections. This setting frequently arises when data is acquired via compressive measurements (Donoho, 2006; Candès & Wakin, 2008), or when
high-dimensional data is projected to lower dimension in
order to reduce storage and bandwidth costs (Haupt et al.,
2008; Abdulghani et al., 2012). In the former case, the use
of compressive measurement enables higher throughput in
signal acquisition, more compact sensors, and reduced data
storage costs (Duarte et al., 2008; Candès & Wakin, 2008).
*

Equal contribution 1 Stanford University, USA. Correspondence to: Vatsal Sharan <vsharan@stanford.edu>, Kai Sheng Tai
<kst@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

In the latter, the use of random projections underlies many
sketching algorithms for stream processing and distributed
data processing applications (Cormode et al., 2012).
Due to the computational benefits of working directly in the
compressed domain, there has been significant interest in
understanding which learning tasks can be performed on
compressed data. For example, consider the problem of
supervised learning on data that is acquired via compressive
measurements. Calderbank et al. (2009) show that it is possible to learn a linear classifier directly on the compressively
sensed data with small loss in accuracy, hence avoiding the
computational cost of first performing sparse recovery for
each input prior to classification. The problem of learning
from compressed data has also been considered for several
other learning tasks, such as linear discriminant analysis
(Durrant & Kabán, 2010), PCA (Fowler, 2009; Zhou & Tao,
2011; Ha & Barber, 2015), and regression (Zhou et al., 2009;
Maillard & Munos, 2009; Kabán, 2014).
Building off this line of work, we consider the problem of
performing low-rank matrix and tensor factorizations directly on compressed data, with the goal of recovering the
low-rank factors in the original, uncompressed domain. Our
results are thus relevant to a variety of problems in this setting, including sparse PCA, nonnegative matrix factorization
(NMF), and Candecomp/Parafac (CP) tensor decomposition.
As is standard in compressive sensing, we assume prior
knowledge that the underlying factors are sparse.
For clarity of exposition, we begin with the matrix factorization setting. Consider a high-dimensional data matrix
M ∈ Rn×m that has a rank-r factorization M = W H,
where W ∈ Rn×r , H ∈ Rr×m , and W is sparse. We are
given the compressed measurements M̃ = P M for a known
measurement matrix P ∈ Rd×n , where d < n. Our goal
is to approximately recover the original factors W and H
given the compressed data M̃ as accurately and efficiently
as possible. This setting of compressed data with sparse
factors arises in a number of important practical domains.
For example, gene expression levels in a collection of tissue
samples can be clustered using NMF to reveal correlations
between particular genes and tissue types (Gao & Church,
2005). Since gene expression levels in each tissue sample
are typically sparse, compressive sensing can be used to

