Scalable Fair Clustering

Arturs Backurs 1 2 Piotr Indyk 1 3 Krzysztof Onak 1 4 Baruch Schieber 1 5 Ali Vakilian 1 3 Tal Wagner 1 3

Abstract
We study the fair variant of the classic kmedian problem introduced by Chierichetti
et al. (Chierichetti et al., 2017) in which the points
are colored, and the goal is to minimize the same
average distance objective as in the standard kmedian problem while ensuring that all clusters
have an “approximately equal” number of points
of each color. Chierichetti et al. proposed a twophase algorithm for fair k-clustering. In the first
step, the pointset is partitioned into subsets called
fairlets that satisfy the fairness requirement and
approximately preserve the k-median objective.
In the second step, fairlets are merged into k clusters by one of the existing k-median algorithms.
The running time of this algorithm is dominated
by the first step, which takes super-quadratic time.
In this paper, we present a practical approximate
fairlet decomposition algorithm that runs in nearly
linear time.

1. Introduction
The success of machine learning led to its widespread adoption in many aspects of our daily lives. Automatic prediction and forecasting methods are now used to approve
mortgage applications or estimate the likelihood of recidivism (Chouldechova, 2017). It is thus crucial to design
machine learning algorithms that are fair, i.e., do not suffer
from bias against or towards particular population groups.
An extensive amount of research over the last few years has
focused on two key questions: how to formalize the notion
of fairness in the context of common machine learning tasks,
and how to design efficient algorithms that conform to those
formalizations. See e.g., the survey by Chouldechova and
Roth for an overview (Chouldechova & Roth, 2018).
1

Authors ordered alphabetically. 2 TTIC, Chicago, IL, USA
CSAIL, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA 4 IBM T. J. Watson, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA 5 Department of Computer Science, New
Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ, USA. Correspondence
to: Ali Vakilian <vakilian@mit.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

In this paper we focus on the second aspect. Specifically,
we consider the problem of fair clustering and propose efficient algorithms for solving this problem. Fair clustering,
introduced in (Chierichetti et al., 2017), generalizes the standard notion of clustering by imposing a constraint that all
clusters must be balanced with respect to specific sensitive
attributes, such as gender or religion. In the simplest formulation, each input point is augmented with one of two
colors (say, red and blue), and the goal is to cluster the data
while ensuring that, in each cluster, the fraction of points
with the less frequent color is bounded from below by some
parameter strictly greater than 0. Chierichetti et al. proposed
polynomial time approximation algorithms for fair variants
of classic clustering methods, such as k-center (minimize
the maximum distance between points and their cluster centers) and k-median (minimize the average distance between
points and their cluster centers). To this end, they introduced the notion of fairlet decomposition: a partitioning of
the input pointset into small subsets, called fairlets, such
that a good balanced clustering can be obtained by merging fairlets into clusters. Unfortunately, their algorithm for
computing a fairlet decomposition has running time that is
at least quadratic in the number of the input points. As a
result, the algorithm is applicable only to relatively small
data sets.
In this paper we address this drawback and propose an algorithm for computing fairlet decompositions with running
time that is near-linear in the data size. We focus on the
k-median formulation, as k-center clustering is known to
be sensitive to outliers. Our algorithms apply to the typical
case where the set of input points lie in a d-dimensional
space, and the distance is induced by the Euclidean norm.1
To state the result formally, we need to introduce some notation. Consider a collection of n points P ⊆ Rd , where
each point p ∈ P is colored either red or blue. For a
subset of points S ⊆ P , the balance of S is defined as
r | |Sb |
balance(S) := min{ |S
|Sb | , |Sr | } where Sr and Sb respectively denote the subset of red and blue points in S. Assuming b < r, a clustering C = {C1 . . . Ck } of P is (r, b)-fair
if for every cluster C ∈ C, balance(C) ≥ rb . In k-median
clustering, the goal is to find k centers and partition the
1
E.g., all data sets used to evaluate the algorithms
in (Chierichetti et al., 2017) fall into this category.

