When Samples Are Strategically Selected

Hanrui Zhang 1 Yu Cheng 1 Vincent Conitzer 1

Abstract
In standard classification problems, the assumption is that the entity making the decision (the
principal) has access to all the samples. However, in many contexts, she either does not have
direct access to the samples, or can inspect only a
limited set of samples and does not know which
are the most relevant ones. In such cases, she
must rely on another party (the agent) to either
provide the samples or point out the most relevant
ones. If the agent has a different objective, then
the principal cannot trust the submitted samples
to be representative. She must set a policy for how
she makes decisions, keeping in mind the agent’s
incentives. In this paper, we introduce a theoretical framework for this problem and provide key
structural and computational results.

1. Introduction
In standard classification problems, the common assumption
is that we have access to all the samples. However, in many
contexts, we either do not have direct access to the samples,
or we can inspect only a limited set of samples and do not
know which are the most relevant ones. In such cases, we
must rely on another party (the agent) to either provide
the samples or point out the most relevant ones. This agent
may have different incentives, which raises several concerns.
One is that the individual samples cannot even be trusted—
e.g., we ask for images but the agent manipulates the images
with editing software before sending them. This is an issue
that we do not consider in this paper; we assume that the
agent cannot modify samples or create fake samples. (In
the related research discussion below, we list some work
that does not make this assumption.) But even in a context
where the individual samples can be trusted (e.g., using
cryptographic tools like digital signatures (Goldwasser et al.,
1
Department of Computer Science, Duke University, Durham,
North Carolina, USA. Correspondence to: Hanrui Zhang
<hrzhang@cs.duke.edu>, Yu Cheng <yucheng@cs.duke.edu>,
Vincent Conitzer <conitzer@cs.duke.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

1988; Friedman, 1993)), there is still the concern that the
agent sends only a biased collection of samples. If we do
not know how many samples n the agent has available, then
we cannot know whether the agent has submitted all of them.
Moreover, we may have capacity to deal with only a fixed
number m of samples.
Consider the following scenario. A faculty member (the
agent) wishes to convince the chair of the department (the
principal) to interview a particular candidate, while the
chair wants to interview the strongest candidates.1 The
principal has time to read exactly three of the candidate’s
papers, and asks the agent, who is familiar with all of the
candidate’s work, which three she should read. Naturally,
the agent chooses the best three papers. The principal, when
reading them, then knows that these three papers may not be
representative of all the candidate’s work, and should make
her decision with this in mind.
In fact, it is not clear that the principal should just ask for the
three best papers according to a single metric. For example,
she could also say: “Of the three papers, at least one must
have at most two authors.” Or: “At least one of the papers
must introduce a new problem.” Or: “In at least one of
the papers, the 42nd letter must be a vowel.” They also do
not need to be hard constraints; she could just announce
that she would appreciate it if one of the papers has at most
two authors, but if that is not the case and the three papers
are spectacular she would still interview the candidate. In
general, the principal will set a policy for when she would
interview a candidate, and the agent will base his choice of
papers on this policy.2
Similar examples abound where an agent aims to convince
a principal based on limited data. The above example can
be generalized to hiring in many other professions: for example, in sports, high school coaches may want to convince
a college scout to come out and take a look at a player. As
before, the scout (the principal) has limited time, and she
must make a decision of taking the trip or not, based on the
limited video footage of that player provided by the coach
1
Of course the decision may not rest with the chair (alone); if
so, we may think of the body of people that needs to be convinced
as the principal.
2
Note that the candidate is not a strategic player; the candidate
takes no actions in the game.

