Deep Residual Output Layers for Neural Language Generation

Nikolaos Pappas 1 James Henderson 1

Abstract
Many tasks, including language generation, benefit from learning the structure of the output space,
particularly when the space of output labels is
large and the data is sparse. State-of-the-art neural language models indirectly capture the output
space structure in their classifier weights since
they lack parameter sharing across output labels.
Learning shared output label mappings helps, but
existing methods have limited expressivity and are
prone to overfitting. In this paper, we investigate
the usefulness of more powerful shared mappings
for output labels, and propose a deep residual output mapping with dropout between layers to better
capture the structure of the output space and avoid
overfitting. Evaluations on three language generation tasks show that our output label mapping
can match or improve state-of-the-art recurrent
and self-attention architectures, and suggest that
the classifier does not necessarily need to be highrank to better model natural language if it is better
at capturing the structure of the output space.

1. Introduction
Learning the structure of the output space benefits a wide
variety of tasks, such as object recognition and novelty detection in images (Weston et al., 2011; Socher et al., 2013;
Frome et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2018a),
zero-shot prediction in texts (Dauphin et al., 2014; Yazdani
& Henderson, 2015; Nam et al., 2016; Rios & Kavuluru,
2018), and structured prediction in either images or text
(Srikumar & Manning, 2014a; Dyer et al., 2015; Belanger
& McCallum, 2016; Graber et al., 2018). When the space of
output labels is large or their data is sparse, treating labels
as independent classes makes learning difficult, because
identifying one label is not helped by data for other labels.
This problem can be addressed by learning output label em1
Idiap Research Institute, Martigny, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Nikolaos Pappas <nikolaos.pappas@idiap.ch>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

beddings to capture the similarity structure of the output
label space, so that data for similar labels can help classification, even to the extent of enabling few-shot or even
zero-shot classification. This approach has been particularly
successful in natural language generation tasks, where word
embeddings give a useful similarity structure for next-wordprediction in tasks such as machine translation (Vaswani
et al., 2017) and language modeling (Merity et al., 2017).
Existing neural language models typically use a log-linear
classifier to predict words (Vaswani et al., 2017; Chen et al.,
2018b). We can view the output label weights as a word
embedding, and the input encoder as mapping the context to
a vector in the same embedding space. Then the similarity
between these two embeddings in this joint input-label space
is measured with a dot product followed by the softmax
function. We will refer to this part as the classifier, distinct
from the input encoder which only depends on the input
and the label encoder which only depends on the label. To
improve performance and reduce model size, sometimes the
output label weights are tied to the input word embedding
vectors (Inan et al., 2016; Press & Wolf, 2017), but there is
no parameter sharing taking place across different words,
which limits the effective transfer between them.
Recent work has shown improvements over specific vanilla
recurrent architectures by sharing parameters across outputs
through a bilinear mapping on neural language modeling
(Gulordava et al., 2018) or a dual nonlinear mapping on
neural machine translation (Pappas et al., 2018), which can
make the classifier more powerful. However, the shallow
modeling constraints and the lack of regularization capabilities limit their applicability on arbitrary tasks and model
architectures. Orthogonal to these studies, Yang et al. (2018)
achieved state-of-the-art improvements on language modeling by increasing the power of the classifier using a mixture
of softmax functions, albeit at the expense of computational
efficiency. A natural question arises of whether one can
make the classifier more powerful by simply increasing the
power of the label mapping while using a single softmax
function without modifying its dimensionality or rank.
In this paper, we attempt to answer this question by investigating alternative neural architectures for learning the
embedding of an output label in the joint input-label space
which address the aforementioned limitations. In particular,

