Spectral Clustering of Signed Graphs via Matrix Power Means

Pedro Mercado 1 2 Francesco Tudisco 3 Matthias Hein 2

Abstract
Signed graphs encode positive (attractive) and
negative (repulsive) relations between nodes. We
extend spectral clustering to signed graphs via
the one-parameter family of Signed Power Mean
Laplacians, defined as the matrix power mean
of normalized standard and signless Laplacians
of positive and negative edges. We provide a
thorough analysis of the proposed approach in
the setting of a general Stochastic Block Model
that includes models such as the Labeled Stochastic Block Model and the Censored Block Model.
We show that in expectation the signed power
mean Laplacian captures the ground truth clusters under reasonable settings where state-of-theart approaches fail. Moreover, we prove that the
eigenvalues and eigenvector of the signed power
mean Laplacian concentrate around their expectation under reasonable conditions in the general
Stochastic Block Model. Extensive experiments
on random graphs and real world datasets confirm
the theoretically predicted behaviour of the signed
power mean Laplacian and show that it compares
favourably with state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
The analysis of graphs has received a significant amount of
attention due to their capability to encode interactions that
naturally arise in social networks. Yet, the vast majority of
graph methods has been focused on the case where interactions are of the same type, leaving aside the case where
different kinds of interactions are available (Leskovec et al.,
2010b). Graphs and networks with both positive and negative edge weights arise naturally in a number of social,
biological and economic contexts. Social dynamics and
relationships are intrinsically positive and negative: users of
online social networks such as Slashdot and Epinions, for
1

Saarland University 2 University of Tübingen 3 University of
Strathclyde. Correspondence to: Pedro Mercado <pedro@cs.unisaarland.de>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

example, can express positive interactions, like friendship
and trust, and negative ones, like enmity and distrust. Other
important application settings are the analysis of gene expressions in biology (Fujita et al., 2012) or the analysis of
financial and economic time sequences (Ziegler et al., 2010;
Pavlidis et al., 2006), where similarity and variable dependence measures commonly used may attain both positive
and negative values (e.g. the Pearson correlation coefficient).
Although the majority of the literature has focused on
graphs that encode only positive interactions, the analysis of signed graphs can be traced back to social balance
theory (Cartwright & Harary, 1956; Harary, 1953; Davis,
1967), where the concept of a k-balance signed graph is
introduced. The analysis of signed networks has been then
pushed forward through the study of a variety of tasks in
signed graphs, as for example edge prediction (Kumar et al.,
2016; Leskovec et al., 2010a; Falher et al., 2017), node
classification (Bosch et al., 2018; Tang et al., 2016a), node
embeddings (Chiang et al., 2011; Derr et al., 2018; Kim
et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2017; Yuan et al., 2017), node
ranking (Chung et al., 2013; Shahriari & Jalili, 2014), and
clustering (Chiang et al., 2012; Kunegis et al., 2010; Mercado et al., 2016; Sedoc et al., 2017; Doreian & Mrvar, 2009;
Knyazev, 2018; Kirkley et al., 2018; Cucuringu et al., 2019;
Cucuringu et al., 2018). See (Tang et al., 2016b; Gallier,
2016) for recent surveys on the topic.
In this paper we present a novel extension of spectral clustering for signed graphs. Spectral clustering (Luxburg, 2007)
is a well established technique for non-signed graphs, which
partitions the set of the nodes based on a k-dimensional node
embedding obtained using the first eigenvectors of the graph
Laplacian. Our contributions are as follows: We introduce the family of Signed Power Mean (SPM) Laplacians:
a one-parameter family of graph matrices for signed graphs
that blends the information from positive and negative interactions through the matrix power mean, a general class of
matrix means that contains the arithmetic, geometric, and
harmonic mean as special cases. This is inspired by recent
extensions of spectral clustering which merge the information encoded by positive and negative interactions through
different types of arithmetic (Chiang et al., 2012; Kunegis
et al., 2010) and geometric (Mercado et al., 2016) means
of the standard and signless graph Laplacians. We analyze
the performance of the signed power mean Laplacian in a

