Making Convolutional Networks Shift-Invariant Again

Richard Zhang 1

Abstract
Modern convolutional networks are not shiftinvariant, as small input shifts or translations
can cause drastic changes in the output. Commonly used downsampling methods, such as
max-pooling, strided-convolution, and averagepooling, ignore the sampling theorem. The wellknown signal processing fix is anti-aliasing by
low-pass filtering before downsampling. However, simply inserting this module into deep networks degrades performance; as a result, it is
seldomly used today. We show that when integrated correctly, it is compatible with existing architectural components, such as max-pooling and
strided-convolution. We observe increased accuracy in ImageNet classification, across several
commonly-used architectures, such as ResNet,
DenseNet, and MobileNet, indicating effective
regularization. Furthermore, we observe better
generalization, in terms of stability and robustness to input corruptions. Our results demonstrate
that this classical signal processing technique has
been undeservingly overlooked in modern deep
networks.

1. Introduction
When downsampling a signal, such an image, the textbook
solution is to anti-alias by low-pass filtering the signal (Oppenheim et al., 1999; Gonzalez & Woods, 1992). Without
it, high-frequency components of the signal alias into lowerfrequencies. This phenomenon is commonly illustrated in
movies, where wheels appear to spin backwards, known as
the Stroboscopic effect, due to the frame rate not meeting
the classical sampling criterion (Nyquist, 1928). Interestingly, most modern convolutional networks do not worry
about anti-aliasing.
Early networks did employ a form of blurred-downsampling
– average pooling (LeCun et al., 1990). However, ample em1
Adobe Research, San Francisco, CA. Correspondence to:
Richard Zhang <rizhang@adobe.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

pirical evidence suggests max-pooling provides stronger
task performance (Scherer et al., 2010), leading to its
widespread adoption. Unfortunately, max-pooling does not
provide the same anti-aliasing capability, and a curious, recently uncovered phenomenon emerges – small shifts in
the input can drastically change the output (Engstrom et al.,
2019; Azulay & Weiss, 2018). As seen in Figure 1, network
outputs can oscillate depending on the input position.
Blurred-downsampling and max-pooling are commonly
viewed as competing downsampling strategies (Scherer
et al., 2010). However, we show that they are compatible.
Our simple observation is that max-pooling is inherently
composed of two operations: (1) evaluating the max operator densely and (2) naive subsampling. We propose to lowpass filter between them as a means of anti-aliasing. This
viewpoint enables low-pass filtering to augment, rather than
replace max-pooling. As a result, shifts in the input leave
the output relatively unaffected (shift-invariance) and more
closely shift the internal feature maps (shift-equivariance).
Furthermore, this enables proper placement of the low-pass
filter, directly before subsampling. With this methodology,
practical anti-aliasing can be achieved with any existing
strided layer, such as strided-convolution, which is used in
more modern networks such as ResNet (He et al., 2016) and
MobileNet (Sandler et al., 2018).
A potential concern is that overaggressive filtering can result
in heavy loss of information, degrading performance. However, we actually observe increased accuracy in ImageNet
classification (Russakovsky et al., 2015) across architectures,
as well as increased robustness and stability to corruptions
and perturbations (Hendrycks et al., 2019). In summary:
• We integrate classic anti-aliasing to improve shiftequivariance of deep networks. Critically, the method
is compatible with existing downsampling strategies.
• We validate on common downsampling strategies – maxpooling, average-pooling, strided-convolution – in different architectures. We test across multiple tasks – image
classification and image-to-image translation.
• For ImageNet classification, we find, surprisingly, that
accuracy increases, indicating effective regularization.
• Furthermore, we observe better generalization. Performance is more robust and stable to corruptions such as
rotation, scaling, blurring, and noise variants.

