Jumpout : Improved Dropout for Deep Neural Networks with ReLUs

Shengjie Wang * 1 Tianyi Zhou * 1 Jeff A. Bilmes 2

Abstract
We discuss three novel insights about dropout for
DNNs with ReLUs: 1) dropout encourages each
local linear piece of a DNN to be trained on data
points from nearby regions; 2) the same dropout
rate results in different (effective) deactivation
rates for layers with different portions of ReLUdeactivated neurons; and 3) the rescaling factor
of dropout causes a normalization inconsistency
between training and test when used together
with batch normalization. The above leads to
three simple but nontrivial modifications resulting
in our method “jumpout.” Jumpout samples
the dropout rate from a monotone decreasing
distribution (e.g., the right half of a Gaussian), so
each local linear piece is trained, with high probability, to work better for data points from nearby
than more distant regions. Jumpout moreover
adaptively normalizes the dropout rate at each
layer and every training batch, so the effective
deactivation rate on the activated neurons is kept
the same. Furthermore, it rescales the outputs
for a better trade-off that keeps both the variance
and mean of neurons more consistent between
training and test phases, thereby mitigating the
incompatibility between dropout and batch normalization. Jumpout significantly improves the
performance of different neural nets on CIFAR10,
CIFAR100, Fashion-MNIST, STL10, SVHN,
ImageNet-1k, etc., while introducing negligible
additional memory and computation costs.

1

Introduction

While deep neural networks (DNNs) are successful on a
wide variety of tasks (Russakovsky et al., 2015; Rajpurkar
et al., 2016), they are often able to fit training data
*

Equal contribution 1 Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering 2 Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, USA. Correspondence to: Shengjie Wang <wangsj@uw.edu>, Tianyi Zhou <tianyizh@uw.edu>, Jeff A. Bilmes <bilmes@uw.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

perfectly, resulting in an overfitting problem and thereby
weakening the generalization performance on unseen data.
Dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014; Huang et al., 2016) is a
simple yet effective technique to mitigate such problems
by randomly setting the activations of hidden neurons to
0, a strategy that reduces co-adaptation amongst neurons.
Dropout applies to any layer in a DNN without causing
significant additional computational overhead.
Dropout, however, has several drawbacks. Firstly, dropout
rates, constituting extra hyper-parameters at each layer, need
to be tuned to get optimal performance. Too high a dropout
rate can slow the convergence rate of the model, and often
hurt final performance. Too low a rate yields few or no improvements on generalization performance. Ideally, dropout
rates should be tuned separately for each layer and also during various training stages. In practice, to reduce computation, we often tune a single dropout rate and keep it constant
for all dropout layers and throughout the training process.
If we treat dropout as a type of perturbation on each
training sample, it acts to generalize the DNN to noisy
samples having that specific expected or typical amount
of perturbation (due to the fixed dropout rate) with high
probability. The fixed rate means noisy samples having less
perturbation, i.e., those potentially more likely to be closer
to the original samples and thus that are potentially more
helpful to improve generalization, are much less likely to
occur. Also, when a constant dropout rate is applied to
layers and samples having different fractions of activated
neurons, the effective dropout rate (i.e., the proportion of
the activated neurons that are deactivated by dropout) varies,
which might result in immoderate perturbation for some
layers and samples and insufficient perturbation for others.
Another deficiency of dropout lies in its incompatibility
with batch normalization (BN) (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015)
(more empirical evidence of this is shown in Section 3.3).
As dropout randomly shuts down activated neurons, it needs
to rescale the undropped neurons to match the original
overall activation gain of the layer. Unfortunately, such
rescaling breaks the consistency of the normalization
parameters required between training and test phases1 and
1
Dropout usually happens only during the training but not the
test phase, since using it for testing requires averaging the results
of multiple dropout inferences on each training sample, which is

