A Composite Randomized Incremental Gradient Method

Junyu Zhang 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of minimizing the composition of a smooth function (which can be nonconvex) and a smooth vector mapping, where both
of them can be express as the average of a large
number of components. We propose a composite
randomized incremental gradient method based
on SAGA type of construction. The gradient
sample complexity of our method matches that
of several recently developed methods based on
SVRG in the general case. However, for structured problems where linear convergence rates
can be obtained, our method can be much better
for ill-conditioned problems. In addition, when
the finite-sum structure only appear for the inner
mapping, the sample complexity of our method
is the same as that of SAGA for minimizing finite
sum of smooth nonconvex functions, despite the
additional outer composition and the stochastic
composite gradients being biased in our case.

1. Introduction
We consider composite optimization problems of the form
 n

1X
minimize f
gi (x) + r(x) ,
(1)
n i=1
x ∈R d
where f : R p → R is a smooth and possibly nonconvex
function, each gi : Rd → R p is a smooth vector mapping
for i = 1, . . . , n, and r : Rd → R ∪ {∞} is a convex but
possibly nonsmooth function. Problem (1) is a special case
of the following more general problem with composite finite
sum (average) structure:
 n

m
1 X
1X
minimize
fj
gi (x) + r(x) ,
(2)
m j=1
n i=1
x ∈R d
1 Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, University
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA. 2 Microsoft Research,
Redmond, Washington, USA. Correspondence to: Junyu Zhang
<zhan4393@umn.edu>, Lin Xiao <lin.xiao@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Lin Xiao 2
where each f j : R p → R is smooth and can be nonconvex.
Such problems often arise as finite sample approximations
of the stochastic composite optimization problem


minimize Eν fν Eξ [gξ (x)] + r(x) ,
(3)
x ∈R d

where fν and gξ are parametrized by the random variables ν
and ξ of some unknown probability distributions. Many
interesting tasks in reinforcement learning (e.g., Sutton &
Barto, 1998) and risk-averse learning can be formulated
as optimization problems with such composite structure.
Algorithms for solving such problems have received lots of
attention in recent years, for both the stochastic version (e.g.,
Wang et al., 2017a;b; Wang & Liu, 2016) and the finite-sum
version (e.g., Huo et al., 2018; Lian et al., 2017; Lin et al.,
2018; Liu et al., 2018).
In this paper, we focus on randomized algorithms for solving
problem (1). While our algorithms and complexity results
all extend to the general case (2), focusing on (1) greatly
simplifies the presentation and also make the main ideas and
analysis much more clear. Nevertheless, our results for the
general case are given in the supplementary materials.
Another reason for us to focus on (1) is that most of the
interesting applications that we know can be put into this
form. A well-known example is the policy evaluation
problem in reinforcement learning (RL). With linear value
function approximation, it can be formulated as
minimize
x ∈R d

kE[A]x − E[b]k 2,

(4)

where A and b are random matrix and vector generated by
the transition probability matrix and rewards of a Markov
decision process (MDP) (e.g., Dann et al., 2014). A finite
sample version of (4) is in the form of (1) with f (·) = k · k 2 .
A more interesting example is risk-averse optimization,
which has many applications in RL and financial mathematics. We consider a general formulation of mean-variance
trade-off:
2
n
n 
n
λX
1X
1X
h j (x)−
hi (x) , (5)
maximize
h j (x)−
n j=1
n j=1
n i=1
x ∈R d
where each h j (x) : Rd → R is a reward function. The goal
of Problem (5) is to maximize the average reward with a

