Bayesian Joint Spike-and-Slab Graphical Lasso

Zehang Richard Li 1 Tyler H. McCormick 2 3 Samuel J. Clark 4

Abstract
In this article, we propose a new class of priors for
Bayesian inference with multiple Gaussian graphical models. We introduce Bayesian treatments
of two popular procedures, the group graphical
lasso and the fused graphical lasso, and extend
them to a continuous spike-and-slab framework to
allow self-adaptive shrinkage and model selection
simultaneously. We develop an EM algorithm that
performs fast and dynamic explorations of posterior modes. Our approach selects sparse models
efficiently and automatically with substantially
smaller bias than would be induced by alternative
regularization procedures. The performance of
the proposed methods are demonstrated through
simulation and two real data examples.

1. Introduction
Bayesian formulations of graphical models have been
widely adopted as a way to characterize conditional independence structure among complex high-dimensional data.
These models are popular in scientific domains including genomics (Briollais et al., 2016; Peterson et al., 2013), public
health (Dobra, 2014; Li et al., 2017b), and economics (Dobra et al., 2010). In practice, data often come from several
distinct groups. For example, data may be collected under
various conditions, at different locations and time periods,
or correspond to distinct subpopulations. Assuming a single graphical model in such cases can lead to unreliable
estimates of network structure, whereas the alternative, estimating different graphical models separately for each group,
may not be feasible for high dimensional problems.
Several approaches have been proposed to learn graphical
1

Department of Biostatistics, Yale School of Public Health,
New Haven, Connecticut, USA 2 Department of Statistics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA 3 Department
of Sociology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
USA 4 Department of Sociology, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA. Correspondence to: Zehang Richard Li <zehang.li@yale.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 36 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

models jointly for multiple classes of data. Much of this
work extends the penalized maximum likelihood approach
to incorporate additional penalty terms that encourage the
class-specific precision matrices to be similar (Guo et al.,
2011; Danaher et al., 2014; Saegusa & Shojaie, 2016; Ma &
Michailidis, 2016). In the Bayesian literature, Peterson et al.
(2015) and Lin et al. (2017) utilize Markov Random Field
priors to model a super-graph linking different graphical
models. Tan et al. (2017) uses a logistic regression model
to link the connectivity of nodes to covariates specific to
each graph. These approaches only model the similarity of
the underlying graphs, and thus are limited in their ability
to borrow information when estimating the precision matrices. Borrowing strength is especially important when some
classes have small sample sizes.
In this work, we introduce a new Bayesian formulation for
estimating multiple related Gaussian graphical models by
leveraging similarities in the underlying sparse precision
matrices directly. We first present two shrinkage priors for
multiple related precision matrices, as the Bayesian counterpart of joint graphical lasso estimators (Danaher et al.,
2014). We then propose a doubly spike-and-slab mixture
extension to these priors, which allows us to achieve simultaneous shrinkage and model selection, as well as handle missing observations. In Section 5 and 6, we extend
from the recent literature on deterministic algorithms for
Bayesian graphical models (Gan et al., 2018; Li & McCormick, 2019; Deshpande et al., 2019) and provide a fast
Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm to quickly identify the posterior modes. We also propose a procedure to
sequentially explore a series of posterior modes. We then
demonstrate the substantial improvements in both model
selection and parameter estimation over the original joint
graphical lasso approach using both simulated data and two
real datasets in Section 7. Finally, in Section 8 we discuss
future directions for improvements.

2. Preliminaries
2.1. The joint graphical lasso
We first briefly introduce the notation used throughout this
paper. We let G denote the number of classes in the data,
and let Ωg and Σg denote the precision and covariance
(g)
matrix for the g-th class. We let ωjk denote the (j, k)-th

