On the Generalization Gap in Reparameterizable Reinforcement Learning

Huan Wang 1 Stephan Zheng 1 Caiming Xiong 1 Richard Socher 1

Abstract
Understanding generalization in reinforcement
learning (RL) is a significant challenge, as many
common assumptions of traditional supervised
learning theory do not apply. We focus on the
special class of reparameterizable RL problems,
where the trajectory distribution can be decomposed using the reparametrization trick. For this
problem class, estimating the expected return is
efficient and the trajectory can be computed deterministically given peripheral random variables,
which enables us to study reparametrizable RL
using supervised learning and transfer learning
theory. Through these relationships, we derive
guarantees on the gap between the expected and
empirical return for both intrinsic and external
errors, based on Rademacher complexity as well
as the PAC-Bayes bound. Our bound suggests the
generalization capability of reparameterizable RL
is related to multiple factors including “smoothness” of the environment transition, reward and
agent policy function class. We also empirically
verify the relationship between the generalization
gap and these factors through simulations.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has proven successful in a series of applications such as games (Silver et al., 2016; 2017;
Mnih et al., 2015; Vinyals et al., 2017; OpenAI, 2018),
robotics (Kober et al., 2013), recommendation systems (Li
et al., 2010; Shani et al., 2005), resource management (Mao
et al., 2016; Mirhoseini et al., 2018), neural architecture
design (Baker et al., 2017), and more. However some key
questions in reinforcement learning remain unsolved. One
that draws more and more attention is the issue of overfitting in reinforcement learning (Sutton, 1995; Cobbe et al.,
2018; Zhang et al., 2018b; Packer et al., 2018; Zhang et al.,
1
Salesforce Research, Palo Alto CA, USA. Correspondence to:
Huan Wang <huan.wang@salesforce.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

2018a). A model that performs well in the training environment, may or may not perform well when used in the
testing environment. There is also a growing interest in
understanding the conditions for model generalization and
developing algorithms that improve generalization.
In general we would like to measure how accurate an algorithm is able to predict on previously unseen data. One
metric of interest is the gap between the training and testing loss or reward. It has been observed that such gaps are
related to multiple factors: initial state distribution, environment transition, the level of “difficulty” in the environment,
model architectures, and optimization. Zhang et al. (2018b)
split randomly sampled initial states into training and testing
and evaluated the performance gap in deep reinforcement
learning. They empirically observed overfitting caused by
the randomness of the environment, even if the initial distribution and the transition in the testing environment are kept
the same as training. On the other hand, Farebrother et al.
(2018); Justesen et al. (2018); Cobbe et al. (2018) allowed
the test environment to vary from training, and observed
huge differences in testing performance. Packer et al. (2018)
also reported very different testing behaviors across models
and algorithms, even for the same RL problem.
Although overfitting has been empirically observed in RL
from time to time, theoretical guarantees on generalization,
especially finite-sample guarantees, are still missing. In this
work, we focus on on-policy RL, where agent policies are
trained based on episodes of experience that are sampled
“on-the-fly” using the current policy in training. We identify
two major obstacles in the analysis of on-policy RL. First,
the episode distribution keeps changing as the policy gets
updated during optimization. Therefore, episodes have to be
continuously redrawn from the new distribution induced by
the updated policy during optimization. For finite-sample
analysis, this leads to a process with complex dependencies.
Second, state-of-the-art research on RL tends to mix the
errors caused by randomness in the environment and shifts
in the environment distribution. We argue that actually
these two types of errors are very different. One, which we
call intrinsic error, is analogous to overfitting in supervised
learning, and the other, called external error, looks more like
the errors in transfer learning.
Our key observation is there exists a special class of RL,

