How does Disagreement Help Generalization against Label Corruption?

Xingrui Yu 1 Bo Han 2 Jiangchao Yao 3 Gang Niu 2 Ivor W. Tsang 1 Masashi Sugiyama 2 4

Abstract
Learning with noisy labels is one of the hottest
problems in weakly-supervised learning. Based
on memorization effects of deep neural networks,
training on small-loss instances becomes very
promising for handling noisy labels. This fosters
the state-of-the-art approach “Co-teaching” that
cross-trains two deep neural networks using the
small-loss trick. However, with the increase
of epochs, two networks converge to a consensus and Co-teaching reduces to the self-training
MentorNet. To tackle this issue, we propose a
robust learning paradigm called Co-teaching+,
which bridges the “Update by Disagreement”
strategy with the original Co-teaching. First, two
networks feed forward and predict all data, but
keep prediction disagreement data only. Then,
among such disagreement data, each network
selects its small-loss data, but back propagates
the small-loss data from its peer network and
updates its own parameters. Empirical results
on benchmark datasets demonstrate that Coteaching+ is much superior to many state-of-theart methods in the robustness of trained models.

1. Introduction
In weakly-supervised learning, learning with noisy labels
is one of the most challenging questions, since noisy labels
are ubiquitous in our daily life, such as web queries (Liu
et al., 2011), crowdsourcing (Welinder et al., 2010), medical images (Dgani et al., 2018), and financial analysis (Aı̈tSahalia et al., 2010). Essentially, noisy labels are systematically corrupted from ground-truth labels, which inevitably
degenerates the accuracy of classifiers. Such degeneration
becomes even more prominent for deep learning models
(e.g., convolutional and recurrent neural networks), since
1

CAI, University of Technology Sydney 2 RIKEN-AIP
Alibaba Damo Academy 4 University of Tokyo. Correspondence
to: Xingrui Yu <xingrui.yu@student.uts.edu.au>.
3

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

these complex models can fully memorize noisy labels
(Zhang et al., 2017; Arpit et al., 2017).
To handle noisy labels, classical approaches focus on either
adding regularization (Miyato et al., 2016) or estimating
the label transition matrix (Patrini et al., 2017). Specifically, both explicit and implicit regularizations leverage
the regularization bias to overcome the label noise issue.
Nevertheless, they introduced a permanent regularization
bias, and the learned classier barely reaches the optimal
performance. Meanwhile, estimating the label transition
matrix does not introduce the regularization bias, and the
accuracy of classifiers can be improved by such accurate
estimation. However, the label transition matrix is hard to
be estimated, when the number of classes is large.
Recently, a promising way of handling noisy labels is to
train on small-loss instances (Jiang et al., 2018; Ren et al.,
2018). These works try to select small-loss instances, and
then use them to update the network robustly. Among those
works, the representative methods are MentorNet (Jiang
et al., 2018) and Co-teaching (Han et al., 2018b). For
example, MentorNet pre-trains an extra network, and then
it uses the extra network for selecting clean instances to
guide the training of the main network. When the clean
validation data is not available, self-paced MentorNet has
to use a predefined curriculum (e.g., small-loss instances).
Nevertheless, the idea of self-paced MentorNet is similar
to the self-training approach, and it inherits the same
inferiority of accumulated error.
To solve the accumulated error issue in MentorNet, Coteaching has been developed, which simultaneously trains
two networks in a symmetric way (Han et al., 2018b).
First, in each mini-batch data, each network filters noisy
(i.e., big-loss) samples based on the memorization effects.
Then, it teaches the remaining small-loss samples to
its peer network for updating the parameters, since the
error from noisy labels can be reduced by peer networks
mutually. From the initial training epoch, two networks
having different learning abilities can filter different types
of error. However, with the increase of training epochs, two
networks will converge to a consensus gradually and Coteaching reduces to the self-training MentorNet in function.
To address the consensus issue in Co-teaching, we should
consider how to always keep two networks diverged within

