Combating Label Noise in Deep Learning Using Abstention

Sunil Thulasidasan 1 2 Tanmoy Bhattacharya 1 Jeffrey Bilmes 2 Gopinath Chennupati 1 Jamaludin Mohd-Yusof 1

Abstract
We introduce a novel method to combat label
noise when training deep neural networks for classification. We propose a loss function that permits
abstention during training thereby allowing the
DNN to abstain on confusing samples while continuing to learn and improve classification performance on the non-abstained samples. We show
how such a deep abstaining classifier (DAC) can
be used for robust learning in the presence of
different types of label noise. In the case of structured or systematic label noise – where noisy training labels or confusing examples are correlated
with underlying features of the data– training with
abstention enables representation learning for features that are associated with unreliable labels. In
the case of unstructured (arbitrary) label noise,
abstention during training enables the DAC to be
used as an effective data cleaner by identifying
samples that are likely to have label noise. We
provide analytical results on the loss function behavior that enable dynamic adaption of abstention
rates based on learning progress during training.
We demonstrate the utility of the deep abstaining
classifier for various image classification tasks
under different types of label noise; in the case
of arbitrary label noise, we show significant improvements over previously published results on
multiple image benchmarks.

1

Introduction

The impressive performance of deep neural networks in recent years in various tasks such as image classification and
speech recognition (LeCun et al., 2015) have been made
possible by the availability of large quantities of humanannotated (i.e., labeled) training data. For example, the
1
Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM, USA
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. Correspondence to: Sunil Thulasidasan <sunil@lanl.gov>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

ImageNet database (Deng et al., 2009) used for training
vision classifiers has now over 14 million hand annotated
images(ImageNet). Though enabling deep models to match
or surpass human performance, the requirement of vast
quantities of human-annotated datasets can often be a bottleneck in training deep learning systems. There are generally two approaches to tackle this problem: use a scalable and affordable annotation platform like Amazon Mechanical Turk (Turk) or alternatively, automatically collect
large amounts of web-based data that have associated metainformation (tags, for instance) which are used for labeling.
In both cases, a certain amount of erroneously labeled data
is bound to occur, often in significant fractions for the latter situation (Li et al., 2017a). While there is empirical
evidence that deep networks are robust to some amount of
label noise (Rolnick et al., 2017), significant label noise can
degrade generalization performance due to the ability of
deep models to fit random labels (Zhang et al., 2016). In
such situations, it is often better to eliminate the noisy data
and train with just the cleaner subset (Frénay & Verleysen,
2014), or use a semi-supervised approach (Chapelle et al.,
2009) which uses all the samples, but only retains the labels
in the cleaner set for training. In both cases, one needs to
identify the subset of training data whose labels are likely
to be unreliable.
While label noise is a well studied problem in machine learning (Nettleton et al., 2010; Zhu & Wu, 2004; Sukhbaatar
et al., 2014; Reed et al., 2014; Patrini et al., 2017), there has
not been much work in identifying and ignoring it during
the process of training itself. In this paper we propose a
novel abstention (or rejection) based mechanism to combat label noise while training deep models. Most of the
theoretical and empirical investigations into rejection classification systems have been studied in a post-processing
setting – i.e., a classifier is first trained as usual, and an
abstention threshold is determined based on post-training
performance on a calibration set; the DNN then abstains on
uncertain predictions during inference. Abstention classifiers have been proposed for shallow learners (Chow, 1970;
Cortes et al., 2016; Fumera & Roli, 2002) and for multilayer perceptrons (De Stefano et al., 2000). In the context
of deep networks, this has been an under-explored area
with (Geifman & El-Yaniv, 2017) recently proposing an
effective technique of selective classification for optimizing

