Provable Guarantees for Gradient-Based Meta-Learning

Mikhail Khodak 1

Maria-Florina Balcan 1

Abstract
We study the problem of meta-learning through
the lens of online convex optimization, developing
a meta-algorithm bridging the gap between popular gradient-based meta-learning and classical
regularization-based multi-task transfer methods.
Our method is the first to simultaneously satisfy
good sample efficiency guarantees in the convex
setting, with generalization bounds that improve
with task-similarity, while also being computationally scalable to modern deep learning architectures and the many-task setting. Despite its
simplicity, the algorithm matches, up to a constant factor, a lower bound on the performance of
any such parameter-transfer method under natural
task similarity assumptions. We use experiments
in both convex and deep learning settings to verify
and demonstrate the applicability of our theory.

1. Introduction
The goal of meta-learning can be broadly defined as using
the data of existing tasks to learn algorithms or representations that enable better or faster performance on unseen
tasks. As the modern iteration of learning-to-learn (LTL)
(Thrun & Pratt, 1998), research on meta-learning has been
largely focused on developing new tools that can exploit the
power of the latest neural architectures. Examples include
the control of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) itself using a recurrent neural network (Ravi & Larochelle, 2017)
and learning deep embeddings that allow simple classification methods to work well (Snell et al., 2017). A particularly simple but successful approach has been parametertransfer via gradient-based meta-learning, which learns a
meta-initialization φ for a class of parametrized functions
fθ : X 7→ Y such that one or a few stochastic gradient steps
on a few samples from a new task suffice to learn good taskspecific model parameters θ̂ . For example, when presented
1

Carnegie Mellon University 2 Determined AI.
Correspondence to: Mikhail Khodak <khodak@cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Ameet Talwalkar 1 2

with examples (xi , yi ) ∈ X × Y for an unseen task, the
popular MAML algorithm (Finn et al., 2017) outputs
X
θ̂ = φ − η
∇L(fφ (xi ), yi )
(1)
i

for loss function L : Y × Y 7→ R+ and learning rate η > 0;
θ̂ is then used for inference on the task. Despite its simplicity, gradient-based meta-learning is a leading approach for
LTL in numerous domains including vision (Li et al., 2017;
Nichol et al., 2018; Kim et al., 2018), robotics (Al-Shedivat
et al., 2018), and federated learning (Chen et al., 2018).
While meta-initialization is a more recent approach, methods for parameter-transfer have long been studied in the
multi-task, transfer, and lifelong learning communities
(Evgeniou & Pontil, 2004; Kuzborskij & Orabona, 2013;
Pentina & Lampert, 2014). A common classical alternative to (1), which in modern parlance may be called metaregularization, is to learn a good bias φ for the following
regularized empirical risk minimization (ERM) problem:
θ̂ = arg min
θ

kθ − φk22 X
+
L(fθ (xi ), yi )
2η
i

(2)

Although there exist statistical guarantees and poly-time algorithms for learning a meta-regularization for simple models (Pentina & Lampert, 2014; Denevi et al., 2018b), such
methods are impractical and do not scale to modern settings
with deep neural architectures and many tasks. On the other
hand, while the theoretically less-studied meta-initialization
approach is often compared to meta-regularization (Finn
et al., 2017), their connection is not rigorously understood.
In this work, we formalize this connection using the theory
of online convex optimization (OCO) (Zinkevich, 2003),
in which an intimate connection between initialization and
regularization is well-understood due to the equivalence of
online gradient descent (OGD) and follow-the-regularizedleader (FTRL) (Shalev-Shwartz, 2011; Hazan, 2015). In the
lifelong setting of an agent solving a sequence of OCO tasks,
we use this connection to analyze an algorithm that learns
a φ, which can be a meta-initialization for OGD or a metaregularization for FTRL, such that the within-task regret of
these algorithms improves with the similarity of the online
tasks; here the similarity is measured by the distance between the optimal actions θ∗ of each task and is not known

