Tight Kernel Query Complexity of Kernel Ridge Regression
and Kernel k-means Clustering

Manuel Fernández * 1 David P. Woodruff * 1 Taisuke Yasuda * 2

Abstract
Kernel methods generalize machine learning algorithms that only depend on the pairwise inner products of the data set by replacing inner
products with kernel evaluations, a function that
passes input points through a nonlinear feature
map before taking the inner product in a higher
dimensional space. In this work, we present tight
lower bounds on the number of kernel evaluations
required to approximately solve kernel ridge regression (KRR) and kernel k-means clustering
(KKMC) on n input points. For KRR, our bound
for relative error approximation to the minimizer
of the objective function is Ω(ndλeff /ε) where dλeff
is the effective statistical dimension, which is
tight up to a log(dλeff /ε) factor. For KKMC, our
bound for finding a k-clustering achieving a relative error approximation of the objective function
is Ω(nk/ε), which is tight up to a log(k/ε) factor.
Our KRR result resolves a variant of an open question of El Alaoui and Mahoney, asking whether
the effective statistical dimension is a lower bound
on the sampling complexity or not. Furthermore,
for the important practical case when the input is
a mixture of Gaussians, we provide algorithms
which bypass the above lower bounds.

1. Introduction
The kernel trick in machine learning is a general technique
that takes linear learning algorithms that only depend on
the dot products of the data, including linear regression,
support vector machines, principal component analysis, and
k-means clustering, and boosts them to powerful nonlinear
algorithms. This is done by replacing the inner product
*

Equal contribution 1 Computer Science Department, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA 2 Department
of Mathematical Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. Correspondence to: Taisuke Yasuda
<taisukey@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

between two data points with their inner product after applying a kernel map, which implicitly maps the points to
a higher dimensional space via a non-linear feature map.
The simplicity and power of kernel methods has led to wide
adoption across the machine learning community: nowadays, kernel methods are a staple both in theory (Friedman
et al., 2001) and in practice (Schölkopf et al., 2004; Zhang
et al., 2007). We refer the reader to (Schölkopf & Smola,
2001) for more background on kernel methods.
However, one problem with kernel methods is that the computation of the kernel matrix K, the matrix containing all
pairs of kernel evaluations between n data points, requires
Ω(n2 ) time, which is prohibitively expensive for the largescale data sets encountered in modern data science. To
combat this, a large body of literature in the last decade
has been devoted to designing faster algorithms that attempt
to trade a small amount of accuracy in exchange for speed
and memory, based on techniques such as random Fourier
features (Rahimi & Recht, 2008), sampling (Bach, 2013;
El Alaoui & Mahoney, 2015; Musco & Musco, 2017; Musco
& Woodruff, 2017), sketching (Yang et al., 2017), and incomplete Cholesky factorization (Bach & Jordan, 2002;
Fine & Scheinberg, 2001). We refer the reader to the exposition of (Musco & Musco, 2017) for a more extensive
overview of recent literature on the approximation of kernel
methods.
1.1. Previous work on kernel query complexity
In this work, we consider lower bounds on the query complexity of the kernel matrix. The kernel query complexity
is a fundamental information-theoretic parameter of kernel
problems and both upper and lower bounds have been studied by a number of works (Lin et al., 2014; Cesa-Bianchi
et al., 2015; Musco & Musco, 2017; Musco & Woodruff,
2017).
For kernel ridge regression, a lower bound has been shown
for additive error approximation of the objective function
value in Corollary 8 of (Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2015), which
is a weaker approximation guarantee than what we study
in this work. However, their bound is not known to be
tight. Furthermore, the best known upper bounds for kernel
ridge regression are in terms of a data-dependent quantity

