Information-Theoretic Considerations in Batch Reinforcement Learning

Jinglin Chen 1 Nan Jiang 1

Abstract
Value-function approximation methods that operate in batch mode have foundational importance to
reinforcement learning (RL). Finite sample guarantees for these methods often crucially rely on
two types of assumptions: (1) mild distribution
shift, and (2) representation conditions that are
stronger than realizability. However, the necessity
(“why do we need them?”) and the naturalness
(“when do they hold?”) of such assumptions have
largely eluded the literature. In this paper, we
revisit these assumptions and provide theoretical
results towards answering the above questions,
and make steps towards a deeper understanding
of value-function approximation.

1. Introduction and Related Work
We are concerned with value-function approximation in
batch-mode reinforcement learning, which is related to and
sometimes known as Approximate Dynamic Programming
(ADP; Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 1996). Such methods take
sample transition data as input1 and approximate the optimal
value-function Q? from a restricted class that encodes one’s
prior knowledge and inductive biases. They provide an
important foundation for RL’s empirical success today, as
many popular deep RL algorithms find their prototypes in
this literature. For example, when DQN (Mnih et al., 2015)
is run on off-policy data, and the target network is updated
slowly, it can be viewed as the stochastic approximation of
its batch analog, Fitted Q-Iteration (Ernst et al., 2005), with
a neural net as the function approximator (Riedmiller, 2005;
Yang et al., 2019).
Given the importance of these methods, the question of
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois,
USA. Correspondence to: Nan Jiang <nanjiang@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).
1
In this paper, we restrict ourselves to the so-called one-path
setting and do not allow multiple samples from the same state
(Sutton & Barto, 1998; Maillard et al., 2010), which is only feasible
in certain simulated environments and allows algorithms to succeed
with realizability as the only representation condition.

when they work is central to our understanding of RL. Existing works that analyze error propagation and finite sample behavior of ADP methods (Munos, 2003; Szepesvári
& Munos, 2005; Antos et al., 2008; Munos & Szepesvári,
2008; Tosatto et al., 2017) have provided us with a decent
understanding: To guarantee sample-efficient learning of
near-optimal policies, we often need assumptions from the
following two categories.
Mild distribution shift Many ADP methods can run completely off-policy and they do the best with whatever data
available.2 Therefore, it is necessary that the data have
sufficient coverage over the state (and action) space.
Representation condition Since the ultimate goal is to
find Q? , we would expect that the function class we work
with contains it (or at least a close approximation). While
such realizability-type assumptions are sufficient for supervised learning, reinforcement learning faces the additional
difficulties of delayed consequences and the lack of labels,
and existing analyses often make stronger assumptions on
the function class, such as (approximate) closedness under
Bellman update (Szepesvári & Munos, 2005).
While the above assumptions make intuitive sense, and finite
sample bounds have been proved when they hold, their
necessity (“can we prove similar results without making
these assumptions?”) and naturalness (“do they actually
hold in interesting problems?”) have largely eluded the
literature. In this paper, we revisit these assumptions and
provide theoretical results towards answering the above
questions. Below is a highlight of our results:
1. To prepare for later discussions, we provide an analysis
of representative ADP algorithms (FQI and its variant)
under a simplified and minimal setup (Section 3). As a
side-product, our results improve upon prior analyses in
the dependence of error rate on sample size.
2. We formally justify the necessity of mild distribution
shift via an information-theoretic lower bound (Section 4.1). Our setup rules out trivial and uninteresting
failure mode due to an adversarial choice of data: Even
2
Even when they are on-policy or combined with a standard exploration module (e.g., -greedy), most often they fail in problems
where exploration is difficult (e.g., combination lock; see Kakade,
2003) and rely on the benignness of data to succeed.

