Trimming the `1 Regularizer:
Statistical Analysis, Optimization, and Applications to Deep Learning

Jihun Yun 1 Peng Zheng 2 Eunho Yang 1 3 Aurélie C. Lozano 4 Aleksandr Aravkin 2

Abstract
We study high-dimensional estimators with the
trimmed `1 penalty, which leaves the h largest parameter entries penalty-free. While optimization
techniques for this nonconvex penalty have been
studied, the statistical properties have not yet been
analyzed. We present the first statistical analyses
for M -estimation, and characterize support recovery, `∞ and `2 error of the trimmed `1 estimates
as a function of the trimming parameter h. Our
results show different regimes based on how h
compares to the true support size. Our second
contribution is a new algorithm for the trimmed
regularization problem, which has the same theoretical convergence rate as difference of convex
(DC) algorithms, but in practice is faster and finds
lower objective values. Empirical evaluation of `1
trimming for sparse linear regression and graphical model estimation indicate that trimmed `1 can
outperform vanilla `1 and non-convex alternatives.
Our last contribution is to show that the trimmed
penalty is beneficial beyond M -estimation, and
yields promising results for two deep learning
tasks: input structures recovery and network sparsification.

1. Introduction
We consider high-dimensional estimation problems, where
the number of variables p can be much larger that the number of observations n. In this regime, consistent estimation
can be achieved by imposing low-dimensional structural
1
School of Computing, KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea
Department of Applied Mathematics, University of Washington, Seattle, USA 3 AITRICS, Seoul, South Korea 4 IBM T.J.
Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Jihun Yun <arcprime@kaist.ac.kr>, Peng
Zheng <zhengp@uw.edu>, Eunho Yang <eunhoy@kaist.ac.kr>,
Aurélie C. Lozano <aclozano@us.ibm.com>, Aleksandr Aravkin
<saravkin@uw.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

constraints on the estimation parameters. Sparsity is a prototypical structural constraint, where at most a small set
of parameters can be non-zero. A key class of sparsityconstrained estimators is based on regularized M -estimators
using convex penalties, with the `1 penalty by far the most
common. In the context of linear regression, the Lasso
estimator (Tibshirani, 1996) solves an `1 regularized or constrained least squares problem, and has strong statistical
guarantees, including prediction error consistency (van de
Geer & Buhlmann, 2009), consistency of the parameter estimates in some norm (van de Geer & Buhlmann, 2009; Meinshausen & Yu, 2009; Candes & Tao, 2007), and variable
selection consistency (Meinshausen & Bühlmann, 2006;
Wainwright, 2009a; Zhao & Yu, 2006). In the context of
sparse Gaussian graphical model (GMRF) estimation, the
graphical Lasso estimator minimizes the Gaussian negative log-likelihood regularized by the `1 norm of the offdiagonal entries of the concentration (Yuan & Lin, 2007;
Friedman et al., 2007; Bannerjee et al., 2008). Strong statistical guarantees for this estimator have been established
(see Ravikumar et al. (2011) and references therein).
Recently, there has been significant interest in non-convex
penalties to alleviate the bias incurred by convex approaches,
including SCAD and MCP penalties (Fan & Li, 2001; Breheny & Huang, 2011; Zhang et al., 2010; Zhang & Zhang,
2012). In particular, Zhang & Zhang (2012) established
consistency for the global optima of least-squares problems with certain non-convex penalties. Loh & Wainwright
(2015) showed that under some regularity conditions on the
penalty, any stationary point of the objective function will
lie within statistical precision of the underlying parameter
vector and thus provide `2 - and `1 - error bounds for any
stationary point. Loh & Wainwright (2017) proved that for
a class of amenable non-convex regularizers with vanishing derivative away from the origin (including SCAD and
MCP), any stationary point is able to recover the parameter
support without requiring the typical incoherence conditions
needed for convex penalties. All of these analyses apply to
non-convex penalties that are coordinate-wise separable.
Our starting point is a family of M -estimators with trimmed
`1 regularization, which leaves the largest h parameters unpenalized. This non-convex family includes the Trimmed

