Fault Tolerance in Iterative-Convergent Machine Learning
Aurick Qiao 1 2 Bryon Aragam 3 Bingjing Zhang 1 Eric P. Xing 1 2 3

Abstract

Machine learning (ML) training algorithms often possess an inherent self-correcting behavior due to their iterativeconvergent nature. Recent systems exploit this property to achieve adaptability and efficiency in unreliable computing
environments by relaxing the consistency of execution and allowing calculation errors to be self-corrected during training.
However, the behavior of such systems are only well understood for specific types of calculation errors, such as those
caused by staleness, reduced precision, or asynchronicity, and for specific algorithms, such as stochastic gradient descent.
In this paper, we develop a general framework to quantify the effects of calculation errors on iterative-convergent
algorithms. We then use this framework to derive a worst-case upper bound on the cost of arbitrary perturbations to
model parameters during training and to design new strategies for checkpoint-based fault tolerance. Our system, SCAR,
can reduce the cost of partial failures by 78%–95% when compared with traditional checkpoint-based fault tolerance
across a variety of ML models and training algorithms, providing near-optimal performance in recovering from failures.

1. Introduction
Distributed model training for machine learning (ML) is a
workload that is typically long-running and resource-intensive.
Throughout a job’s lifetime, it is susceptible to hardware failures, performance fluctuations, and other uncertainties inherent
to real-world cluster environments. For example, processes
can be preempted by a cluster resource allocator (Vavilapalli
et al., 2013; Hindman et al., 2011), parameter synchronization
can be bottlenecked on a slow or congested network (Li et al.,
2014b; Zhang et al., 2017b), and stragglers can severely impact
overall job throughput (Cipar et al., 2013; Harlap et al., 2016).
These concerns are amplified in modern shared clusters and
cloud-based spot instances such as those provided by Amazon
Web Services (AWS). Thus, developing new fault-tolerance
strategies for modern ML systems is a critical area of research.
ML-agnostic distributed systems approaches for addressing
such problems often adopt strong consistency semantics. They
aim to provide strong execution guarantees at a per-operation
level (such as linearizability or serializability), but may also
incur higher performance overhead. On the other hand, ML
training is often tolerant to small calculation errors and may not
require such strong consistency guarantees. This observation
has been exploited by recent ML systems to overcome cluster
1

Petuum, Inc., Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA 2 Computer Science
Department, Carnegie Mellon Univeristy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
USA 3 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon Univeristy,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. Correspondence to: Aurick Qiao
<aurick.qiao@petuum.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright 2019
by the author(s).

x(T)

x*
x(k)

x(0)
x(T) + δ
Figure 1. The self-correcting behavior of iterative-convergent
algorithms. Even though a calculation error results in an undesirable
perturbation of at iteration T , the subsequent iterations still brings
the solution closer to the optimum value of x⇤ .

unreliability and resource limitation issues, such as bounded
staleness consistency (Ho et al., 2013; Cipar et al., 2013; Cui
et al., 2014), quantization and low-precision arithmetic (Courbariaux et al., 2014; Gupta et al., 2015; Hubara et al., 2017),
and lock-free execution (Niu et al., 2011; Dean et al., 2012).
One notable exception to this trend is checkpoint-based fault
tolerance, a common strategy in current ML systems for
mitigating hardware failures (Abadi et al., 2016; Wei et al.,
2015; Low et al., 2012) which continues to enforce strong
consistency semantics at a high cost of re-computing lost work.
This trend of relaxing consistency in ML systems relies
on the self-correcting behavior of iterative-convergent ML
training algorithms (Fig. 1). During each step, the training
algorithm calculates updates based on the current values of
model parameters, and then applies the updates to obtain a
“better” set of model parameters. By iteratively performing this
computation, the model parameters eventually converge to a
set of optimal values. Small computation errors made during
this procedure are eventually washed out by the successive

