Voronoi Boundary Classification: A High-Dimensional Geometric Approach
via Weighted Monte Carlo Integration

Vladislav Polianskii 1 Florian T. Pokorny 1

Abstract
Voronoi cell decompositions provide a classical
avenue to classification. Typical approaches however only utilize point-wise cell-membership information by means of nearest neighbor queries
and do not utilize further geometric information
about Voronoi cells since the computation of
Voronoi diagrams is prohibitively expensive in
high dimensions. We propose a Monte-Carlo integration based approach that instead computes a
weighted integral over the boundaries of Voronoi
cells, thus incorporating additional information
about the Voronoi cell structure. We demonstrate
the scalability of our approach in up to 3072 dimensional spaces and analyze convergence based
on the number of Monte Carlo samples and choice
of weight functions. Experiments comparing our
approach to Nearest Neighbors, SVM and Random Forests indicate that while our approach
performs similarly to Random Forests for large
data sizes, the algorithm exhibits non-trivial datadependent performance characteristics for smaller
datasets and can be analyzed in terms of a geometric confidence measure, thus adding to the
repertoire of geometric approaches to classification while having the benefit of not requiring any
model changes or retraining as new training samples or classes are added.

1. Introduction and Related Work
The problem of classifying a set of n points {x1 , . . . , xn } in
d-dimensional Euclidean space, each labelled with one of k
classes has been tackled with a large variety of approaches
in recent decades. In many application fields, Deep Neural
networks are today leading the field in terms of classifica1

Division of Robotics, Perception and Learning, EECS, KTH
Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden. Correspondence to: Vladislav Polianskii <vpol@kth.se>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

tion rates, particularly in the area of image classification
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012). A draw-back of these approaches
to date is the difficulty of reasoning about the learned representations in terms of convergence guarantees, stability
and the complex structure of learned embeddings leading to
challenging phenomena such as adverserial examples (Kurakin et al., 2016). In contrast, a benefit of purely geometric
approaches such as nearest neighbors – while not always
having optimal performance – is their simplicity and asymptotic convergence under suitable assumptions (Döring et al.,
2017). A further advantage is the lack of dependence on initialization since no stochastic gradient descent or complex
variational inference procedure is required. This work contributes to this category of optimization-free, non-Bayesian
and purely geometric approaches to classification with a
focus on simpliticy and mathematical interpretability.
Recent works such as (Sharif Razavian et al., 2014) have
demonstrated that classical methods such as SVM classifiers
can provide competitive results when combined with representations determined by a neural network. Similarly, metric
learning techniques (Weinberger & Saul, 2009) may be used
to first determine an appropriate metric and/or embedding
before applying geometric methods such as a nearest neighbor classifier. The Voronoi cell based approach proposed
here can hence also be viewed as a component in the toolbox
that may be combined with Bayesian or Neural Network
based methods. In the present paper, we focus on the definition, algorithms, mathematical properties and an initial
stand-alone evaluation of our approach.
While nearest-neighbor classifiers (Biau & Devroye, 2015)
make a classification decision by testing which training data
Voronoi cell a test data point t ∈ Rd belongs to, this membership test can be performed efficiently with approximate
geometric lookup datastructures (Kushilevitz et al., 2000)
and does not require a computation of the full geometry
of the Voronoi cells themselves. Our approach is instead
focused on the Voronoi cell V (t) around the test data point
t and balances the influence of neighboring training data on
the classification decision by means of a weighted integral
over the Voronoi boundary. A related approach consists
of the Natural Neighbor regression method (Sibson, 1981),
where volumes of intersections of Voronoi cells before and

