Exploring Interpretable LSTM Neural Networks over Multi-Variable Data

Tian Guo 1 Tao Lin 2 Nino Antulov-Fantulin 1

Abstract
For recurrent neural networks trained on time series with target and exogenous variables, in addition to accurate prediction, it is also desired to
provide interpretable insights into the data. In this
paper, we explore the structure of LSTM recurrent neural networks to learn variable-wise hidden
states, with the aim to capture different dynamics
in multi-variable time series and distinguish the
contribution of variables to the prediction. With
these variable-wise hidden states, a mixture attention mechanism is proposed to model the generative process of the target. Then we develop associated training methods to jointly learn network parameters, variable and temporal importance w.r.t
the prediction of the target variable. Extensive experiments on real datasets demonstrate enhanced
prediction performance by capturing the dynamics of different variables. Meanwhile, we evaluate the interpretation results both qualitatively
and quantitatively. It exhibits the prospect as an
end-to-end framework for both forecasting and
knowledge extraction over multi-variable data.

1. Introduction
Recently, recurrent neural networks (RNNs), especially long
short-term memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber,
1997) and gated recurrent units (GRU) (Cho et al., 2014),
have been proven to be powerful sequence modeling tools
in various tasks e.g. language modelling, machine translation, health informatics, time series, and speech (Ke et al.,
2018; Lin et al., 2017; Guo et al., 2016; Lipton et al., 2015;
Sutskever et al., 2014; Bahdanau et al., 2014). In this paper,
we focus on RNNs over multi-variable time series consisting of target and exogenous variables. RNNs trained over
such multi-variable data capture nonlinear correlation of
historical values of target and exogenous variables to the
future target values.
1
ETH, Zürich, Switzerland 2 EPFL, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Tian Guo <tian.guo@gess.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

In addition to forecasting, interpretable RNNs are desirable for gaining insights into the important part of data for
RNNs achieving good prediction performance (Hu et al.,
2018; Foerster et al., 2017; Lipton, 2016). In this paper, we
focus on two types of importance interpretation: variable
importance and variable-wise temporal importance. First,
in RNNs variables differ in predictive power on the target,
thereby contributing differently to the prediction (Feng et al.,
2018; Riemer et al., 2016). Second, variables also present
different temporal relevance to the target one (Kirchgässner
et al., 2012). For instance, for a variable instantaneously
correlated to the target, its short historical data contributes
more to the prediction. The ability to acquire this knowledge
enables additional applications, e.g. variable selection.
However, current RNNs fall short of the aforementioned
interpretability for multi-variable data due to their opaque
hidden states. Specifically, when fed with the multi-variable
observations of the target and exogenous variables, RNNs
blindly blend the information of all variables into the hidden
states used for prediction. It is intractable to distinguish
the contribution of individual variables into the prediction
through the sequence of hidden states (Zhang et al., 2017).
Meanwhile, individual variables typically present different
dynamics. This information is implicitly neglected by the
hidden states mixing multi-variable data, thereby potentially
hindering the prediction performance.
Existing works aiming to enhance the interpretability of
recurrent neural networks rarely touch the internal structure
of RNNs to overcome the opacity of hidden states on multivariable data. They still fall short of aforementioned two
types of interpretation (Montavon et al., 2018; Foerster et al.,
2017; Che et al., 2016). One category of the approaches is to
perform post-analyzing on trained RNNs by perturbation on
training data or gradient based methods (Ancona et al., 2018;
Ribeiro et al., 2018; Lundberg & Lee, 2017; Shrikumar et al.,
2017). Another category is to build attention mechanism
on hidden states of RNNs to characterize the importance of
different time steps (Qin et al., 2017; Choi et al., 2016).
In this paper we aim to achieve a unified framework of accurate forecasting and importance interpretation. In particular,
the contribution is fourfold:
• We explore the structure of LSTM to enable variable-

