Task-Agnostic Dynamics Priors for Deep Reinforcement Learning

Yilun Du 1 Karthik Narasimhan 2

Abstract
While model-based deep reinforcement learning
(RL) holds great promise for sample efficiency
and generalization, learning an accurate dynamics
model is often challenging and requires substantial interaction with the environment. A wide
variety of domains have dynamics that share common foundations like the laws of classical mechanics, which are rarely exploited by existing
algorithms. In fact, humans continuously acquire
and use such dynamics priors to easily adapt to
operating in new environments. In this work, we
propose an approach to learn task-agnostic dynamics priors from videos and incorporate them into
an RL agent. Our method involves pre-training a
frame predictor on task-agnostic physics videos
to initialize dynamics models (and fine-tune them)
for unseen target environments. Our frame prediction architecture, SpatialNet, is designed specifically to capture localized physical phenomena and
interactions. Our approach allows for both faster
policy learning and convergence to better policies,
outperforming competitive approaches on several
different environments. We also demonstrate that
incorporating this prior allows for more effective
transfer between environments.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in deep reinforcement learning (RL) have
largely relied on model-free approaches, demonstrating
strong performance on a variety of domains (Silver et al.,
2016; Mnih et al., 2013; Kempka et al., 2016; Zhang et al.,
2018c). However, model-free techniques do not have good
sample efficiency (Sutton, 1990) and are difficult to adapt
to new tasks or domains (Nichol et al., 2018). A key reason
for this is a single value function is used to represent both
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (Work partially
done at OpenAI) 2 Princeton University.
Correspondence
to: Yilun Du <yilundu@mit.com>, Karthik Narasimhan
<karthikn@cs.princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

t

t+1

Figure 1. Two different environments with object dynamics that
obey the common laws of physics (top: PhysWorld, bottom: Atari
Pong). Agents that have a knowledge of general physics will be
able to adapt quickly to either environment.

the agent’s policy and its knowledge of environment dynamics, which can result in heavy overfitting to a particular
task (Zhang et al., 2018b). On the other hand, model-based
RL allows for decoupling the dynamics model from the
policy, enabling better generalization and transfer across
tasks (Zhang et al., 2018a). The challenge with model-based
RL, however, lies in estimating an accurate dynamics model
of the environment while simultaneously using it to learn
a policy, often leading to sub-optimal policies and slower
learning. One way to alleviate this problem is to initialize
dynamics models with universal task-agnostic priors that
allow for more efficient and stable model-based learning.
For example, consider learning dynamics models for the
two different scenarios shown in Figure 1 (top and bottom).
Both environments contain a variety of objects moving with
different velocities and rotations. Current approaches require a large number of samples to learn a robust transition
model of either world. For instance, in the first environment,
inferring that the orange circle is a freely moving object will
require observing the circle moving in a variety of different directions. Or to understand the laws governing elastic
collisions between two bodies (e.g. the circle and the grey
rectangle) requires observing several instances of collisions
at various angles and velocities. On the other hand, humans
have reliable priors that allow for understanding dynamics
of new environments quickly (Dubey et al., 2018) – one
such prior is an understanding of physical laws of motion.

