Learning to Exploit Long-term Relational Dependencies in Knowledge Graphs

Lingbing Guo 1 Zequn Sun 1 Wei Hu 1

Abstract
We study the problem of knowledge graph (KG)
embedding. A widely-established assumption to
this problem is that similar entities are likely to
have similar relational roles. However, existing
related methods derive KG embeddings mainly
based on triple-level learning, which lack the capability of capturing long-term relational dependencies of entities. Moreover, triple-level learning
is insufficient for the propagation of semantic information among entities, especially for the case
of cross-KG embedding. In this paper, we propose recurrent skipping networks (RSNs), which
employ a skipping mechanism to bridge the gaps
between entities. RSNs integrate recurrent neural networks (RNNs) with residual learning to
efficiently capture the long-term relational dependencies within and between KGs. We design an
end-to-end framework to support RSNs on different tasks. Our experimental results showed that
RSNs outperformed state-of-the-art embeddingbased methods for entity alignment and achieved
competitive performance for KG completion.

1. Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) store a wealth of structured facts
about the real world. Each fact is structured in the form of
(s, r, o), where s, o and r denote the subject entity, object
entity and their relation, respectively. KGs have gradually
become an important resource for many knowledge-driven
applications, such as semantic search, question answering
and recommender systems. Oftentimes, a single KG is far
from complete and cannot support these applications with
sufficient facts. To address this problem, two fundamental
KG tasks are proposed: (i) entity alignment, a.k.a. entity
resolution or matching, which aims at integrating multiple
KGs by identifying entities in different KGs referring to the
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China. Correspondence to: Wei Hu
<whu@nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

same real-world object; and (ii) KG completion, a.k.a. link
prediction, which aims to complete the missing facts in a single KG. Conventional methods usually rank candidates by
exploiting various features, as well as using crowdsourcing
(Lacoste-Julien et al., 2013; Suchanek et al., 2012; Zhuang
et al., 2017). However, even for a single KG, it can be developed and maintained by different people using different
domain knowledge and natural languages, which inevitably
makes it heterogeneous. Recently, several methods leverage
KG embedding techniques to tackle this problem (Bordes
et al., 2013; Dettmers et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2017; Zhu
et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2018). They have shown effectiveness in learning relational information either in a single KG
or across multiple KGs.
For KG embedding, existing methods start with the assumption that similar entities are likely to have similar relational
roles. Their primary focus, therefore, lies in learning from
relational triples of entities. Typically, some of them are
inspired by the TransE model (Bordes et al., 2013), which
interprets (s, r, o) as s + r ≈ o, where the boldfaces denote
the corresponding embeddings. Under this modeling, the
embedding of one entity is learned by aggregating the embeddings of its 1-hop relational neighbors. We refer to this
kind of models as triple-level learning. Many KG embedding models belong to this kind, including not only translational models like TransE (Bordes et al., 2013), TransH
(Wang et al., 2014) and TransR (Lin et al., 2015b), but also
compositional models like DistMult (Yang et al., 2015),
ComplEx (Trouillon et al., 2016) and HolE (Nickel et al.,
2016), as well as neural models like ProjE (Shi & Weninger,
2017) and ConvE (Dettmers et al., 2018).
Triple-level learning has two major limitations: (i) low expressiveness. It learns entity embeddings from a fairly local
view (i.e., 1-hop relational neighbors). On one hand, there
are many different entities having common local relational
neighbors in KGs, such as entities with multi-mapping relations as discussed in (Wang et al., 2014). Exploiting local
relational neighbors for KG embedding is insufficient. On
the other hand, there are many entities having few relational
triples (a.k.a. long-tail entities) in real-world KGs (Li et al.,
2017). With triple-level learning, long-tail entities would
receive limited attention, thus their embeddings have low expressiveness; and (ii) inefficient information propagation.
For the entity alignment task, existing methods rely on seed

