Variational Annealing of GANs: A Langevin Perspective

Chenyang Tao 1 Shuyang Dai 1 Liqun Chen 1 Ke Bai 1 Junya Chen 1 2 Chang Liu 1 3 Ruiyi Zhang 1
Georgiy Bobashev 4 Lawrence Carin 1

Abstract
The generative adversarial network (GAN) has received considerable attention recently as a model
for data synthesis, without an explicit specification of a likelihood function. There has been
commensurate interest in leveraging likelihood
estimates to improve GAN training. To enrich
the understanding of this fast-growing yet almost
exclusively heuristic-driven subject, we elucidate
the theoretical roots of some of the empirical attempts to stabilize and improve GAN training
with the introduction of likelihoods. We highlight
new insights from variational theory of diffusion
processes to derive a likelihood-based regularizing scheme for GAN training, and present a
novel approach to train GANs with an unnormalized distribution instead of empirical samples. To
substantiate our claims, we provide experimental
evidence on how our theoretically-inspired new
algorithms improve upon current practice.

1. Introduction
Modern applications of data science necessitate more expressive, robust and efficient probabilistic models, to capture the rich structure in complex datasets. These models
generally fall into two major categories: likelihood-based
and likelihood-free. The former explicitly assigns a likelihood function pG (x; θ) with parameters θ to describe the
data x, while the latter learns a model from which samples
from the desired distribution may be drawn (but does not
assign or learn a form for the distribution itself). Specifically, likelihood-free methods typically pass samples z from
Equal contribution 1 Electrical & Computer Engineering, Duke
University, Durham, NC, USA 2 School of Mathematical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China 3 Computer Science
& Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 4 RTI International, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA. Correspondence
to: Chenyang Tao <chenyang.tao@duke.edu>, Lawrence Carin
<lcarin@duke.edu>.

a pre-specified simple distribution q(z) through a deterministic mapping G(z; θ) : Z → X , commonly known as the
generator. These two paradigms intersect when G(z; θ) is
a diffeomorphism between Z and X (Dinh et al., 2017).
While being more restrictive by construction, likelihoodbased models have been widely studied within the statistics
literature. Most likelihood-based models either directly
minimize the Kullback-Leibler divergence KL(pd k pG )
between the data and model distributions (e.g., maximal
likelihood estimation (MLE)), or a variational bound to it
(e.g., variational inference (VI)) (Blei et al., 2017; Tao et al.,
2018b). Recent advances on the scalability (Hoffman et al.,
2013), flexibility (Kingma et al., 2016) and automation of
inference procedures (Ranganath et al., 2014) have made
such models appealing for modern applications.
In the absence of a tractable likelihood, the development
of practical likelihood-free models has struggled (Diggle
& Gratton, 1984; Beaumont et al., 2002; Didelot et al.,
2011), for a lack of mathematical and computational tools.
The recent introduction of the generative adversarial network (GAN) presented a simple and elegant solution to
this difficulty (Goodfellow et al., 2014), revolutionizing
the practice. The key idea behind GAN is the design of a
critic D(x; ω), parameterized by ω, and a variational functional V (pd , pG ; D) that depends on the critic. The variational functional is chosen such that: (i) V (pd , pG ; D) can
be estimated using samples from the respective distributions, and (ii) solving for d(pd , pG ) , maxD V (pd , pG ; D)
establishes a proper discrepancy metric between distributions pd and pG (Li et al., 2015; Nowozin et al., 2016;
Mohamed & Lakshminarayanan, 2016; Arjovsky et al.,
2017; Tao et al., 2018a). GAN matches pG to pd by seeking a Nash equilibrium of the adversarial minimax game
minG maxD V (pd , pG ; D) between the critic and generator.

*

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Both modeling approaches have their limitations. Likelihood models are prone to learn a model that produces
unrealistic samples (possibly because of a misspecification
of the model form pG (x; θ)), while the major criticisms of
adversarial models target their brittle training (Arjovsky &
Bottou, 2017) and mode-trapping behaviors (Salimans et al.,
2016). Considerable empirical efforts have been made to
combine these two approaches, in the hope of marrying the

