Learning to Select for a Predefined Ranking

Aleksei Ustimenko * 1 2 3 Aleksandr Vorobev * 1 Gleb Gusev 1 4 Pavel Serdyukov 1

Abstract
In this paper, we formulate a novel problem of
learning to select a set of items maximizing the
quality of their ordered list, where the order is
predefined by some explicit rule. Unlike the classic information retrieval problem, in our setting,
the predefined order of items in the list may not
correspond to their quality in general. For example, this is a dominant scenario in personalized
news and social media feeds, where items are ordered by publication time in a user interface. We
propose new theoretically grounded algorithms
based on direct optimization of the resulting list
quality. Our offline and online experiments with
a large-scale product search engine demonstrate
the overwhelming advantage of our methods over
the baselines in terms of all key quality metrics.

1. Introduction
Modern search systems traditionally face the problem of
providing users with ordered lists of items best responding
their needs in different contexts. One particularly important case is serving a user with a list of relevant items, yet
ordered not by their relevance, but by a dedicated item attribute (often chosen by the user after formulating the initial
query). Examples of such scenarios are time-based ordering on a social media website (Hasanain et al., 2015) or
price-based ordering of offers on an e-commerce website
(e.g., Amazon 1 ). In that case, the algorithmic challenge
essentially comes down to selecting items to include in the
list to be shown to the user.
*

Equal contribution 1 Yandex, Moscow, Russia 2 Skoltech University, Moscow, Russia 3 Faculty of Computer Science, Higher
School of Economics, Moscow, Russia 4 Department of Innovation and High Technology, Moscow Institute of Physics and
Technology, Dolgoprudny, Russia. Correspondence to: Aleksei
Ustimenko <austimenko@yandex-team.ru>, Aleksandr Vorobev
<alvorobyev88@gmail.com>, Gleb Gusev <gleb57@gmail.com>,
Pavel Serdyukov <pavser@yandex-team.ru>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).
1
https://www.amazon.com

It is generally a poor choice to select all retrieved items,
since the top ones by the dedicated attribute can be totally
irrelevant to the user needs: e.g., the cheapest offer is often
by no means the most relevant to the user query. In practice, selection algorithms are often far from perfect, and
numerous users of, e.g., popular product or job search engines regularly suffer from poor quality of results ordered
by price or publication time. For example, see (Spirin et al.,
2015, Section 1) for illustrative statistics and Figure 1 in the
supplementary material for a result page at one of the most
popular product search system.
Despite a large body of learning-to-rank literature, surprisingly, there are no papers about learning to select for a
predefined ranking. One straightforward selection method
referred to as the cutoff approach below is (1) to learn a
relevance prediction model, (2) to select only items whose
predicted relevance is higher than some threshold (Hasanain
et al., 2015). As it was demonstrated by Spirin et al. (2015),
this approach is too far from the optimal solution in general. Indeed, on one hand, we want to show the most relevant items at the top of the ordered list; therefore, we
should exclude all items above, even if they are slightly
less relevant. On the other hand, a threshold suitable for
that purpose will also hide many relevant results ranked
below from the user. For example, for the list of items
(d1 , d2 , d3 ) (ordered by a dedicated attribute) with respective relevance values (2, 7, 1), the maximum Discounted
Cumulative Gain2 (Järvelin & Kekäläinen, 2002) of top-3
results (DCG@3) is achieved on the selected set (d2 , d3 ),
where d3 is selected and d1 is not, though having the higher
relevance (see Table 1 for details). At the same time, the
cutoff approach with the best relevance threshold selects
only d2 , and it is much closer to the original list than to the
best solution in terms of DCG@3.
Table 1. Example of suboptimality of the cutoff approach

Original list
List
Attribute values
Relevance values
DCG@3 of list
2

d1 , d2 , d3
1, 2, 3
2, 7, 1
6.92

DCG@k(r1 , . . . , rk ) =
the item at position i

Pk

Best
cutoff
d2
2
7
7

Best
selection
d2 , d3
2, 3
7, 1
7.63

ri
i=1 log2 (i+1) , ri - relevance of

