Toward Controlling Discrimination in Online Ad Auctions

L. Elisa Celis 1 Anay Mehrotra 2 Nisheeth K. Vishnoi 3

Abstract
Online advertising platforms are thriving due to
the customizable audiences they offer advertisers.
However, recent studies show that advertisements
can be discriminatory with respect to the gender
or race of the audience that sees the ad, and may
inadvertently cross ethical and/or legal boundaries. To prevent this, we propose a constrained ad
auction framework that maximizes the platform’s
revenue conditioned on ensuring that the audience seeing an advertiser’s ad is distributed appropriately across sensitive types such as gender
or race. Building upon Myerson’s classic work,
we first present an optimal auction mechanism
for a large class of fairness constraints. Finding
the parameters of this optimal auction, however,
turns out to be a non-convex problem. We show
that this non-convex problem can be reformulated
as a more structured non-convex problem with
no saddle points or local-maxima; this allows us
to develop a gradient-descent-based algorithm to
solve it. Our empirical results on the A1 Yahoo!
dataset demonstrate that our algorithm can obtain
uniform coverage across different user types for
each advertiser at a minor loss to the revenue of
the platform, and a small change to the size of the
audience each advertiser reaches.

1. Introduction
Online advertisements are the main source of revenue
for social-networking sites and search engines such as
Google (Alphabet Inc.). Ad exchange platforms allow advertisers to select the target audience for their ad by specifying
desired user demographics, interests and browsing histories (Facebook, Ad Targeting). Every time a user loads a
webpage or enters a search term, bids are collected from
relevant advertisers (Google, Ad Rank), and an auction is
conducted to determine which ad is shown, and how much
1

Yale University, USA 2 Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur,
India 3 Yale University, USA. Correspondence to: L. Elisa Celis
<elisa.celis@yale.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 36 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

the advertiser is charged (Muthukrishnan, 2009; Yuan et al.,
2012; Varian, 2007). As it is not practical for advertisers
to place individual bids for every user, the advertiser instead gives some high-level preferences about their budget
and target audience, and the platform places bids on their
behalf (Google, Automated Bidding).
More formally, let there be n advertisers, and m types of
users. Each advertiser i specifies their target demographic,
average bid, and budget to the platform, which then decides
a distribution, Pij , of bids of advertiser i ∈ [n] for user type
j ∈ [m]. These distributions represent the value of the user
to the advertiser, and ensure that the advertiser only bids for
users in their target demographic, with the expected bid not
exceeding the amount specified by the advertiser (Facebook,
Bid Strategies). At each time step, a user visits a web page
(e.g., Facebook or Twitter), the user’s type j is observed, and
a bid vi is drawn from Pij , for each advertiser i. Receiving
these bids as input, the mechanism M decides an allocation
x(v) and price p(v) for the advertisement slot. Several
Ad Exchanges including Google Ads (Ad targeting) and
Facebook Ads (About Ad Auctions), use variants of second
price auction mechanism (Ostrovsky & Schwarz, 2011)1 .
Overall, such targeted advertising leads to higher utilities for the advertisers who show content to relevant audiences, for the users who view related advertisements,
and for the platform which can benefit from selling targeted advertisements (Farahat, 2013; Yan et al., 2009; FoxBrewster, 2017; Goldfarb & Tucker, 2011). However, targeted advertising can also lead to discriminatory practices.
For instance, searches with “black-sounding” names were
much more likely to be shown ads suggestive of an arrest
record (Sweeney, 2013). Another study found that women
were shown fewer advertisements for high paying jobs than
men with similar profiles (Datta et al., 2015). In fact, recent
experiments demonstrate that ads can be inadvertently discriminatory; (Lambrecht & Tucker, 2018) found that STEM
job ads, specifically designed to be unbiased by the advertisers, were shown to more men than women across all major
platforms (Facebook Ads, Google Ads, Instagram and Twitter). On Facebook, a platform with 52% women (Vermeren,
1

If the auction sells a single item, then Myerson’s mechanism (Myerson, 1981) reduces to a second price auction mechanism with a reserve price (Hartline, 2017).

