Online Control with Adversarial Disturbances
Naman Agarwal 1 Brian Bullins 2 1 Elad Hazan 2 1 Sham M. Kakade 3 4 1 Karan Singh 2 1

Abstract
We study the control of linear dynamical systems
with adversarial disturbances, as opposed to statistical noise. We present an efficient algorithm that
achieves nearly-tight regret bounds in this setting.
Our result generalizes upon previous work in two
main aspects: the algorithm can accommodate
adversarial noise in the dynamics, and can handle
general convex costs.

1. Introduction
This paper studies the robust control of linear dynamical
systems. A linear dynamical system (LDS) is governed by
the dynamics equation
xt+1 = Axt + But + wt ,

(1.1)

Challenge 1. Perhaps the most important challenge we
address is in dealing with arbitrary disturbances wt in the
dynamics. This is a difficult problem, and so, the standard
approaches often assume i.i.d. Gaussian noise. Worst-case
approaches in the control literature, also known as H∞ control and its variants, are considered overly pessimistic.
Instead, we take an online (adaptive) approach to dealing
with adversarial disturbances.
Challenge 2. Another limitation for efficient methods is the
classical assumption that the costs ct (x, u) are quadratic, as
is the case for the linear quadratic regulator. Part of the
focus in the literature on the quadratic costs is due to special
properties that allow for efficient computation of the best linear controller in hindsight via dynamic programming. One
of our main goals is to introduce a more general technique
that allows for efficient algorithms even when faced with
arbitrary convex costs.

where xt is the state, ut is the control and wt is a disturbance
to the system. At every time step t, the controller suffers
a cost ct (xt , ut ) to enforce the control. In this paper, we
consider the setting of online control with arbitrary disturbances, under known transition dynamics specified by the
matrices A and B. Formally, the setting involves, at every
time step t, an adversary selecting a convex cost function
ct (x, u) and a disturbance wt , and the goal of the controller
is to generate a sequence of controls ut such that a sequence
of convex costs ct (xt , ut ) is minimized.

Our contributions. In this paper, we tackle both of the
challenges outlined above: coping with adversarial noise,
and general loss functions in an online setting. For this we
turn to the algorithmic methodology of regret minimization
in online learning. To define the performance metric, we
denote the cost for a control algorithm A as

The above setting generalizes a fundamental problem in control theory, such as the Linear Quadratic Regulator, which
has been studied over several decades. However, despite
the significant amount of literature on the problem, several
challenges remained.

The standard comparator in control is a linear controller,
which generates a control signal as a linear function of the
state, i.e., ut = −Kxt . Let J(K) denote the cost of a linear
controller from a certain class K ∈ K. For an algorithm A,
we define the regret as the sub-optimality of its cost with
respect to the best linear controller from a certain set, i.e.,

JT (A) =

T
X

ct (xt , ut ).

t=0

1

Google AI Princeton 2 Department of Computer
Science, Princeton University 3 Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington 4 Department of Statistics, University of Washington.
Correspondence to: Naman Agarwal <namanagarwal@google.com>, Brian Bullins <bbullins@cs.princeton.edu>,
Elad
Hazan
<ehazan@google.com>,
Sham
Kakade
<sham@cs.washington.edu>,
Karan
Singh
<karans@princeton.edu>.

Our main result
√ is an efficient algorithm for control which
achieves O( T ) regret in the setting described above.
While a similar setting has been considered in the literature
before (Cohen et al., 2018), our work generalizes previous
work in the following ways:

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

√
1. Our algorithm achieves regret O( T ) even in the presence of bounded adversarial disturbances. Previous

Regret = JT (A) − min JT (K).
K∈K

