NAS-Bench-101: Towards Reproducible Neural Architecture Search

Chris Ying * 1 Aaron Klein * 2 Esteban Real 1 Eric Christiansen 1 Kevin Murphy 1 Frank Hutter 2

Abstract
Recent advances in neural architecture search
(NAS) demand tremendous computational resources, which makes it difficult to reproduce
experiments and imposes a barrier-to-entry to researchers without access to large-scale computation. We aim to ameliorate these problems by introducing NAS-Bench-101, the first public architecture dataset for NAS research. To build NASBench-101, we carefully constructed a compact,
yet expressive, search space, exploiting graph isomorphisms to identify 423k unique convolutional
architectures. We trained and evaluated all of
these architectures multiple times on CIFAR-10
and compiled the results into a large dataset of
over 5 million trained models. This allows researchers to evaluate the quality of a diverse range
of models in milliseconds by querying the precomputed dataset. We demonstrate its utility by
analyzing the dataset as a whole and by benchmarking a range of architecture optimization algorithms.

1. Introduction
Many successes in deep learning (Krizhevsky et al., 2012;
Goodfellow et al., 2014; Sutskever et al., 2014) have resulted from novel neural network architecture designs. For
example, in the field of image classification, research has
produced numerous ways of combining neural network layers into unique architectures, such as Inception modules
(Szegedy et al., 2015), residual connections (He et al., 2016),
or dense connections (Huang et al., 2017). This proliferation of choices has fueled research into neural architecture
search (NAS), which casts the discovery of new architec*
1
Equal contribution
Google Brain,
Mountain
View, California, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Freiburg, Germany.
Correspondence to:
Chris Ying <contact@chrisying.net>, Aaron
Klein
<kleinaa@cs.uni-freiburg.de>,
Esteban
Real
<ereal@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

tures as an optimization problem (Baker et al., 2017; Zoph
& Le, 2016; Real et al., 2017; Elsken et al., 2019). This
has resulted in state of the art performance in the domain
of image classification (Zoph et al., 2018; Real et al., 2018;
Huang et al., 2018), and has shown promising results in
other domains, such as sequence modeling (Zoph & Le,
2016; So et al., 2019).
Unfortunately, NAS research is notoriously hard to reproduce (Li & Talwalkar, 2019; Sciuto et al., 2019). First,
some methods require months of compute time (e.g., Zoph
et al., 2018), making these methods inaccessible to most
researchers. Second, while recent improvements (Liu et al.,
2018a; Pham et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2018b) have yielded
more efficient methods, different methods are not comparable to each other due to different training procedures and
different search spaces, which make it difficult to attribute
the success of each method to the search algorithm itself.
To address the issues above, this paper introduces NASBench-101, the first architecture-dataset for NAS. To build
it, we trained and evaluated a large number of different convolutional neural network (CNN) architectures on CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009), utilizing over 100 TPU
years of computation time. We compiled the results into a
large table which maps 423k unique architectures to metrics
including run time and accuracy. This enables NAS experiments to be run via querying a table instead of performing
the usual costly train and evaluate procedure. Moreover, the
data, search space, and training code is fully public 1 , to
foster reproducibility in the NAS community.
Because NAS-Bench-101 exhaustively evaluates a search
space, it permits, for the first time, a comprehensive analysis
of a NAS search space as a whole. We illustrate such potential by measuring search space properties relevant to
architecture search. Finally, we demonstrate its application
to the analysis of algorithms by benchmarking a wide range
of open source architecture/hyperparameter search methods, including evolutionary approaches, random search, and
Bayesian optimization.
In summary, our contributions are the following:
• We introduce NAS-Bench-101, the first large-scale, open1

Data and code for NAS-Bench-101 available at https://
github.com/google-research/nasbench.

