Decentralized Stochastic Optimization and Gossip Algorithms
with Compressed Communication

Anastasia Koloskova * 1 Sebastian U. Stich * 1 Martin Jaggi 1

Abstract
We consider decentralized stochastic optimization with the objective function (e.g. data samples
for machine learning tasks) being distributed over
n machines that can only communicate to their
neighbors on a fixed communication graph. To
address the communication bottleneck, the nodes
compress (e.g. quantize or sparsify) their model
updates. We cover both unbiased and biased compression operators with quality denoted by δ ≤ 1
(δ = 1 meaning no compression).
We (i) propose a novel gossip-based stochastic
gradient descent algorithm, C HOCO -SGD,that
converges at rate O 1/(nT ) + 1/(T ρ2 δ)2 for
strongly convex objectives, where T denotes the
number of iterations and ρ the eigengap of the
connectivity matrix. We (ii) present a novel
gossip algorithm, C HOCO -G OSSIP, for the average consensus problem that converges in time
O(1/(ρ2 δ) log(1/ε)) for accuracy ε > 0. This is
(up to our knowledge) the first gossip algorithm
that supports arbitrary compressed messages for
δ > 0 and still exhibits linear convergence. We
(iii) show in experiments that both of our algorithms do outperform the respective state-of-theart baselines and C HOCO -SGD can reduce communication by at least two orders of magnitudes.

1. Introduction
Decentralized machine learning methods are becoming core
aspects of many important applications, both in view of
scalability to larger datasets and systems, but also from the
perspective of data locality, ownership and privacy. We consider decentralized optimization methods that do not rely
on a central coordinator (e.g. parameter server) but instead
only require on-device computation and local communica*
Equal contribution 1 EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Anastasia Koloskova <anastasia.koloskova@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

tion with neighboring devices. This covers for instance the
classic setting of training machine learning models in large
data-centers, but also emerging applications were the computations are executed directly on the consumer devices,
which keep their part of the data private at all times.1
Formally, we consider optimization problems distributed
across n devices or nodes of the form


n
1X
f ? := min f (x) :=
fi (x) ,
(1)
n i=1
x∈Rd
where fi : Rd → R for i ∈ [n] := {1, . . . , n} are the objectives defined by the data available locally on each node. We
also allow each local objective fi to have stochastic optimization (or sum) structure, covering the important case of
empirical risk minimization in distributed machine learning
and deep learning applications.
Decentralized Communication. We model the network
topology as a graph where edges represent the communication links along which messages (e.g. model updates) can
be exchanged. The decentralized setting is motivated by
centralized topologies (corresponding to a star graph) often
not being possible, and otherwise often posing a significant bottleneck on the central node in terms of communication latency, bandwidth and fault tolerance. Decentralized
topologies avoid these bottlenecks and thereby offer hugely
improved potential in scalability. For example, while the
master node in the centralized setting receives (and sends)
in each round messages from all workers, Θ(n) in total2 , in
decentralized topologies the maximal degree of the network
is often constant (e.g. ring or torus) or a slowly growing
function in n (e.g. scale-free networks).
Decentralized Optimization. For the case of deterministic (full-gradient) optimization, recent seminal theoretical advances show that the network topology only affects
higher-order terms of the convergence rate of decentralized
optimization algorithms on convex problems (Scaman et al.,
1

Note the optimization process itself (as for instance the computed result) might leak information about the data of other nodes.
We do not focus on quantifying notions of privacy in this work.
2
For better connected topologies sometimes more efficient allreduce and broadcast implementations are available.

