On the Long-term Impact of Algorithmic Decision Policies:
Effort Unfairness and Feature Segregation through Social Learning

Hoda Heidari * 1 Vedant Nanda * 2 Krishna P. Gummadi 2

Abstract
Most existing notions of algorithmic fairness are
one-shot: they ensure some form of allocative
equality at the time of decision making, but do
not account for the adverse impact of the algorithmic decisions today on the long-term welfare
and prosperity of certain segments of the population. We take a broader perspective on algorithmic fairness. We propose an effort-based measure of fairness and present a data-driven framework for characterizing the long-term impact of
algorithmic policies on reshaping the underlying
population. Motivated by the psychological literature on social learning and the economic literature on equality of opportunity, we propose
a micro-scale model of how individuals may respond to decision making algorithms. We employ
existing measures of segregation from sociology
and economics to quantify the resulting macroscale population-level change. Importantly, we
observe that different models may shift the groupconditional distribution of qualifications in different directions. Our findings raise a number of
important questions regarding the formalization
of fairness for decision-making models.

1. Introduction
Machine Learning tools are increasingly employed to make
consequential decisions for human subjects, in areas such
as credit lending (Petrasic et al., 2017), policing (Rudin,
2013), criminal justice (Barry-Jester et al., 2015), and
medicine (Deo, 2015). Decisions made by these algorithms can have a long-lasting impact on people’s lives
and may affect certain individuals or social groups negatively (Sweeney, 2013; Angwin et al., 2016; Levin, 2016).
*

Equal contribution 1 Computer Science Department, ETH
Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland 2 MPI-SWS, Saarbrücken, Germany.
Correspondence to: Hoda Heidari <hheidari@inf.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

This realization has recently spawned an active area of research into quantifying and guaranteeing fairness for machine learning (Dwork et al., 2012; Kleinberg et al., 2017;
Hardt et al., 2016).
Most existing notions of fairness assume a static population: they ensure some form of allocative equality at the
time of decision making, but do not account for the adverse impact of algorithmic decisions today on the long
term welfare and prosperity of different segments of the
population. For instance, consider equality of odds (Hardt
et al., 2016). The notion requires that the model distributes
different types of error (i.e., false positives and false negatives) equally across different social groups. But it does
not take into consideration the fact that for members of the
advantaged group these erroneous predictions may be easy
to overturn, whereas for the disadvantaged it may take a
significant amount of effort to improve their qualifications
to obtain better algorithmic outcomes. Furthermore, in the
long run, the decision-making model may nudge different
segments of the population to obtain very different sets of
qualifications—some of which might be socially and economically more desirable than others. This may in effect
lead to further marginalization of these groups.
Motivated by these concerns about existing notions of fairness, we argue for a broader view of algorithmic models—
one that treats them as policies implemented within a social
context and with the potential of impacting individuals and
reshaping society. Among other considerations1 , such view
of decision-making models necessitates a deeper understanding of how individual decision subjects may respond to these
models and how those responses may translate into adverse
impact for certain segments of the population.
In this work, we propose an effort-based measure of unfairness for algorithmic decisions. We define a data-driven,
group-dependent measure of effort drawing on the economic
literature on Equality of Opportunity (Roemer & Trannoy,
2015). Our effort function captures the idea that the kind of
1
Another important factor is how a utility maximizing decision
maker—employing the model—would respond to its predictions.
For instance, they may interpret the predictions in a certain way,
or update the model entirely. Prior work (Liu et al., 2018; Kannan
et al., 2019) has already addressed some of these considerations.

