Certified Adversarial Robustness via Randomized Smoothing

Jeremy Cohen 1 Elan Rosenfeld 1 J. Zico Kolter 1 2

Abstract
We show how to turn any classifier that classifies
well under Gaussian noise into a new classifier
that is certifiably robust to adversarial perturbations under the `2 norm. While this “randomized
smoothing” technique has been proposed before
in the literature, we are the first to provide a tight
analysis, which establishes a close connection
between `2 robustness and Gaussian noise. We
use the technique to train an ImageNet classifier
with e.g. a certified top-1 accuracy of 49% under adversarial perturbations with `2 norm less
than 0.5 (=127/255). Smoothing is the only approach to certifiably robust classification which
has been shown feasible on full-resolution ImageNet. On smaller-scale datasets where competing approaches to certified `2 robustness are
viable, smoothing delivers higher certified accuracies. The empirical success of the approach suggests that provable methods based on randomization at prediction time are a promising direction
for future research into adversarially robust classification. Code and models are available at http:
//github.com/locuslab/smoothing.

1. Introduction
Modern image classifiers achieve high accuracy on i.i.d.
test sets but are not robust to small, adversarially-chosen
perturbations of their inputs (Szegedy et al., 2014; Biggio
et al., 2013). Given an image x correctly classified by, say,
a neural network, an adversary can usually engineer an adversarial perturbation δ so small that x + δ looks just like
x to the human eye, yet the network classifies x + δ as a
different, incorrect class. Many works have proposed heuristic methods for training classifiers intended to be robust to
adversarial perturbations. However, most of these heuristics
have been subsequently shown to fail against suitably pow1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Bosch Center for AI. Correspondence to: Jeremy Cohen <jeremycohen@cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

pA
pB

x

Figure 1. Evaluating the smoothed classifier at an input x. Left:
the decision regions of the base classifier f are drawn in different colors. The dotted lines are the level sets of the distribution
N (x, σ 2 I). Right: the distribution f (N (x, σ 2 I)). As discussed
below, pA is a lower bound on the probability of the top class and
pB is an upper bound on the probability of each other class. Here,
g(x) is “blue.”

.
erful adversaries (Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Athalye et al.,
2018; Uesato et al., 2018). In response, a line of work on
certifiable robustness studies classifiers whose prediction at
any point x is verifiably constant within some set around x
(e.g. Wong & Kolter, 2018; Raghunathan et al., 2018a). In
most of these works, the robust classifier takes the form of a
neural network. Unfortunately, all existing approaches for
certifying the robustness of neural networks have trouble
scaling to networks that are large and expressive enough to
solve problems like ImageNet.
One workaround is to look for robust classifiers that are not
neural networks. In this paper, we analyze an operation we
call randomized smoothing1 which transforms any arbitrary
base classifier f into a new “smoothed classifier” g that is
certifiably robust in `2 norm. Let f be an arbitrary classifier
which maps inputs Rd to classes Y. For any input x, the
smoothed classifier’s prediction g(x) is defined to be the
class which f is most likely to classify the random variable N (x, σ 2 I) as. That is, g(x) returns the most probable
prediction by f of random Gaussian corruptions of x.
If the base classifier f is most likely to classify N (x, σ 2 I)
as x’s correct class, then the smoothed classifier g will be
1
We adopt this term because it has been used to describe as
similar technique in a different context (Duchi et al., 2012).

