Replica Conditional Sequential Monte Carlo

Alexander Y. Shestopaloff 1 2 Arnaud Doucet 3 2

Abstract
We propose a Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) scheme to perform state inference in
non-linear non-Gaussian state-space models. Current state-of-the-art methods to address this problem rely on particle MCMC techniques and its
variants, such as the iterated conditional Sequential Monte Carlo (cSMC) scheme, which uses
a Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) type proposal
within MCMC. A deficiency of standard SMC
proposals is that they only use observations up to
time t to propose states at time t when an entire
observation sequence is available. More sophisticated SMC based on lookahead techniques could
be used but they can be difficult to put in practice.
We propose here replica cSMC where we build
SMC proposals for one replica using information
from the entire observation sequence by conditioning on the states of the other replicas. This
approach is easily parallelizable and we demonstrate its excellent empirical performance when
compared to the standard iterated cSMC scheme
at fixed computational complexity.

1. Introduction
We consider discrete-time state-space models. They can
be described by a latent Markov process (Xt )t≥1 and an
observation process (Yt )t≥1 , (Xt , Yt ) being X × Y-valued,
which satisfy X1 ∼ µ(·) and
Xt+1 |{Xt = x} ∼ f (·|x)

Yt |{Xt = x} ∼ g(·|x)
(1)
for t ≥ 1. Our goal is to sample from posterior distribution
of the latent states X1:T := (X1 , ..., XT ) given a realization
of the observations Y1:T = y1:T . This distribution admits a
1
School of Mathematics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
UK 2 The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK 3 Department of
Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. Correspondence
to: Alexander Y. Shestopaloff <ashestopaloff@turing.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

density given by
p(x1:T |y1:T ) ∝ µ(x1 )g(y1 |x1 )

T
Y

f (xt |xt−1 )g(yt |xt ).

t=2

(2)
This sampling problem is now commonly addressed using an MCMC scheme known as the iterated cSMC sampler (Andrieu et al., 2010) and extensions of it; see, e.g.,
(Shestopaloff & Neal, 2018). This algorithm relies on a
SMC-type proposal mechanism. A limitation of these algorithms is that they typically use data only up to time t
to propose candidate states at time t, whereas the entire
sequence y1:T is observed in the context we are interested
in. To address these issues, various lookahead techniques
have been proposed in the SMC literature; see (Chen et al.,
2013) for a review. Alternative approaches relying on a
parametric approximation of the backward information filter used for smoothing in state-space models (Briers et al.,
2010) have also been recently proposed in (Scharth & Kohn,
2016; Guarniero et al., 2017; Ruiz & Kappen, 2017; Heng
et al., 2017). When applicable, these iterative methods have
demonstrated good performance. However, it is unclear
how these ideas could be adapted to the MCMC framework
investigated here. Additionally these methods are difficult
to put in practice for multimodal posterior distributions.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach which allows
us to build proposals for cSMC that allows considering all
observed data in a proposal, based on conditioning on replicas of the state variables. Our approach is based purely on
Monte Carlo sampling, bypassing any need for approximating functions in the estimate of the backward information
filter.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section
2, we review the iterated cSMC algorithm and outline its
limitations. Section 3 introduces the replica iterated cSMC
methodology. In Section 4, we demonstrate the methodology on a linear Gaussian model, two non-Gaussian state
space models from (Shestopaloff & Neal, 2018) as well as
the Lorenz-96 model from (Heng et al., 2017).

2. Iterated cSMC
The iterated cSMC sampler is an MCMC method for sampling from a target distribution of density π (x1:T ) :=

