Optimal Kronecker-Sum Approximation of Real Time Recurrent Learning

Frederik Benzing * 1 Marcelo Matheus Gauy * 1 Asier Mujika 1 Anders Martinsson 1 Angelika Steger 1

Abstract
One of the central goals of Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) is to learn long-term dependencies in sequential data. Nevertheless, the most
popular training method, Truncated Backpropagation through Time (TBPTT), categorically forbids
learning dependencies beyond the truncation horizon. In contrast, the online training algorithm
Real Time Recurrent Learning (RTRL) provides
untruncated gradients, with the disadvantage of
impractically large computational costs. Recently
published approaches reduce these costs by providing noisy approximations of RTRL. We present
a new approximation algorithm of RTRL, Optimal Kronecker-Sum Approximation (OK). We
prove that OK is optimal for a class of approximations of RTRL, which includes all approaches
published so far. Additionally, we show that OK
has empirically negligible noise: Unlike previous
algorithms it matches TBPTT in a real world task
(character-level Penn TreeBank) and can exploit
online parameter updates to outperform TBPTT
in a synthetic string memorization task.
Code available at GitHub.

1. Introduction
Learning to predict sequential and temporal data is one of
the core problems of Machine Learning arising for example
in language modeling, speech generation and Reinforcement
Learning. One of the main aims when modeling sequential data is to capture long-term dependencies. Most of the
significant advances towards this goal have been achieved
through Recurrent Neural Nets (RNNs). More specifically,
different architectures (e.g. the Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) and the Recurrent Highway Network (RHN) (Zilly et al., 2017)) were
developed to facilitate learning long-term dependencies and
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, ETH
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: FB <benzingf@inf.ethz.ch>, MMG <marcelo.matheus@inf.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

achieved notable successes. However, few improvements
have been made regarding the training methods of RNNs.
Since Williams and Peng (1990) developed Truncated Backpropagation through Time (TBPTT), it continues to be the
most popular training method in many areas (Mnih et al.,
2016; Mehri et al., 2017; Merity et al., 2018) - despite the
fact that it does not seem to align well with the goal of
learning arbitrary long-term dependencies. This is because
TBPTT ‘unrolls’ the RNN only for a fixed number of time
steps T (the truncation horizon) and backpropagates the
gradient for these steps only. This almost categorically
forbids learning dependencies beyond the truncation horizon. Unfortunately, extending the truncation horizon makes
TBPTT increasingly memory consuming, since long input
sequences need to be stored, and considerably slows down
learning, since parameters are updated less frequently, a phenomenon known as ‘update lock’ (Jaderberg et al., 2017).
An alternative avoiding these issues of TBPTT is Real Time
Recurrent Learning (RTRL) (Williams & Zipser, 1989). The
advantages of RTRL are that it provides untruncated gradients, which in principle allow the network to learn arbitrarily
long-term dependencies, and that it is fully online, so that
parameters are updated frequently allowing faster learning. However, its runtime and memory requirements scale
poorly with the network size and make RTRL infeasible for
practical applications. As a remedy to this problem, Tallec
and Ollivier (2017a) proposed replacing the full gradient of
RTRL by an unbiased, less computationally costly but noisy
approximation (Unbiased Online Recurrent Optimisation,
UORO). Recently, Mujika et al. (2018) reduced the noise
of this approach and demonstrated empirically that their improvement (Kronecker factored RTRL, KF-RTRL) allows
learning complex real world data sets (character-level Penn
TreeBank (Marcus et al., 1993)). Nevertheless, the noise introduced by KF-RTRL remains a problem, leading to slower
learning and worse performance when compared to TBPTT.
To address this problem, we propose a new approximation
of RTRL, Optimal Kronecker-Sum Approximation (OK).
Extending ideas of KF-RTRL, it approximates the gradient by a sum of Kronecker-factors. It then introduces a
novel procedure to perform the online updates of this approximation. We prove that this procedure has minimum
achievable variance for a certain class of approximations,
which includes UORO and KF-RTRL. Thus, OK does not

