Extrapolating Beyond Suboptimal Demonstrations via
Inverse Reinforcement Learning from Observations

Daniel S. Brown * 1 Wonjoon Goo * 1 Prabhat Nagarajan 2 Scott Niekum 1

Abstract
A critical flaw of existing inverse reinforcement
learning (IRL) methods is their inability to significantly outperform the demonstrator. This is
because IRL typically seeks a reward function
that makes the demonstrator appear near-optimal,
rather than inferring the underlying intentions of
the demonstrator that may have been poorly executed in practice. In this paper, we introduce
a novel reward-learning-from-observation algorithm, Trajectory-ranked Reward EXtrapolation
(T-REX), that extrapolates beyond a set of (approximately) ranked demonstrations in order to
infer high-quality reward functions from a set of
potentially poor demonstrations. When combined
with deep reinforcement learning, T-REX outperforms state-of-the-art imitation learning and IRL
methods on multiple Atari and MuJoCo benchmark tasks and achieves performance that is often more than twice the performance of the best
demonstration. We also demonstrate that T-REX
is robust to ranking noise and can accurately extrapolate intention by simply watching a learner
noisily improve at a task over time.

1. Introduction
Due to advantages such as computational speed, precise manipulation, and exact timing, computers and robots are often
superior to humans at performing tasks with well-defined
goals and objectives. However, it can be difficult, even for
experts, to design reward functions and objectives that lead
to desired behaviors when designing autonomous agents (Ng
et al., 1999; Amodei et al., 2016). When goals or rewards are
difficult for a human to specify, inverse reinforcement learn*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at Austin, USA 2 Preferred Networks, Japan. Correspondence to: Daniel S. Brown <dsbrown@cs.utexas.edu>,
Wonjoon Goo <wonjoon@cs.utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Figure 1. T-REX takes a sequence of ranked demonstrations and
learns a reward function from these rankings that allows policy
improvement over the demonstrator via reinforcement learning.

ing (IRL) (Abbeel & Ng, 2004) techniques can be applied
to infer the intrinsic reward function of a user from demonstrations. Unfortunately, high-quality demonstrations are
difficult to provide for many tasks—for instance, consider
a non-expert user attempting to give kinesthetic demonstrations of a household chore to a robot. Even for relative experts, tasks such as high-frequency stock trading or playing
complex video games can be difficult to perform optimally.
If a demonstrator is suboptimal, but their intentions can be
ascertained, then a learning agent ought to be able to exceed the demonstrator’s performance in principle. However,
existing IRL algorithms fail to do this, typically searching
for a reward function that makes the demonstrations appear
near-optimal (Ramachandran & Amir, 2007; Ziebart et al.,
2008; Finn et al., 2016; Henderson et al., 2018). Thus, when
the demonstrator is suboptimal, IRL results in suboptimal
behavior as well. Imitation learning approaches (Argall
et al., 2009) that mimic behavior directly without reward
inference, such as behavioral cloning (Torabi et al., 2018a),
also suffer from the same shortcoming.
To overcome this critical flaw in current imitation learning
methods, we propose a novel IRL algorithm, Trajectoryranked Reward EXtrapolation (T-REX)1 that utilizes ranked
demonstrations to extrapolate a user’s underlying intent beyond the best demonstration, even when all demonstrations
1
Code available at https://github.com/hiwonjoon/
ICML2019-TREX

