Random Function Priors for Correlation Modeling

Aonan Zhang 1 John Paisley 1

Abstract
The likelihood model of high dimensional data
Xn can often be expressed as p(Xn |Zn , θ), where
θ := (θk )k∈[K] is a collection of hidden features
shared across objects, indexed by n, and Zn is
a non-negative factor loading vector with K entries where Znk indicates the strength of θk used
to express Xn . In this paper, we introduce random function priors for Zn for modeling correlations among its K dimensions Zn1 through ZnK ,
which we call population random measure embedding (PRME). Our model can be viewed as
a generalized paintbox model (Broderick et al.,
2013) using random functions, and can be learned
efficiently with neural networks via amortized
variational inference. We derive our Bayesian
nonparametric method by applying a representation theorem on separately exchangeable discrete
random measures.

1. Introduction
Let X = [X1 , . . . , XN ] be a group of exchangeable high
dimensional observations, where Xn ∈ Rd . In this paper,
we assume X is generated by the model
Z
p(X) = p(X, Z, θ) dZdθ
Z
Y
= p(Z)p(θ)
p(Xn |Zn , θ) dZdθ, (1)
n∈[N ]

where p(Xn |Zn , θ) is a likelihood model conditioned on
latent features θ := (θk )k∈[K] that are shared across the
population. Zn := [Zn1 , . . . , ZnK ] is a non-negative vector
for the nth observation, where Znk determines the extent
to which θk is used to express Xn . For example, in topic
models (Blei et al., 2003), Zn is a discrete distribution over

topics, where Znk represents the proportion of words in
document n sampled from topic k. In sparse factor models (Griffiths & Ghahramani, 2011), Zn is a binary vector
such that latent feature θk contributes to the likelihood if
and only if Znk = 1. We generically refer to Zn as a “nonnegative feature loading vector.” For exchangeable X, it
is often assumed the Zn are exchangeable as well. If we
take Z as a feature loading matrix with Zn as its rows, then
Z is row exchangeable. By de Finetti’s theorem, we can
represent
Z Y
p(Z) =
p(Zn |ζ)p(ζ)dζ,
(2)
n∈N

for some random object ζ. (We let N = ∞ in order to apply
de Finetti’s theorem.) The goal of this paper is to model
complex correlations among entries of Zn . Following a
common
practice, we put an independent prior on θ, p(θ) =
Q
p(θ
)
and focus on modeling p(Z).
k
k
A straightforward way to model correlation structure is to
let p(Zn |ζ) be a parametric exponential family model. By
defining the mean/natural parameters for the model, one
can handle correlations to various degrees. For example,
Zn may follow a log-normal distribution (Lafferty & Blei,
2006), where correlations are modeled through a covariance
matrix. However, exponential family models (Wainwright
et al., 2008) can be rigid, since the number of free parameters is fixed for a certain K. To get a more flexible model, it
is tempting to consider higher-order moments E[Zn⊗M ] for
a large M up to K, where u⊗M denotes an M-th order outer
product of a vector u. but in this case the number of free
parameters increases exponentially, leading to intractable
inference.

Department of Electrical Engineering & Data Science Institute,
Columbia University, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Aonan
Zhang <az2385@columbia.edu>.

In this paper, we use an alternative Bayesian nonparametric
method to model Zn as an outcome of random functions,
which can handle complex correlations even when K and
M go to infinity. Moreover, those random functions can be
learned efficiently through inference/decoder networks via
amortized variational inference (Kingma & Welling, 2013).
In principle, arbitrarily complex neural networks can be
applied to model correlations in our setting.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

To give intuition why random function priors are powerful, we first show in Figure 1 an existing feature paintbox
model for binary Zn that illustrates how to model arbitrarily

1

