Random Shuffling Beats SGD after Finite Epochs

Jeff HaoChen 1 Suvrit Sra 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
We focus on minimization of the finite-sum
n

A long-standing problem in optimization is
proving that R ANDOM S HUFFLE, the withoutreplacement version of S GD, converges faster
than (the usual) with-replacement S GD. Building
upon (Gürbüzbalaban et al., 2015b), we present
the first non-asymptotic results for this problem,
proving that after a reasonable number of epochs
R ANDOM S HUFFLE converges faster than S GD.
Specifically, we prove that for strongly convex,
second-order smooth functions, the iterates of
R ANDOM S HUFFLE converge to the optimal solu3
tion as O(1/T 2 + n /T 3 ), where n is the number
of components in the objective, and T is number
√
of iterations. This result implies that after O( n)
epochs, R ANDOM S HUFFLE is strictly better than
S GD (which converges as O(1/T )). The key step
toward showing this better dependence on T is the
introduction of n into the bound; and as our analysis shows, in general a dependence on n is unavoidable without further changes. To understand
how R ANDOM S HUFFLE works in practice, we further explore two valuable settings: data sparsity
and over-parameterization. For sparse data, R AN DOM S HUFFLE has the rate O (1/T 2 ), again strictly
better than S GD. Under a setting closely related
to over-parameterization, R ANDOM S HUFFLE is
shown to converge faster than S GD after any arbitrary number of iterations. Finally, we extend the
analysis of R ANDOM S HUFFLE to smooth convex
and some non-convex functions.

F (x) :=

1X
fi (x) ,
n i=1

(1.1)

where each fi : Rd → R is smooth and convex, and the
sum F is strongly convex. A classical approach to solving (1.1) is stochastic gradient descent (S GD). At each
iteration S GD independently samples an index i uniformly
from {1, . . . , n}, and uses the (stochastic) gradient ∇fi to
compute its update. The stochasticity makes each iteration
of S GD cheap, and the uniformly independent sampling of i
makes ∇fi an unbiased estimator of the full gradient ∇F .
These properties are central to S GD’s effectiveness in large
scale machine learning, and underlie much of its theoretical
analysis (see e.g., (Rakhlin et al., 2012; Bertsekas, 2011;
Bottou et al., 2016; Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David, 2014)).
However, what is actually used in practice is the without replacement version of S GD, henceforth called R AN DOM S HUFFLE. At each epoch R ANDOM S HUFFLE samples
a random permutation of the n functions uniformly independently (some implementations shuffle the data only once at
load, rather than at each epoch). Then, it performs S GDstyle updates by going through the n functions according to
the sampled permutation. By avoiding random sampling at
each iteration, R ANDOM S HUFFLE can be computationally
more practical (Bottou, 2012); and empirically, it is known
to converge faster than S GD (Bottou, 2009).

1
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua
University 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Jeff HaoChen <zhc15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Suvrit
Sra <suvrit@mit.edu>.

Resolving this discrepancy between theory and practice of
S GD has been long an open problem. Recently, this problem has drawn renewed attention, with the goal of better
understanding R ANDOM S HUFFLE. The key difficulty is
that without-replacement produces non-independent samples, which greatly complicates the analysis. Two extreme
case results are known: Shamir (2016) shows that R AN DOM S HUFFLE is not much worse than S GD , provided the
number of epochs is not too large; while Gürbüzbalaban
et al. (2015b) show that R ANDOM S HUFFLE converges faster
than S GD asymptotically at the rate O( T12 ).

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

But it remains unclear what happens in between, i.e., after a
(reasonable) finite number of epochs are run. This regime is
the most compelling one to study, since in practice one runs

