Nonparametric Bayesian Deep Networks with Local Competition

Konstantinos P. Panousis * 1 Sotirios Chatzis * 2 Sergios Theodoridis 1 3

Abstract
The aim of this work is to enable inference of
deep networks that retain high accuracy for the
least possible model complexity, with the latter deduced from the data during inference. To this end,
we revisit deep networks that comprise competing
linear units, as opposed to nonlinear units that do
not entail any form of (local) competition. In this
context, our main technical innovation consists in
an inferential setup that leverages solid arguments
from Bayesian nonparametrics. We infer both
the needed set of connections or locally competing sets of units, as well as the required floatingpoint precision for storing the network parameters. Specifically, we introduce auxiliary discrete
latent variables representing which initial network
components are actually needed for modeling the
data at hand, and perform Bayesian inference over
them by imposing appropriate stick-breaking priors. As we experimentally show using benchmark
datasets, our approach yields networks with less
computational footprint than the state-of-the-art,
and with no compromises in predictive accuracy.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) (LeCun et al., 2015) are
flexible models that represent complex functions as a combination of simpler primitives. Despite their success in a wide
range of applications, they typically suffer from overparameterization: they entail millions of weights, a large fraction
of which is actually redundant. This leads to unnecessary
computational burden, and limits their scalability to commodity hardware devices, such as mobile phones and cars.
*

Equal contribution 1 Dept. of Informatics & Telecommunications, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece
2
Dept. of Electrical Eng., Computer Eng., and Informatics, Cyprus
University of Technology, Limassol, Cyprus 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzen, China. Correspondence to: Konstantinos P. Panousis <kpanousis@di.uoa.gr>, Sotirios Chatzis
<sotirios.chatzis@cut.ac.cy>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

In addition, this fact renders DNNs susceptible to strong
overfitting tendencies that may severely undermine their
generalization capacity.
The deep learning community has devoted significant effort
to address overfitting in deep learning; `2 regularization,
Dropout, and variational variants thereof are characteristic
such examples (Gal & Ghahramani, 2015). However, the
scope of regularization is limited to effectively training (and
retaining) all network weights. Addressing redundancy in
deep networks requires data-driven structure shrinkage and
weight compression techniques.
A popular type of solution to this end consists in training
a condensed student network by leveraging a previously
trained full-fledged teacher network (Ba & Caruana, 2014;
Hinton et al., 2015). However, this paradigm suffers from
two main drawbacks: (i) One cannot avoid the computational costs and overfitting tendencies related to training a
large deep network; on the contrary, the total training costs
are augmented with the weight distillation and training costs
of the student network; and (ii) the student teaching procedure itself entails a large deal of heuristics and assorted
artistry in designing effective teacher distillation.
As an alternative, several researchers have examined application of network component (unit/connection) pruning
criteria. In most cases, these criteria are applied on top of
some appropriate regularization technique. In this context,
Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs) have been proposed as
a full probabilistic paradigm for formulating DNNs (Gal &
Ghahramani, 2015; Graves, 2011), obtained by imposing
a prior distribution over their weights. Then, appropriate
posteriors are inferred, and predictive distributions are obtained via marginalization in the Bayesian averaging sense.
This way, BNNs induce strong regularization under a solid
inferential framework. In addition, they naturally allow
for reducing floating-point precision in storing the network
weights. Specifically, since Bayesian inference boils down
to drawing samples from an inferred weight posterior, the
higher the inferred weight posterior variance, the lower the
needed floating-point precision (Louizos et al., 2017).
Finally, Chatzis (2018) recently considered addressing these
problems by introducing an additional set of auxiliary
Bernoulli latent variables, which explicitly indicate the utility of each component (in an “on/off” fashion). In this

