Towards Understanding Knowledge Distillation

Mary Phuong 1 Christoph H. Lampert 1

Abstract
Knowledge distillation, i.e. one classifier being
trained on the outputs of another classifier, is an
empirically very successful technique for knowledge transfer between classifiers. It has even been
observed that classifiers learn much faster and
more reliably if trained with the outputs of another
classifier as soft labels, instead of from ground
truth data. So far, however, there is no satisfactory
theoretical explanation of this phenomenon. In
this work, we provide the first insights into the
working mechanisms of distillation by studying
the special case of linear and deep linear classifiers. Specifically, we prove a generalization
bound that establishes fast convergence of the expected risk of a distillation-trained linear classifier.
From the bound and its proof we extract three key
factors that determine the success of distillation:
data geometry – geometric properties of the data
distribution, in particular class separation, has an
immediate influence on the convergence speed
of the risk; optimization bias – gradient descent
optimization finds a very favorable minimum of
the distillation objective; and strong monotonicity
– the expected risk of the student classifier always
decreases when the size of the training set grows.

1. Introduction
In 2014, Hinton et al. (2014) made a surprising observation: they found it easier to train classifier using the realvalued outputs of another classifier as target values than
using actual ground-truth labels. Calling the procedure
knowledge distillation, or distillation for short, they noticed
the positive effect to occur even when the existing classifier
(called teacher) was trained on the same data as it used
afterwards for the distillation-training of the new classifier
(called students). Since that time, the positive properties of
1
IST Austria (Institute of Science and Technology Austria).
Correspondence to: Mary Phuong <bphuong@ist.ac.at>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

distillation-based training has been confirmed several times:
the optimization step is generally more well-behaved than
the optimization step in label-based training, and it needs
less if any regularization or specific optimization tricks.
Consequently, in several fields, distillation has become a
standard technique for transfering the information between
classifiers with different architectures, such as from deep to
shallow neural networks or from ensembles of classifiers to
individual ones.
While the practical benefits of distillation are beyond doubt,
its theoretical justification remains almost completely unclear. Existing explanations rarely go beyond qualitative
statements, e.g. claiming that learning from soft labels
should be easier than learning from hard labels, or that in a
multi-class setting the teacher’s output provides information
about how similar different classes are to each other.
In this work, we follow a different approach. Instead of
studying distillation in full generality, we restrict our attention to a simplified, analytically tractable, setting: binary classification with linear teacher and linear student
(either shallow or deep linear networks). For this situation, we achieve the first quantitative results about the effectiveness of distillation-based training. Specifically, our
main results are: 1) We prove a generalization bound
that establishes extremely fast convergence of the risk
of distillation-trained classifiers. In fact, it can reach zero
risk from finite training sets. 2) We identify three key
factors that explain the success of distillation: data geometry – geometric properties of the data distribution, in
particular class separation, directly influence the convergence speed of the student’s risk; optimization bias – even
though the distillation objective can have many optima, gradient descent optimization is guaranteed to find a particularly favorable one; and strong monotonicity – increasing
the training set always decreases the risk of the student
classifier.

2. Related Work
Ideas underpinning distillation have a long history dating
back to the work of Ba & Caruana (2014); Bucilua et al.
(2006); Craven & Shavlik (1996); Li et al. (2014); Liang
et al. (2008). In its current and most widely known form,
it was introduced by Hinton et al. (2014) in the context of

