Domain Agnostic Learning with Disentangled Representations
Xingchao Peng 1 Zijun Huang 2 Ximeng Sun 1 Kate Saenko 1

Abstract
Unsupervised model transfer has the potential to
greatly improve the generalizability of deep models to novel domains. Yet the current literature
assumes that the separation of target data into distinct domains is known as a priori. In this paper,
we propose the task of Domain-Agnostic Learning (DAL): How to transfer knowledge from a
labeled source domain to unlabeled data from arbitrary target domains? To tackle this problem,
we devise a novel Deep Adversarial Disentangled
Autoencoder (DADA) capable of disentangling
domain-speciﬁc features from class identity. We
demonstrate experimentally that when the target
domain labels are unknown, DADA leads to stateof-the-art performance on several image classiﬁcation datasets.

1. Introduction
Supervised machine learning assumes that training and testing data are sampled i.i.d from the same distribution, while
in practice, the training and testing data are typically collected from related domains but under different distributions,
a phenomenon known as domain shift (Quionero-Candela
et al., 2009). To avoid the cost of annotating each new
test domain, Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) tackles domain shift by aligning the feature distribution of the
source domain with that of the target domain, resulting
in domain-invariant features. However, current methods
assume that target samples have domain labels and therefore can be isolated into separate homogeneous domains.
For many practical applications, this is an overly strong
assumption. For example, a hand-written character recognition system could encounter characters written by different
1
Computer Science Department, Boston University; 111 Cummington Mall, Boston, MA 02215, USA;
email:xpeng@bu.edu 2 Columbia Unversity and MADO AI
Research; 116th St and Broadway, New York, NY 10027, USA;
email:zijun.huang@columbia.edu. Correspondence to: Kate
Saenko <saenko@bu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

people, on different materials, and under different lighting
conditions; an image recognition system applied to images
scraped from the web must handle mixed-domain data (e.g.
paintings, sketches, clipart) without their domain labels.
In this paper, we consider Domain-Agnostic Learning
(DAL), a more difﬁcult but practical problem of knowledge transfer from one labeled source domain to multiple
unlabeled target domains. The main challenges of domainagnostic learning are that: (1) the target data has mixed
domains, which hampers the effectiveness of mainstream
feature alignment methods (Long et al., 2015; Sun & Saenko,
2016; Saito et al., 2018), and (2) class-irrelevant information
leads to negative transfer (Pan & Yang, 2010), especially
when the target domain is highly heterogeneous.
Mainstream UDA methods align the source domain to the
target domain by minimizing the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (Long et al., 2015; Tzeng et al., 2014), aligning highorder moments (Sun & Saenko, 2016; Zellinger et al., 2017),
or adversarial training (Ganin & Lempitsky, 2015; Tzeng
et al., 2017). However, these methods are designed for oneto-one domain alignment and do not account for multiple
latent domains in the target. Multi-source domain adaptation (Peng et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2018; Mansour et al.,
2009) considers adaptation between multiple sources and
a single target domain and assumes domain labels on the
source data. Continuous domain adaptation (Hoffman et al.,
2014) aims to transfer knowledge to a continuously changing domain (e.g. cars in different decades), but in their
scenario the target data are temporally related. Recently, domain generalization approaches (Li et al., 2018a; Carlucci
et al., 2018b; Li et al., 2018b) have been introduced to adapt
from multiple labeled source domains to an unseen target
domain. All of the above models make a strong assumption
that the target data are homogeneously sampled from the
same distribution, unlike the scenario we consider here.
We postulate that a solution to domain-agnostic learning
should not only learn invariance between source and target,
but should also actively disentangle the class-speciﬁc features from the remaining information in the image. Deep
neural networks are known to extract features in which multiple hidden factors are highly entangled (Bengio et al., 2013).
Recent work attempts to disentangle features in the latent
space of autoencoders with adversarial training (Cao et al.,

