Non-Monotonic Sequential Text Generation

Sean Welleck 1 Kianté Brantley 2 Hal Daumé III 2 3 Kyunghyun Cho 1 4 5
4

1

Abstract
Standard sequential generation methods assume a
pre-specified generation order, such as text generation methods which generate words from left to
right. In this work, we propose a framework for
training models of text generation that operate in
non-monotonic orders; the model directly learns
good orders, without any additional annotation.
Our framework operates by generating a word at
an arbitrary position, and then recursively generating words to its left and then words to its right,
yielding a binary tree. Learning is framed as imitation learning, including a coaching method which
moves from imitating an oracle to reinforcing the
policy’s own preferences. Experimental results
demonstrate that using the proposed method, it
is possible to learn policies which generate text
without pre-specifying a generation order, while
achieving competitive performance with conventional left-to-right generation.

1. Introduction
Most sequence-generation models, from n-grams (Bahl
et al., 1983) to neural language models (Bengio et al., 2003)
generate sequences in a purely left-to-right, monotonic order. This raises the question of whether alternative, nonmonotonic orders are worth considering (Ford et al., 2018),
especially given the success of “easy first” techniques in
natural language tagging (Tsuruoka & Tsujii, 2005), parsing
(Goldberg & Elhadad, 2010), and coreference (Stoyanov
& Eisner, 2012), which allow a model to effectively learn
their own ordering. In investigating this question, we are
solely interested in considering non-monotonic generation
that does not rely on external supervision, such as parse
trees (Eriguchi et al., 2017; Aharoni & Goldberg, 2017).
1
New York University 2 University of Maryland, College
Park 3 Microsoft Research 4 Facebook AI Research 5 CIFAR
Azrieli Global Scholar. Correspondence to: Sean Welleck
<wellecks@nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

are

3

2

2

8
?

how

6

6
4

1

<end>

5

3

<end>

7

you

8

5

<end>

9

<end>

9

7

<end>

Figure 1. A sequence, “how are you ?”, generated by the proposed
approach trained on utterances from a dialogue dataset. The model
first generated the word “are” and then recursively generated left
and right subtrees (“how” and “you ?”, respectively) of this word.
At each production step, the model may either generate a token,
or an hendi token, which indicates that this subtree is complete.
The full generation is performed in a level-order traversal, and the
output is read off from an in-order traversal. The numbers in green
squares denote generation order (level-order); those in rounded
blue squares denote location in the final sequence (in-order).

In this paper, we propose a framework for training sequential text generation models which learn a generation order
without having to specifying an order in advance (§2). An
example generation from our model is shown in Figure 1.
We frame the learning problem as an imitation learning
problem, in which we aim to learn a generation policy that
mimics the actions of an oracle generation policy (§3). Because the tree structure is unknown, the oracle policy cannot
know the exact correct actions to take; to remedy this we propose a method called annealed coaching which can yield a
policy with learned generation orders, by gradually moving
from imitating a maximum entropy oracle to reinforcing the
policy’s own preferences. Experimental results demonstrate
that using the proposed framework, it is possible to learn
policies which generate text without pre-specifying a generation order, achieving easy first-style behavior. The policies
achieve performance metrics that are competitive with or
superior to conventional left-to-right generation in language
modeling, word reordering, and machine translation (§5).1

2. Non-Monotonic Sequence Generation
Formally, we consider the problem of sequentially generating a sequence of discrete tokens Y = (w1 , . . . , wN ),
1
Code and trained models available at https://github.
com/wellecks/nonmonotonic_text.

