High-Fidelity Image Generation With Fewer Labels
Mario Lucic * 1 Michael Tschannen * 2 Marvin Ritter * 1 Xiaohua Zhai 1 Olivier Bachem 1 Sylvain Gelly 1

Abstract
Deep generative models are becoming a cornerstone of modern machine learning. Recent
work on conditional generative adversarial networks has shown that learning complex, highdimensional distributions over natural images is
within reach. While the latest models are able to
generate high-fidelity, diverse natural images at
high resolution, they rely on a vast quantity of
labeled data. In this work we demonstrate how
one can benefit from recent work on self- and
semi-supervised learning to outperform the state
of the art on both unsupervised ImageNet synthesis, as well as in the conditional setting. In particular, the proposed approach is able to match the
sample quality (as measured by FID) of the current state-of-the-art conditional model BigGAN
on ImageNet using only 10% of the labels and
outperform it using 20% of the labels.

1. Introduction
Deep generative models have received a great deal of
attention due to their power to learn complex highdimensional distributions, such as distributions over natural
images (van den Oord et al., 2016b; Dinh et al., 2017; Brock
et al., 2019), videos (Kalchbrenner et al., 2017), and audio (van den Oord et al., 2016a). Recent progress was driven
by scalable training of large-scale models (Brock et al.,
2019; Menick & Kalchbrenner, 2019), architectural modifications (Zhang et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2019a; Karras et al.,
2019), and normalization techniques (Miyato et al., 2018).
Currently, high-fidelity natural image generation hinges
upon having access to vast quantities of labeled data. The
labels induce rich side information into the training process
which effectively decomposes the extremely challenging image generation task into semantically meaningful sub-tasks.
*
Equal contribution 1 Google Research, Brain Team 2 ETH
Zurich. Correspondence to: Mario Lucic <lucic@google.com>,
Michael Tschannen <mi.tschannen@gmail.com>, Marvin Ritter
<marvinritter@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Median FID of the baselines and the proposed method.
The vertical line indicates the baseline (B IG GAN) which uses all
the labeled data. The proposed method (S 3 GAN) is able to match
the state-of-the-art while using only 10% of the labeled data and
outperform it with 20%.

However, this dependence on vast quantities of labeled data
is at odds with the fact that most data is unlabeled, and
labeling itself is often costly and error-prone. Despite the
recent progress on unsupervised image generation, the gap
between conditional and unsupervised models in terms of
sample quality is significant.
In this work, we take a significant step towards closing the
gap between conditional and unsupervised generation of
high-fidelity images using generative adversarial networks
(GANs). We leverage two simple yet powerful concepts:
(i) Self-supervised learning: A semantic feature extractor
for the training data can be learned via self-supervision,
and the resulting feature representation can then be
employed to guide the GAN training process.
(ii) Semi-supervised learning: Labels for the entire training set can be inferred from a small subset of labeled
training images and the inferred labels can be used as
conditional information for GAN training.
Our contributions In this work, we
1. propose and study various approaches to reduce or fully
omit ground-truth label information for natural image
generation tasks,
2. achieve a new state of the art (SOTA) in unsupervised
generation on IMAGENET, match the SOTA on 128⇥128
IMAGENET using only 10% of the labels, and set a new
SOTA (measured by FID) using 20% of the labels, and
3. open-source all the code used for the experiments at
github.com/google/compare gan.

