Discovering Latent Covariance Structures for Multiple Time Series

Anh Tong 1 Jaesik Choi 1

Abstract
Analyzing multivariate time series data is important to predict future events and changes of complex systems in finance, manufacturing, and administrative decisions. The expressiveness power
of Gaussian Process (GP) regression methods has
been significantly improved by compositional covariance structures. In this paper, we present a
new GP model which naturally handles multiple
time series by placing an Indian Buffet Process
(IBP) prior on the presence of shared kernels. Our
selective covariance structure decomposition allows exploiting shared parameters over a set of
multiple, selected time series. We also investigate
the well-definedness of the models when infinite
latent components are introduced. We present
a pragmatic search algorithm which explores a
larger structure space efficiently. Experiments
conducted on five real-world data sets demonstrate that our new model outperforms existing
methods in term of structure discoveries and predictive performances.

1. Introduction
Time series data analysis is important for numerous realworld applications: signal processing of audio and video
data; the study of financial variables such as stocks, currencies, and crude oil prices. When several data sources
are correlated, a model that exploits a group structure often
demonstrates competitive predictive performance (Yuan &
Lin, 2006). It is critical to learn how multiple time series
are correlated. Many practical applications i.e. visualizing, filtering or generating reports from multiple time series,
depend on their inherent encoded relations. However, it is
non-trivial to extract such important relations among them.
A recent work contributed a highly general framework called
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Ulsan
National Institute of Science and Technology, Ulsan, 44919, South
Korea. Correspondence to: Jaesik Choi <jaesik@unist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

the Automatic Bayesian Covariance Discovery (ABCD)
which solves regression tasks using Gaussian Process (GP)
models (Duvenaud et al., 2013; Lloyd et al., 2014; Ghahramani, 2015; Hwang et al., 2016; Malkomes et al., 2016;
Kim & Teh, 2018). Previously, selecting GP kernels was
heavily based on expert knowledge or trial-and-error. The
ABCD automatically extracts an appropriate compositional
covariance structure to fit data based on grammar rules;
then it generates human-friendly reports explaining data.
The compositional covariance structure makes the GP models more expressive and interpretable so that GP kernels
are explained in a form of natural language. There are
cognitive studies (Schulz et al., 2016; 2017) showing that
compositional functions are intuitively preferred by humans.
Exploiting these key properties of compositional kernel, we
develop a kernel composition framework for multiple time
series which produces explainable outputs with improved
predictive accuracy.
A solid foundation for multi-task GP regression methods has
been established in (Bonilla et al., 2007; Titsias & LázaroGredilla, 2011; Álvarez et al., 2012; Wilson et al., 2012;
Guarnizo et al., 2015). However, assigning compositional
kernel structures has not yet been investigated in the existing multi-task GP regression methods. Notably, the multioutput GP regression network (GPRN) (Wilson et al., 2012)
is highly general, and models data by the combinations of latent GP functions and weights which are also GPs. Applying
structure search is challenging due to the huge search space
to cover the whole network. In order to select appropriate
covariance structures for multiple correlated sequences, we
model time series by additive structures which are, instead
of staying fixed, searched over a set of kernels. We place Indian Buffet Process (IBP) (Griffiths & Ghahramani, 2005;
2011) prior over an indicator matrix that represents whether
the time series share one or many of these additive kernels.
Furthermore, we introduce a search algorithm which enables
us to explore a large kernel space.
Here, we present a new model to handle heterogeneous,
correlated multiple time series by stochastic GP kernels. The
combination of latent features and interpretable covariance
structures brings a new tool to understand multiple time
series better. Our model outputs human-readable reports
with high-level abstraction as well as the relation among
time series. We believe such results potentially facilitate

