Understanding and correcting pathologies in the training of learned optimizers

Luke Metz 1 Niru Maheswaranathan 1 Jeremy Nixon 1 C. Daniel Freeman 1 Jascha Sohl-Dickstein 1

Abstract
Deep learning has shown that learned functions can dramatically outperform hand-designed
functions on perceptual tasks. Analogously,
this suggests that learned optimizers may similarly outperform current hand-designed optimizers, especially for specific problems. However, learned optimizers are notoriously difficult to train and have yet to demonstrate wallclock speedups over hand-designed optimizers,
and thus are rarely used in practice. Typically, learned optimizers are trained by truncated
backpropagation through an unrolled optimization process resulting in gradients that are either
strongly biased (for short truncations) or have exploding norm (for long truncations). In this work
we propose a training scheme which overcomes
both of these difficulties, by dynamically weighting two unbiased gradient estimators for a variational loss on optimizer performance, allowing
us to train neural networks to perform optimization of a specific task faster than tuned first-order
methods. We demonstrate these results on problems where our learned optimizer trains convolutional networks faster in wall-clock time compared to tuned first-order methods and with an
improvement in test loss.

1. Introduction
Gradient based optimization is a cornerstone of modern
machine learning. A large body of research has been targeted at developing improved gradient based optimizers. In
practice, this typically involves analysis and development
of hand-designed optimization algorithms (Nesterov, 1983;
Duchi et al., 2011; Tieleman & Hinton, 2012; Kingma &
Ba, 2014). These algorithms generally work well on a wide
variety of tasks, and are tuned to specific problems via hy1
Google Brain.
<lmetz@google.com>.

Correspondence to:

Luke Metz

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

perparameter search. On the other hand, a complementary
approach is to learn the optimization algorithm (Bengio
et al., 1990; Schmidhuber, 1995; Hochreiter et al., 2001;
Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Wichrowska et al., 2017; Li &
Malik, 2017b; Lv et al., 2017; Bello et al., 2017). That is,
to learn a function that performs optimization, targeted at
particular problems of interest. In this way, the algorithm
may learn task specific structure, enabling dramatic performance improvements over more general optimizers.
However, training learned optimizers is notoriously difficult. Existing work in this vein can be classified into
two broad categories. On one hand are black-box methods such as evolutionary algorithms (Goldberg & Holland,
1988; Bengio et al., 1992), random search (Bergstra & Bengio, 2012), reinforcement learning (Bello et al., 2017; Li &
Malik, 2017a;b), or Bayesian optimization (Snoek et al.,
2012). However, these methods scale poorly with the number of optimizer parameters.
The other approach is to use first-order methods, by computing the gradient of some measure of optimizer effectiveness with respect to the optimizer parameters. Computing these gradients is costly as we need to iteratively apply
the learned update rule, and then backpropagate through
these applications, a technique commonly referred to as
“unrolled optimization” (Bengio, 2000; Maclaurin et al.,
2015). To address the problem of backpropagation through
many optimization steps (analogous to many timesteps
in recurrent neural networks), many works make use of
truncated backpropagation though time (TBPTT) to partition the long unrolled computational graph into separate
pieces (Werbos, 1990; Domke, 2012; Tallec & Ollivier,
2017). This not only yields computational savings, at the
cost of increased bias (Tallec & Ollivier, 2017), but also
limits exploding gradients which emerge from too many
iterated non-linear function applications (Pascanu et al.,
2013; Parmas et al., 2018). Existing methods have been
proposed to address the bias of TBPTT but come at the
cost of increased variance or computational complexity
(Williams & Zipser, 1989; Ollivier et al., 2015; Tallec &
Ollivier, 2017). Previous techniques for training RNNs via
TBPTT have thus far not been effective for training optimizers.
In this paper, we analytically and experimentally explore

