Trainable Decoding of Sets of Sequences for Neural Sequence Models

Ashwin Kalyan 1 Peter Anderson 1 Stefan Lee 1 Dhruv Batra 1 2

Abstract
Many sequence prediction tasks admit multiple
correct outputs and so, it is often useful to decode
a set of outputs that maximize some task-specific
set-level metric. However, retooling standard sequence prediction procedures tailored towards predicting single best outputs tends to produce sets
containing very similar sequences; failing to capture the variation in the output space. To address
this, we propose ∇BS, a trainable decoding procedure that outputs a set of sequences, highly valued according to the metric. Our method tightly
integrates the training and decoding phases and
further allows for the optimization of the taskspecific metric addressing the shortcomings of
standard sequence prediction. Further, we discuss the trade-offs of commonly used set-level
metrics and motivate a new set-level metric that
naturally evaluates the notion of “capturing the
variation in the output space”. Finally, we show
results on the image captioning task and find that
our model outperforms standard techniques and
natural ablations.

1. Introduction
Given an input x, sequence prediction problems require
outputting a single sequence y that it is highly valued
as measured by some task specific metric φ(y|x); for
example, BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) is a commonly
used metric for language generation tasks. However, many
real-world sequence prediction problems are inherently
multimodal i.e. for a given input, there can be multiple
outputs Y = {y1 , y2 , . . . yK } that are highly valued
according to the metric. For instance, the task of image
captioning (Chen et al., 2015) admits multiple correct
outputs because an image can be accurately described
in numerous ways by focusing on different objects and
1

School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Tech, Atlanta, GA,
USA 2 Facebook AI Research, Menlo Park, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Ashwin Kalyan <ashwinkv@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

interactions present in the image (Kalyan et al., 2018).
Being able to produce multiple relevant output sequences
is not only important from a modeling perspective, but is
also beneficial even in tasks in which a single best output is
ultimately required. For example, in the task of automated
response suggestion for email, Kannan et al. (2016) allow
the user to select from a set of generated responses with
different sentiments. Similarly, producing multiple outputs
and then reranking them leads to improvements in the task
of machine translation (Shen et al., 2004; Li et al., 2016).
In these settings where a set of sequences is expected, the
quality of the generated set is measured using set-level
metrics Φ(Y|x) that evaluate higher-order interactions
between elements of the decoded set. For example, oracle
accuracy is a set-level metric that corresponds to the
maximum sequence level score achieved by any of the
sequences in the generated set. It is commonly used as a
proxy for a downstream selection mechanism (Zhang et al.,
2006; Batra et al., 2012).
In
Decoding K outputs using Sequence Models.
practice, the standard single-sequence prediction pipeline
can be used to produce a set of K outputs. In this setup,
neural sequence models like RNNs, LSTMs (Hochreiter
& Schmidhuber, 1997) or Transformers (Vaswani et al.,
2017) trained to maximize the likelihood of individual
sequences are used in conjunction with approximate top-K
inference procedures like Beam Search (BS). As the goal
of this procedure is to find the single best output, BS
does not consider intra-set interactions in the decoded
output set. Naturally, this leads to the decoding of largely
redundant output sets containing near identical sequences
(Vijayakumar et al., 2018; Li et al., 2016; Jiang & de Rijke,
2018). While the specific issue of diversity has been
addressed by a variety of approaches that either modify the
training objective (Dai & Lin, 2017; Wang et al., 2017),
learn model ensembles (Lee et al., 2016; Wang et al.,
2016; He et al., 2018) or modify the inference procedure
(Vijayakumar et al., 2018; Li et al., 2016), these methods
are incapable of modeling higher-order interactions between
the sequences in the decoded set and by extension, cannot
optimize arbitrary set-level metrics.
Trainable Decoding of Sequence Sets.

In this work,

