Making Deep Q-learning Methods Robust to Time Discretization

Corentin Tallec 1 Léonard Blier 1 2 Yann Ollivier 2

Abstract
Despite remarkable successes, Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) is not robust to hyperparameterization, implementation details, or small environment changes (Henderson et al. 2017, Zhang
et al. 2018). Overcoming such sensitivity is key
to making DRL applicable to real world problems.
In this paper, we identify sensitivity to time discretization in near continuous-time environments
as a critical factor; this covers, e.g., changing the
number of frames per second, or the action frequency of the controller. Empirically, we find that
Q-learning-based approaches such as Deep Qlearning (Mnih et al., 2015) and Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (Lillicrap et al., 2015) collapse
with small time steps. Formally, we prove that
Q-learning does not exist in continuous time. We
detail a principled way to build an off-policy RL
algorithm that yields similar performances over
a wide range of time discretizations, and confirm
this robustness empirically.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) approaches have provided impressive results in a variety of
domains, achieving superhuman performance with no expert
knowledge in perfect information zero-sum games (Silver
et al., 2017), reaching top player level in video games (OpenAI 2018b, Mnih et al. 2015), or learning dexterous manipulation from scratch without demonstrations (OpenAI,
2018a). In spite of those successes, DRL approaches are
sensitive to a number of factors, including hyperparameterization, implementation details or small changes in the
environment parameters (Henderson et al. 2017, Zhang et al.
2018). This sensitivity, along with sample inefficiency,
largely prevents DRL from being applied in real world settings. Notably, high sensitivity to environment parameters
1

TAckling the Underspecified, Université Paris Sud 2 Facebook
Artificial Intelligence Research. Correspondence to: Corentin
Tallec <corentin.tallec@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

prevents transfer from imperfect simulators to real world
scenarios.
In this paper we focus on the sensitivity to time discretization of DRL approaches, such as what happens when an
agent receives 50 observations and is expected to take 50
actions per second instead of 10. In principle, decreasing
time discretization, or equivalently shortening reaction time,
should only improve agent performance. Robustness to
time discretization is especially relevant in near-continuous
environments, which includes most continuous control environments, robotics, and many video games.
Standard approaches based on estimation of state-action
value functions, such as Deep Q-learning (DQN, Mnih et al.
2015) and Deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG, Lillicrap et al. 2015) are not at all robust to changes in time
discretization. This is shown experimentally in Sec. 5. Intuitively, as the discretization timestep decreases, the effect of
individual actions on the total return decreases too: Q∗ (s, a)
is the value of playing action a then playing optimally, and if
a is only maintained for a very short time its advantage over
other actions will be accordingly small. (This occurs even
with a suitably adjusted decay factor γ.) If the discretization
timestep becomes infinitesimal, the effect of every individual action vanishes: there is no continuous-time Q-function
(Thm. 2), hence the poor performance of Q-learning with
small time steps. These statements can be fully formalized
in the framework of continuous-time reinforcement learning
(Sec. 3) (Doya, 2000; Baird, 1994).
We focus on continuous time because this leads to a clear
theoretical framework, but our observations make sense in
any setting in which the value results from taking a large
number of small individual actions. Our results suggest standard Q-learning will fail in such settings without a delicate
balance of hyperparameter scalings and reparameterizations.
We are looking for an algorithm that would be as invariant
as possible to changing the discretization timestep. Such an
algorithm should remain viable, in the sense that it should
still learn, when this timestep is small, and in particular admit a continuous-time limit when the discretization timestep
goes to 0. This leads to precise design choices in terms
of agent architecture, exploration policy, and learning rates
scalings. The resulting algorithm is shown to provide better
invariance to time discretization than vanilla DQN or DDPG,

