Connectivity-Optimized Representation Learning via Persistent Homology

Christoph D. Hofer 1 Roland Kwitt 1 Mandar Dixit 2 Marc Niethammer 3

Abstract
We study the problem of learning representations
with controllable connectivity properties. This is
beneficial in situations when the imposed structure can be leveraged upstream. In particular,
we control the connectivity of an autoencoder’s
latent space via a novel type of loss, operating
on information from persistent homology. Under mild conditions, this loss is differentiable and
we present a theoretical analysis of the properties
induced by the loss. We choose one-class learning as our upstream task and demonstrate that
the imposed structure enables informed parameter
selection for modeling the in-class distribution
via kernel density estimators. Evaluated on computer vision data, these one-class models exhibit
competitive performance and, in a low sample
size regime, outperform other methods by a large
margin. Notably, our results indicate that a single autoencoder, trained on auxiliary (unlabeled)
data, yields a mapping into latent space that can
be reused across datasets for one-class learning.

1. Introduction
Much of the success of neural networks in (supervised)
learning problems, e.g., image recognition (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012; He et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2017), object detection (Ren et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2016; Dai et al., 2016), or
natural language processing (Graves, 2013; Sutskever et al.,
2014) can be attributed to their ability to learn task-specific
representations, guided by a suitable loss.
In an unsupervised setting, the notion of a good/useful representation is less obvious. Reconstructing inputs from a
(compressed) representation is one important criterion, highlighting the relevance of autoencoders (Rumelhart et al.,
1986). Other criterions include robustness, sparsity, or informativeness for tasks such as clustering or classification.
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Salzburg, Austria 2 Microsoft 3 UNC Chapel Hill. Correspondence to: Christoph
D. Hofer <chr.dav.hofer@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

To meet these criteria, the reconstruction objective is typically supplemented by additional regularizers or cost functions that directly (/indirectly) impose structure on the
latent space. For instance, sparse (Makhzani & Frey,
2014), denoising (Vincent et al., 2010), or contractive (Rifai
et al., 2011) autoencoders aim at robustness of the learned
representations, either through a penalty on the encoder
parametrization, or through training with stochastically perturbed data. Additional cost functions guiding the mapping
into latent space are used in the context of clustering, where
several works (Xie et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2017; Zong et al.,
2018) have shown that it is beneficial to jointly train for reconstruction and a clustering objective. This is a prominent
example for representation learning guided towards an upstream task. Other incarnations of imposing structure can be
found in generative modeling, e.g., using variational autoencoders (Kingma & Welling, 2014). Although, in this case,
autoencoders arise as a model for approximate variational
inference in a latent variable model, the additional optimization objective effectively controls distributional aspects of
the latent representations via the Kullback-Leibler divergence. Adversarial autoencoders (Makhzani et al., 2016;
Tolstikhin et al., 2018) equally control the distribution of
the latent representations, but through adversarial training.
Overall, the success of these efforts clearly shows that imposing structure on the latent space can be beneficial. In
this work, we focus on one-class learning as the upstream
task. This is a challenging problem, as one needs to uncover
the underlying structure of a single class using only samples of that class. Autoencoders are a popular backbone
model for many approaches in this area (Zhou & Pfaffenroth, 2017; Zong et al., 2018; Sabokrou et al., 2018). By
controlling topological characteristics of the latent representations, connectivity in particular, we argue that kerneldensity estimators can be used as effective one-class models.
While earlier works (Pokorny et al., 2012a;b) show that informed guidelines for bandwidth selection can be derived
from studying the topology of a space, our focus is not on
passively analyzing topological properties, but rather on
actively controlling them. Besides work by (Chen et al.,
2019) on topologically-guided regularization of decision
boundaries (in a supervised setting), we are not aware of
any other work along the direction of backpropagating a
learning signal derived from topological analyses.

