A Better k-means++ Algorithm via Local Search

Silvio Lattanzi * 1 Christian Sohler * 1

Abstract
In this paper, we develop a new variant of kmeans++ seeding that in expectation achieves a
constant approximation guarantee. We obtain this
result by a simple combination of k-means++ sampling with a local search strategy. We evaluate
our algorithm empirically and show that it also
improves the quality of the solution in practice.

1. Introduction
As a central problem in unsupervised learning clustering
received a lot of attention in the past decades. The goal of
clustering is to partition a given set of objects into clusters
with the idea that objects in the same cluster should be similar to each other while objects in different clusters should
be less similar. One basic formulation of clustering is the
k-clustering problem with sum-of-squared-error objective
function. In this problem, the objects are represented as vectors in Rd and we think of the squared Euclidean distance
as a measure of dissimilarity. Formally, in this setting we
want to find a set C of k centers that minimizes
X
min kp − ck2 .
p∈P

c∈C

The clusters are defined by assigning each point to their
closest center. It is known that the optimal center of a given
cluster is the average or mean of the cluster, which is why
the problem is also often called k-means clustering.
k-means has been extensively studied in literature, and several heuristic have been proposed to solve the problem. Probably the most celebrated heuristic for k-means is the wellknown Lloyd’s algorithm (Lloyd, 2006). The algorithm is
also often called the k-means algorithm. The algorithm usually performs very well in practice, but it does not provide a
theoretical approximation guarantee.
*

Equal contribution 1 Google Research, Zurich, ZH, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Silvio Lattanzi <silviol@google.com>,
Christian Sohler <sohler@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

The k-means++ seeding algorithm (Arthur & Vassilvitskii,
2007) is a simple way to improve Lloyd’s algorithm. The
algorithm incrementally chooses a set of k centers by sampling the next center from a distribution where every point
has probability proportional to its squared distance to the
currently closest center. The solution computed by the seeding algorithm has expected cost of O(log k) times the cost
of the optimum solution. In practice, it is then often used
as a starting solution for Lloyd’s algorithm (which never
decreases the objective function).
k-means++ is easy to implement and is known to sometimes heavily outperform Lloyd’s algorithm with random
initialization in terms of the cost of the computed solution (Arthur & Vassilvitskii, 2007). However, from a
theoretical point of view, the approximation guarantee of
O(log k) is not fully satisfying as constant approximation
algorithms exist (Ahmadian et al., 2017). Unfortunately,
it is known that the analysis is tight (Arthur & Vassilvitskii, 2007) and there are also input sets such that k-means++
achieves an o(log k)-approximation with probability at most
exp(−k 1−o(1) ) (Brunsch & Röglin, 2011). At the same
time, it is known that k-means++ provides a constant bicriteria approximation with constant probability, if one allows to sample O(k) centers (Aggarwal et al., 2009). More
recently, a more precise tradeoff with respect to the number
of centers and the expected cost has been given by (Wei,
2016).
1.1. Our Contribution
We show that a simple combination of k-means++ seeding
with O(k log log k) rounds of local search gives a constant
approximation guarantee in expectation. Our strategy is as
follows. We start similarly as k-means++: We iteratively
sample centers from a distribution where every point has
probability proportional to its cost in the current clustering.
However, after we have sampled k centers we continue for
another O(k log log k) rounds. In order to maintain a set
of k centers, we exchange the newly sampled center with
the old center, such that the swap improves the cost by the
largest amount. If there is no improving swap, we discard
the sampled center. We prove that after O(k log log k) iterations our solution is in expectation a constant factor larger
than the optimal solution.

