Warm-starting Contextual Bandits:
Robustly Combining Supervised and Bandit Feedback

Chicheng Zhang 1 Alekh Agarwal 1 Hal Daumé III 1 2 John Langford 1 Sahand N Negahban 3

Abstract
We investigate the feasibility of learning from
a mix of both fully-labeled supervised data and
contextual bandit data. We specifically consider
settings in which the underlying learning signal
may be different between these two data sources.
Theoretically, we state and prove no-regret algorithms for learning that is robust to misaligned
cost distributions between the two sources. Empirically, we evaluate some of these algorithms
on a large selection of datasets, showing that our
approach is both feasible, and helpful in practice.

1. Introduction
In many real-world settings, a system must learn from multiple types of feedback; we consider the specific setting of
learning jointly from fully labeled “supervised” examples
and from online feedback “contextual bandit” (abbrev. CB)
examples. For instance, in a system that chooses personalized content to display on a webpage, an expert may be
able to provide an initial set of fully labeled examples to get
a system started. After deployment, however, the system
can only measure its performance (e.g., dwell time) on the
content it displays and not other (counterfactual) options.
In an automated translation system, professional translators
can provide initial translations to seed a system, but the system may be able to further improve its performance based
on, e.g., user satisfaction measures (Sokolov et al., 2015;
Nguyen et al., 2017).
In both these settings (content display and translation), we
desire an approach that is able to use the fully supervised expert data to “warm-start” a system, which later learns from
CB feedback (Auer et al., 2002b; Langford & Zhang, 2007;
Chu et al., 2011; Dudik et al., 2011; Agrawal & Goyal, 2013;
Agarwal et al., 2014). Doing so has the added advantage of
1

Microsoft Research 2 University of Maryland 3 Yale
University.
Correspondence to:
Chicheng Zhang
<Chicheng.Zhang@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

ensuring that such a system does not need to suffer too much
error in an initial exploration phase, which may be necessary in user-facing systems or in error- or safety-critical
settings (Tewari & Murphy, 2017). However, it is generally
unreasonable to assume that the expert supervision and the
CB feedback in such settings are perfectly aligned: the “best”
decision according to an expert may not necessarily match a
user’s choice. We need algorithms that operate well even in
the case of unknown degrees of misalignment; we introduce
a hypothesis class-specific notion of cost similarity used in
our analysis, but not our algorithms (§2). We also highlight
how simple strategies for combining the two sources without
robustness to misalignment can perform significantly worse
than learning from the ground truth source alone (§2.1).
Furthermore, different applications can differ in terms of
which source—supervised or CB—is considered “ground
truth”. For example, while the CB feedback from users is
the better signal about their preferences in content personalization (§ 3), the expert translations provide the ground
truth in the translation setting for which user satisfaction is
an imperfect proxy (§4). We develop algorithms for both
settings, which effectively “search” for a good balance between fitting the CB feedback and supervised labels. In
both cases, we provide regret bounds showing the value of
the complementary data sources, dependent on their cost
discrepancy and respective sample sizes. Importantly, our
theory shows that our methods perform close to an oracle
that knows the similarity of the two sources beforehand and
uses it to optimally weight their examples, with a small
additional penalty from searching for this weighting.
Empirically, we perform experiments based on fully-labeled
examples from which CB feedback is simulated. We focus on the setting when CB data is ground truth and the
supervised warm-start might have differing levels of bias.
In an experimental study over hundreds of datasets (§5) we
demonstrate the efficacy of our algorithm. As a snapshot,
Figure 1 shows the empirical cumulative distribution functions (CDF) of algorithms across a number of experimental
conditions, where each (x, y) value on the curve indicates
that there is a y fraction of experimental conditions where
the normalized error1 of a method is below x. The plot ag1

See §5 for a formal definition of normalized error.

