Phase transition in PCA with missing data:
Reduced signal-to-noise ratio, not sample size!

Niels Bruun Ipsen 1 Lars Kai Hansen 1

Abstract
How does missing data affect our ability to learn
signal structures? It has been shown that learning
signal structure in terms of principal components
is dependent on the ratio of sample size and dimensionality and that a critical number of observations is needed before learning starts (Biehl and
Mietzner, 1993). Here we generalize this analysis
to include missing data. Probabilistic principal
component analysis is regularly used for estimating signal structures in datasets with missing data.
Our analytic result suggests that the effect of missing data is to effectively reduce signal-to-noise
ratio rather than - as generally believed - to reduce sample size. The theory predicts a phase
transition in the learning curves and this is indeed
found both in simulation data and in real datasets.

1. Introduction
Principal component analysis (PCA) is a widely used tool
for exploratory data analysis originating with Karl Pearson
(1901) who described a method for obtaining the "best fit"
of a plane or a line to a system of points, by minimizing
the sum of squared orthogonal distances from the points
to the line/plane. PCA has been rediscovered many times,
for example by Hotelling (1933). In many research areas
variants of PCA are known under specific names, viz., the
Kosambi-Karhunen-Loève transform in signal processing,
the Hotelling transform in multivariate quality control and
Latent Semantic Analysis in natural language processing.
A well known and illustrative application of PCA is the
eigenfaces investigation by Turk and Pentland (1991).
The probabilistic version of PCA (PPCA) was proposed
independently by Roweis (1998) and Tipping and Bishop
1
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark, Denmark. Correspondence to: Niels Bruun Ipsen <nbip@dtu.dk>, Lars Kai Hansen
<lkai@dtu.dk>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

(1999) and this formulation allows for estimating principal
components in the presence of missing data via the EM
algorithm (Dempster et al., 1977). Numerous modern PCA
applications are reviewed in the recent volume (Sanguansat,
2012) and new variations on the classical scheme keep developing, see e.g., a recent ‘supervised’ principal component
analysis for microbiology (Piironen & Vehtari, 2017).
Explorative data analysis is particularly relevant in high
dimensional and correlated measurements such as images,
times series, frequency spectra or text and where the data
generating process yields relatively ‘clean’ measurements,
2
i.e., the variance of the signal of interest σsignal
domi2
nates the variance of the measurement noise σnoise
leaving a signal-to-noise variance ratio bigger than one: S =
2
2
σsignal
/σnoise
> 1. The structure of such a clean signal
can be learned from data by PCA: Let the measured signal
be a D−dimensional vector x and let the training sample
consist of N such measurements X = {x1 , x2 , ...xN }. Assuming that a non-informative mean has been subtracted
from the data we can infer the pattern of covariance in meab that
surement space a
‘explains’ variance, as
Pmaximally
T
b = arg max||a||=1 N
a
(a
·
x
)2 . Empirically, it is
n
n=1
b stafound that for sample sizes large enough, the estimate a
bilizes. In simulation studies where the ground truth direction a0 is known we can use the quantity R2 = (b
a> · a0 )2
to measure the alignment between estimated and ground
truth directions and there we find that as N → ∞ perfect
alignment R2 → 1 is obtained under weak conditions.
Principal component analysis has gained significant theoretical interest and a rather complete analytical understanding
has been obtained in the big data limit D, N → ∞ (Biehl &
Mietzner, 1993; Hoyle & Rattray, 2007). In fact in this limit
a remarkable universality is found. If we define the ratio of
samples to dimensionality α = N/D, the analytical result
(
0
αS 2 < 1,
2
hR iX = αS 2 −1
(1)
αS 2 ≥ 1
S+αS 2
resembles a ‘phase transition’ at the critical value of the effective sample size: αcritical = S −2 . The relation between
signal-to-noise ratio and effective sample size is highly nonlinear: If PCA is presented with too small an effective sample size, we essentially learn nothing hR2 iX = 0. Important

