Differentiable Linearized ADMM
Xingyu Xie * 1 Jianlong Wu * 1 Zhisheng Zhong 1 Guangcan Liu 2 Zhouchen Lin 1

Abstract
Recently, a number of learning-based optimization methods that combine data-driven architectures with the classical optimization algorithms
have been proposed and explored, showing superior empirical performance in solving various illposed inverse problems, but there is still a scarcity
of rigorous analysis about the convergence behaviors of learning-based optimization. In particular, most existing analyses are specific to unconstrained problems but cannot apply to the more
general cases where some variables of interest
are subject to certain constraints. In this paper,
we propose Differentiable Linearized ADMM (DLADMM) for solving the problems with linear
constraints. Specifically, D-LADMM is a K-layer
LADMM inspired deep neural network, which is
obtained by firstly introducing some learnable
weights in the classical Linearized ADMM algorithm and then generalizing the proximal operator
to some learnable activation function. Notably,
we rigorously prove that there exist a set of learnable parameters for D-LADMM to generate globally converged solutions, and we show that those
desired parameters can be attained by training
D-LADMM in a proper way. To the best of our
knowledge, we are the first to provide the convergence analysis for the learning-based optimization
method on constrained problems.

1. Introduction
Numerous problems solving at the core of statistics, learning
and vision areas rely on well-designed optimization algorithms, and especially so for the recently prevalent deep
*

Equal contribution.
Key Lab. of Machine Perception, School of EECS, Peking
University.
2
B-DAT and CICAEET, School of Automation, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology.
Correspondence to: Guangcan Liu <gcliu@nuist.edu.cn>,
Zhouchen Lin <zlin@pku.edu.cn>.
1

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

learning. Provided with some well-deigned optimization
strategies such as (Kingma & Ba, 2014; Zeiler, 2012; Li
et al., 2019), the researchers can focus on the design of taskoriented loss functions without being encumbered by the
solving methods. In addition, optimization can also help the
deep neural network (DNN) design. For example, Li et al.
(2018) show that optimization algorithms can in fact inspire
the architectures of DNN, and they connect the classical
optimization algorithms with some prevalent DNN architectures, e.g., ResNet (He et al., 2016) and DenseNet (Huang
et al., 2017). While it is apparent that optimization does
benefit learning, the converse of the statement is not so affirmative. That is, can the well-developed learning methods
also benefit the optimization? If so, in what sense?
To answer the highlighted question, some techniques have
been proposed to combine data-driven learning frameworks
with the traditional optimization algorithms, so called as
learning-based optimization (Gregor & LeCun, 2010; Liu
et al., 2016; Chen & Pock, 2017; Liu et al., 2018a; Peng
et al., 2018). Usually, the combination is achieved by introducing learnable parameters into the classical numerical
solvers at first, then performing discriminative learning on
collected training data so as to obtain some task-specific
(but possibly inconsistent) optimization schemes. Due to
the success of deep learning in a wide variety of application
fields, many researchers choose to consider DNN as the
learnable units for being combined with the optimization
procedure. For example, Sprechmann et al. (2015); Liu et al.
(2019); Chen et al. (2018) resemble a recurrent neural network (RNN) to solve the LASSO problem, and Zhou et al.
(2018) show the connection between sparse coding and long
short term memory (LSTM). The empirical results in these
studies illustrate that the computational efficiency of optimization is dramatically improved by the incorporation of
DNN. However, there is only few work that analyzes the
convergence properties of these algorithms in theory. Chen
et al. (2018) prove that there exist a sequence of parameters
for their learning-based optimization procedure to converge
linearly to the optimal solution of the LASSO problem. But
this result is specific to LASSO and may not apply to the
other problems.
While most existing methods and theories in learning-based
optimization are made specific to unconstrained problems,
many optimization problems arising from modern appli-

