Self-Similar Epochs: Value in Arrangement

Eliav Buchnik * 1 2 Edith Cohen * 2 1 Avinatan Hassidim 2 Yossi Matias 2

Abstract
Optimization of machine learning models is commonly performed through stochastic gradient updates on randomly ordered training examples.
This practice means that each fraction of an epoch
comprises an independent random sample of the
training data that may not preserve informative
structure present in the full data. We hypothesize that the training can be more effective with
self-similar arrangements that potentially allow
each epoch to provide benefits of multiple ones.
We study this for “matrix factorization” – the
common task of learning metric embeddings of
entities such as queries, videos, or words from
example pairwise associations. We construct arrangements that preserve the weighted Jaccard
similarities of rows and columns and experimentally observe training acceleration of 3%-37% on
synthetic and recommendation datasets. Principled arrangements of training examples emerge
as a novel and potentially powerful enhancement
to SGD that merits further exploration.

1. Introduction
Large scale machine learning models are commonly trained
on data of the form of associations between entities. The
goals are to obtain a model that generalizes (supports inference of associations not present in the input data) or obtain
metric representations of entities that capture their associations and can be used as in downstream tasks. Prevalent
examples are images and their labels (Deng et al., 2009),
similar image pairs (Schroff et al., 2015), text documents
and occurring terms (Berry et al., 1995; Dumais, 1995; Deerwester et al., 1990), users and watched or rated videos (Koren et al., 2009), pairs of co-occurring words (Mikolov et al.,
2013), and pairs of nodes in a graph that co-occur in short
random walks (Perozzi et al., 2014). This setting is fairly
*

Equal contribution 1 Tel Aviv University, Israel 2 Google
Research.
Correspondence to:
Eliav Buchnik <eliavbuh@gmail.com>, Edith Cohen <edith@cohenwang.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

broad: entities can be of one or multiple types and example
associations used for training can be raw or preprocessed
by reweighing raw frequencies (Salton & Buckley, 1988;
Deerwester et al., 1990; Mikolov et al., 2013; Pennington
et al., 2014) or adding negative examples when the raw data
includes only positive ones (Koren et al., 2009; Mikolov
et al., 2013).
The optimization objective of the model parameters has
the general form of a sum over example associations. In
modern applications the number of terms can be huge and
the de facto method is stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
(Robbins & Siegmund, 1971; Koren, 2008; Salakhutdinov
et al., 2007; Gemulla et al., 2011; Mikolov et al., 2013).
With SGD, gradient updates computed over stochasticallyselected minibatches of training examples are performed
over multiple epochs. The extensive practice and theory
of SGD optimization introduced numerous tunable hyperparameters and extensions aimed to improve quality and
efficiency. These include tuning the learning rate also perparameter (Duchi et al., 2011) and altering the distribution
of training examples by gradient magnitudes (Alain et al.,
2015; Zhao & Zhang, 2015), cluster structure (Fu & Zhang,
2017), and diversity criteria (Zhang et al., 2017). Another
popular method, Curriculum Learning (Bengio et al., 2009),
alters the distribution of examples (from easy to hard) in the
course of training. In this work we motivate and explore
the potential benefits of tuning the arrangement of training
examples – a novel optimization method that is combinable
with those mentioned above.
The baseline practice, which we refer to as independent arrangements, forms the training order by drawing examples
(or minibatches of examples) independently at random according to prescribed probabilities (that may correspond to
the frequency of the association in the training set). This i.i.d
practice is supported by optimization theory as it bounds
the variance of stochastic gradient updates. Independent
arrangements, however, have a potential drawback: Informative structure that is present in the full data is not recoverable from the independent random samples that comprise
fractional epochs. We demonstrate this point for a common “matrix factorization” task where the data is pairwise
associations such as users watches of videos for recommendation tasks (Koren et al., 2009) and term co-occurrences
for word embeddings (Mikolov et al., 2013). The rows and

