Fast Rates for a kNN Classifier Robust to Unknown Asymmetric Label Noise

Henry W. J. Reeve 1 Ata Kabán 1

Abstract
We consider classification in the presence of classdependent asymmetric label noise with unknown
noise probabilities. In this setting, identifiability
conditions are known, but additional assumptions
were shown to be required for finite sample rates,
and so far only the parametric rate has been obtained. Assuming these identifiability conditions,
together with a measure-smoothness condition on
the regression function and Tsybakov’s margin
condition, we show that the Robust kNN classifier
of Gao et al. attains, the mini-max optimal rates
of the noise-free setting, up to a log factor, even
when trained on data with unknown asymmetric
label noise. Hence, our results provide a solid
theoretical backing for this empirically successful
algorithm. By contrast the standard kNN is not
even consistent in the setting of asymmetric label
noise. A key idea in our analysis is a simple kNN
based method for estimating the maximum of a
function that requires far less assumptions than
existing mode estimators do, and which may be
of independent interest for noise proportion estimation and randomised optimisation problems.

1. Introduction
Label noise is a pervasive issue in real-world classification
tasks, as perfectly accurate labels are often very costly, and
sometimes impossible, to produce (Natarajan et al., 2018;
Cannings et al., 2018; Blanchard et al., 2016; Frénay &
Verleysen, 2014).
We consider asymmetric label noise with unknown classconditional noise probabilities – that is, the labels we observe have randomly flipped in some proportion that depends on the class. This type of noise is both realistic and
amenable to analysis (Blanchard et al., 2016; Natarajan
1

School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, UK. Correspondence to: Henry W. J. Reeve <henrywjreeve@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

et al., 2018). In this setting the classical kNN algorithm is
no longer consistent (see Section 5). Most existing theoretical work in this direction assumes that the noise probabilities are known in advance by the learner (Natarajan et al.,
2013), at least approximately (Natarajan et al., 2018). However, in many situations such knowledge is not available,
for instance in positive unlabelled (PU) learning (Elkan &
Noto, 2008) one may regard unlabelled data as a class of
negative examples contaminated with positives in an unknown proportion. Other examples include the problem of
nucleur particle classification discussed by (Blanchard et al.,
2016). That work also established identifiability conditions
sufficient for recovering unknown noise probabilities from
corrupted data.
Blanchard et al. (2010) proved that the identifiability conditions are insufficient to obtain finite sample convergence
rates. Consequently, Scott et al. (2013) introduced additional conditions external to the classification task with
which it is possible to obtain the parametric rate (of order n−1/2 where n is the sample size) (Blanchard et al.,
2016). To the best of our knowledge it is unknown if faster
rates are possible with unknown asymmetric label noise.
Here we answer this question in the affirmative by analysing
an existing Robust kNN classifier (Gao et al., 2018). Previously, Gao et al. (2018) conducted a comprehensive empirical study which demonstrates that the Robust kNN, introduced therein, typically outperforms a range of competitors for classification problems with asymmetric label
noise. Gao et al. (2018) also proved the consistency of their
method, but only under the restrictive assumption of prior
knowledge of the label noise probabilities.
We prove that the Robust kNN classifier attains fast rates for
classification problems in a flexible non-parametric setting
with unknown asymmetric label noise. More precisely, we
work under a measure-smoothness condition on the regression function, introduced in recent analyses of kNN in the
noise-free setting (Chaudhuri & Dasgupta, 2014), termed
the ‘modified Lipschitz’ condition in (Döring et al., 2017),
as well as Tsybakov’s margin condition. We assume in
addition conditions equivalent to those of label noise identifiability (Blanchard et al., 2016; Menon et al., 2015). We
show that the Robust kNN introduced by (Gao et al., 2018)
attains, up to a log factor, the known minimax optimal fast

