Cross-Domain 3D Equivariant Image Embeddings

Carlos Esteves * 1 Avneesh Sud 2 Zhengyi Luo 1 Kostas Daniilidis 1 Ameesh Makadia 2

Abstract
Spherical convolutional networks have been introduced recently as tools to learn powerful feature
representations of 3D shapes. Spherical CNNs
are equivariant to 3D rotations making them ideally suited to applications where 3D data may be
observed in arbitrary orientations. In this paper
we learn 2D image embeddings with a similar
equivariant structure: embedding the image of a
3D object should commute with rotations of the
object. We introduce a cross-domain embedding
from 2D images into a spherical CNN latent space.
This embedding encodes images with 3D shape
properties and is equivariant to 3D rotations of the
observed object. The model is supervised only
by target embeddings obtained from a spherical
CNN pretrained for 3D shape classification. We
show that learning a rich embedding for images
with appropriate geometric structure is sufficient
for tackling varied applications, such as relative
pose estimation and novel view synthesis, without
requiring additional task-specific supervision.

1. Introduction
The success of CNNs in computer vision has shown that
large training datasets and task-specific supervision are sufficient to learn rich feature representations for a variety of
tasks such as image classification and object detection (He
et al., 2016). However, there remain many challenges, such
as motion estimation and view synthesis, which require
complex geometric reasoning and for which labeled data is
not available at scale. For such problems there is a trend
towards developing models with geometry-aware latent representations that can learn the structure of the world without
requiring full geometric supervision (e.g. Kulkarni et al.
(2015); Rhodin et al. (2018); Yang et al. (2015); Yan et al.
(2016); Mahjourian et al. (2018); Eslami et al. (2018)).
*

Work done during an internship at Google. 1 GRASP Laboratory, University of Pennsylvania 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Carlos Esteves <machc@seas.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

A desirable property for an image embedding is robustness
to 3D geometric transformations of the scene. 3D rotations,
in particular, are a nuisance to computer vision algorithms
because even small 3D rotations of objects in the world
can induce large transformations in image space. In recent
years there has been much attention given to the study of
equivariant neural networks (e.g. Cohen & Welling (2016);
Worrall et al. (2017a)), as equivariant maps provide a natural
formulation to address group transformations on images.
Despite these advances, designing a 3D rotation equivariant
map of 2D images is an open challenge. This is because
the rotation of a 3D object does not act directly on the
pixels of the resulting image due to the intervening camera
projection. Thus, an equivariant map cannot be constructed
by design and instead an (approximate) equivariant map
must be learned. This is the central task of the paper: how
can we learn an embedding for images of 3D objects that is
equivariant to 3D rotations of the objects?
Our proposal is inspired by recent works on 3D rotation
equivariant CNNs for 3D shape representations (Cohen
et al., 2018; Esteves et al., 2018). These works show that
spherical convolutional networks can achieve state of the
art performance on 3D shape classification and pose estimation tasks, and these networks’ equivariance properties
mean their performance does not suffer when considering
3D shapes in arbitrary orientations.
In this work we propose to learn an equivariant embedding
of an image by mapping it into the equivariant feature space
of a spherical CNN trained on datasets of 3D shapes. Our
approach is unique in that we are directly supervising the
desired target embeddings with the pretrained 3D shape
features and we do not consider any other task-specific
training losses. By bootstrapping with features of 3D shapes,
our model (1) encodes images with the shape properties of
the observed object and (2) has an an underlying spherical
structure that is equivariant to 3D rotations of the object.
The cross-domain embeddings can be used for different applications, either directly or indirectly, without requiring
any additional task-specific supervised training. We illustrate this point by showing results on two very different
challenges:

