SGD: General Analysis and Improved Rates

Robert M. Gower 1 Nicolas Loizou 2 Xun Qian 3 Alibek Sailanbayev 3 Egor Shulgin 4 Peter Richtárik 3 2 4
where each fi : Rd → R is smooth (but not necessarily
convex). Further, we assume that f has a unique1 global
minimizer x∗ and is µ–strongly quasi-convex (Karimi et al.,
2016; Necoara et al., 2018):

Abstract
We propose a general yet simple theorem describing the convergence of SGD under the arbitrary
sampling paradigm. Our theorem describes the
convergence of an infinite array of variants of
SGD, each of which is associated with a specific
probability law governing the data selection rule
used to form minibatches. This is the first time
such an analysis is performed, and most of our
variants of SGD were never explicitly considered
in the literature before. Our analysis relies on the
recently introduced notion of expected smoothness and does not rely on a uniform bound on the
variance of the stochastic gradients. By specializing our theorem to different mini-batching strategies, such as sampling with replacement and independent sampling, we derive exact expressions for
the stepsize as a function of the mini-batch size.
With this we can also determine the mini-batch
size that optimizes the total complexity, and show
explicitly that as the variance of the stochastic
gradient evaluated at the minimum grows, so does
the optimal mini-batch size. For zero variance,
the optimal mini-batch size is one. Moreover, we
prove insightful stepsize-switching rules which
describe when one should switch from a constant
to a decreasing stepsize regime.

2

f (x∗ ) ≥ f (x) + h∇f (x), x∗ − xi + µ2 kx∗ − xk
for all x ∈ Rd .
1.1. Background and contributions

Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Robbins & Monro,
1951; Nemirovski & Yudin, 1978; 1983; Shalev-Shwartz
et al., 2007; Nemirovski et al., 2009; Hardt et al., 2016),
has become the workhorse for training supervised machine
learning problems which have the generic form (1).
Linear convergence of SGD. Moulines & Bach (2011) provided a non-asymptotic analyses of SGD showing linear convergence for strongly convex f up to a certain noise level.
Needell et al. (2016) improved upon these results by removing the quadratic dependency on the condition number in
the iteration complexity results, and considered importance
sampling. The analysis of Needell et al. (2016) was later
extended to a mini-batch variant where the mini-batches are
formed by partitioning the data (Needell & Ward, 2017).
These works are the main starting point for ours.

1. Introduction
We consider the optimization problem


Pn
x∗ = arg minx∈Rd f (x) = n1 i=1 fi (x) ,

(2)

(1)

1
Télécom ParisTech, LTCI, Université Paris-Saclay, France
University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom 3 King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 4 Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Russian
Federation. Correspondence to: Robert M. Gower <gowerrobert@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Contributions: We further tighten and generalize these results to virtually all forms of sampling. We introduce an
expected smoothness assumption (Assumption 2.1), first introduced in (Gower et al., 2018) in the context of a certain
class of variance-reduced methods. This assumption is a
joint property of f and the sampling scheme D utilized by
an SGD method, and allows us prove a generic complexity result (Theorem 3.1) that holds for arbitrary sampling
schemes D. Our work is the first time SGD is analysed
under this assumption. We obtain linear convergence rates
without strong convexity; in particular, assuming strong
quasi-convexity (this class includes some non-convex functions as well). Furthermore, we do not require the functions
fi to be convex.
Gradient noise assumptions. Shamir & Zhang (2013) extended the analysis of SGD to convex non-smooth optimiza1
This assumption can be relaxed; but for simplicity of exposition we enforce it.

