Lipschitz Generative Adversarial Nets

Zhiming Zhou 1 Jiadong Liang 2 Yuxuan Song 1 Lantao Yu 3 Hongwei Wang 3 Weinan Zhang 1 Yong Yu 1
Zhihua Zhang 2

Abstract

2018; Yadav et al., 2017), are still not fully understood.

In this paper we show that generative adversarial
networks (GANs) without restriction on the discriminative function space commonly suffer from
the problem that the gradient produced by the
discriminator is uninformative to guide the generator. By contrast, Wasserstein GAN (WGAN),
where the discriminative function is restricted to
1-Lipschitz, does not suffer from such a gradient uninformativeness problem. We further show
in the paper that the model with a compact dual
form of Wasserstein distance, where the Lipschitz
condition is relaxed, may also theoretically suffer
from this issue. This implies the importance of
Lipschitz condition and motivates us to study the
general formulation of GANs with Lipschitz constraint, which leads to a new family of GANs that
we call Lipschitz GANs (LGANs). We show that
LGANs guarantee the existence and uniqueness
of the optimal discriminative function as well as
the existence of a unique Nash equilibrium. We
prove that LGANs are generally capable of eliminating the gradient uninformativeness problem.
According to our empirical analysis, LGANs are
more stable and generate consistently higher quality samples compared with WGAN.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.,
2014), as one of the most successful generative models, have
shown promising results in various challenging tasks. GANs
are popular and widely used, but they are notoriously hard to
train (Goodfellow, 2016). The underlying obstacles, though
have been heavily studied (Arjovsky & Bottou, 2017; Lucic
et al., 2017; Heusel et al., 2017; Mescheder et al., 2017;
1

2

3

Shanghai Jiao Tong University Peking University Stanford
University.
Correspondence to: Zhiming Zhou <heyohai@apex.sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

The objective of GAN is usually defined as a distance metric
between the real distribution Pr and the generative distribution Pg , which implies that Pr = Pg is the unique global
optimum. The nonconvergence of traditional GANs has
been considered as a result of ill-behaving distance metric
(Arjovsky & Bottou, 2017), i.e., the distance between Pr
and Pg keeps constant when their supports are disjoint. Arjovsky et al. (2017) accordingly suggested using the Wasserstein distance, which can properly measure the distance
between two distributions no matter whether their supports
are disjoint.
In this paper, we conduct a further study on the convergence
of GANs from the perspective of the informativeness of the
gradient of the optimal discriminative function f ∗. We show
that for GANs that have no restriction on the discriminative
function space, e.g., the vanilla GAN and its most variants,
f ∗(x) is only related to the densities of the local point x and
does not reflect any information about other points in the distributions. We demonstrate that under these circumstances,
the gradient of the optimal discriminative function with respect to its input, on which the generator updates generated
samples, usually tells nothing about the real distribution. We
refer to this phenomenon as the gradient uninformativeness,
which is substantially different from the gradient vanishing
and is a fundamental cause of nonconvergence of GANs.
According to the analysis of Gulrajani et al. (2017), Wasserstein GAN can avoid the gradient uninformativeness problem. Meanwhile, we show in the paper that the Lipschitz
constraint in the Kantorovich-Rubinstein dual of the Wasserstein distance can be relaxed, leading to a new equivalent
dual; and with the new dual form, the gradient may also not
reflect any information about how to refine Pg towards Pr .
It suggests that Lipschitz condition would be a vital element
for resolving the gradient uninformativeness problem.
Motivated by the above analysis, we investigate the general
formulation of GANs with Lipschitz constraint. We show
that under a mild condition, penalizing Lipschitz constant
guarantees the existence and uniqueness of the optimal discriminative function as well as the existence of the unique
Nash equilibrium between f ∗ and Pg where Pr = Pg . It
leads to a new family of GANs that we call Lipschitz GANs

