On the Feasibility of Learning, Rather than Assuming,
Human Biases for Reward Inference
Rohin Shah 1 Noah Gundotra 1 Pieter Abbeel 1 Anca D. Dragan 1

Abstract
Our goal is for agents to optimize the right reward function, despite how difficult it is for us
to specify what that is. Inverse Reinforcement
Learning (IRL) enables us to infer reward functions from demonstrations, but it usually assumes
that the expert is noisily optimal. Real people,
on the other hand, often have systematic biases:
risk-aversion, myopia, etc. One option is to try
to characterize these biases and account for them
explicitly during learning. But in the era of deep
learning, a natural suggestion researchers make is
to avoid mathematical models of human behavior
that are fraught with specific assumptions, and
instead use a purely data-driven approach. We
decided to put this to the test – rather than relying on assumptions about which specific bias
the demonstrator has when planning, we instead
learn the demonstrator’s planning algorithm that
they use to generate demonstrations, as a differentiable planner. Our exploration yielded mixed
findings: on the one hand, learning the planner
can lead to better reward inference than relying
on the wrong assumption; on the other hand, this
benefit is dwarfed by the loss we incur by going
from an exact to a differentiable planner. This suggest that at least for the foreseeable future, agents
need a middle ground between the flexibility of
data-driven methods and the useful bias of known
human biases. Code is available at https:
//tinyurl.com/learningbiases.

1. Introduction
Our ultimate goal is to enable the design of agents that optimize for the right reward function. Unfortunately, designing
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Rohin Shah <rohinmshah@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

w
r

p ( a|s) µ e bQ(s,a;r)

w

!

r

(a) Assuming a specific suboptimality

!

(b) Learning the suboptimality

Figure 1. While we could correct for systematic biases by having
our AI system reason about explicit models of human reasoning,
using the wrong assumption can lead to agents that do not correctly
understand what people want. A natural alternative is to learn
human biases from data. Our goal in this work is to investigate this
alternative and gain insight into what additional assumptions might
make it feasible and what algorithmic improvements it demands.

reward functions is challenging (Amodei et al., 2017) and
can have unintended side-effects (Hadfield-Menell et al.,
2017; Krakovna, 2018). Inverse Reinforcement Learning
(IRL) (Russell, 1998; Ng et al., 2000; Abbeel & Ng, 2004)
aims to bypass the need for reward design by learning the
reward from observed demonstrations of good behavior.
Existing IRL algorithms typically make the assumption that
the demonstrator is either optimal, or Boltzmann rational,
i.e. taking better actions with higher probability (Ziebart
et al., 2008; Finn et al., 2016). However, there is a rich
literature showing that humans are not optimal, and are
biased in systematic ways. Consider a grad student who
starts writing a paper a month in advance, expecting it to
take two weeks, but then misses the deadline. Should we
infer that they prefer to lose sleep to pursue a deadline that
they then miss? Of course not. This is a classic case of
the planning fallacy (Buehler et al., 1994): the grad student
was wrong in their prediction of how long it would take
to complete the paper. An assumption of noisy rationality
cannot allow us to correct for this bias: how do we tell
whether the grad student underestimated the time required

