On Sparse Linear Regression in the Local Differential Privacy Model

Di Wang 1 Jinhui Xu 1

Abstract
In this paper, we study the sparse linear regression problem under the Local Differential Privacy
(LDP) model. We first show that polynomial dependency on the dimensionality 𝑝 of the space
is unavoidable for the estimation error in both
non-interactive and sequential interactive local
models, if the privacy of the whole dataset needs
to be preserved. Similar limitations also exist
for other types of error measurements and in the
relaxed local models. This indicates that differential privacy in high dimensional space is unlikely
achievable for the problem. With the understanding of this limitation, we then present two algorithmic results. The first one is a sequential interactive LDP algorithm for the low dimensional
sparse case, called Locally Differentially Private
Iterative Hard Thresholding (LDP-IHT), which
achieves a near optimal upper bound. This algorithm is actually rather general and can be used
to solve quite a few other problems, such as (Local) DP-ERM with sparsity constraints and sparse
regression with non-linear measurements. The
second one is for the restricted (high dimensional)
case where only the privacy of the responses (labels) needs to be preserved. For this case, we
show that the optimal rate of the error estimation
can be made logarithmically depending on 𝑝 (i.e.,
log 𝑝) in the local model, where an upper bound is
obtained by a label-privacy version of LDP-IHT.
Experiments on real world and synthetic datasets
confirm our theoretical analysis.

1. Introduction
Linear regression is a fundamental and classical tool for
data analysis, and finds numerous applications in social
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, State
University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, USA. Emails:
{dwang45,jinhui}@buffalo.edu. Correspondence to: Di Wang
<dwang45@buffalo.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36𝑡ℎ International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

sciences (Marascuilo & Serlin, 1988), genomics research
(Bŭžková, 2013) and signal recovery (Bühlmann & Van
De Geer, 2011). One frequently encountered challenge for
such a technique is how to deal with the high dimensionality
of the dataset, such as those in genomics, educational and
psychological research. A commonly adopted strategy for
dealing with such an issue is to assume that the unknown
regression vector is sparse.
Another often encountered challenge for linear regression
is how to handle sensitive data, such as those in social
science. As a commonly-accepted approach for preserving
privacy, differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2006) provides
provable protection against identification and is resilient to
arbitrary auxiliary information that might be available to
attackers. Methods to guarantee differential privacy have
been widely studied, and recently adopted in industry (Near,
2018; Erlingsson et al., 2014; Tang et al., 2017).
Two main user models have emerged for differential privacy: the central model and the local one. In the central
model, data are managed by a trusted central entity which is
responsible for collecting them and for deciding which differentially private data analysis to perform and to release. A
classical application of this model is the one of census data.
In the local model instead, each individual manages his/her
proper data and discloses them to a server through some differentially private mechanisms. The server collects the (now
private) data of each individual and combines them into a
resulting data analysis. A classical example of this model is
the one aiming at collecting statistics from user devices like
in the case of Google’s Chrome browser (Erlingsson et al.,
2014), and Apple’s iOS-10 (Near, 2018; Tang et al., 2017).
Despite being used in industry, the local model has been
much less studied than the central one. Part of the reason for
this is that there are intrinsic limitations in what one can do
in the local model. As a consequence, many basic questions,
that are well studied in the central model, have not been
completely understood in the local model, yet.
To advance our understanding on the local model, we
study, in this paper, the locally differentially private version of the sparse linear regression problem, where each
user 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] holds a data record (𝑥𝑖 , 𝑦𝑖 ) ∈ ℝ𝑝 × ℝ. There
are two commonly used ways for measuring the performance of this problem, which correspond to two differ-

