Optimality Implies Kernel Sum Classifiers are Statistically Efficient
Raphael A. Meyer 1 Jean Honorio 1

Abstract
We propose a novel combination of optimization
tools with learning theory bounds in order to analyze the sample complexity of optimal kernel
sum classifiers. This contrasts the typical learning
theoretic results which hold for all (potentially
suboptimal) classifiers. Our work also justifies
assumptions made in prior work on multiple kernel learning. As a byproduct of our analysis, we
also provide a new form of Rademacher complexity for hypothesis classes containing only optimal
classifiers.

1. Introduction
Classification is a fundamental task in machine learning
(Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David, 2014; Daumé III, 2012;
Friedman et al., 2001). Kernel methods allow classifiers to
learn powerful nonlinear relationships (Shawe-Taylor et al.,
2004; Balcan et al., 2006). Optimization tools allow these
methods to learn efficiently (Soentpiet et al., 1999). Under
mild assumptions, kernels guarantee that learned models
generalize well (Bartlett & Mendelson, 2002). However, the
overall quality of these models still depends heavily on the
choice of kernel. To compensate for this, prior work considers learning how to linearly combine a set of arbitrary kernels into a good data-dependent kernel (Sonnenburg et al.,
2006; Gönen & Alpaydın, 2011; Bach et al., 2004).
It is known that if the learned linear combination of kernels is well behaved, then the kernel classifier generalizes
well (Cortes et al., 2010; 2009a; Argyriou et al., 2005). We
extend this body of work by proving that if our classifier
is optimal, then the linear combination of kernels is well
behaved. This optimality assumption is well justified because many common machine learning problems are solved
using optimization algorithms. For instance, in this paper
1

Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, Indiana, USA. Correspondence to:
Raphael
A. Meyer <meyer219@purdue.edu>, Jean Honorio <jhonorio@purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

we consider binary classification with Kernel Support Vector Machines (SVM), which are computed by solving a
quadratic programming problem. Specifically, we bound
the sample complexity of kernel classifiers in two regimes.
In the first, we are forced to classify using the sum of a set of
kernels. In the second, we choose which kernels we include
in our summation.
There exists substantial prior work considering learning
kernels. From the computational perspective, several theoretically sound and experimentally efficient algorithms are
known (Cortes et al., 2009b;a; Kivinen et al., 2004; Sinha
& Duchi, 2016; Duvenaud et al., 2013). Much of this work
relies on optimization tools such as quadratic programs
(Chen et al., 2009), sometimes specifically considering Kernel SVM (Srebro & Ben-David, 2006). This motivates our
focus on optimal classifiers for multiple kernel learning.
The literature on sample complexity for these problems always assumes that the learned combination of kernels is
well behaved (Cortes et al., 2009c; 2012; 2013; Srebro &
Ben-David, 2006; Sinha & Duchi, 2016). That is, the prior
work assumes that the weighted sum of kernel matrices K̃Σ
is paired with a vector αΣ such that α|Σ K̃Σ αΣ ≤ C 2 for
some constant C. It is unclear how C depends on the structure or number of base kernels. Our work provides bounds
that explains this relationship for optimal classifiers. Additionally, Rademacher complexity is typically used to control
the generalization error over all possible (not necessarily
optimal) estimators (Bartlett & Mendelson, 2002; Koltchinskii et al., 2002; Kakade et al., 2009). We differ from this
approach by bounding the Rademacher complexity for only
optimal estimators. We are not aware of any prior work that
explores such bounds.
Contributions. Our results start with a core technical
theorem, which is then applied to two novel hypothesis
classes.
• We first show that the optimal solution to the Kernel SVM problem using the sum of m kernels is well
behaved. That is, we consider the given kernel matrices K̃1 , . . . , K̃m and the corresponding Dual Kernel SVM solution vectors α1 , . . . , αm , as well as the
sum of these kernel matrices K̃Σ and its Dual Kernel SVM solution vector αΣ . Using Karush-KuhnTucker (KKT) optimality conditions, we prove that

