Distributed Learning over Unreliable Networks

Chen Yu 1 Hanlin Tang 1 Cedric Renggli 2 Simon Kassing 2 Ankit Singla 2 Dan Alistarh 3 Ce Zhang 2 Ji Liu 4 1

Abstract
Most of today’s distributed machine learning systems assume reliable networks: whenever two
machines exchange information (e.g., gradients
or models), the network should guarantee the delivery of the message. At the same time, recent
work exhibits the impressive tolerance of machine
learning algorithms to errors or noise arising from
relaxed communication or synchronization. In
this paper, we connect these two trends, and consider the following question: Can we design machine learning systems that are tolerant to network unreliability during training? With this motivation, we focus on a theoretical problem of independent interest—given a standard distributed
parameter server architecture, if every communication between the worker and the server has
a non-zero probability p of being dropped, does
there exist an algorithm that still converges, and
at what speed? The technical contribution of this
paper is a novel theoretical analysis proving that
distributed learning over unreliable network can
achieve comparable convergence rate to centralized or distributed learning over reliable networks.
Further, we prove that the influence of the packet
drop rate diminishes with the growth of the number of parameter servers. We map this theoretical
result onto a real-world scenario, training deep
neural networks over an unreliable network layer,
and conduct network simulation to validate the
system improvement by allowing the networks to
be unreliable.

1. Introduction
Distributed learning has attracted significant interest from
both academia and industry. Over the last decade, re1
Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester,
USA 2 Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich 3 Institute of
Science and Technology Austria 4 Seattle AI Lab, FeDA Lab, Kwai
Inc. Correspondence to: Chen Yu <cyu28@ur.rochester.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Figure 1: An illustration of the communication pattern of
distributed learning with three parameter servers and four
workers — each server serves a partition of the model, and
each worker holds a replica of the whole model. In this
paper, we focus on the case in which every communication
between the worker and the server has a non-zero probability
p of being dropped.

searchers have come with up a range of different designs
of more efficient learning systems. An important subset of
this work focuses on understanding the impact of different
system relaxations to the convergence and performance of
distributed stochastic gradient descent, such as the compression of communication, e.g (Seide & Agarwal, 2016),
decentralized communication (Lian et al., 2017a; Sirb &
Ye, 2016; Lan et al., 2017; Tang et al., 2018a; Stich et al.,
2018), and asynchronous communication (Lian et al., 2017b;
Zhang et al., 2013; Lian et al., 2015). Most of these works
are motivated by real-world system bottlenecks, abstracted
as general problems for the purposes of analysis.
In this paper, we focus on the centralized SGD algorithm
in the distributed machine learning scenario implemented
using standard AllReduce operator or parameter server architecture and we are motivated by a new type of system
relaxation—the reliability of the communication channel.
We abstract this problem as a theoretical one, conduct a
novel convergence analysis for this scenario, and then validate our results in a practical setting.
The Centralized SGD algorithm works as Figure 1 shows.
Given n machines/workers, each maintaining its own local model, each machine alternates local SGD steps with
global communication steps, in which machines exchange
their local models. In this paper, we covers two standard

