Regret Circuits: Composability of Regret Minimizers

Gabriele Farina 1 Christian Kroer 2 Tuomas Sandholm 1 3 4 5

Abstract
Regret minimization is a powerful tool for solving large-scale problems; it was recently used
in breakthrough results for large-scale extensiveform game solving. This was achieved by composing simplex regret minimizers into an overall regret-minimization framework for extensiveform game strategy spaces. In this paper we study
the general composability of regret minimizers.
We derive a calculus for constructing regret minimizers for composite convex sets that are obtained
from convexity-preserving operations on simpler
convex sets. We show that local regret minimizers
for the simpler sets can be combined with additional regret minimizers into an aggregate regret
minimizer for the composite set. As one application, we show that the CFR framework can be
constructed easily from our framework. We also
show ways to include curtailing (constraining)
operations into our framework. For one, they enable the construction of CFR generalization for
extensive-form games with general convex strategy constraints that can cut across decision points.

1. Introduction
Counterfactual regret minimization (CFR) (Zinkevich et al.,
2007), and its newer variants (Lanctot et al., 2009; Brown &
Sandholm, 2015a; Tammelin et al., 2015; Brown et al., 2017;
Brown & Sandholm, 2017a; 2019), have been a central component in several recent milestones in solving imperfectinformation extensive-form games (EFGs). Bowling et al.
(2015) used CFR+ to near-optimally solve heads-up limit
Texas hold’em. Brown & Sandholm (2017c) used CFR
1

Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA 15213 2 IEOR Department, Columbia University, New York NY 10027 3 Strategic Machine, Inc. 4 Strategy
Robot, Inc. 5 Optimized Markets, Inc.. Correspondence
to: Gabriele Farina <gfarina@cs.cmu.edu>, Christian Kroer
<christian.kroer@columbia.edu>, Tuomas Sandholm <sandholm@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

variants, along with other scalability techniques such as
real-time endgame solving (Ganzfried & Sandholm, 2015;
Burch et al., 2014; Moravcik et al., 2016; Brown & Sandholm, 2017b) and automated action abstraction (Brown &
Sandholm, 2014), to create Libratus, an AI that beat top human specialist professionals at the larger game of heads-up
no-limit Texas hold’em. Moravčı́k et al. (2017) also used
CFR variants and endgame solving to beat professional human players at that game.
CFR and its newer variants are usually presented as algorithms for finding an approximate Nash equilibrium in
zero-sum EFGs. However, an alternative view is that it is a
framework for constructing regret minimizers for the types
of action spaces encountered in EFGs, as well as singleagent sequential decision making problems with similarlystructured actions spaces. Viewed from a convex optimization perspective, the class of convex sets to which they apply
are sometimes referred to as treeplexes (Hoda et al., 2010;
Kroer et al., 2015; 2018). In this view, those algorithms
specify how a set of regret minimization algorithms for simplexes and linear loss functions can be composed to form
a regret minimizer for a treeplex. Farina et al. (2019) take
this view further, describing how regret-minimization algorithms can be composed to form regret minimizers for
a generalization of treeplexes that allows convex sets and
convex losses. This decomposition into individual optimization problems can be beneficial because it enables the use
of 1) different algorithms for different parts of the search
space, 2) specialized techniques for different parts of the
problem, such as warm starting (Brown & Sandholm, 2014;
2015b; 2016) and pruning (Lanctot et al., 2009; Brown &
Sandholm, 2015a; Brown et al., 2017; Brown & Sandholm,
2017a), and 3) approximation of some parts of the space.
In this paper we introduce a general methodology for composing regret minimizers. We derive a set of rules for how
regret minimizers can be constructed for composite convex
sets via a calculus of regret minimization: given regret minimizers for convex sets X , Y we show how to compose these
regret minimizers for various convexity-preserving operations performed on the sets (e.g., intersection, convex hull,
Cartesian product), in order to arrive at a regret minimizer
for the resulting composite set.
Our approach treats the regret minimizers for individual

