Feature-Critic Networks for Heterogeneous Domain Generalisation

Yiying Li * 1 2 Yongxin Yang * 2 Wei Zhou 1 Timothy M. Hospedales 2 3

Abstract
The well known domain shift issue causes model
performance to degrade when deployed to a new
target domain with different statistics to training.
Domain adaptation techniques alleviate this, but
need some instances from the target domain to
drive adaptation. Domain generalisation is the
recently topical problem of learning a model that
generalises to unseen domains out of the box,
and various approaches aim to train a domaininvariant feature extractor, typically by adding
some manually designed losses. In this work, we
propose a learning to learn approach, where the
auxiliary loss that helps generalisation is itself
learned. Beyond conventional domain generalisation, we consider a more challenging setting of
heterogeneous domain generalisation, where the
unseen domains do not share label space with the
seen ones, and the goal is to train a feature representation that is useful off-the-shelf for novel
data and novel categories. Experimental evaluation demonstrates that our method outperforms
state-of-the-art solutions in both settings.

1. Introduction
A shift in data statistics between training and testing is
often unavoidable in real-world applications, and leads to a
significant negative impact on the performance of machine
learning models in practice. This motivates research into
methods to ameliorate the impact of domain shift, including
Domain Adaption (DA) (Bousmalis et al., 2016; Ganin &
Lempitsky, 2015; Long et al., 2015; 2016) and Domain
Generalisation (DG) (Muandet et al., 2013; Ghifary et al.,
2015; Li et al., 2018a; Shankar et al., 2018).
*

Equal contribution 1 College of Computer, National University
of Defense Technology, Hunan, China 2 School of Informatics, The
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK 3 Samsung AI Centre,
Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to: Timothy M. Hospedales
<t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) (Long et al., 2016;
Saito et al., 2017; Shu et al., 2018) methods operate in
the setting where we can access unlabelled testing (target)
domain data during training to drive model adaptation and
compensate for the domain shift. Domain Generalisation
addresses the harder setting, where a model trained on a set
of source domains should perform well on a novel target
domain with different data statistics, without requiring any
access to target domain data during training. That is, the
model should be robust enough out-of-the-box to perform
well in a new domain, without further parameter updates.
Both DA and DG methods almost always assume the label
space is consistent across both source and target domains.
In the case of disjoint label spaces between source and
target domain, we term the domain generalisation problem
as one of heterogeneous domain generalisation. In this case
a feature representation trained on a source domain should
generalise to supporting recognition of novel categories in
a novel target domain. This problem setting is actually
widely encountered. The central example is the ubiquitous
computer vision pipeline where a CNN feature extractor
pre-trained on ImageNet is re-used for diverse applications.
If data, computation, and human expert time is available, the
feature can be fine-tuned on the target problem. However,
for many practical applications lacking one or more of these
requirements, standard practice is to use an ImageNet CNN
off-the-shelf as a fixed feature extractor, and train a shallow
model such as SVM or KNN for the new problem (Donahue
et al., 2014; Razavian et al., 2014). This pipeline is an
example of the heterogeneous domain generalisation setting,
in that a feature is being asked to generalise to supporting
recognition of novel categories in data with novel statistics.
The ImageNet pre-trained feature is strong enough to do a
reasonable job of this already. However, given the ubiquity
of this pipeline, providing an improved general purpose
feature would be widely beneficial. In this paper we aim to
do exactly this by presenting a novel method that explicitly
trains a feature to prepare it for domain and label shift. We
demonstrate this via performing heterogeneous DG on the
Visual Decathalon benchmark (Rebuffi et al., 2017). This
also provides the largest scale evaluation of DG to date.
We are inspired by recent meta-learning learning methods
that perform episodic training (Finn et al., 2017; Snell et al.,
2017; Ravi & Larochelle, 2017) to simulate the train/test

