D OUBLE S QUEEZE: Parallel Stochastic Gradient Descent with Double-pass
Error-Compensated Compression

Hanlin Tang 1 Xiangru Lian 1 Chen Yu 1 Tong Zhang 2 Ji Liu 3 1

Abstract
A standard approach in large scale machine learning is distributed stochastic gradient training,
which requires the computation of aggregated
stochastic gradients over multiple nodes on a network. Communication is a major bottleneck in
such applications, and in recent years, compressed
stochastic gradient methods such as QSGD (quantized SGD) and sparse SGD have been proposed
to reduce communication. It was also shown
that error compensation can be combined with
compression to achieve better convergence in
a scheme that each node compresses its local
stochastic gradient and broadcast the result to all
other nodes over the network in a single pass.
However, such a single pass broadcast approach
is not realistic in many practical implementations.
For example, under the popular parameter-server
model for distributed learning, the worker nodes
need to send the compressed local gradients to
the parameter server, which performs the aggregation. The parameter server has to compress
the aggregated stochastic gradient again before
sending it back to the worker nodes. In this work,
we provide a detailed analysis on this two-pass
communication model, with error-compensated
compression both on the worker nodes and on
the parameter server. We show that the errorcompensated stochastic gradient algorithm admits
three very nice properties: 1) it is compatible with
an arbitrary compression technique; 2) it admits
an improved convergence rate than the non errorcompensated stochastic gradient methods such
as QSGD and sparse SGD; 3) it admits linear
speedup with respect to the number of workers.
An empirical study is also conducted to validate
our theoretical results.
1

University of Rochester 2 Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology 3 Seattle AI Lab, FeDA Lab, Kwai Inc. Correspondence to: Hanlin Tang <htang14@ur.rochester.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Large scale distributed machine learning on big data sets
are important for many modern applications (Abadi et al.,
2016a; Seide & Agarwal, 2016), and there are many methods being studied to improve the performance of distributed
learning, such as communication efficient learning (Alistarh et al., 2017; Bernstein et al., 2018a; Seide et al., 2014),
decentralized learning (He et al., 2018b; Lian et al., 2017),
and asynchronous learning (Agarwal & Duchi, 2011; Lian
et al., 2015; Recht et al., 2011). All these methods have
been proved to be quite efficient in accelerating distributed
learning under different seneario.
A widely used framework in distributed learning is data parallelism, where we assume that data are distributed over multiple nodes on a network, with a shared model that needs to
be jointly optimized. Mathematically, the underlying problem can be posed as the following distributed optimization
problem:
n

min
x

f (x) =

1X
Eζ∼Di F (x; ζ),
n i=1

(1)

where n is the number of workers, Di is the local data
distribution for worker i (in other words, we do not assume
that all nodes can access the same data set), and F (x; ζ) is
the local loss function of model x given data ζ for worker i.
A standard synchronized approach for solving (1) is parallel
SGD (stochastic gradient descent) (Bottou & Bottou, 2010),
where each worker i draws ζ (i) from Di , and compute the
local stochastic gradient with respect to the shared parameter
x:
g (i) = ∇F (x; ζ (i) ),
The local gradients are sent over the network, where the
aggregated SGD is computed as:
n

g=

1 X (i)
g ,
n i=1

and the result are sent back to each local node.
The high communication cost is a main bottleneck for large
scale distributed training. In order to alleviate this cost,

