Bayesian Nonparametric Federated Learning of Neural Networks

Mikhail Yurochkin 1 2 Mayank Agarwal 1 2 Soumya Ghosh 1 2 3 Kristjan Greenewald 1 2 Trong Nghia Hoang 1 2
Yasaman Khazaeni 1 2

Abstract
In federated learning problems, data is scattered
across different servers and exchanging or pooling
it is often impractical or prohibited. We develop a
Bayesian nonparametric framework for federated
learning with neural networks. Each data server is
assumed to provide local neural network weights,
which are modeled through our framework. We
then develop an inference approach that allows us
to synthesize a more expressive global network
without additional supervision, data pooling and
with as few as a single communication round. We
then demonstrate the efficacy of our approach on
federated learning problems simulated from two
popular image classification datasets.1

1. Introduction
The standard machine learning paradigm involves algorithms that learn from centralized data, possibly pooled
together from multiple data sources. The computations involved may be done on a single machine or farmed out to a
cluster of machines. However, in the real world, data often
live in silos and amalgamating them may be prohibitively
expensive due to communication costs, time sensitivity, or
privacy concerns. Consider, for instance, data recorded from
sensors embedded in wearable devices. Such data is inherently private, can be voluminous depending on the sampling
rate of the sensors, and may be time sensitive depending on
the analysis of interest. Pooling data from many users is
technically challenging owing to the severe computational
burden of moving large amounts of data, and is fraught with
privacy concerns stemming from potential data breaches that
may expose a user’s protected health information (PHI).
Federated learning addresses these pitfalls by obviating the
1

IBM Research, Cambridge 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab 3 Center
for Computational Health. Correspondence to: Mikhail Yurochkin
<mikhail.yurochkin@ibm.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).
1
Code is available at https://github.com/IBM/
probabilistic-federated-neural-matching

need for centralized data, instead designing algorithms that
learn from sequestered data sources. These algorithms iterate between training local models on each data source and
distilling them into a global federated model, all without
explicitly combining data from different sources. Typical
federated learning algorithms, however, require access to
locally stored data for learning. A more extreme case surfaces when one has access to models pre-trained on local
data but not the data itself. Such situations may arise from
catastrophic data loss but increasingly also from regulations
such as the general data protection regulation (GDPR) (EU,
2016), which place severe restrictions on the storage and
sharing of personal data. Learned models that capture only
aggregate statistics of the data can typically be disseminated with fewer limitations. A natural question then is,
can “legacy” models trained independently on data from
different sources be combined into an improved federated
model?
Here, we develop and carefully investigate a probabilistic
federated learning framework with a particular emphasis on
training and aggregating neural network models. We assume
that either local data or pre-trained models trained on local
data are available. When data is available, we proceed by
training local models for each data source, in parallel. We
then match the estimated local model parameters (groups of
weight vectors in the case of neural networks) across data
sources to construct a global network. The matching, to
be formally defined later, is governed by the posterior of a
Beta-Bernoulli process (BBP) (Thibaux & Jordan, 2007), a
Bayesian nonparametric (BNP) model that allows the local
parameters to either match existing global ones or to create
new global parameters if existing ones are poor matches.
Our construction provides several advantages over existing approaches. First, it decouples the learning of local
models from their amalgamation into a global federated
model. This decoupling allows us to remain agnostic about
the local learning algorithms, which may be adapted as
necessary, with each data source potentially even using a
different learning algorithm. Moreover, given only pretrained models, our BBP informed matching procedure is
able to combine them into a federated global model without requiring additional data or knowledge of the learning
algorithms used to generate the pre-trained models. This is

