The Wasserstein Transform
Facundo Mémoli * 1 2 Zane Smith * 3 Zhengchao Wan * 1

Abstract
We introduce the Wasserstein transform, a method
for enhancing and denoising datasets defined on
general metric spaces. The construction draws inspiration from Optimal Transportation ideas. We
establish the stability of our method under data
perturbation and, when the dataset is assumed to
be Euclidean, we also exhibit a precise connection between the Wasserstein transform and the
mean shift family of algorithms. We then use this
connection to prove that mean shift also inherits
stability under perturbations. We study the performance of the Wasserstein transform method on
different datasets as a preprocessing step prior to
clustering and classification tasks.

1. Introduction
Optimal transport (OT) is concerned with finding cost efficient ways of deforming a given source probability distribution into a target distribution (Villani, 2003; 2008; Santambrogio, 2015). In recent years, ideas from OT have found
applications in machine learning and data analysis in general.
Applications range from image equalization (Delon, 2004),
shape interpolation (Solomon et al., 2015), image/shape
(Solomon et al., 2016; Rubner et al., 1998) and document
classification (Kusner et al., 2015; Rolet et al., 2016), semisupervised learning (Solomon et al., 2014), to population
analysis of Gaussian processes (Mallasto & Feragen, 2017)
and domain adaptation (Courty et al., 2017).
In line with previous applications of OT, we represent
datasets as probability measures on an ambient metric space.
We introduce the so called Wasserstein transform (WT)
which takes this input dataset and alters its interpoint dis*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, The Ohio
State University, Ohio, USA 2 Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minnesota, USA
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Ohio
State University, Ohio, USA. Correspondence to: Facundo Mémoli
<memoli@math.osu.edu>, Zane Smith <smit9474@umn.edu>,
Zhengchao Wan <wan.252@osu.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 36 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

tance information in order to both enhance features, such as
clusters, present in the data, and to denoise the data. As a
theoretical contribution, we prove the stability of our construction to perturbations in the input data (i.e. changes in
the input probability measure).
We also interpret our proposed feature enhancing method
as both a generalization and a strengthening of Mean Shift
(MS) (Cheng, 1995; Fukunaga & Hostetler, 1975) which
can operate on general metric spaces. Although mean shift
has been generalized to data living on Riemannian manifolds (Subbarao & Meer, 2009; Shamir et al., 2006), our
interpretation departs from the ones in those papers in that
we do not attempt to estimate a local mean or median of
the data but, instead, we use the local density of points to
iteratively directly adjust the distance function on the metric
space. We do this without appealing to any intermediate
embedding into a Euclidean space. As a further contribution,
through this connection between the WT and MS, we are
able to prove that MS is stable to data perturbations. We are
not aware of any extant results in the literature that address
this type of stability for MS methods.
Our experiments show that the Wasserstein transform is
effective in both denoising and resolving the well known
chaining effect that affects linkage based clustering methods.
Furthermore, we compared the perfomance of our method
with mean shift on the MNIST dataset (LeCun et al., 1998)
and on Grassmannian manifold data (Cetingul & Vidal,
2009).

2. Optimal Transport Concepts
Given a compact metric space (X, dX ) one of the fundamental concepts of OT (Villani, 2003) is the so called Wasserstein distance on the set of all probability measures P(X)
on X. The `1 -Wassertein distance dW,1 (α, β) between probability measures α, β ∈ P(X) is obtained by solving the
following linear optimization problem:
ZZ
dW,1 (α, β) := inf
dX (x, x0 ) dµ(x × x0 ),
µ∈Π(α,β)

X×X

where Π(α, β) is the set of all couplings between the probability measures α and β: namely, µ in Π(α, β) is a probability measure on X × X whose marginals are α and β,
respectively.

