Kernel Normalized Cut: a Theoretical Revisit
Yoshikazu Terada 1 2 Michio Yamamoto 3 2

Abstract
In this paper, we study the theoretical properties
of clustering based on the kernel normalized cut.
Our first contribution is to derive a nonasymptotic
upper bound on the expected distortion rate of the
kernel normalized cut. From this result, we show
that the solution of the kernel normalized cut converges to that of the population-level weighted
k-means clustering on a certain reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS). Our second contribution is the discover of the interesting fact that the
population-level weighted k-means clustering in
the RKHS is equivalent to the population-level
normalized cut. Combining these results, we can
see that the kernel normalized cut converges to
the population-level normalized cut. The criterion of the population-level normalized cut can be
considered as an indivisibility of the population
distribution, and this criterion plays an important
role in the theoretical analysis of spectral clustering in Schiebinger et al. (2015). We believe
that our results will provide deep insights into
the behavior of both normalized cut and spectral
clustering.

1. Introduction
Data clustering is one of the most important problems in
unsupervised learning and has many applications. Given a
set of data points, the purpose of clustering algorithms is
to discover groups (clusters) of data points based on some
sense of similarity. In the context of the clustering problem,
we do not have any information or training labels about these
groups and, therefore, the sense (or type of optimality) of the
obtained groups is very important. Usually, we assume that
the data points X1 , . . . , Xn are independently drawn from
1

Graduate School of Engineering Science, Osaka University,
Osaka, Japan 2 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
(AIP), Tokyo, Japan 3 Graduate School of Environmental and Life
Science, Okayama University, Okayama, Japan. Correspondence
to: Yoshikazu Terada <terada@sigmath.es.osaka-u.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

an unknown underlying distribution, called the population
distribution. In this setting, as mentioned in von Luxburg
et al. (2008), it is important to check whether a clustering
algorithm satisfies the following requirements:
• When the sample size n goes to infinity, the clusterings constructed by the clustering algorithm converge
to a certain clustering of the underlying data space
corresponding to the population distribution.
• If so, the limit clustering of the underlying space provides a partition of the underlying space that is optimal
in some sense for the population distribution.
For example, k-means clustering satisfies these requirements under very mild conditions (Pollard, 1981) and can
reach a fast rate of convergence under the margin condition
(Levrard, 2015). Even though classical clustering algorithms
such as k-means clustering have such nice properties, the
obtained partitions are too simple and sometime do not capture group structures that are reasonably intuitive. In recent
years, graph partitioning approaches represented by spectral
clustering have drawn much attention (Shi & Malik, 2000;
Ng et al., 2002; Rosasco et al., 2010; Cao & Chen, 2011;
Arias-Castro et al., 2012; Schiebinger et al., 2015; Gracía
Trillos et al., 2016; Davis & Sethuraman, 2016; Gracía Trillos & Slepčev, 2016). When we use graph partitioning
approaches to cluster multivariate data, we treat the similarity matrix between the data points as an adjacency matrix of
a graph and then apply a graph cut algorithm to the similarity matrix. Typically, the similarity measure depends on the
distances between data points and the connectivity length
scale parameter n , which determines the length scale of the
edges.
Spectral clustering was introduced in the machine learning
community with applications to image segmentation and
clustering multivariate data (e.g., Shi & Malik, 2000; Ng
et al., 2002), and it has been successfully applied in various fields. The input of graph-based clustering algorithms
such as spectral clustering is a similarity matrix between
the data points. Since spectral clustering is one of modern state-of-the-art clustering algorithms, there have been
several studies addressing its theoretical properties. For example, von Luxburg et al. (2008), Rosasco et al. (2010)
and Cao & Chen (2011) established the consistency of

