Overcoming Mean-Field Approximations
in Recurrent Gaussian Process Models
Alessandro Davide Ialongo 1 2 Mark van der Wilk 3 James Hensman 3 Carl Edward Rasmussen 1

Abstract
We identify a new variational inference scheme
for dynamical systems whose transition function
is modelled by a Gaussian process. Inference in
this setting has either employed computationally
intensive MCMC methods, or relied on factorisations of the variational posterior. As we demonstrate in our experiments, the factorisation between latent system states and transition function
can lead to a miscalibrated posterior and to learning unnecessarily large noise terms. We eliminate
this factorisation by explicitly modelling the dependence between state trajectories and the Gaussian process posterior. Samples of the latent states
can then be tractably generated by conditioning
on this representation. The method we obtain
(VCDT: variationally coupled dynamics and trajectories) gives better predictive performance and
more calibrated estimates of the transition function, yet maintains the same time and space complexities as mean-field methods. Code is available
at: github.com/ialong/GPt.

1

Introduction

Many time series are well explained by assuming their progression is determined by an underlying dynamical system.
A model of this dynamical system can be used to make
strong predictions of the future behaviour of the time series. We often require predictions of systems with unknown
dynamics, be it for economic models of financial markets,
or models of physical systems to be controlled with model
predictive control or model-based reinforcement learning.
Particularly in low-data regimes, estimates of the uncertainty
in the predictions are crucial for making robust decisions,
as the expected utility of an action can depend strongly on
1
Computational and Biological Learning Group, University
of Cambridge 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems,
Tübingen 3 PROWLER.io. Correspondence to: Alessandro Davide Ialongo <adi24@cam.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

the distribution of the outcome (von Neumann et al., 1944).
A striking example of this is model based policy search
(Deisenroth & Rasmussen, 2011).
There are many approaches to time series prediction. Within
the machine learning community, autoregressive (AR)
(Billings, 2013) and state-space (SSMs) models are popular, in part due to the relative ease with which predictions
can be made. AR predictions are obtained by a learned mapping from the H last observations to the next one, whereas
SSMs model the underlying dynamical system by learning
a transition function which maps a system state forward
in time. At each point in time, the state contains sufficient
information for predicting both future states and observations. While AR models can be easier to train, SSMs have
the potential to be more data efficient, due to their minimal
state representation.
We aim to learn complex, possibly stochastic, non-linear
dynamical systems from noisy data, following the Bayesian
paradigm in order to capture model uncertainty. We use a
Gaussian process (GP) prior (Rasmussen & Williams, 2005)
for the transition function, giving the Gaussian Process State
Space Model (GPSSM) (Frigola et al., 2013). Aside from
capturing uncertainty, GPs are non-parametric, guaranteeing
that our model complexity will not saturate as we observe
more data.
Despite the challenge of performing accurate approximate
inference in the GPSSM, an impressive amount of progress
has been made (Frigola et al., 2014; McHutchon, 2014;
Eleftheriadis et al., 2017; Ialongo et al., 2017; Doerr et al.,
2018), helped along by the development of elegant variational inference techniques (Titsias, 2009; Hensman et al.,
2013) which retain the key non-parametric property of GPs.
In this work, we improve variational approximations by critically examining existing methods and their failure modes.
We propose a family of non-factorised variational posteriors
which alleviate crucial problems with earlier approaches
while maintaining the same efficiency. We refer to the proposed approach as VCDT: variationally coupled dynamics
and trajectories.

