Asynchronous Batch Bayesian Optimisation with Improved Local Penalisation

Ahsan S. Alvi * 1 2 Binxin Ru * 1 Jan Calliess 1 3 Stephen J. Roberts 1 2 3 Michael A. Osborne 1 2

Abstract
Batch Bayesian optimisation (BO) has been successfully applied to hyperparameter tuning using parallel computing, but it is wasteful of resources: workers that complete jobs ahead of
others are left idle. We address this problem by
developing an approach, Penalising Locally for
Asynchronous Bayesian Optimisation on k workers (PLAyBOOK), for asynchronous parallel BO.
We demonstrate empirically the efficacy of PLAyBOOK and its variants on synthetic tasks and a
real-world problem. We undertake a comparison
between synchronous and asynchronous BO, and
show that asynchronous BO often outperforms
synchronous batch BO in both wall-clock time
and number of function evaluations.

1. Introduction
Bayesian optimisation (BO) is a popular sequential global
optimisation technique for functions that are expensive to
evaluate (Brochu et al., 2010). Whilst standard BO may be
sufficient for many applications, it is often the case that multiple experiments can be run at the same time in parallel. For
example, in the case of drug discovery, many different compounds can be tested in parallel via high throughput screening equipment (Hernández-Lobato et al., 2017), and when
optimising machine learning algorithms, we can train different model configurations concurrently on multiple workers
(Chen et al., 2018; Kandasamy et al., 2018). This observation lead to the development of parallel (“batch”) BO
algorithms, which, at each optimisation step, recommend a
batch of k configurations to be evaluated.
In cases where the runtimes of tasks are roughly equal, this
is usually sufficient, but, if the runtimes in a batch vary,
this will lead to inefficient utilisation of our hardware. For
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford 2 Mind Foundry Ltd., Oxford, UK 3 Oxford-Man
Institute of Quantitative Finance. Correspondence to: Binxin Ru
<robin@robots.ox.ac.uk>, Ahsan Alvi <asa@robots.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

example, consider the optimisation of the number of units
in the layers of a neural network. Training and evaluating a
large network (greater number of units per layer) will take
significantly longer than a small network (fewer units per
layer), so for an iteration of (synchronous) batch BO to
complete, we need to wait for the slowest configuration in
the batch to finish, leaving the other workers idle. In order
to improve the utilisation of parallel computing resources,
we can run function evaluations asynchronously: as soon as
c workers (c < k) complete their jobs, we choose new tasks
for them.
Although asynchronous batch BO has a clear advantage
over synchronous batch BO in terms of wall-clock time
(Kandasamy et al., 2018), it may lose out in terms of sample
efficiency, as an asynchronous method takes decisions with
less data than its synchronous counterpart at each stage of
the optimisation. We investigate this empirically in this
work.
Our contributions can be summarised as follows.
• We develop a new approach to asynchronous parallel
BO, Penalising Locally for Asynchronous Bayesian
Optimisation on k workers (PLAyBOOK), which
uses penalisation-based strategies to prevent redundant
batch selection. We show that our approach compares
favourably against existing asynchronous methods.
• We propose a new penalisation function, which prevents redundant samples from being chosen. We also
propose designing the penalisers using local (instead
of global) variability features of the surrogate to more
effectively explore the search space.
• We demonstrate empirically that asynchronous methods perform at least as well as their synchronous variants. We also show that PLAyBOOK outperforms
its synchronous variants both in terms of wall-clock
time and sample efficiency, particularly for larger batch
sizes. This renders PLAyBOOK a competitive parallel
BO method.

2. Related work
Many different synchronous batch BO methods have been
proposed over the past years. Approaches include using

