Learning Classifiers for Target Domain with Limited or No Labels

Pengkai Zhu * 1 Hanxiao Wang * 1 Venkatesh Saligrama 1

Abstract
In computer vision applications, such as domain
adaptation (DA), few shot learning (FSL) and
zero-shot learning (ZSL), we encounter new objects and environments, for which insufficient examples exist to allow for training “models from
scratch,” and methods that adapt existing models,
trained on the presented training environment, to
the new scenario are required. We propose a novel
visual attribute encoding method that encodes
each image as a low-dimensional probability vector composed of prototypical part-type probabilities. The prototypes are learnt to be representative
of all training data. At test-time we utilize this encoding as an input to a classifier. At test-time we
freeze the encoder and only learn/adapt the classifier component to limited annotated labels in FSL;
new semantic attributes in ZSL. We conduct extensive experiments on benchmark datasets. Our
method outperforms state-of-art methods trained
for the specific contexts (ZSL, FSL, DA).

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks have emerged as the state-of-art
in terms of achievable accuracy in a wide variety of applications including large-scale visual classification. Nevertheless, this success of DNNs has critically hinged on
availability of large amount of labeled training data, data
that is labeled by human labelers. It is increasingly being recognized, particularly in the context of large-scale
visual classification problems (Russakovsky et al., 2014),
that such large-scale human labeling is not scalable (Antol
et al., 2014), and we must account for challenges posed by
non-uniform and sparsely annotated training data (Bhatia
et al., 2015) as in few-shot learning (FSL), appearance of
novel objects for in-the-wild scenarios (Zhu et al., 2019b) as
in generalized zero-shot learning (GZSL), and responding to
changes in operational environment such as changes in data
*

Equal contribution 1 Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Boston University, Boston, USA. Correspondence to:
Venkatesh Saligrama <srv@bu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

collection viewpoints as exemplified by domain adaptation
(DA) (Tzeng et al., 2017).
Decomposability and Compositionality: We are motivated
to respond to these aforementioned challenges without training “models from scratch,” which requires collecting new
labeled data, and yet achieving high-accuracy. We propose a
novel framework and DNN architecture that addresses these
challenges in a unified manner. Our key insight is based
on decomposability of objects into proto-typical primitive
parts/part-types and compositionality of proto-typical primitive part/part-types to explain new, unseen or modified object classes. This insight is not new and has been employed
in a long-line of work particularly in cognitive science to
explain human concept learning such as children making
meaningful generalization through one-shot learning, parsing objects into parts, and generating new concepts from
parts (see (Lake et al., 2015)). While (Lake et al., 2015) advocates a generative Bayesian Program Learning framework
to mimic human concept learning and avoid “data-hungry”
DNNs altogether, we advocate use of DNNs and situate
our work within a discriminative learning framework and
employ novel DNN architectures that also obviates the need
for new annotated data and realizes high-accuracy.
Our Contributions. We propose a novel approach that encodes an input instance as a collection of probability vectors.
Each probability vector is associated with a part and represents the mixture of prototypical part types that makeup the
part. To do this we train a Multi-Attention CNN (MACNN),
which produces a diverse collection of attention regions and
associated features masking out uninteresting regions of the
image space. These attention regions are decomposed into a
suitably small number of prototypical parts and prototypical
part probabilities, yielding a low-dimensional encoding. We
refer to these encodings as low-dimensional visual attribute
(LDVA) encodings since they are analogous to how humans
would quantify the existence of an attribute in the presented
instance by drawing similarity to a prototypical attribute
seen from experience. We input the LDVA encoding into
a predictor, which then predicts the output for the different
scenarios (ZSL, FSL or DA). We learn an end-to-end model
on training data and at test-time, freeze the high-dimensional
mapping to LDVA encoding component, and only adapting
the predictor based on what is revealed during test-time.

