Functional Transparency for Structured Data: a Game-Theoretic Approach

Guang-He Lee 1 Wengong Jin 1 David Alvarez-Melis 1 Tommi S. Jaakkola 1

Abstract
We provide a new approach to training neural
models to exhibit transparency in a well-defined,
functional manner. Our approach naturally operates over structured data and tailors the predictor,
functionally, towards a chosen family of (local)
witnesses. The estimation problem is setup as a
co-operative game between an unrestricted predictor such as a neural network, and a set of witnesses
chosen from the desired transparent family. The
goal of the witnesses is to highlight, locally, how
well the predictor conforms to the chosen family of functions, while the predictor is trained to
minimize the highlighted discrepancy. We emphasize that the predictor remains globally powerful
as it is only encouraged to agree locally with locally adapted witnesses. We analyze the effect
of the proposed approach, provide example formulations in the context of deep graph and sequence models, and empirically illustrate the idea
in chemical property prediction, temporal modeling, and molecule representation learning.

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning tasks are increasingly complex,
requiring flexible models with large numbers of parameters such as deep networks (Silver et al., 2016; Vaswani
et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2017). Such modeling gains often
come at the cost of transparency or interpretability. This
is particularly problematic when predictions are fed into
decision-critical applications such as medicine where the
ability to verify predictions may be just as important as the
raw predictive power.
It seems plausible to guide a flexible neural network towards
a complex yet well-understood (i.e., transparent) functional
class. For example, in realizing Wasserstein-1 distance (Arjovsky et al., 2017), the discriminator should be limited
1

MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.
Correspondence to: Guang-He Lee <guanghe@csail.mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

to 1-Lipschitz functions. A strict adherence to a complex,
global functional class is not the only way to achieve transparency. For example, linearity is a desirable characteristic
for transparency but is sensible to enforce only locally. We
offer therefore a new notion of transparency – functional
transparency – where the goal is to guide models to adopt
a desirable local behavior yet allowing them to be more
flexible globally. Note that functional transparency should
be established only approximately in many cases since, e.g.,
strict local linearity implies global linearity.
Previous approaches to interpretability have mainly focused
on models that operate on fixed-size data, such as scalarfeatures (Lakkaraju et al., 2016) or images (Selvaraju et al.,
2016; Mahendran & Vedaldi, 2015). The emphasis has been
on feature relevance or selection (Ribeiro et al., 2016). Recent methods do address some of the challenges in sequential data (Lei et al., 2016; Arras et al., 2017; Alvarez-Melis
& Jaakkola, 2017), primarily in NLP tasks where the input
sequence is discrete. Interpretability for continuous temporal data (Al-Shedivat et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2018a) or graph
structures remains largely unexplored.
We develop a novel approach to transparency that is naturally suited for structured data. At the core of our approach
is a game-theoretic definition of transparency. This is set
up as a two-player co-operative game between a predictor
and a witness. The predictor remains a complex model
whereas the witness is chosen from a simple transparent
family. Transparency arises from the fact that the predictor
is encouraged to exemplify simple behavior as captured by
the witness in each local region while remaining globally
powerful. The approach differs from global regularization
of models towards interpretability (Wu et al., 2018a), models that are constructed a priori to be interpretable, either
architecturally or in terms of the function class (Al-Shedivat
et al., 2017; Lei et al., 2016), or from post-hoc explanations
of black-box methods via local perturbations (Ribeiro et al.,
2016; Alvarez-Melis & Jaakkola, 2017). Our models are
guided towards functional transparency during learning.
As an illustration, we contrast our approach with methods
that seek to obtain interpretable explanations after the fact
(e.g., (Ribeiro et al., 2016)). Derived explanation after training can be misleading in some cases if the explanation does
not match the functional behavior of the model. For exam-

