Efficient Dictionary Learning with Gradient Descent

Dar Gilboa 1 2 Sam Buchanan 3 2 John Wright 3 2

Abstract
Randomly initialized first-order optimization algorithms are the method of choice for solving
many high-dimensional nonconvex problems in
machine learning, yet general theoretical guarantees cannot rule out convergence to critical points
of poor objective value. For some highly structured nonconvex problems however, the success
of gradient descent can be understood by studying the geometry of the objective. We study one
such problem – complete orthogonal dictionary
learning, and provide converge guarantees for randomly initialized gradient descent to the neighborhood of a global optimum. The resulting rates
scale as low order polynomials in the dimension
even though the objective possesses an exponential number of saddle points. This efficient convergence can be viewed as a consequence of negative curvature normal to the stable manifolds
associated with saddle points, and we provide
evidence that this feature is shared by other nonconvex problems of importance as well.

1. Introduction
Many central problems in machine learning and signal processing are most naturally formulated as optimization problems. These problems are often both nonconvex and highdimensional. High dimensionality makes the evaluation
of second-order information prohibitively expensive, and
thus randomly initialized first-order methods are usually employed instead. This has prompted great interest in recent
years in understanding the behavior of gradient descent on
nonconvex objectives (Hardt et al., 2015; Ge et al., 2015;
Hardt et al., 2016; Dauphin et al., 2014). General analysis
of first- and second-order methods on such problems can
provide guarantees for convergence to critical points but
1
Department of Neuroscience, Columbia University 2 Data Science Institute, Columbia University 3 Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University. Correspondence to: Dar Gilboa
<dargilboa@gmail.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 36 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

these may be highly suboptimal, since nonconvex optimization is in general an NP-hard probem (Bertsekas, 1999).
Outside of a convex setting (Nesterov, 2013) one must assume additional structure in order to make statements about
convergence to optimal or high quality solutions. It is a
curious fact that for certain classes of problems such as ones
that involve sparsification (Lee et al., 2013; Bronstein et al.,
2005) or matrix/tensor recovery (Keshavan et al., 2010; Jain
et al., 2013; Anandkumar et al., 2014) first-order methods
can be used effectively. Even for some highly nonconvex
problems where there is no ground truth available such as
the training of neural networks first-order methods converge
to high-quality solutions (Zhang et al., 2016).
Dictionary learning is a problem of inferring a sparse representation of data that was originally developed in the
neuroscience literature (Olshausen & Field, 1996), and has
since seen a number of important applications including
image denoising, compressive signal acquisition and signal
classification (Elad & Aharon, 2006; Mairal et al., 2014).
In this work we study a formulation of the dictionary learning problem that can be solved efficiently using randomly
initialized gradient descent despite possessing a number of
saddle points exponential in the dimension. A feature that
appears to enable efficient optimization is the existence of
sufficient negative curvature in the directions normal to the
stable manifolds of all critical points that are not global minima 1 . This property ensures that the regions of the space
that feed into small gradient regions under gradient flow do
not dominate the parameter space. Figure 1 illustrates the
value of this property: negative curvature prevents measure
from concentrating about the stable manifold. As a consequence randomly initialized gradient methods avoid the
“slow region” of around the saddle point.
The main results of this work is a convergence rate for randomly initialized gradient descent for complete orthogonal
dictionary learning to the neighborhood of a global minimum of the objective. Our results are probabilistic since
they rely on initialization in certain regions of the parameter
space, yet they allow one to flexibly trade off between the
maximal number of iterations in the bound and the probabil1

As well as a lack of spurious local minimizers, and the existence of large gradients or strong convexity in the remaining parts
of the space

