Generative Modeling of Infinite Occluded Objects for
Compositional Scene Representation

Jinyang Yuan 1 Bin Li 1 Xiangyang Xue 1

Abstract
We present a deep generative model which explicitly models object occlusions for compositional
scene representation. Latent representations of
objects are disentangled into location, size, shape,
and appearance, and the visual scene can be generated compositionally by integrating these representations and an infinite-dimensional binary
vector indicating presences of objects in the scene.
By training the model to learn spatial dependences
of pixels in the unsupervised setting, the number
of objects, pixel-level segregation of objects, and
presences of objects in overlapping regions can
be estimated through inference of latent variables.
Extensive experiments conducted on a series of
specially designed datasets demonstrate that the
proposed method outperforms two state-of-the-art
methods when object occlusions exist.

1. Introduction
Perceiving the seemingly chaotic visual scenes structurally
and compositionally is essential for humans to understand
and interact with the complex world (Lake et al., 2017). This
presumably innate ability has been considerably studied for
years in the fields of neuroscience and cognitive science.
Finding the underlying mechanisms is usually termed as the
perceptual grouping problem (Grossberg et al., 1997), which
is a special type of the binding problem (Treisman, 1996)
related to visual perception. The synchronization theory
(Milner, 1974) and the feature integration theory (Treisman
& Gelade, 1980) are two representative theories underpinning the binding problem based on extensive experimental
findings. It is intriguing to build human-like AI systems that
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing; Fudan-Qiniu Joint Laboratory for Deep Learning; Shanghai
Institute of Intelligent Electronics & Systems; School of Computer
Science, Fudan University, China. Correspondence to: Bin Li
<libin@fudan.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

can automatically segregate the visual scene into conceptual
entities (e.g. objects) through inferring latent compositional
and disentangled representations (Bengio et al., 2013) that
cause the scene, on the basis of these neurodynamical and
psychological theories. Because visual scenes may comprise different number of objects, it is also desirable to adaptively determine the number of representations in the scene.
Compared with learning a single complex representation
for the entire visual scene, decomposing the visual scene
into multiple conceptual entities and learn a relatively simple representation for each separately is more advantageous
because better expressiveness and generalizability can be
achieved. By decomposing the raw observations, organized
and compact knowledge of visual scenes can be summarized (Bienenstock et al., 1997). The learned knowledge is
applicable to an infinite number of novel scenes composed
of objetcs similar to the ones that have been observed before
(Biederman, 1987; van den Hengel et al., 2015).
Various methods which are more or less related to the synchronization theory (Milner, 1974) have been proposed for
segregating visual scenes into objects since last century.
(Wang & Terman, 1995; Rao et al., 2008; Reichert & Serre,
2014) use neuronal synchrony as the mechanism and segregate objects based on simulated phases of neurons. Although the achieved results are gratifying, the learned representations of objects are not compositional and disentangled,
which limits the expressiveness and generalizability of the
model. In recent years, a series of approaches (Greff et al.,
2016b;a; 2017; Prémont-Schwarz et al., 2017) combining
spatial mixture models with neural networks to segregate
objects have been proposed to learn compositional representations. In these approaches, the visual scene is modeled as
a pixel-wise weighted summation of the images generated
by individual mixture components, where each object is
expected to be modeled by a single component. Posterior
probabilities of the latent component indicator variables at
each pixel are used as the segregation criterion.
Attend-Infer-Repeat (AIR) (Eslami et al., 2016) is a variablesized variational autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma & Welling,
2014) that structurally decompose images into objects. It
can automatically determine the number of objects and
choose the number of inference steps accordingly. AIR

