On the Complexity of Approximating Wasserstein Barycenters

Alexey Kroshnin 1 2 3 Darina Dvinskikh 4 1 Pavel Dvurechensky 4 1 Alexander Gasnikov 5 1 2 Nazarii Tupitsa 1 5
César A. Uribe 6

Abstract
We study the complexity of approximating the
Wasserstein barycenter of m discrete measures,
or histograms of size n, by contrasting two alternative approaches that use entropic regularization. The first approach is based on the Iterative
Bregman Projections (IBP) algorithm for which
our novel analysis gives a complexity bound proportional to mn2 /ε2 to approximate the original
non-regularized barycenter. On the other hand,
using an approach based on accelerated gradient descent, we obtain a complexity proportional
to mn2 /ε. As a byproduct, we show that the
regularization parameter in both approaches has
to be proportional to ε, which causes instability
of both algorithms when the desired accuracy is
high. To overcome this issue, we propose a novel
proximal-IBP algorithm, which can be seen as
a proximal gradient method, which uses IBP on
each iteration to make a proximal step. We also
consider the question of scalability of these algorithms using approaches from distributed optimization and show that the first algorithm can be
implemented in a centralized distributed setting
(master/slave), while the second one is amenable
to a more general decentralized distributed setting
with an arbitrary network topology.

Introduction
Optimal transport (OT) (Monge, 1781; Kantorovich, 1942)
is becoming increasingly popular in the statistics, machine
1

Institute for Information Transmission Problems RAS,
Moscow, Russia 2 National Research University Higher School
of Economics, Moscow, Russia 3 Université Claude Bernard Lyon
1, Villeurbanne, France 4 Weierstrass Institute for Applied Analysis
and Stochastics, Berlin, Germany 5 Moscow Institute of Physics
and Technology, Moscow, Russia 6 Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA. Correspondence to: Pavel Dvurechensky <pavel.dvurechensky@wias-berlin.de>, Alexey Kroshnin
<akroshnin@hse.ru>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

learning and optimization communities. Statistical methods
based on optimal transport are readily available (Bigot et al.,
2012; Del Barrio et al., 2015; Ebert et al., 2017; Le Gouic &
Loubes, 2017), as well as many applications in unsupervised
learning (Arjovsky et al., 2017; Bigot et al., 2017), semisupervised learning (Solomon et al., 2014), clustering (Ho
et al., 2017), text classification (Kusner et al., 2015), among
others. Optimal transport distances lead to the concept
of Wasserstein barycenter, which allows to define a mean
of a set of complex objects, e.g. images, preserving their
geometric structure (Cuturi & Doucet, 2014). In this paper,
we focus on the computational aspects of optimal transport,
namely on the complexity approximating a Wasserstein
barycenter of a set of histograms.
Starting with Altschuler et al. (2017), several groups of authors addressed the question of the Wasserstein distance
approximation complexity (Chakrabarty & Khanna, 2018;
Dvurechensky et al., 2018b; Blanchet et al., 2018; Lin et al.,
2019). Implementable schemes based on Sinkhorn’s algorithm were first applied to OT in Cuturi (2013), see also
(Genevay et al., 2016). Also, accelerated gradient descent
methods were proposed as an alternative in Dvurechensky
et al. (2018b). Much less is known about the complexity of
approximating Wasserstein barycenter. The works (Staib
et al., 2017; Dvurechensky et al., 2018a), are in some sense
close, but do not provide an explicit answer.
Following Dvurechensky et al. (2018b), we study two alternative approaches for approximating Wasserstein barycenters based on entropic regularization (Cuturi, 2013). The
first approach is based on the Iterative Bregman Projection
(IBP) algorithm (Benamou et al., 2015), which can be considered as a general alternating projections algorithm. The
second approach is based on constructing a dual problem
and solving it by primal-dual accelerated gradient descent.
For both approaches, we show, how the regularization parameter should be chosen in order to approximate the original, non-regularized barycenter.
We also address the question of scalability in the Big Data
regime, i.e., when the size of the histograms n and the number of histograms m are large. In this case, the dataset of n
histograms can be distributedly produced or stored in a network of agents/sensors/computers with a network structure

