The Kernel Interaction Trick: Fast Bayesian Discovery of Pairwise
Interactions in High Dimensions
Raj Agrawal 1 Jonathan H. Huggins 2 Brian L. Trippe 1 Tamara Broderick 1

Abstract
Discovering interaction effects on a response of
interest is a fundamental problem faced in biology, medicine, economics, and many other scientific disciplines. In theory, Bayesian methods for discovering pairwise interactions enjoy
many benefits such as coherent uncertainty quantification, the ability to incorporate background
knowledge, and desirable shrinkage properties. In
practice, however, Bayesian methods are often
computationally intractable for even moderatedimensional problems. Our key insight is that
many hierarchical models of practical interest admit a particular Gaussian process (GP) representation; the GP allows us to capture the posterior with
a vector of O(p) kernel hyper-parameters rather
than O(p2 ) interactions and main effects. With
the implicit representation, we can run Markov
chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) over model hyperparameters in time and memory linear in p per
iteration. We focus on sparsity-inducing models
and show on datasets with a variety of covariate
behaviors that our method: (1) reduces runtime
by orders of magnitude over naive applications
of MCMC, (2) provides lower Type I and Type II
error relative to state-of-the-art LASSO-based approaches, and (3) offers improved computational
scaling in high dimensions relative to existing
Bayesian and LASSO-based approaches.

1. Introduction
Many decision-making and scientific tasks require understanding how a set of covariates relate to a target response.
For example, in clinical trials and precision medicine, re1
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 2 Department
of Biostatistics, Harvard, Cambridge, MA. Correspondence to: Raj
Agrawal <r.agrawal@csail.mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

searchers seek to characterize how individual-level traits
impact treatment effects, and in modern genomic studies,
researchers seek to identify genetic variants that are risk
factors for particular diseases. While linear regression is a
default method for these tasks and many others due to its
ease of interpretability, its simplicity often comes at the cost
of failing to learn more nuanced information from the data.
A common way to increase flexibility, while still retaining
the interpretability of linear regression, is to augment the
covariate space. For instance, two genes together might
be highly associated with a disease even though individually they exhibit only moderate association; thus, an analyst
might want to consider the multiplicative effect of pairs of
covariates co-occurring.
Unfortunately, augmenting the covariate space by including all possible pairwise interactions means the number of
parameters to analyze grows quadratically with the number
of covariates p. This growth leads to many statistical and
computational difficulties that are only made worse in the
high-dimensional setting, where p is much larger than the
number of observations N . And p
N is often exactly
the case of interest in genomic and medical applications. To
address the statistical challenges, practitioners often enforce
a sparsity constraint on the model, reflecting an assumption
that only a small subset of all covariates affect the response.
The problem of identifying this subset is a central problem
in high-dimensional statistics and many different LASSObased approaches have been proposed to return sparse point
estimates. However, these methods do not address how
to construct valid confidence intervals or adjust for multiple comparisons1 (Bien et al., 2013; Lim & Hastie, 2015;
Nakagawa et al., 2016; Shah, 2016; Wu et al., 2009).
Fortunately, hierarchical Bayesian methods have a shrinkage effect, naturally handle multiplicity, can provide better
statistical power than multiple comparison corrections (Gelman et al., 2012), and can leverage background knowledge.
However, naive approaches to Bayesian inference are computationally intractable for even moderate-dimensional prob1
While the knockoff filter introduced in Barber & Candès
(2015) is a promising way to control the false discovery rate, such
a method has not been evaluated theoretically or empirically for
interaction models.

