Neural Collaborative Subspace Clustering

Tong Zhang 1 2 Pan Ji 3 Mehrtash Harandi 4 Wenbing Huang 5 Hongdong Li 2

Abstract
We introduce the Neural Collaborative Subspace
Clustering, a neural model that discovers clusters of data points drawn from a union of lowdimensional subspaces. In contrast to previous attempts, our model runs without the aid of spectral
clustering. This makes our algorithm one of the
kinds that can gracefully scale to large datasets.
At its heart, our neural model benefits from a classifier which determines whether a pair of points
lies on the same subspace or not. Essential to
our model is the construction of two affinity matrices, one from the classifier and one based on
a notion of subspace self-expressiveness, to supervise training in a collaborative scheme. We
thoroughly assess and contrast the performance
of our model against various state-of-the-art clustering algorithms including deep subspace-based
ones.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we tackle the problem of subspace clustering,
where the aim is to cluster data points drawn from a union
of low-dimensional subspaces in an unsupervised manner.
Subspace Clustering (SC) has achieved great success in
various computer vision tasks, such as motion segmentation (Kanatani, 2001; Elhamifar & Vidal, 2009; Ji et al.,
2014a; 2016), face clustering (Ho et al., 2003; Elhamifar
& Vidal, 2013) and image segmentation (Yang et al., 2008;
Ma et al., 2007).
Majority of the SC algorithms (Yan & Pollefeys, 2006; Chen
& Lerman, 2009; Elhamifar & Vidal, 2013; Liu et al., 2013;
Wang et al., 2013; Lu et al., 2012; Ji et al., 2015; You et al.,
2016a) rely on the linear subspace assumption to construct
the affinity matrix for spectral clustering. However, data
do not naturally conform to linear models, which in turns
1

Motovis Australia Pty Ltd 2 Australian National University
NEC Labs America 4 Monash University 5 Tencent AI Lab. Correspondence to: Pan Ji <peterji1990@gmail.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

results in the development of non-linear SC techniques. Kernel methods (Chen et al., 2009; Patel et al., 2013; Patel &
Vidal, 2014; Yin et al., 2016; Xiao et al., 2016; Ji et al.,
2017a) can be employed to implicitly map data to higher dimensional spaces, hoping that data fit better to linear models
in the resulting spaces. That said, it is not straightforward to
identify the right kernel function and its parameters. The use
of deep neural networks as non-linear mapping functions to
determine subspace friendly latent spaces has formed the
latest developments in the field with promising results (Ji
et al., 2017b; Peng et al., 2016).
Despite significant improvements, SC algorithms still resort
to spectral clustering which in hindsight requires constructing an affinity matrix. This step, albeit effective, hampers
the scalability as it takes O(n2 ) memory and O(kn2 ) computations for storing and decomposing the affinity matrix for
n data points and k clusters. There are several attempts to
resolve the scalability issue. For example, You et al. (2016a)
accelerate the construction of the affinity matrix using orthogonal matching pursuit; Zhang et al. (2018) resort to
k-subspace clustering to avoid generating the affinity matrix. However, the issue is not fully addressed either due to
the use of spectral clustering (You et al., 2016a), or mitigates
but at the cost of performance (Zhang et al., 2018).
In this paper, we propose a neural structure to improve the
performance of subspace clustering while being mindful to
the scalablity issue. To this end, we first formulate subspace
clustering as a classification problem, which in turn removes
the spectral clustering step from the computations. Our neural model is comprised of two modules, one for classification and one for affinity learning. Both modules collaborate
during learning, hence the name “Neural Collaborative Subspace Clustering”. During training and in each iteration,
we use the affinity matrix generated by the subspace selfexpressiveness to supervise the affinity matrix computed
from the classification part. Concurrently, we make use of
the classification part to improve self-expressiveness to build
a better affinity matrix through collaborative optimization.
We evaluate our algorithm on three datasets , namely
MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998), Fashion-MNIST (Xiao et al.,
2017), and the Stanford Online Products dataset (Oh Song
et al., 2016) which exhibit different levels of difficulty. Our
empirical study shows the superiority of the proposed algo-

