Robust Decision Trees Against Adversarial Examples

Hongge Chen 1 Huan Zhang 2 Duane Boning 1 Cho-Jui Hsieh 2

Abstract
Although adversarial examples and model robustness have been extensively studied in the context
of linear models and neural networks, research
on this issue in tree-based models and how to
make tree-based models robust against adversarial examples is still limited. In this paper, we
show that tree based models are also vulnerable
to adversarial examples and develop a novel algorithm to learn robust trees. At its core, our method
aims to optimize the performance under the worstcase perturbation of input features, which leads
to a max-min saddle point problem. Incorporating this saddle point objective into the decision
tree building procedure is non-trivial due to the
discrete nature of trees—a naive approach to finding the best split according to this saddle point
objective will take exponential time. To make
our approach practical and scalable, we propose
efficient tree building algorithms by approximating the inner minimizer in this saddle point problem, and present efficient implementations for
classical information gain based trees as well as
state-of-the-art tree boosting models such as XGBoost. Experimental results on real world datasets
demonstrate that the proposed algorithms can substantially improve the robustness of tree-based
models against adversarial examples.

1. Introduction
The discovery of adversarial examples in various deep learning models (Szegedy et al., 2013; Kos et al., 2018; Cheng
et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2018a; Carlini & Wagner, 2018;
Huang et al., 2017) has led to extensive studies of deep
neural network (DNN) robustness under such maliciously
crafted subtle perturbations. Although deep learning-based
model robustness has been well-studied in the recent literature from both attack and defense perspectives, studies on
1

MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA 2 UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. Correspondence to: Hongge Chen
<chenhg@mit.edu>, Huan Zhang <huan@huan-zhang.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

the robustness of tree-based models are quite limited (Papernot et al., 2016a).
In our paper, we shed light on the adversarial robustness
of an important class of machine learning models — decision trees. Among machine learning models used in practice, tree-based methods stand out in many applications,
with state-of-the-art performance. Tree-based methods have
achieved widespread success due to their simplicity, efficiency, interpretability, and scalability on large datasets.
They have been suggested as an advantageous alternative
to deep learning in some cases (Zhou & Feng, 2017). In
this paper, we study the robustness of tree-based models
under adversarial attacks, and more importantly, we propose
a novel robust training framework for tree-based models.
Below we highlight our major contributions:
• We study the robustness of decision tree-based machine
learning algorithms through the lens of adversarial examples.
We study both classical decision trees and state-of-the-art
ensemble boosting methods such as XGBoost. We show
that, similar to neural networks, tree-based models are also
vulnerable to adversarial examples.
• We propose a novel robust decision tree training framework to improve robustness against adversarial examples.
This method seeks to optimize the worst case condition by
solving a max-min problem. This framework is quite general and can be applied to tree-based models with any score
function used to choose splitting thresholds. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first work contributing a general
robust decision tree training framework against adversarial
examples.
• We implement our framework in both classical information gain based classification trees and state-of-the-art largescale tree boosting systems. To scale up our framework,
we make necessary and efficient approximations to handle
complex models and real world data sets. Our experimental
results show consistent and substantial improvements on
adversarial robustness.

2. Related Works
2.1. Decision Tree and Gradient Boosted Decision Tree
Decision tree learning methods are widely used in machine
learning and data mining. As considered here, the goal is to

