Neurally-Guided Structure Inference

Sidi Lu * 1 Jiayuan Mao * 2 3 Joshua B. Tenenbaum 2 4 5 Jiajun Wu 2

Abstract
Most structure inference methods either rely on
exhaustive search or are purely data-driven. Exhaustive search robustly infers the structure of
arbitrarily complex data, but it is slow. Datadriven methods allow efficient inference, but do
not generalize when test data have more complex
structures than training data. In this paper, we propose a hybrid inference algorithm, the NeurallyGuided Structure Inference (NG-SI), keeping the
advantages of both search-based and data-driven
methods. The key idea of NG-SI is to use a neural network to guide the hierarchical, layer-wise
search over the compositional space of structures.
We evaluate our algorithm on two representative
structure inference tasks: probabilistic matrix decomposition and symbolic program parsing. It
outperforms data-driven and search-based alternatives on both tasks.

1. Introduction
At the heart of human intelligence is the ability to infer the
structural representation of data. Looking at hand-written
digits from the MNIST dataset (LeCun et al., 1998), we
humans effortlessly group them by digits and extract key
features such as angles and thickness of strokes. Throughout
the years, researchers have developed many practically useful compositional structures. A non-exhaustive list includes
low-rank factorization (Mnih & Salakhutdinov, 2008), clustering, co-clustering (Kemp et al., 2006), binary latent factors (Ghahramani & Griffiths, 2006), sparse coding (Olshausen & Field, 1996; Berkes et al., 2008), and dependent
GSM (Karklin & Lewicki, 2009).
*

Equal contribution 1 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 MIT
CSAIL, 3 IIIS, Tsinghua University, 4 Department of Brain
and Cognitive Sciences, MIT, 5 Center for Brains, Minds
and Machines (CBMM), MIT. Correspondence to: Sidi Lu
<steve lu@apex.sjtu.edu.cn>, Jiajun Wu <jiajunwu@mit.edu>.
Project Page: http://ngsi.csail.mit.edu.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

An emerging research topic is to discover appropriate structures from data automatically (Kemp & Tenenbaum, 2008;
Grosse et al., 2012). These methods are motivated by a
key observation: structures can be expressed as hierarchical
compositions of primitive components. Given the set of
primitives and the production rules for composition (a.k.a. a
domain-specific language), they use various inference algorithms to find the appropriate structure.
These inference algorithms can be roughly divided into two
categories: search-based and data-driven. Search-based algorithms (Figure 1a) look for the best structure by an exhaustive search over the compositional space of possible structures. Candidate structures are ranked by expert-designed
metrics. Such search routines are robust in inferring structures of arbitrary complexity, but they can be prohibitively
slow for complex structures.
By contrast, data-driven algorithms (Figure 1b) learn to infer structures based on annotated data. Among them, deep
neural networks enable efficient amortized inference: by
learning from past inferences, future inferences run faster.
Nevertheless, data-driven methods tend to overfit to training examples and fail to generalize to test data with more
complex structures.
In this paper, we propose the Neurally-Guided Structure
Inference (NG-SI, see Figure 1c), a hybrid inference algorithm that integrates the advantages of both search-based
and data-driven approaches. In particular, it uses a neural
network learning to guide a hierarchical, layer-wise search
process. For each layer, the neural guider outputs a probability distribution over all possible production rules that can
be applied. Based on this ranking, only a small number of
rules are evaluated. This remarkably reduces the number of
nodes in the search tree.
We evaluate NG-SI on two representative structure inference
tasks: probabilistic matrix decomposition and symbolic program parsing. It outperforms data-driven and search-based
alternatives in both inference robustness and efficiency.

2. Structure Inference
In this section, we formally introduce the task of inferring
hierarchical structures from data.

