Anomaly Detection With Multiple-Hypotheses Predictions

Duc Tam Nguyen 1 2 Zhongyu Lou 2 Michael Klar 2 Thomas Brox 1

Abstract
In one-class-learning tasks, only the normal case
(foreground) can be modeled with data, whereas
the variation of all possible anomalies is too erratic to be described by samples. Thus, due to the
lack of representative data, the wide-spread discriminative approaches cannot cover such learning tasks, and rather generative models, which
attempt to learn the input density of the foreground, are used. However, generative models
suffer from a large input dimensionality (as in
images) and are typically inefficient learners. We
propose to learn the data distribution of the foreground more efficiently with a multi-hypotheses
autoencoder. Moreover, the model is criticized
by a discriminator, which prevents artificial data
modes not supported by data, and enforces diversity across hypotheses. Our multiple-hypothesesbased anomaly detection framework allows the reliable identification of out-of-distribution samples.
For anomaly detection on CIFAR-10, it yields up
to 3.9% points improvement over previously reported results. On a real anomaly detection task,
the approach reduces the error of the baseline
models from 6.8% to 1.5%.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection classifies a sample as normal or abnormal. In many applications, however, it must be treated as a
one-class-learning problem, since the abnormal class cannot
be defined sufficiently by samples. Samples of the abnormal
class can be extremely rare, or they do not cover the full
space of possible anomalies. For instance, in an autonomous
1

Computer Vision Group, University of Freiburg,
2
Freiburg, Germany
Corporate Research, Robert Bosch
GmbH, Renningen, Germany.
Correspondence to: Duc
Tam
Nguyen
<Nguyen@informatik.uni-freiburg.de>,
Zhongyu Lou <Zhongyu.Lou@de.bosch.com>, Michael
Klar <Michael.Klar2@de.bosch.com>,
Thomas Brox
<Brox@informatik.uni-freiburg.de>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

driving system, we may have a test case with a bear or a
kangaroo on the road. For defect detection in manufacturing,
new, unknown production anomalies due to critical changes
in the production environment can appear. In medical data
analysis, there can be unknown deviations from the healthy
state. In all these cases, the well-studied discriminative
models, where decision boundaries of classifiers are learned
from training samples of all classes, cannot be applied. The
decision boundary learning of discriminative models will
be dominated by the normal class, which will negatively
influence the classification performance.
Anomaly detection as one-class learning is typically approached by generative, reconstruction-based methods
(Zong et al., 2018). They approximate the input distribution of the normal cases by parametric models, which allow
them to reconstruct input samples from this distribution.
At test time, the data negative log-likelihood serves as an
anomaly-score. In the case of high-dimensional inputs, such
as images, learning a representative distribution model of
the normal class is hard and requires many samples.
Autoencoder-based approaches, such as the variational autoencoder (Rezende et al., 2014; Kingma & Welling, 2013),
mitigate the problem by learning a mapping to a lowerdimensional representation, where the actual distribution
is modeled. In principle, the nonlinear mappings in the
encoder and decoder allow the model to cover multi-modal
distributions in the input space. However, in practice, autoencoders tend to yield blurry reconstructions, since they
regress mostly the conditional mean rather than the actual
multi-modal distribution (see Fig. 1 for an example on a
metal anomaly dataset). Due to multiple modes in the actual
distribution, the approximation with the mean predicts high
probabilities in areas not supported by samples. The blurry
reconstructions in Fig. 1 should have a low probability and
be classified as anomalies, but instead they have the highest
likelihood under the learned autoencoder. This is fatal for
anomaly detection.
Alternatively, mixture density networks (Bishop, 1994) learn
a conditional Gaussian mixture distribution. They directly
estimate local densities that are coupled to a global density estimate via mixing coefficients. Anomaly scores for
new points can be estimated using the data likelihood (see
Appendix). However, global, multi-modal distribution es-

