Domain Adaptation with Asymmetrically-Relaxed Distribution Alignment

Yifan Wu 1 Ezra Winston 1 Divyansh Kaushik 1 Zachary C. Lipton 1

Abstract
Domain adaptation addresses the common situation in which the target distribution generating our test data differs from the source distribution generating our training data. While absent assumptions, domain adaptation is impossible, strict conditions, e.g. covariate or label shift,
enable principled algorithms. Recently-proposed
domain-adversarial approaches consist of aligning
source and target encodings, an approach often
motivated as minimizing two (of three) terms in a
theoretical bound on target error. Unfortunately,
this minimization can cause arbitrary increases
in the third term, a problem guaranteed to arise
under shifting label distributions. We propose
asymmetrically-relaxed distribution alignment, a
new approach that overcomes some limitations of
standard domain-adversarial algorithms. Moreover, we characterize precise assumptions under
which our algorithm is theoretically principled
and demonstrate empirical benefits on both synthetic and real datasets.

1. Introduction
Despite breakthroughs in supervised deep learning across a
variety of challenging tasks, current techniques depend precariously on the i.i.d. assumption. Unfortunately, real-world
settings often demand not just generalization to unseen examples but robustness under a variety of shocks to the data
distribution. Ideally, our models would leverage unlabeled
test data, adapting in real time to produce improved predictions. Unsupervised domain adaptation formalizes this
problem as learning a classifier from labeled source domain
data and unlabeled data from a target domain, to maximize
performance on the target distribution.
Without further assumptions, guarantees of target-domain
accuracy are impossible (Ben-David et al., 2010b). How1
Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Yifan Wu
<yw4@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

ever, well-chosen assumptions can make possible algorithms
with non-vacuous performance guarantees. For example,
under the covariate shift assumption (Heckman, 1977; Shimodaira, 2000), although the input marginals can vary between source and target (pS (x) 6= pT (x)), the conditional
distribution of the labels (given features) exhibits invariance across domains (pS (y|x) = pT (y|x)). Some consider
the reverse setting label shift (Saerens et al., 2002; Zhang
et al., 2013; Lipton et al., 2018), where although the label
distribution shifts (pS (y) 6= pT (y)), the class-conditional
input distribution is invariant (pS (x|y) = pT (x|y)). Traditional approaches to both problems require the source
distribution’s support to cover the target support, estimating
adapted classifiers via importance-weighted risk minimization (Shimodaira, 2000; Huang et al., 2007; Gretton et al.,
2009; Yu & Szepesvári, 2012; Lipton et al., 2018).
Problematically, assumptions of contained support are violated in practice. Moreover, most theoretical analyses do
not guaranteed target accuracy when the source distribution
support does not cover that of the target. A notable exception, Ben-David et al. (2010a) leverages capacity constraints
on the hypothesis class to enable generalization to out-ofsupport samples. However, their results (i) do not hold
for high-capacity hypothesis classes, e.g., neural networks;
and (ii) do not provide intuitive interpretations on what is
sufficient to guarantee a good target domain performance.
A recent sequence of deep learning papers have proposed
empirically-supported adversarial training schemes aimed
at practical problems with non-overlapping supports (Ganin
et al., 2016; Tzeng et al.). Example problems include generalizing from gray-scale images to colored images or product
images on white backgrounds to photos of products in natural settings. While importance-weighting solutions are
useless here (with non-overlapping support, weights are unbounded), domain-adversarial networks (Ganin et al., 2016)
and subsequently-proposed variants report favorable empirical results on a variety of image recognition challenges.
The key idea of domain-adversarial networks is to simultaneously minimize the source error and align the two distributions in representation space. The scheme consists of an
encoder, a label classifier, and a domain classifier. During
training, the domain classifier is optimized to predict each
image’s domain given its encoding. The label classifier

