Open-ended Learning in Symmetric Zero-sum Games
David Balduzzi 1 Marta Garnelo 1 Yoram Bachrach 1 Wojciech M. Czarnecki 1 Julien Perolat 1
Max Jaderberg 1 Thore Graepel 1

Abstract
Zero-sum games such as chess and poker are, abstractly, functions that evaluate pairs of agents,
for example labeling them ‘winner’ and ‘loser’.
If the game is approximately transitive, then selfplay generates sequences of agents of increasing strength. However, nontransitive games, such
as rock-paper-scissors, can exhibit strategic cycles, and there is no longer a clear objective – we
want agents to increase in strength, but against
whom is unclear. In this paper, we introduce a
geometric framework for formulating agent objectives in zero-sum games, in order to construct
adaptive sequences of objectives that yield openended learning. The framework allows us to reason about population performance in nontransitive games, and enables the development of a
new algorithm (rectified Nash response, PSROrN )
that uses game-theoretic niching to construct diverse populations of effective agents, producing
a stronger set of agents than existing algorithms.
We apply PSROrN to two highly nontransitive resource allocation games and find that PSROrN
consistently outperforms the existing alternatives.

1. Introduction
A story goes that a Cambridge tutor in the mid-19th century
once proclaimed: “I’m teaching the smartest boy in Britain.”
His colleague retorted: “I’m teaching the best test-taker.”
Depending on the version of the story, the first boy was
either Lord Kelvin or James Clerk Maxwell. The second boy,
who indeed scored highest on the Tripos, is long forgotten.
Modern learning algorithms are outstanding test-takers:
once a problem is packaged into a suitable objective, deep
(reinforcement) learning algorithms often find a good solution. However, in many multi-agent domains, the question
1

DeepMind. Correspondence to: <dbalduzzi@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

of what test to take, or what objective to optimize, is not
clear. This paper proposes algorithms that adaptively and
continually pose new, useful objectives which result in openended learning in two-player zero-sum games. This setting
has a large scope of applications and is general enough to
include function optimization as a special case.
Learning in games is often conservatively formulated as
training agents that tie or beat, on average, a fixed set of
opponents. However, the dual task, that of generating useful
opponents to train and evaluate against, is under-studied. It
is not enough to beat the agents you know; it is also important to generate better opponents, which exhibit behaviours
that you don’t know.
There are very successful examples of algorithms that pose
and solve a series of increasingly difficult problems for
themselves through forms of self-play (Silver et al., 2018;
Jaderberg et al., 2018; Bansal et al., 2018; Tesauro, 1995).
Unfortunately, it is easy to encounter nontransitive games
where self-play cycles through agents without improving
overall agent strength – simultaneously improving against
one opponent and worsening against another. In this paper,
we develop a mathematical framework for analyzing nontransitive games, and present algorithms that systematically
uncover and solve the latent problems embedded in a game.
Overview. The paper starts in Section 2 by introducing
functional-form games (FFGs) as a new mathematical model
of zero-sum games played by parametrized agents such as
neural networks. Theorem 1 decomposes any FFG into a
sum of transitive and cyclic components. Transitive games,
and closely related monotonic games, are the natural setting for self-play, but the cyclic components, present in
non-transitive games, require more sophisticated algorithms
which motivates the remainder of the paper.
The main problem in tackling nontransitive games, where
there is not necessarily a best agent, is understanding what
the objective should be. In Section 3, we formulate the
global objective in terms of gamescapes – convex polytopes that encode the interactions between agents in a game.
If the game is transitive or monotonic, then the gamescape
degenerates to a one-dimensional landscape. In nontransitive games, the gamescape can be high-dimensional because
training against one agent can be fundamentally different

