Supervised Hierarchical Clustering with Exponential Linkage

Nishant Yadav 1 Ari Kobren 1 Nicholas Monath 1 Andrew McCallum 1

Abstract
In supervised clustering, standard techniques for
learning a pairwise dissimilarity function often
suffer from a discrepancy between the training
and clustering objectives, leading to poor cluster
quality. Rectifying this discrepancy necessitates
matching the procedure for training the dissimilarity function to the clustering algorithm. In this
paper, we introduce a method for training the dissimilarity function in a way that is tightly coupled with hierarchical clustering, in particular single linkage. However, the appropriate clustering
algorithm for a given dataset is often unknown.
Thus we introduce an approach to supervised hierarchical clustering that smoothly interpolates
between single, average, and complete linkage,
and we give a training procedure that simultaneously learns a linkage function and a dissimilarity function. We accomplish this with a novel
Exponential Linkage function that has a learnable
parameter that controls the interpolation. In experiments on four datasets, our joint training procedure consistently matches or outperforms the next
best training procedure/linkage function pair and
gives up to 8 points improvement in dendrogram
purity over discrepant pairs.

1. Introduction
Clustering algorithms are pervasive in data analysis, preprocessing, modeling and visualization (Brown et al., 1992;
Alon et al., 1999; Seo & Shneiderman, 2002). While often an unsuperivsed problem, in many cases, there exists
a small collection of data points that are labeled with their
ground-truth cluster assignments. This enables supervised
clustering, where a dissimilarity function is learned from the
1

College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst, USA. Correspondence
to: Nishant Yadav <nishantyadav@cs.umass.edu>, Ari
Kobren
<akobren@cs.umass.edu>,
Nicholas
Monath
<nmonath@cs.umass.edu>, Andrew McCallum <mccallum@cs.umass.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

labeled data and then used by a clustering algorithm to partition unlabeled data (Finley & Joachims, 2005). Supervised
clustering is a common approach in many practical application areas, such as record linkage (Bilenko & Mooney,
2002; Bilenko et al., 2006), coreference resolution (Ng &
Cardie, 2002b; Huang et al., 2006; Stoyanov et al., 2009)
and image segmentation (Liu et al., 2013).
In both supervised and unsupervised settings, the choice
of clustering algorithm bears a significant impact on the
quality of the resulting partition of the data. This is because
each clustering algorithm is designed with specific inductive biases, for example: k-means performs best when the
data points in each cluster are close to that cluster’s mean,
DBSCAN (Ester et al., 1996) detects clusters composed of
contiguous, high-density regions, and hierarchical agglomerative clustering with average linkage discovers clusters
for which all within-cluster data points pairs are similar
on average. In addition to choosing a clustering algorithm,
supervised clustering demands that practitioners choose a
training procedure for learning the dissimilarity function
that will be used by the algorithm. Often in practice, the
training and clustering objectives are mismatched, leading
to poor cluster quality.
This is especially relevant for the family of hierarchical agglomerative clustering (HAC) variants, which are widely
deployed (Culotta et al., 2007; Lee et al., 2012; Levin et al.,
2012; Kenyon-Dean et al., 2018) and are the subject of
significant theoretical study (Dasgupta, 2016; Moseley &
Wang, 2017). Variants in the HAC family iteratively merge
clusters greedily according to the dissimilarity between pairs
of clusters which is measured using a linkage function. HAC
variants are differentiated based on the linkage function.
Common linkages, such as single, average, and complete
linkage use pairwise data point dissimilarities to compute
dissimilarities between pairs of clusters. In the supervised
setting, learning is typically performed by training the pairwise dissimilarity function to predict dissimilarity for all
within- and across-cluster data points pairs, regardless of
the selected linkage function (Bilenko & Mooney, 2002;
Huang et al., 2006; Stoyanov et al., 2009; Guha et al., 2015).
However, naively training the dissimilarity function to predict whether all data point pairs belong to the same cluster
does not lead to robust generalization on unseen data. Especially when clustering is performed with the single linkage

