Natural Analysts in Adaptive Data Analysis

Tijana Zrnic 1 Moritz Hardt 1

Abstract
Adaptive data analysis is frequently criticized for
its pessimistic generalization guarantees. The
source of these pessimistic bounds is a model
that permits arbitrary, possibly adversarial analysts that optimally use information to bias results. While being a central issue in the field,
still lacking are notions of natural analysts that
allow for more optimistic bounds faithful to the
reality that typical analysts aren’t adversarial. In
this work, we propose notions of natural analysts
that smoothly interpolate between the optimal
non-adaptive bounds and the best-known adaptive generalization bounds. To accomplish this,
we model the analyst’s knowledge as evolving
according to the rules of an unknown dynamical system that takes in revealed information and
outputs new statistical queries to the data. This
allows us to restrict the analyst through different natural control-theoretic notions. One such
notion corresponds to a recency bias, formalizing an inability to arbitrarily use distant information. Another complementary notion formalizes
an anchoring bias, a tendency to weight initial
information more strongly. Both notions come
with quantitative parameters that smoothly interpolate between the non-adaptive case and the fully
adaptive case, allowing for a rich spectrum of intermediate analysts that are neither non-adaptive
nor adversarial. Natural not only from a cognitive
perspective, we show that our notions also capture standard optimization methods, like gradient
descent in various settings. This gives a new interpretation to the fact that gradient descent tends
to overfit much less than its adaptive nature might
suggest.

1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences,
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, USA. Correspondence to: Tijana Zrnic <tijana@eecs.berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Modern data analysis is usually adaptive in the sense that
past analyses shape future analyses. This practice offers
power and flexibility to data science at the cost of a greater
potential for spurious results. The issue is now well recognized in multiple communities. The problem of inference
after selection is an active research area in statistics, while
computer science has developed an area known as adaptive
data analysis.
The statistical community has focused on analyzing concrete
two-step procedures, such as, variable selection followed
by a significance test on the chosen variables (Fithian et al.,
2014; Belloni et al., 2014). This approach leads to precise
insight into some concrete procedures, but it does not capture the workflow of typical analysts that proceed in more
than two steps.
Computer scientists took an alternative route by focusing on
a powerful statistical query model that in principle captures
all sorts of different analyses involving many adaptive steps.
In this model, an analyst interacts with a data set through
a primitive called statistical queries. In each round, the
analyst can evaluate one statistical query on the data. Future
statistical queries may depend arbitrarily on the revealed
transcript of past queries and query results. This level of
generality comes at the cost of diminished generalization
ability.
To review what’s known, the generalization error on t nonadaptively chosen statistical
queries on a data set of size n
p
is on the order of O( log(t)/n), as follows from Hoeffding’s bound. In the fully adaptive
p model, Hoeffding’s bound
would only give a rate of Õ( t/n). This disappointing
bound coincides with the naive strategy of splitting the data
set into t chunks, each of size n/t and using one chunk for
each query. Noise addition techniques combined with the
mature technical repertoire
√ of differential privacy yield a better bound of Õ(t1/4 / n) (Bassily et al., 2016). However,
this bound still features a polynomial dependence on the
number of queries t that has resisted improvement for years.
Negative results suggest that it might in fact be computationally hard to improve on this bound (Hardt & Ullman,
2014; Ullman et al., 2018).
For years, the knee jerk reaction to such pessimistic bounds

