The Advantages of Multiple Classes for
Reducing Overfitting from Test Set Reuse

Vitaly Feldman 1 2 Roy Frostig 1 Moritz Hardt 3 4

Abstract
Excessive reuse of holdout data can lead to overfitting. Known results show that, in the worstcase, given the accuracies of k adaptively chosen
classifiers on a dataset of size n,
p one can create a classifier with a bias of Θ( k/n) for any
binary prediction problem.
p We show a new upper bound of Õ(max{ k log(n)/(mn), k/n})
on the worst-case bias that any attack can achieve
in a prediction problem with m classes. Moreover, we present
an efficient attack that achieves a
p
bias of Ω( k/(m2 n)) and improves on previous
work for the binary setting (m = 2). We also
present an inefficient attack that achieves a bias
of Ω̃(k/n). Complementing our theoretical work,
we give new practical attacks to stress-test multiclass benchmarks by aiming to create as large a
bias as possible with a given number of queries.
Our experiments show that the additional uncertainty of prediction with a large number of classes
indeed mitigates the effect of our best attacks.

1. Introduction
Several machine learning benchmarks have shown surprising longevity, such as the ILSVRC 2012 image classification
benchmark based on the ImageNet database (Russakovsky
et al., 2015). Even though the test set contains only 50,000
data points, hundreds of results have been reported on this
test set. Large-scale hyperparameter tuning and experimental trials across numerous studies likely add thousands of
queries to the test data. Despite this excessive data reuse,
recent replication studies (Recht et al., 2018; 2019; Yadav &
Bottou, 2019) have shown that the best performing models
1
Google Brain 2 Part of this work was done while the
author was visiting the Simons Institute for the Theory of
Computing. 3 University of California, Berkeley 4 Work done
while at Google. Correspondence to: Vitaly Feldman <vitalyfm@google.com>, Roy Frostig <frostig@google.com>,
Moritz Hardt <hardt@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

transfer rather gracefully to a newly collected test set collected from the same source according to the same protocol.
What matters is not only the number of times that a test (or
holdout) set has been accessed, but also how it is accessed.
Modern machine learning practice is adaptive in its nature.
Prior information about a model’s performance on the test
set inevitably influences future modeling choices and hyperparameter settings. Adaptive behavior, in principle, can
have a radical effect on generalization.
Standard concentration
bounds teach us to expect a maxip
mum error of O( log(k)/n) when estimating the means
of k non-adaptively chosen bounded functions on a data set
of size
p n. However, this upper bound sharply deteriorates to
O( k/n) for adaptively chosen functions, an exponential
loss in k. Moreover, there exists a sequence of adaptively
chosen functions, what we
p will call an attack, that causes
an estimation error of Ω( k/n) (Dwork et al., 2014).
What this means is that in principle an analyst can overfit
substantially to a test set with relatively few queries to the
test set. Powerful results in adaptive data analysis provide
sophisticated holdout mechanisms that guarantee better error bounds through noise addition (Dwork et al., 2015b)
and limited feedback mechanisms (Blum & Hardt, 2015).
However, the standard holdout method remains widely used
in practice, ranging from machine learning benchmarks and
data science competitions to validating scientific research
and testing products during development. If the pessimistic
bound were indicative of performance in practice, the holdout method would likely be much less useful than it is.
It seems evident that there are factors that prevent this worstcase overfitting from happening in practice. In this work, we
isolate the number of classes in the prediction problem as
one such factor that has an important effect on the amount
of overfitting we expect to see. Indeed, we find that in the
worst-case the number of queries required to achieve certain
bias grows at least linearly with the number of classes, a
phenomenon that we establish theoretically and substantiate
experimentally.

