Optimal Auctions through Deep Learning

Paul Dütting * 1 Zhe Feng * 2 Harikrishna Narasimham * 2 David C. Parkes * 2 Sai S. Ravindranath * 2

Abstract
Designing an incentive compatible auction that
maximizes expected revenue is an intricate task.
The single-item case was resolved in a seminal
piece of work by Myerson in 1981. Even after 30-40 years of intense research the problem
remains unsolved for seemingly simple multibidder, multi-item settings. In this work, we initiate the exploration of the use of tools from deep
learning for the automated design of optimal auctions. We model an auction as a multi-layer neural
network, frame optimal auction design as a constrained learning problem, and show how it can
be solved using standard pipelines. We prove generalization bounds and present extensive experiments, recovering essentially all known analytical
solutions for multi-item settings, and obtaining
novel mechanisms for settings in which the optimal mechanism is unknown.

1. Introduction
Optimal auction design is one of the cornerstones of economic theory. It is of great practical importance, as auctions
are used across industries and by the public sector to organize the sale of their products and services. Concrete
examples are the US FCC Incentive Auction, the sponsored
search auctions conducted by web search engines such as
Google, or the auctions run on platforms such as eBay.
In the standard independent private valuations model, each
bidder has a valuation function over subsets of items, drawn
independently from not necessarily identical distributions.
It is assumed that the auctioneer knows the distributions and
can (and will) use this information in designing the auction.
A major difficulty in designing auctions is that valuations
are private and bidders need to be incentivized to report
their valuations truthfully. The goal is to learn an incentive
compatible auction that maximizes revenue.
*

1
Equal contribution
London School of Economics
Harvard University.
Correspondence to:
Zhe Feng
<zhe_feng@g.harvard.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

In a seminal piece of work, Myerson resolved the optimal
auction design problem when there is a single item for sale
(Myerson, 1981). Quite astonishingly, even after 30-40
years of intense research, the problem is not completely
resolved even for a simple setting with two bidders and two
items. While there have been some elegant partial characterization results (Manelli & Vincent, 2006; Pavlov, 2011;
Haghpanah & Hartline, 2015; Giannakopoulos & Koutsoupias, 2015; Daskalakis et al., 2017; Yao, 2017), and an
impressive sequence of recent algorithmic results (Cai et al.,
2012b;a; 2013; Hart & Nisan, 2017; Babaioff et al., 2014;
Yao, 2015; Cai & Zhao, 2017; Chawla et al., 2010), most
of them apply to the weaker notion of Bayesian incentive
compatibility (BIC). Our focus is on designing auctions that
satisfy dominant-strategy incentive compatibility (DSIC),
which is the more robust and desirable notion of incentive
compatibility.
A recent, concurrent line of work started to bring in tools
from machine learning and computational learning theory to
design auctions from samples of bidder valuations. Much of
the effort here has focused on analyzing the sample complexity of designing revenue-maximizing auctions (see e.g. Cole
& Roughgarden (2014); Mohri & Medina (2016)). A handful of works has leveraged machine learning to optimize different aspects of mechanisms (Lahaie, 2011; Dütting et al.,
2014; Narasimhan et al., 2016), but none of these offers the
generality and flexibility of our approach. There have also
been computational approaches to auction design, under the
agenda of automated mechanism design (Conitzer & Sandholm, 2002; 2004; Sandholm & Likhodedov, 2015), but
these are limited to specialized classes of auctions known to
be incentive compatible.
Our contribution. In this work we provide the first, general
purpose, end-to-end approach for solving the multi-item auction design problem. We use multi-layer neural networks
to encode auction mechanisms, with bidder valuations being the input and allocation and payment decisions being
the output. We then train the networks using samples from
the value distributions, so as to maximize expected revenue
subject to constraints for incentive compatibility.
To be able to tackle this problem using standard pipelines,
we restate the incentive compatibility constraint as requiring
the expected ex post regret for the auction to be zero. We

