Partially Exchangeable Networks and Architectures for Learning Summary
Statistics in Approximate Bayesian Computation

Samuel Wiqvist∗ 1 Pierre-Alexandre Mattei∗ 2 Umberto Picchini 3 Jes Frellsen 2

Abstract
We present a novel family of deep neural architectures, named partially exchangeable networks
(PENs) that leverage probabilistic symmetries.
By design, PENs are invariant to block-switch
transformations, which characterize the partial exchangeability properties of conditionally Markovian processes. Moreover, we show that any
block-switch invariant function has a PEN-like
representation. The DeepSets architecture is a
special case of PEN and we can therefore also target fully exchangeable data. We employ PENs to
learn summary statistics in approximate Bayesian
computation (ABC). When comparing PENs to
previous deep learning methods for learning summary statistics, our results are highly competitive,
both considering time series and static models. Indeed, PENs provide more reliable posterior samples even when using less training data.

1. Introduction
We propose a novel neural network architecture to ease the
application of approximate Bayesian computation (ABC),
a.k.a. likelihood-free inference. The architecture, called partially exchangeable network (PEN), uses partial exchangeability in Markovian data, allowing us to perform ABC
inference for time series models with Markovian structure.
Empirically, we also show that we can target non-Markovian
time series data with PENs. Since the DeepSets architecture (Zaheer et al., 2017) turns out to be a special case of
PEN, we can also perform ABC inference for static models. Our work is about automatically construct summary
*

Equal contribution 1 Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Lund
University, Lund, Sweden 2 Department of Computer Science, IT
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark 3 Department
of Mathematical Sciences, Chalmers University of Technology
and the University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. Correspondence to: Jes Frellsen <jefr@itu.dk>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

statistics of the data that are informative for model parameters. This is a main challenge in the practical application
of ABC algorithms, since such summaries are often handpicked (i.e. ad-hoc summaries are constructed from model
domain expertise), or these are automatically constructed
using a number of approaches as detailed in Section 2. Neural networks have been previously used to automatically
construct summary statistics for ABC. Jiang et al. (2017)
and Creel (2017) employ standard multilayer perceptron
(MLP) networks for learning the summary statistics. Chan
et al. (2018) introduce a network that exploits the exchangeability property in exchangeable data. Our PEN architecture
is a new addition to the tools for automatic construction of
summary statistics, and PEN produces competitive inference results compared to Jiang et al. (2017), which in turn
was shown outperforming the semi-automatic regression
method by Fearnhead & Prangle (2012). Moreover, our
PEN architecture is more data efficient and when reducing
the training data PEN outperforms Jiang et al. (2017), the
factor of reduction being of order 10 to 102 depending on
cases.
Our main contributions are:
• Introducing the partially exchangeable networks
(PENs) architecture;
• Using PENs to automatically learn summary statistics
for ABC inference. We consider both static and dynamic models. In particular, our network architecture
is specifically designed to learn summary statistics for
dynamic models.

2. Approximate Bayesian computation
Approximate Bayesian computation (ABC) is an increasingly popular inference method for model parameters θ, in
that it only requires the ability to produce artificial data from
a stochastic model simulator (Beaumont et al., 2002; Marin
et al., 2012). A simulator is essentially a computer program,
which takes θ, makes internal calls to a random number
generator, and outputs a vector of artificial data. The implication is that ABC can be used to produce approximate
inference when the likelihood function p(y|θ) underlying

