Lower Bounds for Smooth Nonconvex Finite-Sum Optimization

Dongruo Zhou 1 Quanquan Gu 1

Abstract
Smooth finite-sum optimization has been widely
studied in both convex and nonconvex settings.
However, existing lower bounds for finite-sum optimization are mostly limited to the setting where
each component function is (strongly) convex,
while the lower bounds for nonconvex finite-sum
optimization remain largely unsolved. In this paper, we study the lower bounds for smooth nonconvex finite-sum optimization, where the objective function is the average of n nonconvex component functions. We prove tight lower bounds
for the complexity of finding -suboptimal point
and -approximate stationary point in different settings, for a wide regime of the smallest eigenvalue
of the Hessian of the objective function (or each
component function). Given our lower bounds,
we can show that existing algorithms including
KatyushaX (Allen-Zhu, 2018), Natasha (AllenZhu, 2017b) and StagewiseKatyusha (Chen &
Yang, 2018) have achieved optimal Incremental
First-order Oracle (IFO) complexity (i.e., number
of IFO calls) up to logarithm factors for nonconvex finite-sum optimization. We also point out potential ways to further improve these complexity
results, in terms of making stronger assumptions
or by a different convergence analysis.

1. Introduction
We consider minimizing the following unconstrained finitesum optimization problem:
n

min F (x) =

x∈Rd

1X
fi (x),
n i=1

(1.1)

where each fi (x) : Rm → R is smooth and nonconvex
function. We are interested in the algorithmic performance
1

Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles. Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu
<qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

of first-order algorithms for solving (1.1), which have accesses to the Incremental First-order Oracle (IFO) (Agarwal
& Bottou, 2015) defined as follows:
Given x and i ∈ [n], an IFO returns [fi (x), ∇fi (x)].
In this paper, we consider the very general setting where
F (x) is of (l, L)-smoothness (Allen-Zhu, 2017b), i.e., there
exist some constant l ∈ R and L > 0, such that for any
x, y ∈ Rd ,
l
kx − yk22 ≤ F (x) − F (y) − h∇F (y), x − yi
2
L
(1.2)
≤ kx − yk22 ,
2
where l ∈ R 1 is the lower smoothness parameter, and L > 0
is the upper smoothness parameter. Note that conventional
L-smoothness definition is a special case of (1.2), where l =
−L. (1.2) is quite general, because with different choice of
l, (1.1) and (1.2) together can cover various kinds of smooth
finite-sum optimization problems. For example, when l ≥ 0,
F (x) is convex function, and F (x) is σ-strongly convex
if l = σ > 0. Such a sum-of-nonconvex optimization
problem (convex functions that are average of nonconvex
ones) was originally identified in Shalev-Shwartz (2015),
and appears in various machine learning problems such
as the shift-and-inverse procedure for principal component
analsyis (PCA) (Garber et al., 2016; Allen-Zhu & Li, 2016).
In specific, inPorder to calculate the leading eigenvector
n
of A = 1/n i=1 ai a>
, the shift-and-inverse procedure
iP
n
minimizes F (x) = 1/n i=1 fi (x), where fi (x) = 1/2 ·
>
>
>
x (µI − ai ai )x + b x, µ > 0 such that µI  A, and b
is a vector. It can be seen that F (x) is convex because its
Hessian µI − A is positive definite, but some fi (x)’s can be
nonconvex since their Hessian µI − ai a>
i can be negative
definite. With l ≥ 0, our goal is to find an -suboptimal
b (Woodworth & Srebro, 2016) to (1.1), which
solution x
satisfies
EF (b
x) − inf F (x) ≤ .
x

(1.3)

On the other hand, when l = −σ < 0, F (x) is nonconvex,
1
We allow l to be nonnegative, which covers the definitions of
convex and strongly convex functions.

