Fair k-Center Clustering for Data Summarization

Matthäus Kleindessner 1 Pranjal Awasthi 1 Jamie Morgenstern 2

Abstract
In data summarization we want to choose k prototypes in order to summarize a data set. We study
a setting where the data set comprises several demographic groups and we are restricted to choose
ki prototypes belonging to group i. A common
approach to the problem without the fairness constraint is to optimize a centroid-based clustering
objective such as k-center. A natural extension
then is to incorporate the fairness constraint into
the clustering problem. Existing algorithms for
doing so run in time super-quadratic in the size of
the data set, which is in contrast to the standard kcenter problem being approximable in linear time.
In this paper, we resolve this gap by providing a
simple approximation algorithm for the k-center
problem under the fairness constraint with running time linear in the size of the data set and k.
If the number of demographic groups is small, the
approximation guarantee of our algorithm only
incurs a constant-factor overhead.

1. Introduction
Machine learning (ML) algorithms have been rapidly
adopted in numerous human-centric domains, from personalized advertising to lending to health care. Fast on the heels
of this ubiquity have come a whole host of concerning behaviors from these algorithms: facial recognition has higher
accuracy on white, male faces (Buolamwini & Gebru, 2017);
online advertisements suggesting arrest are shown more frequently to search queries that comprise a name primarily
associated with minority groups (Sweeney, 2013); and criminal recidivism tools are likely to mislabel black low-risk
defendants as high-risk while mislabeling white high-risk
defendants as low-risk (Angwin et al., 2016). There are also
1

Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University, NJ
College of Computing, Georgia Tech, GA. Correspondence to:
Matthäus Kleindessner <matthaeus.kleindessner@rutgers.edu>,
Pranjal Awasthi <pranjal.awasthi@rutgers.edu>, Jamie Morgenstern <jamiemmt@cs.gatech.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

several examples of unsavory ML behavior pertaining to
unsupervised learning tasks, such as gender stereotypes in
word2vec embeddings (Bolukbasi et al., 2016). Most of
the academic work on fairness in ML, however, has investigated how to solve classification tasks subject to various
constraints on the behavior of a classifier on different demographic groups (e.g., Hardt et al., 2016; Zafar et al., 2017).
This paper adds to the literature on fair methods for unsupervised learning tasks (see Section 4 for related work). We
consider the problem of data summarization (Hesabi et al.,
2015) through the lens of algorithmic fairness. The goal of
data summarization is to output a small but representative
subset of a data set. Think of an image database and a user
entering a query that is matched by many images. Rather
than presenting the user with all matching images, we only
want to show a summary. In such an example, a data summary can be quite unfair on a demographic group. Indeed,
Google Images has been found to answer the query “CEO”
with a much higher fraction of images of men compared to
the real-world fraction of male CEOs (Kay et al., 2015).
One approach to the problem of data summarization is provided by centroid-based clustering, such as k-center (formally defined in Section 2) or k-medoid (Hastie et al., 2009,
Section 14.3.10; sometimes referred to as k-median). For
a centroid-based clustering objective, an optimal clustering
of a data set S can be defined by k points c∗1 , . . . , c∗k ∈ S,
called centroids, such that the clusters are formed by assigning every s ∈ S to its closest centroid. Since the centroids
are good representatives of their clusters, the set of centroids can be used as a summary of S. This approach of
data summarization via centroid-based clustering is used
in numerous domains, for example in text summarization
(Moens et al., 1999) or robotics (Girdhar & Dudek, 2012).
If the data set S comprises several demographic groups
S1 , . . . , Sm , we may consider c∗1 , . . . , c∗k to be a fair summary only if the groups are represented fairly: if in the real
world 70% of CEOs are male and we want to output ten
images for the query “CEO”, then three of the ten images
should show women. Formally, this can be encoded with
one parameter kSi for every group Si . Our goal is then to
minimize the clustering objective under the constraint that
kSi many centroids belong to Si . A constraint of this form
can also enforce balanced summaries: even if in the real

