Remember and Forget for Experience Replay

Guido Novati 1 Petros Koumoutsakos 1

Abstract
Experience replay (ER) is a fundamental component of off-policy deep reinforcement learning
(RL). ER recalls experiences from past iterations
to compute gradient estimates for the current policy, increasing data-efficiency. However, the accuracy of such updates may deteriorate when the
policy diverges from past behaviors and can undermine the performance of ER. Many algorithms
mitigate this issue by tuning hyper-parameters
to slow down policy changes. An alternative is
to actively enforce the similarity between policy and the experiences in the replay memory.
We introduce Remember and Forget Experience
Replay (ReF-ER), a novel method that can enhance RL algorithms with parameterized policies.
ReF-ER (1) skips gradients computed from experiences that are too unlikely with the current
policy and (2) regulates policy changes within a
trust region of the replayed behaviors. We couple
ReF-ER with Q-learning, deterministic policy
gradient and off-policy gradient methods. We
find that ReF-ER consistently improves the performance of continuous-action, off-policy RL on
fully observable benchmarks and partially observable flow control problems.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has an ever increasing
number of success stories ranging from realistic simulated
environments (Schulman et al., 2015; Mnih et al., 2016),
robotics (Levine et al., 2016) and games (Mnih et al., 2015;
Silver et al., 2016). Experience Replay (ER) (Lin, 1992)
enhances RL algorithms by using information collected in
past policy (µ) iterations to compute updates for the current
policy (π). ER has become one of the mainstay techniques
to improve the sample-efficiency of off-policy deep RL.
1

Computational Science & Engineering Laboratory, ETH
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Guido Novati
<novatig@ethz.ch>, Petros Koumoutsakos <petros@ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Sampling from a replay memory (RM) stabilizes stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) by disrupting temporal correlations
and extracts information from useful experiences over multiple updates (Schaul et al., 2015b). However, when π is
parameterized by a neural network (NN), SGD updates may
result in significant changes to the policy, thereby shifting
the distribution of states observed from the environment.
In this case sampling the RM for further updates may lead
to incorrect gradient estimates, therefore deep RL methods must account for and limit the dissimilarity between π
and behaviors in the RM. Previous works employed trust
region methods to bound policy updates (Schulman et al.,
2015; Wang et al., 2017). Despite several successes, deep
RL algorithms are known to suffer from instabilities and
exhibit high-variance of outcomes (Islam et al., 2017; Henderson et al., 2017), especially continuous-action methods
employing the stochastic (Sutton et al., 2000) or deterministic (Silver et al., 2014) policy gradients (PG or DPG).
In this work we redesign ER in order to control the similarity
between the replay behaviors µ used to compute updates
and the policy π. More specifically, we classify experiences
either as “near-policy" or “far-policy", depending on the
ratio ρ of probabilities of selecting the associated action with
π and that with µ. The weight ρ appears in many estimators
that are used with ER such as the off-policy policy gradients
(off-PG) (Degris et al., 2012) and the off-policy return-based
evaluation algorithm Retrace (Munos et al., 2016). Here
we propose and analyze Remember and Forget Experience
Replay (ReF-ER), an ER method that can be applied to
any off-policy RL algorithm with parameterized policies.
ReF-ER limits the fraction of far-policy samples in the
RM, and computes gradient estimates only from near-policy
experiences. Furthermore, these hyper-parameters can be
gradually annealed during training to obtain increasingly
accurate updates from nearly on-policy experiences. We
show that ReF-ER allows better stability and performance
than conventional ER in all three main classes of continuousactions off-policy deep RL algorithms: methods based on
the DPG (ie. DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2016)), methods based
on Q-learning (ie. NAF (Gu et al., 2016)), and with offPG (Degris et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2017).
In recent years, there is a growing interest in coupling RL
with high-fidelity physics simulations (Reddy et al., 2016;
Novati et al., 2017; Colabrese et al., 2017; Verma et al.,

