Do ImageNet Classifiers Generalize to ImageNet?

Benjamin Recht⇤ 1 Rebecca Roelofs 1 Ludwig Schmidt 1 Vaishaal Shankar 1

Abstract
We build new test sets for the CIFAR-10 and ImageNet datasets. Both benchmarks have been the
focus of intense research for almost a decade, raising the danger of overfitting to excessively re-used
test sets. By closely following the original dataset
creation processes, we test to what extent current
classification models generalize to new data. We
evaluate a broad range of models and find accuracy drops of 3% – 15% on CIFAR-10 and 11%
– 14% on ImageNet. However, accuracy gains
on the original test sets translate to larger gains
on the new test sets. Our results suggest that the
accuracy drops are not caused by adaptivity, but
by the models’ inability to generalize to slightly
“harder” images than those found in the original
test sets.

1. Introduction
The overarching goal of machine learning is to produce
models that generalize. We usually quantify generalization
by measuring the performance of a model on a held-out
test set. What does good performance on the test set then
imply? At the very least, one would hope that the model also
performs well on a new test set assembled from the same
data source by following the same data cleaning protocol.
In this paper, we realize this thought experiment by replicating the dataset creation process for two prominent
benchmarks, CIFAR-10 and ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009;
Krizhevsky, 2009). In contrast to the ideal outcome, we find
that a wide range of classification models fail to reach their
original accuracy scores. The accuracy drops range from
3% to 15% on CIFAR-10 and 11% to 14% on ImageNet.
On ImageNet, the accuracy loss amounts to approximately
five years of progress in a highly active period of machine
learning research.
⇤
Authors ordered alphabetically. Ben did none of the work.
Department of Computer Science, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, California, USA. Correspondence to: Benjamin
Recht <brecht@berkeley.edu>.

1

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Conventional wisdom suggests that such drops arise because
the models have been adapted to the specific images in the
original test sets, e.g., via extensive hyperparameter tuning.
However, our experiments show that the relative order of
models is almost exactly preserved on our new test sets:
the models with highest accuracy on the original test sets
are still the models with highest accuracy on the new test
sets. Moreover, there are no diminishing returns in accuracy.
In fact, every percentage point of accuracy improvement
on the original test set translates to a larger improvement
on our new test sets. So although later models could have
been adapted more to the test set, they see smaller drops in
accuracy. These results provide evidence that exhaustive
test set evaluations are an effective way to improve image
classification models. Adaptivity is therefore an unlikely
explanation for the accuracy drops.
Instead, we propose an alternative explanation based on
the relative difficulty of the original and new test sets. We
demonstrate that it is possible to recover the original ImageNet accuracies almost exactly if we only include the
easiest images from our candidate pool. This suggests that
the accuracy scores of even the best image classifiers are
still highly sensitive to minutiae of the data cleaning process.
This brittleness puts claims about human-level performance
into context (He et al., 2015; Karpathy, 2011; Russakovsky
et al., 2015). It also shows that current classifiers still do
not generalize reliably even in the benign environment of a
carefully controlled reproducibility experiment.
Figure 1 shows the main result of our experiment. Before
we describe our methodology in Section 3, the next section
provides relevant background. To enable future research, we
release both our new test sets and the corresponding code.1

2. Potential Causes of Accuracy Drops
We adopt the standard classification setup and posit the
existence of a “true” underlying data distribution D over
labeled examples (x, y). The overall goal in classification
1

https://github.com/modestyachts/CIFAR-10
.1 and https://github.com/modestyachts/ImageN
etV2

