Agnostic Federated Learning

Mehryar Mohri 1 2 Gary Sivek 1 Ananda Theertha Suresh 1

Abstract
A key learning scenario in large-scale applications
is that of federated learning, where a centralized
model is trained based on data originating from a
large number of clients. We argue that, with the
existing training and inference, federated models
can be biased towards different clients. Instead,
we propose a new framework of agnostic federated learning, where the centralized model is optimized for any target distribution formed by a mixture of the client distributions. We further show
that this framework naturally yields a notion of
fairness. We present data-dependent Rademacher
complexity guarantees for learning with this objective, which guide the definition of an algorithm
for agnostic federated learning. We also give a fast
stochastic optimization algorithm for solving the
corresponding optimization problem, for which
we prove convergence bounds, assuming a convex
loss function and a convex hypothesis set. We further empirically demonstrate the benefits of our
approach in several datasets. Beyond federated
learning, our framework and algorithm can be of
interest to other learning scenarios such as cloud
computing, domain adaptation, drifting, and other
contexts where the training and test distributions
do not coincide.

1. Motivation
A key learning scenario in large-scale applications is that
of federated learning. In that scenario, a centralized model
is trained based on data originating from a large number of
clients, which may be mobile phones, other mobile devices,
or sensors (Konečnỳ, McMahan, Yu, Richtárik, Suresh, and
Bacon, 2016b; Konečnỳ, McMahan, Ramage, and Richtárik,
2016a). The training data typically remains distributed over
1

Google Research, New York; 2 Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York, NY. Correspondence to: Ananda
Theertha Suresh <theertha@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

the clients, each with possibly unreliable or relatively slow
network connections.
Federated learning raises several types of issues and has
been the topic of multiple research efforts. These include
systems, networking and communication bottleneck problems due to frequent exchanges between the central server
and the clients (McMahan et al., 2017). Other research efforts include the design of more efficient communication
strategies (Konečnỳ, McMahan, Yu, Richtárik, Suresh, and
Bacon, 2016b; Konečnỳ, McMahan, Ramage, and Richtárik,
2016a; Suresh, Yu, Kumar, and McMahan, 2017), devising
efficient distributed optimization methods benefiting from
differential privacy guarantees (Agarwal, Suresh, Yu, Kumar, and McMahan, 2018), as well as recent lower bound
guarantees for parallel stochastic optimization with a dependency graph (Woodworth, Wang, Smith, McMahan, and
Srebro, 2018).
Another important problem in federated learning, which
appears more generally in distributed machine learning and
other learning setups, is that of fairness. In many instances
in practice, the resulting learning models may be biased or
unfair: they may discriminate against some protected groups
(Bickel, Hammel, and O’Connell, 1975; Hardt, Price, Srebro, et al., 2016). As a simple example, a regression algorithm predicting a person’s salary could be using that
person’s gender. This is a central problem in modern machine learning that does not seem to have been specifically
studied in the context of federated learning.
While many problems related to federated learning have
been extensively studied, the key objective of learning in
that context seems not to have been carefully examined.
We are also not aware of statistical guarantees derived for
learning in this scenario. A crucial reason for such questions to emerge in this context is that the target distribution
for which the centralized model is learned is unspecified.
Which expected loss is federated learning seeking to minimize? Most centralized models for standard federated learning are trained on the aggregate training sample obtained
from the subsamples drawn from the clients. Thus, if we
denote by Dk the distribution associated to client k, mk the
size of the sample available from that client and m the total
sample size, intrinsically, the centralized model is trained to
minimize the loss with respect to the uniform distribution

