Statistics and Samples in Distributional Reinforcement Learning

Mark Rowland 1 Robert Dadashi 2 Saurabh Kumar 2 Rémi Munos 1 Marc G. Bellemare 2 Will Dabney 1

Abstract
We present a unifying framework for designing
and analysing distributional reinforcement learning (DRL) algorithms in terms of recursively estimating statistics of the return distribution. Our
key insight is that DRL algorithms can be decomposed as the combination of some statistical
estimator and a method for imputing a return distribution consistent with that set of statistics. With
this new understanding, we are able to provide
improved analyses of existing DRL algorithms as
well as construct a new algorithm (EDRL) based
upon estimation of the expectiles of the return
distribution. We compare EDRL with existing
methods on a variety of MDPs to illustrate concrete aspects of our analysis, and develop a deep
RL variant of the algorithm, ER-DQN, which we
evaluate on the Atari-57 suite of games.

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL), a central notion is the return,
the sum of discounted rewards. Typically, the average of
these returns is estimated by a value function and used
for policy improvement. Recently, however, approaches
that attempt to learn the distribution of the return have been
shown to be surprisingly effective (Morimura et al., 2010a;b;
Bellemare et al., 2017; Dabney et al., 2017; 2018; Gruslys
et al., 2018); we refer to the general approach of learning
return distributions as distributional RL (DRL).
Despite impressive experimental performance (Bellemare
et al., 2017; Barth-Maron et al., 2018; Dabney et al., 2018)
and fundamental theoretical results (Rowland et al., 2018;
Qu et al., 2018; Bellemare et al., 2019), it remains challenging to develop and analyse DRL algorithms. In this
paper, we propose to address these challenges by phrasing
DRL algorithms in terms of recursive estimation of sets of
statistical functionals of the return distribution. We observe
1
DeepMind 2 Google Brain. Correspondence to: Mark Rowland
<markrowland@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

that DRL algorithms can be viewed as combining a statistical estimator with a procedure we refer to as an imputation
strategy, which generates a return distribution consistent
with the set of statistical estimates. This highly general
approach (see Figure 1) requires a precise treatment of the
differing roles of statistics and samples in distributional RL.
Using this framework we are able to provide new theoretical
results for existing DRL algorithms as well as derive a new
algorithm based on the expectiles of the return distribution.
More importantly, our novel approach applies to a large
class of statistical functionals and imputation strategies, suggesting several avenues for future research. Specifically, we
provide answers to the following questions:
(i) Can we describe existing DRL algorithms in a unifying
framework, and could such a framework be used to
develop new algorithms?
(ii) What statistical functionals of the return distribution
can be learnt exactly through Bellman updates?
(iii) If certain statistics cannot be learnt exactly, how can
we estimate them in a principled manner, and give guarantees on their approximation error relative to the true
values of these statistics?
After reviewing relevant background material, we begin
with (i) by presenting a new framework for understanding
DRL, in terms of a set of statistics to be learnt and an imputation strategy for specifying a dynamic programming
update. We then formalise (ii) by introducing the notion of
Bellman closedness for collections of statistical functionals,
and show that in a wide class of such functionals, the only
properties of return distributions that can be learnt exactly
through Bellman updates are moments. Interestingly, this
rules out statistical functionals such as quantiles that have
formed the basis of successful existing DRL algorithms.
However, we then address (iii) by showing that the framework allows us to give guarantees on the approximation
error introduced in learning these statistics, through the
notion of approximate Bellman closedness. We apply the
framework developed in answering these questions to the
case of expectiles to develop a new distributional RL algorithm, which we term Expectile Distributional RL (EDRL).
Finally, we test these new insights on a variety of MDPs
and larger-scale environments to illustrate and expand on
the theoretical contributions developed earlier in the paper.

