Multi-Object Representation Learning with Iterative Variational Inference

Klaus Greff 1 2 Raphaël Lopez Kaufman 3 Rishabh Kabra 3 Nick Watters 3 Chris Burgess 3 Daniel Zoran 3
Loic Matthey 3 Matthew Botvinick 3 Alexander Lerchner 3

Abstract
Human perception is structured around objects
which form the basis for our higher-level cognition and impressive systematic generalization abilities. Yet most work on representation learning
focuses on feature learning without even considering multiple objects, or treats segmentation as an
(often supervised) preprocessing step. Instead, we
argue for the importance of learning to segment
and represent objects jointly. We demonstrate
that, starting from the simple assumption that a
scene is composed of multiple entities, it is possible to learn to segment images into interpretable
objects with disentangled representations. Our
method learns – without supervision – to inpaint
occluded parts, and extrapolates to scenes with
more objects and to unseen objects with novel feature combinations. We also show that, due to the
use of iterative variational inference, our system
is able to learn multi-modal posteriors for ambiguous inputs and extends naturally to sequences.

1. Introduction
Learning good representations of complex visual scenes is
a challenging problem for artificial intelligence that is far
from solved. Recent breakthroughs in unsupervised representation learning (Higgins et al., 2017a; Makhzani et al.,
2015; Chen et al., 2016) tend to focus on data where a single
object of interest is placed in front of some background (e.g.
dSprites, 3D Chairs, CelebA). Yet in general, visual scenes
contain a variable number of objects arranged in various spatial configurations, and often with partial occlusions (e.g.,
CLEVR, Johnson et al. 2017; see Figure 1). This motivates
the question: what forms a good representation of a scene
with multiple objects? In line with recent advances (Burgess
et al., 2019; van Steenkiste et al., 2018; Eslami et al., 2016),
1

The Swiss AI lab IDSIA, Lugano, Switzerland 2 Work done at
DeepMind 3 DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to: Klaus
Greff <klaus.greff@startmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Object decomposition of an image from the CLEVR
dataset by IODINE. The model is able to decompose the image into
separate objects in an unsupervised manner, inpainting occluded
objects in the process (see slots (d), (e) and (h)).

we maintain that discovery of objects in a scene should be
considered a crucial aspect of representation learning, rather
than treated as a separate problem.
We approach the problem from a spatial mixture model
perspective (Greff et al., 2017) and use amortized iterative
refinement (Marino et al., 2018b) of latent object representations within a variational framework (Rezende et al.,
2014; Kingma & Welling, 2013). We encode our basic intuition about the existence of objects into the structure of our
model, which simultaneously facilitates their discovery and
efficient representation in a fully data-driven, unsupervised
manner. We name the resulting architecture IODINE (short
for Iterative Object Decomposition Inference NEtwork).
IODINE can segment complex scenes and learn disentangled object features without supervision on datasets like
CLEVR, Objects Room (Burgess et al., 2019), and Tetris
(see Appendix B). We show systematic generalization to
more objects than included in the training regime, as well as
objects formed with unseen feature combinations. This highlights the benefits of multi-object representation learning by
comparison to a VAE’s single-slot representations. We also
justify how the sampling used in iterative refinement lends
to resolving multi-modal and multi-stable decomposition.

