Robust Inference via Generative Classifiers for Handling Noisy Labels
Kimin Lee 1 Sukmin Yun 1 Kibok Lee 2 Honglak Lee 3 2 Bo Li 4 Jinwoo Shin 1 5

Abstract

Large-scale datasets may contain significant proportions of noisy (incorrect) class labels, and it
is well-known that modern deep neural networks
(DNNs) poorly generalize from such noisy training datasets. To mitigate the issue, we propose a
novel inference method, termed Robust Generative classifier (RoG), applicable to any discriminative (e.g., softmax) neural classifier pre-trained on
noisy datasets. In particular, we induce a generative classifier on top of hidden feature spaces of
the pre-trained DNNs, for obtaining a more robust
decision boundary. By estimating the parameters
of generative classifier using the minimum covariance determinant estimator, we significantly
improve the classification accuracy with neither
re-training of the deep model nor changing its
architectures. With the assumption of Gaussian
distribution for features, we prove that RoG generalizes better than baselines under noisy labels.
Finally, we propose the ensemble version of RoG
to improve its performance by investigating the
layer-wise characteristics of DNNs. Our extensive
experimental results demonstrate the superiority
of RoG given different learning models optimized
by several training techniques to handle diverse
scenarios of noisy labels.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) tend to generalize well when
they are trained on large-scale datasets with ground-truth
label annotations. For example, DNNs have achieved stateof-the-art performance on many classification tasks, e.g.,
image classification (He et al., 2016), object detection (Girshick, 2015), and speech recognition (Amodei et al., 2016).
However, as the scale of training dataset increases, it becomes infeasible to obtain all ground-truth class labels from
domain experts. A common practice is collecting the class
labels from data mining on social media (Mahajan et al.,
1

KAIST 2 University of Michingan Ann Arbor 3 Google Brain
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign 5 AItrics. Correspondence to: Kimin Lee <kiminlee@kaist.ac.kr>.

4

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

2018) or web data (Krause et al., 2016). Machine-generated
labels are often used; e.g., the Open Images Dataset V4 contains such 70 million labels for training images (Kuznetsova
et al., 2018). However, they may contain incorrect labels,
and recent studies have shown that modern deep architectures may generalize poorly from the noisy datasets (Zhang
et al., 2017) (e.g., see the black line of Figure 1(a)).
To address the poor generalization issue of DNNs with noisy
labels, many training strategies have been investigated (Reed
et al., 2014; Patrini et al., 2017; Ma et al., 2018; Han et al.,
2018b; Hendrycks et al., 2018; Goldberger & Ben-Reuven,
2017; Jiang et al., 2018; Ren et al., 2018; Zhang & Sabuncu,
2018; Malach & Shalev-Shwartz, 2017; Han et al., 2018a).
However, using such training methods may incur expensive
back-and-forth costs (e.g., additional time and hyperparameter tuning) and suffer from the reproducibility issue. This
motivates our approach of developing a more plausible inference method applicable to any pre-trained deep model.
Hence, our direction is complementary to the prior works:
one can combine ours and a prior training method for the
best performance (see Tables 3, 4, & 5 in Section 4).
The key contribution of our work is to develop such an inference method, Robust Generative classifier (RoG), which is
applicable to any discriminative (e.g., softmax) neural classifier pre-trained on noisy datasets (without re-training). Our
main idea is inducing a better posterior distribution from
the pre-trained (noisy, though) feature representation by utilizing a robust generative classifier. Here, our belief is that
the softmax DNNs can learn meaningful feature patterns
shared by multiple training examples even under datasets
with noisy labels, e.g., see (Arpit et al., 2017).
To motivate our approach, we first observe that training
samples with noisy labels (red circles) are distributed like
outliers when their hidden features are projected in a 2dimensional space using t-SNE (Maaten & Hinton, 2008)
(see Figure 1(b)). In other words, this phenomena implies
that DNN representations even when trained with noisy labels may still exhibit clustering properties (i.e., the DNN
learns embedding that tend to group clean examples of the
same class into the clusters while pushing away the examples with corrupt labels outside these clusters). The observation inspires us to induce a generative classifier on the
pre-trained hidden features since it can model joint data
distributions P (x, y) for input x and its label y for outlier

