Analyzing and Improving Representations with the Soft Nearest Neighbor Loss

Nicholas Frosst 1 Nicolas Papernot 1 Geoffrey Hinton 1

Abstract
We explore and expand the Soft Nearest Neighbor
Loss to measure the entanglement of class manifolds in representation space: i.e., how close pairs
of points from the same class are relative to pairs
of points from different classes. We demonstrate
several use cases of the loss. As an analytical tool,
it provides insights into the evolution of class similarity structures during learning. Surprisingly, we
find that maximizing the entanglement of representations of different classes in the hidden layers
is beneficial for discrimination in the final layer,
possibly because it encourages representations to
identify class-independent similarity structures.
Maximizing the soft nearest neighbor loss in the
hidden layers leads not only to better-calibrated
estimates of uncertainty on outlier data but also
marginally improved generalization. Data that is
not from the training distribution can be recognized by observing that in the hidden layers, it has
fewer than the normal number of neighbors from
the predicted class.

1. Introduction
From SVM kernels to hidden layers in neural nets, the similarity structure of representations plays a fundamental role
in how well classifiers generalize from training data. Representations are also instrumental in enabling well-calibrated
confidence estimates for model predictions. This is particularly important when the model is likely to be presented
with outlier test data: e.g. to assist with medical diagnostics
when a patient has an unknown condition, or more generally
when safety or security are at stake.
In this paper, we use the labels of the data points to illuminate the class similarity structure of the internal representations learned by discriminative training. Our study of
internal representations is structured around a loss function,
1

Google Brain.
Correspondence to:
N. Frosst
<frosst@google.com>, N. Papernot <papernot@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

the soft nearest neighbor loss (Salakhutdinov & Hinton,
2007), which we explore to measure the lack of separation
of class manifolds in representation space—in other words,
the entanglement of different classes. We expand upon the
original loss by introducing a notion of temperature to control the perplexity at which entanglement is measured. We
show several use cases of this loss including as an analytical tool for the progress of discriminative and generative
training. It can also be used to measure the entanglement of
synthetic and real data in generative tasks.
We focus mainly on the effect of deliberately maximizing
the entanglement of hidden representations in a classifier.
Surprisingly, we find that, unlike the penultimate layer, hidden layers that perform feature extraction benefit from being
entangled. That is, they should not be forced to disentangle
data from different classes. In practice, we promote the
entanglement of hidden layers by adding our soft nearest
neighbor loss as a bonus to the training objective. We find
that this bonus regularizes the model by encouraging representations that are already similar to become more similar
if they have different labels. The entangled representations
form class-independent clusters which capture other kinds
of similarity that is helpful for eventual discrimination.
In addition to this regularization effect, entangled representations support better estimates of uncertainty on outlier data,
such as adversarial examples or inputs from a different distribution. In our empirical study, we measure uncertainty with
the Deep k-Nearest Neighbors (DkNN): the approach relies
on a nearest neighbor search in the representation spaces
of the model to identify support in the training data for a
given test input (Papernot & McDaniel, 2018). Since entangled representations exhibit a similarity structure that is less
class-dependent, entangled models more coherently project
outlier data that does not lie on the training manifold. In
particular, data that is not from the training distribution has
fewer than the normal number of neighbors in the predicted
class. As a consequence, uncertainty estimates provided by
the DkNN are better calibrated on entangled models.
The contributions of this paper are the following:
• We explore and expand the soft nearest neighbor loss
to characterize the class similarity structure in representation space (Section 2). Informally, the loss measures

