Imitating Latent Policies from Observation

Ashley D. Edwards 1 Himanshu Sahni 1 Yannick Schroecker 1 Charles L. Isbell 1

Abstract
In this paper, we describe a novel approach to
imitation learning that infers latent policies directly from state observations. We introduce a
method that characterizes the causal effects of latent actions on observations while simultaneously
predicting their likelihood. We then outline an
action alignment procedure that leverages a small
amount of environment interactions to determine
a mapping between the latent and real-world actions. We show that this corrected labeling can
be used for imitating the observed behavior, even
though no expert actions are given. We evaluate our approach within classic control environments and a platform game and demonstrate that
it performs better than standard approaches. Code
for this work is available at https://github.
com/ashedwards/ILPO.

1. Introduction
Humans often learn from and develop experiences through
mimicry. Notably, we are capable of mirroring behavior
through only the observation of state trajectories without
direct access to the underlying actions (e.g., the exact kinematic forces) and intentions that yielded them (Rizzolatti &
Sinigaglia, 2010). In order to be general, artificial agents
should also be equipped with the ability to quickly solve
problems after observing the solution; however, imitation
learning approaches typically require both observations and
actions to learn policies along with extensive interaction
with the environment.
A recent approach for overcoming these issues is to learn
an initial self-supervised model for how to imitate by collecting experiences within the environment and then using
this learned model to infer policies from expert observations (Pathak et al., 2018; Torabi et al., 2018a). However,
unguided exploration can be risky in many real-world sce1
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA. Correspondence to: Ashley D. Edwards <aedwards8@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

narios and costly to obtain. Thus, we need a mechanism for
learning policies from observation alone without requiring
access to expert actions and with only a few interactions
within the environment.
In order to tackle this challenge, we hypothesize that predictable, though unknown, causes may describe the classes
of transitions that we observe. These causes could be natural
phenomena in the world, or the consequences of the actions
that the agent takes. This work aims to demonstrate how an
agent can predict and then imitate these latent causes, even
though the ground truth environmental actions are unknown.
We follow a two-step approach, where the agent first learns
a policy offline in a latent space that best describes the
observed transitions. Then it takes a limited number of
steps in the environment to ground this latent policy to the
true action labels. We liken this to learning to play a video
game by observing a friend play first, and then attempting
to play it ourselves. By observing, we can learn the goal
of the game and the types of actions we should be taking,
but some interaction may be required to learn the correct
mapping of controls on the joystick.
We first make the assumption that the transitions between
states can be described through a discrete set of latent actions. We then learn a forward dynamics model that, given
a state and latent action, predicts the next state and prior,
supervised only by {state, next state} pairs. We use this
model to greedily select the latent action that leads to the
most probable next state. Because these latent actions are
initially mislabeled, we use a few interactions with the environment to learn a relabeling that outputs the probability of
the true action.
We evaluate our approach in four environments: classic
control with cartpole, acrobot, and mountain car, and a
recent platform game by OpenAI, CoinRun (Cobbe et al.,
2018). We show that our approach is able to perform as well
as the expert after just a few steps of interacting with the
environment, and performs better than a recent approach
for imitating from observations, Behavioral Cloning from
Observation (Torabi et al., 2018a).

