Characterization of Convex Objective Functions and Optimal Expected
Convergence Rates for SGD

Marten van Dijk 1 Lam M. Nguyen 2 Phuong Ha Nguyen 1 Dzung T. Phan 2

Abstract

Algorithm 1 Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) Method

We study Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD)
with diminishing step sizes for convex objective
functions. We introduce a definitional framework
and theory that defines and characterizes a core
property, called curvature, of convex objective
functions. In terms of curvature we can derive a
new inequality that can be used to compute an optimal sequence of diminishing step sizes by solving a differential equation. Our exact solutions
confirm known results in literature and allows us
to fully characterize a new regularizer with its
corresponding expected convergence rates.

Initialize: w0
Iterate:
for t = 0, 1, 2, . . . do
Choose a step size (i.e., learning rate) ηt > 0.
Generate a random variable ξt .
Compute a stochastic gradient ∇f (wt ; ξt ).
Update the new iterate wt+1 = wt − ηt ∇f (wt ; ξt ).
end for

1. Introduction
It is well-known that the following stochastic optimization
problem
min {F (w) = E[f (w; ξ)]} ,

w∈Rd

(1)

where ξ is a random variable obeying some distribution can
be solved efficiently by stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
(Robbins & Monro, 1951). The SGD algorithm is described
in Algorithm 1.
If we define fi (w) := f (w; ξi ) for a given training set
{(xi , yi )}ni=1 and ξi is a random variable that is defined by
a single random sample (x, y) pulled uniformly from the
training set, then empirical risk minimization reduces to
)
(
n
1X
min F (w) =
fi (w) .
(2)
n i=1
w∈Rd
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Connecticut, CT, USA. 2 IBM Research,
Thomas J. Watson Research Center, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Marten van Dijk <marten.van dijk@uconn.edu>,
Lam M. Nguyen <LamNguyen.MLTD@ibm.com>, Phuong
Ha Nguyen <phuongha.ntu@gmail.com>, Dzung T. Phan
<phandu@us.ibm.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Problem (2), which can also be solved by gradient descent
(GD) (Nesterov, 2004; Nocedal & Wright, 2006), has been
discussed in many supervised learning applications (Hastie
et al., 2009). As an important note, a class of variance
reduction methods (Le Roux et al., 2012; Defazio et al.,
2014; Johnson & Zhang, 2013; Nguyen et al., 2017) has
been proposed for solving (2) in order to reduce the computational cost. Since all these algorithms explicitly use the
finite sum form of (2), they and GD may not be efficient
for very large scale machine learning problems. In addition,
variance reduction methods are not applicable to (1). Hence,
SGD is an important algorithm for very large scale machine
learning problems and the problems for which we cannot
compute the exact gradient. It is proved that SGD has a
sub-linear convergence rate with convergence rate O(1/t)
in the strongly convex cases (Bottou et al., √
2016; Nguyen
et al., 2018; Gower et al., 2019), and O(1/ t) in the general convex cases (Nemirovsky & Yudin, 1983; Nemirovski
et al., 2009), where t is the number of iterations.
In this paper we derive convergence properties for SGD
applied to (1) for many different flavors of convex objective
functions F . We introduce a new notion called ω-convexity
where ω denotes a function with certain properties (see Definition 1). Depending on ω, F can be convex or strongly
convex, or something in between, i.e., F is not strongly convex but is “better” than “plain” convex. This region between
plain convex and strongly convex F will be characterized by
a new notion for convex objective functions called curvature
(see Definition 3).
Convex and non-convex optimization are well-known problems in the literature (see e.g. (Schmidt et al., 2016; Defazio
et al., 2014; Schmidt & Roux, 2013; Reddi et al., 2016)).

