Flexibly Fair Representation Learning by Disentanglement
Elliot Creager 1 2 David Madras 1 2 Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen 2 Marissa A. Weis 2 3 Kevin Swersky 4
Toniann Pitassi 1 2 Richard Zemel 1 2

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning representations that achieve group and subgroup fairness
with respect to multiple sensitive attributes. Taking inspiration from the disentangled representation learning literature, we propose an algorithm for learning compact representations of
datasets that are useful for reconstruction and prediction, but are also flexibly fair, meaning they
can be easily modified at test time to achieve subgroup demographic parity with respect to multiple sensitive attributes and their conjunctions.
We show empirically that the resulting encoder—
which does not require the sensitive attributes for
inference—enables the adaptation of a single representation to a variety of fair classification tasks
with new target labels and subgroup definitions.

1. Introduction
Machine learning systems are capable of exhibiting discriminatory behaviors against certain demographic groups in
high-stakes domains such as law, finance, and medicine
(Kirchner et al., 2016; Aleo & Svirsky, 2008; Kim et al.,
2015). These outcomes are potentially unethical or illegal
(Barocas & Selbst, 2016; Hellman, 2018), and behoove researchers to investigate more equitable and robust models.
One promising approach is fair representation learning: the
design of neural networks using learning objectives that
satisfy certain fairness or parity constraints in their outputs
(Zemel et al., 2013; Louizos et al., 2016; Edwards & Storkey,
2016; Madras et al., 2018). This is attractive because neural
network representations often generalize to tasks that are
unspecified at train time, which implies that a properly specified fair network can act as a group parity bottleneck that
reduces discrimination in unknown downstream tasks.
1

University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute 3 University of
Tübingen 4 Google Research. Correspondence to: Elliot Creager
<creager@cs.toronto.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Current approaches to fair representation learning are flexible with respect to downstream tasks but inflexible with
respect to sensitive attributes. While a single learned representation can adapt to the prediction of different task labels y, the single sensitive attribute a for all tasks must be
specified at train time. Mis-specified or overly constraining
train-time sensitive attributes could negatively affect performance on downstream prediction tasks. Can we instead
learn a flexibly fair representation that can be adapted, at
test time, to be fair to a variety of protected groups and their
intersections? Such a representation should satisfy two criteria. Firstly, the structure of the latent code should facilitate
simple adaptation, allowing a practitioner to easily adapt
the representation to a variety of fair classification settings,
where each task may have a different task label y and sensitive attributes a. Secondly, the adaptations should be compositional: the representations can be made fair with respect
to conjunctions of sensitive attributes, to guard against subgroup discrimination (e.g., a classifier that is fair to women
but not Black women over the age of 60). This type of
subgroup discrimination has been observed in commercial
machine learning systems (Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018).
In this work, we investigate how to learn flexibly fair representations that can be easily adapted at test time to achieve
fairness with respect to sets of sensitive groups or subgroups.
We draw inspiration from the disentangled representation
literature, where the goal is for each dimension of the representation (also called the “latent code”) to correspond to no
more than one semantic factor of variation in the data (for
example, independent visual features like object shape and
position) (Higgins et al., 2017; Locatello et al., 2019). Our
method uses multiple sensitive attribute labels at train time
to induce a disentangled structure in the learned representation, which allows us to easily eliminate their influence
at test time. Importantly, at test time our method does not
require access to the sensitive attributes, which can be difficult to collect in practice due to legal restrictions (Elliot
et al., 2008; DCCA, 1983). The trained representation permits simple and composable modifications at test time that
eliminate the influence of sensitive attributes, enabling a
wide variety of downstream tasks.
We first provide proof-of-concept by generating a variant of
the synthetic DSprites dataset with correlated ground truth

