On Certifying Non-uniform Bounds against Adversarial Attacks
Chen Liu 1 Ryota Tomioka 2 Volkan Cevher 1

Abstract
This work studies the robustness certification
problem of neural network models, which aims
to find certified adversary-free regions as large
as possible around data points. In contrast to the
existing approaches that seek regions bounded
uniformly along all input features, we consider
non-uniform bounds and use it to study the decision boundary of neural network models. We
formulate our target as an optimization problem
with nonlinear constraints. Then, a framework applicable for general feedforward neural networks
is proposed to bound the output logits so that the
relaxed problem can be solved by the augmented
Lagrangian method. Our experiments show the
non-uniform bounds have larger volumes than
uniform ones and the geometric similarity of the
non-uniform bounds gives a quantitative, dataagnostic metric of input features’ robustness. Further, compared with normal models, the robust
models have even larger non-uniform bounds and
better interpretability.

1. Introduction
Although deep neural networks have achieved great success and state-of-the-art performances in many tasks, they
are vulnerable to some adversarial attacks of the input
data (Szegedy et al., 2013; Goodfellow et al., 2015; MoosaviDezfooli et al., 2017). This issue can be contextualized as a
game between the attackers who try to adversarially manipulate the input data and the defenders who try to obtain the
robust model parameters.
Numerous methods have been proposed to attack or defend
deep neural network models. Popular attack methods include fast gradient method (FGM) (Goodfellow et al., 2015),
iterative fast gradient method (IFGM) (Kurakin et al., 2016),
projected gradient descent (PGD) (Madry et al., 2017) and
1
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland 2 Microsoft Research, Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to: Chen Liu <chen.liu@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

CW attack (Carlini & Wagner, 2017). Most attack methods
search for the adversarial example by utilizing the gradient
of loss objective w.r.t. the input data. On the defenders’ side,
adversarial training (Szegedy et al., 2013), which augments
the training data with adversarial examples, is a simple and
popular method. It achieves the best empirical performance
over other recent methods (Buckman et al., 2018; Ma et al.,
2018; Guo et al., 2017; Dhillon et al., 2018; Xie et al., 2017;
Song et al., 2017; Samangouei et al., 2018) under adversarial
settings in Athalye et al. (2018).
However, recent work (Athalye et al., 2018) shows that
these uncertified defense methods might fail when a stronger
attack is applied. Therefore, finding a provable defense
algorithm and certifying the level of robustness of an input
data point have become active research topics. We need to
guarantee that the models output consistent results in the
worst cases under some conditions.
Following this line of works, we focus on the certification
problem in this paper:
Given the label set C, a classification model f : Rn ! C
and an input data point x 2 Rn , we would like to find
the largest neighborhood S around x such that f (x) =
f (x0 ) 8x0 2 S.

Many methods have been proposed for certifying a region
bounded around a data point. Early studies use Satisfiability
Modulo Theories (SMT) solvers (Huang et al., 2017b) or
integer programming approaches (Lomuscio & Maganti,
2017). Despite some recent progress, these combinatorial
methods still tend to suffer from superpolynomial time complexity (Katz et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2018) or requires solving a semi-definite programming problem (Raghunathan
et al., 2018a;b).
More recently, Kolter & Wong (2017) and Wong et al. (2018)
use a convex polytope relaxation to construct the bounds
of the model’s output logits. The gap between the logits
of true and false labels is then minimized by primal-dual
methods and can be trained by a dual network. Zhang et al.
(2018) generalizes the method of Kolter & Wong (2017) to
non-ReLU networks. Singh et al. (2018) further proposes a
method of higher speed and precision based on the abstract
interpretation of neural networks. These methods generally
have quadratic complexity for strict bound.

