A Polynomial Time MCMC Method for
Sampling from Continuous Determinantal Point Processes

Alireza Rezaei 1 Shayan Oveis Gharan 1

Abstract
We study the Gibbs sampling algorithm for discrete and continuous k-determinantal point processes. We show that in both cases, the spectral
gap of the chain is bounded by a polynomial of k
and it is independent of the size of the domain. As
an immediate corollary, we obtain sublinear time
algorithms for sampling from discrete k-DPPs
given access to polynomially many processors.
In the continuous setting, our result leads to the
first class of rigorously analyzed efficient algorithms to generate random samples of continuous
k-DPPs. We achieve this by showing that the
Gibbs sampler for a large family of continuous kDPPs can be simulated efficiently when the spectrum is not concentrated on the top k eigenvalues.

1. Introduction
Determinantal Point Processes (DPPs) are a family of probability distributions that were first introduced in quantum
physics to model particles with repulsive interactions (Macchi, 1975). They have been extensively studied by mathematicians, as they naturally appear in many contexts including non-intersecting random walks (Johansson, 2002),
random spanning trees (Burton & Pemantle, 1993), eigenvalues of random matrices (Mehta & Gaudin, 1960; Ginibre,
1965), and zero-set of Gaussian analytic functions (Peres &
Virág, 2005). Studying DPPs in machine learning was initiated by the work of (Kulesza et al., 2012) who exploited the
repulsive behavior of them to model diversity in real world
tasks. Following this insight, DPPs have found numerous
applications in machine learning, including document summarization, building news story timelines, tweet generation
*

1
Equal contribution
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, USA. Correspondence to: Alireza Rezaei
<arezaei@cs.washington.edu>,
Shayan Oveis Gharan
<shayan@cs.washington.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

(Kulesza et al., 2012; Chao et al., 2015; Yao et al., 2016;
Gillenwater et al., 2012), video summarization, pose estimation, and image search (Kulesza et al., 2012; Kulesza
& Taskar, 2010; Gong et al., 2014; Mirzasoleiman et al.,
2017).
Formally, let L ∈ Rn×n be a positive semi-definite (PSD)
matrix. Given a set Ω of size n, matrix L defines a probability distribution over the set of subsets of Ω which is known
as a discrete DPP, and is characterized as follows: Letting π
denote the DPP, for every subset S ⊆ Ω, we have
det(LS )
,
T ⊆[n] det(LT )

π(S) ∝ det(LS ) = P

where LS is the principal submatrix of L indexed by the
corresponding elements of set S. In this setting, matrix L is
called the kernel of the DPP and Ω is known as the domain,
i.e. we say π is a DPP on domain [n] defined by kernel L.
For an integer k ≤ n, a k-DPP defined by L is the restriction
of π to subsets of Ω of size k. k-DPPs are useful when the
size of the desired diverse set that we aim to select is known
in advance.
DPPs and k-DPP have been also studied on continuous
spaces. Continuous DPPs can be defined by extending the
above definition by considering a subset Ω ⊆ Rd as the
domain and letting the kernel be a PSD integral operator
L : L2 (Ω) → L2 (Ω) (with some additional constraints, see
subsection 2.1 for more details). In the other words, the
continuous DPP defined by L is a probability distribution
on the finite subsets of Ω whose PDF function, denoted
by f , is given by the following for any integer k and any
{x1 , . . . , xk } ⊂ Ω:
f ({x1 , . . . , xk }) ∝ det(x1 , . . . , xk ),
L

where the detL notation indicates the determinant of
the k by k matrix formed by L(a, b) values for a, b ∈
{x1 , . . . , xk }. Similar to the discrete case, the continuous
k-DPPs are defined by restricting DPPs. These distributions
have recently gained more attention in ML as in many applications of DPPs, the domain is naturally a continuous space;
in particular, such applications arise in learning parameters
of generative mixture models (Petralia et al., 2012; Kwok

