Provably Efficient Imitation Learning from Observation Alone
Wen Sun 1 Anirudh Vemula 1 Byron Boots 2 J. Andrew Bagnell 3

Abstract
We study Imitation Learning (IL) from Observations alone (IL F O) in large-scale MDPs. While
most IL algorithms rely on an expert to directly
provide actions to the learner, in this setting the
expert only supplies sequences of observations.
We design a new model-free algorithm for IL F O,
Forward Adversarial Imitation Learning (FAIL),
which learns a sequence of time-dependent policies by minimizing an Integral Probability Metric
between the observation distributions of the expert
policy and the learner. FAIL is the first provably
efficient algorithm in IL F O setting, which learns
a near-optimal policy with a number of samples
that is polynomial in all relevant parameters but
independent of the number of unique observations.
The resulting theory extends the domain of provably sample efficient learning algorithms beyond
existing results, which typically only consider tabular reinforcement learning settings or settings
that require access to a near-optimal reset distribution. We also demonstrate the efficacy of FAIL
on multiple OpenAI Gym control tasks.

1. Introduction
Imitation Learning (IL) is a sample efficient approach to
policy optimization (Ross et al., 2011; Ross & Bagnell,
2014; Sun et al., 2017) that has been extensively used in
real applications, including Natural Language Processing
(Daumé III et al., 2009; Chang et al., 2015b;a), game playing (Silver et al., 2016; Hester et al., 2017), system identification (Venkatraman et al., 2015; Sun et al., 2016), and
robotics control tasks (Pan et al., 2018). Most previous IL
work considers settings where an expert can directly provide action signals to the learner. In these settings, a general
strategy is to directly learn a policy that maps from state to
1

Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA
3
Aurora Innovation, USA. Correspondence to: Wen Sun <wensun@cs.cmu.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

action, via supervised learning approaches (e.g., DAgger
(Ross et al., 2011), AggreVaTe (Ross & Bagnell, 2014), Behaviour Cloning (Syed & Schapire, 2010)). Another popular
strategy is to learn a policy by minimizing some divergence
between the policy’s state-action distribution and the expert’s state-action distribution. Popular divergences include
Forward KL (i.e., Behaviour Cloning), Jensen Shannon Divergence (e.g., GAIL (Ho & Ermon, 2016)).
Here, we consider a more challenging IL setting, where
experts’ demonstrations consist only of observations, no
action or reward signals are available to the learner, and no
reset is allowed (e.g., a robot learns a task by just watching
an expert performing the task). We call this setting Imitation Learning from Observations alone (IL F O). Under this
setting, without access to expert actions, approaches like
DAgger, AggreVaTe, GAIL, and Behaviour Cloning by definition cannot work. Although recently several model-based
approaches, which learn an inverse model that predicts the
actions taken by an expert (Torabi et al., 2018; Edwards
et al., 2018) based on successive observations, have been
proposed, these approaches can suffer from covariate shift
(Ross et al., 2011). While we wish to train a predictor that
can infer an expert’s actions accurately under the expert’s
observation distribution, we do not have access to actions
generated by the expert conditioned on the expert’s observation (See Section 6 for a more detailed discussion). An
alternative strategy is to handcraft cost functions that use
some distance metric to penalize deviation from the experts’
trajectories (e.g., Liu et al. (2018); Peng et al. (2018)), which
is then optimized by Reinforcement Learning (RL). These
methods typically involve hand-designed cost functions that
sometimes require prior task-specific knowledge (Peng et al.,
2018). The quality of the learned policy is therefore completely dependent on the hand-designed costs which could
be widely different from the true cost. Ideally, we would
like to learn a policy that minimizes the unknown true cost
function of the underlying MDP.
In this work, we explicitly consider learning near-optimal
policies in a sample and computationally efficient manner.
Specifically, we focus on large-scale MDPs where the number of unique observations is extremely large (e.g., highdimensional observations such as raw-pixel images). Such
large-scale MDP settings immediately exclude most existing
sample efficient RL algorithms, which are often designed

