MIWAE: Deep Generative Modelling and Imputation of Incomplete Data Sets

Pierre-Alexandre Mattei 1 Jes Frellsen 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of handling missing data
with deep latent variable models (DLVMs). First,
we present a simple technique to train DLVMs
when the training set contains missing-at-random
data. Our approach, called MIWAE, is based
on the importance-weighted autoencoder (IWAE),
and maximises a potentially tight lower bound of
the log-likelihood of the observed data. Compared
to the original IWAE, our algorithm does not induce any additional computational overhead due
to the missing data. We also develop Monte Carlo
techniques for single and multiple imputation using a DLVM trained on an incomplete data set.
We illustrate our approach by training a convolutional DLVM on incomplete static binarisations
of MNIST. Moreover, on various continuous data
sets, we show that MIWAE provides extremely
accurate single imputations, and is highly competitive with state-of-the-art methods.

ciently using nonparametric methods, in particular k-nearest
neighbours (kNN, see e.g. Troyanskaya et al., 2001) or random forests (Stekhoven & Bühlmann, 2011). However,
when dealing with high dimensional and complex data distributions multiple imputation methods (recently reviewed
by Murray, 2018) are often preferred. Such techniques create several sets of imputed values, and consequently allow to
quantify the uncertainty of the imputed values. Often, they
rely on fitting a parametric model by integrating the missing values out of the likelihood (in a maximum-likelihood
setting) or the posterior distribution (in a Bayesian context).
Quite often, these approaches are valid under the assumption
that the data are missing-at-random (MAR, see e.g. Little &
Rubin, 2002), which essentially means that the missingness
mechanism is independent of the missing values.
Earlier attempts mainly relied on using multivariate Gaussian or Student’s t distributions (see e.g. Little & Rubin,
2002, Chapters 11 & 12), with potentially low-rank constraints (e.g. Audigier et al., 2016). More complex models
have also been explored, including mixtures (e.g. Di Zio
et al., 2007) and nonparametric Bayes (e.g. Si & Reiter,
2013).

1. Introduction
In data analysis, we often encounter incomplete data sets.
For instance, we may choose to observe a limited set of
values due to some constraints; sometimes a data acquisition
machine will break; more and more often, respondents do
not respond to parts of surveys (National Research Council,
2013). This ubiquity, illustrated for example by Josse &
Reiter (2018) or by the monograph of Little & Rubin (2002),
calls for a sound statistical response.
Over the last decades, numerous statistical approaches
to handling incomplete data sets have been proposed—
reviewed, e.g., by Schafer (1997), Little & Rubin (2002),
and Van Buuren (2018). One way of handling the missing
values is to replace them by a single set of imputations. Such
a procedure, called single imputation, can be performed effi1

Department of Computer Science, IT University of Copenhagen, Denmark. Correspondence to: Pierre-Alexandre Mattei
<pima@itu.dk>, Jes Frellsen <jefr@itu.dk>.
th

Proceedings of the 36 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

1.1. Deep generative models and incomplete data
The main purpose of this work is to present a simple way to
fit a deep latent variable model (DLVM, Kingma & Welling,
2014; Rezende et al., 2014) to an incomplete data set, and
to show how to use it for single or multiple imputation.
DLVMs are latent variable models that draw their high flexibility from deep neural architectures. They can be seen as
nonlinear extensions of factor analysis and have links with
robust principal component analysis (Dai et al., 2018) and
nonparametric mixture models (Mattei & Frellsen, 2018a).
In recent years, DLVMs have had remarkable successes in
modelling images (Siddharth et al., 2017), molecules (Kusner et al., 2017; Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018; Riesselman
et al., 2018), arithmetic expressions (Kusner et al., 2017),
and single-cell data (Grønbech et al., 2018; Lopez et al.,
2018).
Since DLVMs are generative models, data imputation is a
natural application and was actually already considered in
the seminal paper of Rezende et al. (2014). However, most
of the inferential machinery used within DLVM cannot read-

