Learn to Grow: A Continual Structure Learning Framework for Overcoming
Catastrophic Forgetting

Xilai Li * † 1 Yingbo Zhou * 2 Tianfu Wu 1 Richard Socher 2 Caiming Xiong 2

Abstract
Addressing catastrophic forgetting is one of the
key challenges in continual learning where machine learning systems are trained with sequential
or streaming tasks. Despite recent remarkable
progress in state-of-the-art deep learning, deep
neural networks (DNNs) are still plagued with
the catastrophic forgetting problem. This paper
presents a conceptually simple yet general and
effective framework for handling catastrophic forgetting in continual learning with DNNs. The
proposed method consists of two components:
a neural structure optimization component and
a parameter learning and/or fine-tuning component. By separating the explicit neural structure
learning and the parameter estimation, not only
is the proposed method capable of evolving neural structures in an intuitively meaningful way,
but also shows strong capabilities of alleviating
catastrophic forgetting in experiments. Furthermore, the proposed method outperforms all other
baselines on the permuted MNIST dataset, the
split CIFAR100 dataset and the Visual Domain
Decathlon dataset in continual learning setting.

1. Introduction
Learning different tasks continuously is a common and practical scenario that happens all through the course of human
learning. The learning of new skills from new tasks usually
does not have negative impact on the previously learned
tasks. Furthermore, with learning multiple tasks that are
highly related, it often helps to advance all related skills.
However, this is commonly not the case in current machine
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering and the Visual Narrative Initiative, North Carolina
State University, NC, USA. 2 Salesforce Research, Palo Alto, CA,
USA.. Correspondence to: C. Xiong <cxiong@salesforce.com>,
T. Wu <tianfu wu@ncsu.edu>.
†
Part of the work was done when X. Li was an intern at Salesforce Research in Summer 2018.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

learning with deep neural networks (DNNs). When presented a sequence of learning tasks, DNNs experiences
so called “catastrophic forgetting” problem (McCloskey &
Cohen, 1989; Ratcliff, 1990), where they usually largely
“forget” previously learned tasks after trained for a new task.
This is an interesting phenomenon that has attracted lots of
research efforts recently.
To overcome catastrophic forgetting, approaches such as
Elastic Weight Consolidation (EWC Kirkpatrick et al., 2017)
and synaptic intelligence (Zenke et al., 2017) introduce constraints to control parameter changes when learning new
tasks. However, forgetting is still non-negligible with these
approaches, especially when the number of tasks increases.
Forgetting is also addressed with memory-based methods,
where certain information regarding learned tasks are stored
to help retaining the performance of the learned tasks (see
Lopez-Paz et al., 2017; Sener & Savarese, 2018, for example). Additionally, there are methods (Mallya & Lazebnik,
2018; Rebuffi et al., 2017a; 2018; Mancini et al., 2018) that
learn multiple domains and completely avoid forgetting by
adding a small amount of parameters while the previously
estimated parameters are kept fixed. However, these models
rely on a strong base network and knowledge transferability
is limited mainly between two consecutive tasks.
Most of the current approaches in continual learning with
DNNs couple network structure and parameter estimation
and usually apply the same model structure for all tasks.
In this paper, we propose to explore a more intuitive and
sensible approach, that is to learn task specific model structures explicitly while retaining model primitives sharing,
decoupling from model parameter estimation1 . Different
tasks may require different structures, especially if they are
not relevant, so it may not make much sense to employ the
same structure in learning. For example, consider the tasks
of learning digit and face recognition DNNs, the lower level
layers (features) required for the two tasks are likely to be
drastically different, thus entailing different overall structures that have task specific low level layers. Forcing the
1
The structure that referred here is more fine-grained, such as
number of layers, type of operations at each layer, etc. It does not
refer to generic structure names like convolutional neural networks
or recurrent neural networks.

