Dynamic Learning with Frequent New Product Launches:
A Sequential Multinomial Logit Bandit Problem

Junyu Cao 1 Wei Sun 2

Abstract
Motivated by the phenomenon that companies introduce new products to keep abreast with customers’ rapidly changing tastes, we consider
a novel online learning setting where a profitmaximizing seller needs to learn customers’
preferences through offering recommendations,
which may contain existing products and new
products that are launched in the middle of a selling period. We propose a sequential multinomial
logit (SMNL) model to characterize customers’
behavior when product recommendations are presented in tiers. For the offline version with known
customers’ preferences, we propose a polynomialtime algorithm and characterize the properties of
the optimal tiered product recommendation. For
the online problem, we propose a learning algorithm and quantify its regret bound. Moreover,
we extend the setting to incorporate a constraint
which ensures every new product is learned to a
given accuracy. Our results demonstrate the tier
structure can be used to mitigate the risks associated with learning new products.

1. Introduction
Facing increasingly savvy customers whose preferences are
rapidly changing, companies that choose to play it safe by
remaining with traditional product lines risk being overtaken
by competitors more in tune with their customers. A coping
strategy adopted by companies is to frequently launch new
products and learn from the market responses. Between
the tried-and-true existing products and new products with
little or no history, companies face a dilemma - they have
to offer new products in order to understand the changing
1
Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, USA 2 IBM
Research, Yorktown Height, New York, USA. Correspondence to:
Junyu Cao <jycao@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

market dynamics so as to improve longer-term profitability,
yet they may have to sacrifice short-term profitability. The
central question is, how can a company quickly learn customers’ preferences while mitigating the risks inherent in
new products?
We approach this question as an online learning task. We
consider a seller whose goal is to maximize cumulative
profit over a selling horizon T . She will introduce several
new products at different times during the selling period.
For every customer, the seller determines some products to
offer1 , which may include the existing and/or new products.
Based on the customer’s response, the seller updates her
belief on the latent customers’ preferences (also known as
product valuations), and uses the information to optimize
the product selection for the next customer. As we will
show in the paper, many new products with relatively low
profit will never be offered from a pure profit-maximizing
objective.
In reality, companies often intentionally price new products
low to gain exposure and to entice customers to give them
a try. Thus, many new products may have relatively low
profits, yet learning from these product is crucial for understanding customers’ preferences, and enabling companies
to make better business decisions in the future. To model
such behavior, we impose a constraint, termed “minimum
learning criterion”, which requires every new product to be
offered and learned to a given accuracy. A direct implication
is that the seller will be bearing additional cost of learning
as she makes less money from these products. It is natural
to ask what can be done to reduce such cost.
We will show that a judicious choice of presenting products
is capable of mitigating some costs associated with learning new products. In our setting, products are presented in
tiers, indicating the precedence in which customers discover
them. For a given customer, a seller first offers the products on the first tier. If none are selected, the seller then
presents the second tier, and so on. Priorities are embedded
in tiers as product placement affects product visibility. Such
product offerings are ubiquitous in the online marketplace.
1

We use “recommend” and “offer” interchangeably in this
work.

