Transferable Adversarial Training:
A General Approach to Adapting Deep Classifiers

Hong Liu 1 2 Mingsheng Long 1 3 Jianmin Wang 1 3 Michael I. Jordan 4

Abstract
Domain adaptation enables knowledge transfer
from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain. A mainstream approach is adversarial
feature adaptation, which learns domain-invariant
representations through aligning the feature distributions of both domains. However, a theoretical
prerequisite of domain adaptation is the adaptability measured by the expected risk of an ideal
joint hypothesis over the source and target domains. In this respect, adversarial feature adaptation may potentially deteriorate the adaptability,
since it distorts the original feature distributions
when suppressing domain-specific variations. To
this end, we propose Transferable Adversarial
Training (TAT) to enable the adaptation of deep
classifiers. The approach generates transferable
examples to fill in the gap between the source and
target domains, and adversarially trains the deep
classifiers to make consistent predictions over the
transferable examples. Without learning domaininvariant representations at the expense of distorting the feature distributions, the adaptability in
the theoretical learning bound is algorithmically
guaranteed. A series of experiments validate that
our approach advances the state of the arts on a
variety of domain adaptation tasks in vision and
NLP, including object recognition, learning from
synthetic to real data, and sentiment classification.

Figure 1. An overview of our approach. (a) A model trained only
on the source domain is not adaptive to the target domain. (b) Our
approach generates transferable examples to fill in the gap between
domains. (c) The decision boundary is adapted to the target data
through training with transferable examples. Best viewed in color.

task is often prohibitive. However, deep neural networks
are sensitive to cross-domain distribution shift. The same
network can make spurious prediction on a target domain
dissimilar to the source domain (Quionero-Candela et al.,
2009). A notable example is that models trained on labeled
synthetic data which come in abundance, may fail when
generalizing to real-world unlabeled data (Liu et al., 2017;
Hoffman et al., 2018).

School of Software 2 Department of Electronic Engineering
BNRist, Research Center for Big Data, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 4 University of California, Berkeley, USA.
Hong Liu <h-l17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>. Correspondence to:
Mingsheng Long <mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Domain adaptation aims at learning an accurate classifier for
such a scenario. Recent advances in deep neural networks
have enhanced the transferability of feature representations
(Yosinski et al., 2014) and the disentanglement of explanatory factors behind data (Bengio et al., 2013). Therefore, a
reasonable approach to domain adaptation is harnessing the
power of deep neural networks to extract domain-invariant
feature representations. One possible way is to minimize
some measure of distance between the source and target
feature distributions such as maximum mean discrepancy
(Long et al., 2015). On par with distance minimizing methods, adversarial domain adaptation incorporates adversarial
learning as a two-player game similar to GANs (Goodfellow
et al., 2014). In this paradigm, the base network is divided
into a feature extractor and a classifier. A domain discriminator is induced to discriminate the source domain from
the target domain, while the feature extractor learns domaininvariant representations to fool the domain discriminator
(Ganin et al., 2016; Tzeng et al., 2017; Long et al., 2018).

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

However, this class of techniques face critical restrictions.
Based on the domain adaptation theory (Ben-David et al.,
2010), an essential prerequisite for domain adaptation is the

1. Introduction
Transferring knowledge from a source domain with sufficient supervision to an unlabeled target domain is advantageous, since manual annotation for a new machine learning
1

3

