On Dropout and Nuclear Norm Regularization

Poorya Mianjy 1 Raman Arora 1

Abstract
We give a formal and complete characterization
of the explicit regularizer induced by dropout in
deep linear networks with squared loss. We show
that (a) the explicit regularizer is composed of an
`2 -path regularizer and other terms that are also rescaling invariant, (b) the convex envelope of the
induced regularizer is the squared nuclear norm
of the network map, and (c) for a sufficiently large
dropout rate, we characterize the global optima of
the dropout objective. We validate our theoretical
findings with empirical results.

1. Introduction
Deep learning is revolutionizing the technological world
with recent advances in artificial intelligence. However, a
formal understanding of when or why deep learning algorithms succeed has remained elusive. Recently, a series of
works focusing on computational learning theoretic aspects
of deep learning have implicated inductive biases due to
various algorithmic choices to be a crucial potential explanation (Zhang et al., 2016; Gunasekar et al., 2018a; Neyshabur
et al., 2014; Martin & Mahoney, 2018; Mianjy et al., 2018).
Here, we examine such an implicit bias of dropout in deep
linear networks.
Dropout is a popular algorithmic approach that helps training deep neural networks that generalize better (Hinton et al.,
2012; Srivastava et al., 2014). Inspired by the reproduction
model in the evolution of advanced organisms, dropout
training aims at breaking co-adaptation among neurons by
dropping them independently and identically according to a
Bernoulli random variable.
Here, we restrict ourselves to simpler networks; we consider multi-layered feedforward networks with linear activations (Goodfellow et al., 2016). While the overall function
1

Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA. Correspondence to: Raman Arora
<arora@cs.jhu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

is linear, the representation in factored form makes the optimization landscape non-convex and hence, challenging
to analyze. More importantly, we argue that the fact we
choose to represent a linear map in a factored form has important implications to the learning problem, akin in many
ways to the implicit bias due to stochastic optimization algorithms and various algorithmic heuristics used in deep
learning (Gunasekar et al., 2017; Li et al., 2018; Azizan &
Hassibi, 2019).
Several recent works have investigated the optimization
landscape properties of deep linear networks (Baldi &
Hornik, 1989; Saxe et al., 2013; Kawaguchi, 2016; Hardt &
Ma, 2016; Laurent & Brecht, 2018), as well as the implicit
bias due to first-order optimization algorithms for training
such networks (Gunasekar et al., 2018b; Ji & Telgarsky,
2018), and the convergence rates of such algorithms (Bartlett
et al., 2018; Arora et al., 2018). The focus here is to have a
similar development for dropout when training deep linear
networks.
1.1. Notation
For an integer i, [i] represents the set {1, . . . , i}, ei denotes
the i-th standard basis, and 1i ∈ Ri is the vector of all ones.

The set of all k-combinations of a set S is denoted by Sk .
We denote linear operators and vectors by Roman capital
and lowercase letters, respectively, e.g. Y and y. Scalar
variables are denoted by lower case letters (e.g. y) and sets
by script letters, e.g. Y. We denote the `2 norm of a vector
x by kxk. For a matrix X, kXkF denotes the Frobenius
norm, kXk∗ denotes the nuclear norm, and σi (X) is the i-th
largest singular value of matrix X. For X ∈ Rd2 ×d1 and a
positive definite matrix C ∈ Rd1 ×d1 , kXk2C := Tr XCX> .
0
The standard inner product between
 two matrices X, X ,
0
> 0
is denoted by hX, X i := Tr X X . We denote the i-th
column and the j-th row of a matrix X with vectors x:i and
xj: , both in column form. The vector of diagonal elements
of X is denoted as diag (X). The diagonal matrix with
diagonal entries as the elements of a vector x is denoted as
diag (x). With a slight abuse of notation, we use {Wi } as a
shorthand for the tuple (W1 , . . . , Wk+1 ).

