Adaptive Stochastic Natural Gradient Method for One-Shot Neural
Architecture Search
Youhei Akimoto * 1 Shinichi Shirakawa * 2 Nozomu Yoshinari 2 Kento Uchida 2 Shota Saito 2 3 Kouhei Nishida 4

Abstract
High sensitivity of neural architecture search
(NAS) methods against their input such as stepsize (i.e., learning rate) and search space prevents
practitioners from applying them out-of-the-box
to their own problems, albeit its purpose is to automate a part of tuning process. Aiming at a fast,
robust, and widely-applicable NAS, we develop a
generic optimization framework for NAS. We turn
a coupled optimization of connection weights and
neural architecture into a differentiable optimization by means of stochastic relaxation. It accepts
arbitrary search space (widely-applicable) and enables to employ a gradient-based simultaneous
optimization of weights and architecture (fast).
We propose a stochastic natural gradient method
with an adaptive step-size mechanism built upon
our theoretical investigation (robust). Despite its
simplicity and no problem-dependent parameter
tuning, our method exhibited near state-of-theart performances with low computational budgets
both on image classification and inpainting tasks.

1. Introduction
Neural architecture search (NAS) is a promising way to
automatically find a reasonable neural network architecture
and one of the most popular research topics in deep learning.
The success of deep learning impresses people from outside
machine learning communities and attracts practitioners
to apply deep learning to their own tasks. However, they
face different difficulties when applying deep learning. One
difficulty is to determine the neural architecture for their
previously-unseen problem. NAS is a possible solution to
this difficulty.
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Tsukuba & RIKEN
AIP 2 Yokohama National University 3 SkillUp AI Co., Ltd.
4
Shinshu University. Correspondence to: Youhei Akimoto
<akimoto@cs.tsukuba.ac.jp>, Shinichi Shirakawa <shirakawashinichi-bg@ynu.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Work published before 2017 often frames NAS as a hyperparameter optimization, where an architecture’s performance is measured by the validation error obtained after the
training of the weights under a fixed architecture (Real et al.,
2017; Suganuma et al., 2017; Zoph & Le, 2017). More
recent studies (Brock et al., 2018; Shirakawa et al., 2018;
Pham et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2019; Cai
et al., 2019), on the other hand, optimize the weights and
the architecture simultaneously within a single training by
treating all possible architectures as subgraphs of a supergraph. These approaches are called one-shot architecture
search or one-shot NAS. They break through the bottleneck
of the hyper-parameter optimization approaches, namely,
high computational cost for each architecture evaluation,
and enable to perform NAS on a standard personal computer, leading to gathering more potential applications.
Research directions of NAS fall into three categories (Elsken
et al., 2019): performance estimation (how to estimate the
performance of architectures), search space definition (how
to define the possible architectures), and search strategy
(how to optimize the architecture). In the last direction,
promising approaches transform a coupled optimization of
weights and architectures into optimization of a differentiable objective by means of continuous relaxation (Liu
et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2019) or stochastic relaxation (Shirakawa et al., 2018; Pham et al., 2018). A gradient descent
or a natural gradient descent strategy with an existing adaptive step-size mechanism or a constant step-size is then employed to optimize weights and architecture simultaneously.
However, optimization performance is sensitive against its
inputs such as step-size (i.e., learning rate) and search space,
limiting its application to unseen tasks.
To achieve a robust NAS, we develop a generic optimization framework for one-shot NAS. Our strategy is based on
stochastic relaxation. We generalize the work by Shirakawa
et al. (2018) to enable arbitrary types of architecture variables including categorical variables, ordinal (such as real or
integer) variables, and their mixture. We develop a unified
optimization framework for our stochastic relaxation based
on the so-called stochastic natural gradient (Amari, 1998).
Our theoretical investigation derives a condition on the stepsize for our objective value to improve monotonically every
iteration. We propose a step-size adaptation mechanism to

