Online Variance Reduction with Mixtures
Zalán Borsos 1 Sebastian Curi 1 Kfir Y. Levy 1 Andreas Krause 1

Abstract
Adaptive importance sampling for stochastic optimization is a promising approach that offers improved convergence through variance reduction.
In this work, we propose a new framework for
variance reduction that enables the use of mixtures
over predefined sampling distributions, which can
naturally encode prior knowledge about the data.
While these sampling distributions are fixed, the
mixture weights are adapted during the optimization process. We propose VRM, a novel and efficient adaptive scheme that asymptotically recovers the best mixture weights in hindsight and can
also accommodate sampling distributions over
sets of points. We empirically demonstrate the
versatility of VRM in a range of applications.

Why mixtures? The majority of existing works on adaptive sampling distributions are unable to exploit similarities
between points. Thus, only after several passes over the
dataset do these methods become effective. This can become a major bottleneck for large datasets.
Fortunately, in many situations, it is possible to exploit the
structure present in data in some form of a prior. One way
of capturing prior knowledge in the framework of importance sampling for variance reduction is to propose plausible
fixed sampling distributions before performing the optimization. This is very natural for problems where similar objects
can be grouped together, e.g., based on the class label or
clustering in feature space. In such cases it is sensible to
employ standard sampling distributions that draw similar
members with the same probability, e.g., as considered by
Zhao & Zhang (2014). Another option is to employ sampling distributions that encourage diverse sets of samples,
e.g., Determinantal Point Processes (Kulesza et al., 2012).

In the framework of Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM),
we are provided with a set of samples D = {x1 , . . . , xn } ⊂
X drawn from the underlying data distribution, and our
goal is to minimize the average loss over D, known as
the empirical risk. Sequential ERM solvers (SGD, SVRG,
etc.) proceed in multiple passes over the dataset and usually
require an unbiased estimate of the loss in each round of
the optimization. Typically, the estimate is generated by
sampling uniformly from D, which is oblivious to the fact
that different points can affect the optimization differently.
This ignorance can hinder the performance of the optimizer
due to the high variance of the obtained estimates.

Suppose that several such proposals for sampling distributions are available. A natural idea is to combine them into a
mixture and adapt the mixture weights during the optimization process, in order to achieve variance reduction. This
setup has the potential of being much more efficient than
learning an arbitrary sampling distribution over individual
points, provided that one can propose plausible sampling
distributions prior to the optimization. Another advantage
of this setting is that it enables efficient handling of distributions not only on individual points, but also on sets of
points. While in principle this can still be treated using existing approaches, their computational complexity in this case
will increase proportionally to the number of sets, possibly
exponentially with the number of points.

A promising direction that has recently received increased
interest is represented by (adaptive) importance sampling
techniques. Clever sampling distributions can account for
characteristics of datapoints relevant to the optimization in
order to improve the performance (Zhao & Zhang, 2015;
Namkoong et al., 2017; Katharopoulos & Fleuret, 2018).

In this work, we develop an online learning approach to
variance reduction and ask the following question: given k
fixed sampling distributions, how can we choose the mixture weights in order to achieve the largest reduction in the
variance of the estimates? We provide a simple yet efficient
algorithm for doing so. As for our main contributions, we:

1. Introduction

1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich. Correspondence to: Zalán Borsos <zalan.borsos@inf.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

• formulate the task of adaptive importance sampling for
variance reduction with mixtures as an online learning
problem,
• propose a novel algorithm for this setting with sublinear regret of Õ(T 4/5 ),

