Generative Adversarial User Model for
Reinforcement Learning Based Recommendation System

Xinshi Chen 1 † Shuang Li 2 Hui Li 4 Shaohua Jiang 4 Yuan Qi 4 Le Song 3 4

Abstract
There are great interests as well as many challenges in applying reinforcement learning (RL)
to recommendation systems. In this setting, an
online user is the environment; neither the reward
function nor the environment dynamics are clearly
defined, making the application of RL challenging.
In this paper, we propose a novel model-based
reinforcement learning framework for recommendation systems, where we develop a generative
adversarial network to imitate user behavior dynamics and learn her reward function. Using this
user model as the simulation environment, we develop a novel Cascading DQN algorithm to obtain
a combinatorial recommendation policy which
can handle a large number of candidate items efficiently. In our experiments with real data, we
show this generative adversarial user model can
better explain user behavior than alternatives, and
the RL policy based on this model can lead to a
better long-term reward for the user and higher
click rate for the system.

1. Introduction
Recommendation systems have become a crucial part of
almost all online service platforms. A typical interaction
between the system and its users is — users are recommended a page of items and they provide feedback, and then
the system recommends a new page of items. A common
way of building recommendation systems is to estimate a
model which minimizes the discrepancy between the model
prediction and the immediate user response according to
some loss function. In other words, these models do not
†
Work done partially during an internship at Ant Financial.
School of Mathematics, 2 School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, 3 School of Computational Science and Engineering,
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 4 Ant
Financial, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Xinshi Chen
<xinshi.chen@gatech.edu>.

1

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

explicitly take into account the long-term user interest. However, user’s interest can evolve over time based on what she
observes, and the recommender’s action may significantly
influence such evolution. In some sense, the recommender
is guiding users’ interest by displaying particular items and
hiding the rest. Thus, it is more favorable to design a recommendation strategy, such as one based on reinforcement
learning (RL), which can take users’ long-term interest into
account. However, it is challenging to apply RL framework
to recommendation system setting since the environment
will correspond to the logged online user.
First, a user’s interest (reward function) driving her behavior
is typically unknown, yet it is critically important for the
use of RL algorithms. In existing RL algorithms for recommendation systems, the reward functions are manually
designed (e.g. ±1 for click/no-click) which may not reflect
a user’s preference over different items.
Second, model-free RL typically requires lots of interactions with the environment in order to learn a good policy.
This is impractical in the recommendation system setting.
An online user will quickly abandon the service if the recommendation looks random and do not meet her interests.
Thus, to avoid the large sample complexity of the modelfree approach, a model-based RL approach is more preferable. In a related but a different setting where one wants to
train a robot policy, recent works showed that model-based
RL is much more sample efficient (Nagabandi et al., 2017;
Deisenroth et al., 2015; Clavera et al., 2018). The advantage of model-based approaches is that potentially large
amount of off-policy data can be pooled and used to learn a
good environment dynamics model, whereas model-free approaches can only use expensive on-policy data for learning.
However, previous model-based approaches are typically
designed based on physics or Gaussian processes, and not
tailored for complex sequences of user behaviors.
To address the above challenges, we propose a novel modelbased RL framework for recommendation systems, where
a user behavior model and the associated reward function
are learned in unified mini-max framework, and then RL
policies are learned using this model. Our main technical
contributions are:
1. We develop a generative adversarial learning (GAN) for-

