Emerging Convolutions for Generative Normalizing Flows

Emiel Hoogeboom 1 Rianne van den Berg 2 Max Welling 1 3

Abstract

in 2

in 2

*

in 1

Generative flows are attractive because they admit
exact likelihood optimization and efficient image
synthesis. Recently, Kingma & Dhariwal (2018)
demonstrated with Glow that generative flows are
capable of generating high quality images. We
generalize the 1 × 1 convolutions proposed in
Glow to invertible d × d convolutions, which are
more flexible since they operate on both channel and spatial axes. We propose two methods
to produce invertible convolutions that have receptive fields identical to standard convolutions:
Emerging convolutions are obtained by chaining
specific autoregressive convolutions, and periodic
convolutions are decoupled in the frequency domain. Our experiments show that the flexibility
of d × d convolutions significantly improves the
performance of generative flow models on galaxy
images, CIFAR10 and ImageNet.

1. Introduction
Generative models aim to learn a representation of the data
p(x), in contrast with discriminative models that learn a
probability distribution of labels given data p(y|x). Generative modeling may be used for numerous applications
such as anomaly detection, denoising, inpainting, and superresolution. The task of generative modeling is challenging,
because data is often very high-dimensional, which makes
optimization and choosing a successful objective difficult.
Generative models based on normalizing flows (Rippel &
Adams, 2013) have several advantages over other generative
models: i) They optimize the log likelihood of a continuous distribution exactly, as opposed to Variational AutoEncoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al.,
2014) which optimize a lower bound to the log-likelihood.
1

UvA-Bosch Delta Lab, University of Amsterdam, Netherlands
University of Amsterdam, Netherlands 3 Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR). Correspondence to: Emiel Hoogeboom
<e.hoogeboom@uva.nl>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

out 1

=
in 1

out 2

out 1

out 2

=

Figure 1. Illustration of a square emerging convolution. The input
has spatial dimensions equal to 3 × 3, and two channels, white
squares denote zero values. Convolutions use one-pixel-wide zero
padding at each border. Two consecutive square autoregressive
convolutions with filters k2 and k1 have a receptive field identical
to a standard convolution, with filter k2 ∗l k1 , where ∗l denotes a
convolution layer. These operations are equivalent to the multiplication of matrices K2 · K1 and a vectorized input signal ~
x. Since
the filters are learned decomposed, the Jacobian determinant and
inverse are straightforward to compute.

ii) Drawing samples has a computational cost comparable
to inference, in contrast with PixelCNNs (Van Oord et al.,
2016). iii) Generative flows also have the potential for huge
memory savings, because activations necessary in the backward pass can be obtained by computing the inverse of
layers (Gomez et al., 2017; Li & Grathwohl, 2018).
The performance of flow-based generative models can be
largely attributed to Masked Autoregressive Flows (MAFs)
(Papamakarios et al., 2017) and the coupling layers introduced in NICE and RealNVP (Dinh et al., 2014; 2017).
MAFs contain flexible autoregressive transformations, but
are computationally expensive to invert, which is a disadvantage for sampling high-dimensional data. Coupling layers
transform a subset of the dimensions of the data, parameterized by the remaining dimensions. The inverse of coupling
layers is straightforward to compute, which makes them
suitable for generative flows. However, since coupling layers can only operate on a subset of the dimensions of the
data, they may be limited in flexibility.
To improve their effectiveness, coupling layers are alternated with less complex transformations that do operate on
all dimensions of the data. Dinh et al. (2017) use a fixed
channel permutation in Real NVP, and Kingma & Dhariwal
(2018) utilize learnable 1 × 1 convolutions in Glow.
However, 1 × 1 convolutions suffer from limited flexibility, and using standard convolutions is not straightforward

