Exploiting Structure of Uncertainty for Efficient Matroid Semi-Bandits

Pierre Perrault 1 2 Vianney Perchet 2 3 Michal Valko 1 4

Abstract
We improve the efficiency of algorithms for
stochastic combinatorial semi-bandits. In most
interesting problems, state-of-the-art algorithms
take advantage of structural properties of rewards,
such as independence. However, while being
optimal in terms of asymptotic regret, these algorithms are inefficient. In our paper, we first
reduce their implementation to a specific submodular maximization. Then, in case of matroid constraints, we design adapted approximation routines, thereby providing the first efficient algorithms that rely on reward structure to improve
regret bound. In particular, we improve the stateof-the-art
efficient gap-free regret bound by a fac√
tor m/ log m, where m is the maximum action
size. Finally, we show how our improvement
translates to more general budgeted combinatorial semi-bandits.

1. Introduction
Stochastic bandits model sequential decision-making in
which an agent selects an arm (a decision) at each round and
observes a realization of the corresponding unknown reward
distribution. The goal is to maximize the expected cumulative reward, or equivalently, to minimize the expected regret,
defined as the difference between the expected cumulative
reward achieved by an oracle algorithm always selecting the
optimal arm and that achieved by the agent. To accomplish
this objective, the agent must trade-off between exploration
(gaining information about reward distributions) and exploitation (using greedily the information collected so far)
as it was already discovered by Robbins (1952). Bandits
have been applied to many fields such as mechanism design
(Mohri & Munoz, 2014), search advertising (Tran-Thanh
et al., 2014), and personalized recommendation (Li et al.,
2010). We improve the computational efficiency (i.e., the
1

SequeL team, INRIA Lille - Nord Europe 2 CMLA, ENS ParisSaclay 3 Criteo AI Lab 4 now with DeepMind. Correspondence to:
P. Perrault <pierre.perrault@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

time and space complexity) of their combinatorial generalization, in which the agent selects at each round a subset of
arms, that we refer to as an action in the rest of the paper
(Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2012; Gai et al., 2012; Audibert
et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2014).
Different kinds of feedback provided by the environment
are possible. First, with bandit feedback (also called full
bandit or opaque feedback), the agent only observes the
total reward associated to the selected action. Second, with
semi-bandit feedback, the agent observes the partial reward
of each base arm in the selected action. Finally, with full
information feedback, the agent observes the partial reward
of all arms. We give results for semi-bandit feedback only.
There are two main questions that come up with combinatorial (semi)-bandits: 1◦ How can the stochastic structure
of the reward vector be exploited to reduce the regret? and
2◦ Can algorithms be efficient? Combes et al. (2015) answer the first question assuming that reward distributions
are mutually independent. Later, Degenne & Perchet (2016)
generalize the algorithm of Combes et al. (2015) to a larger
class of sub-Gaussian rewards by exploiting the covariance
structure of the arms. They also show the optimality of
proposed algorithms, in particular, that an upper bound on
their regret matches the asymptotic gap dependent lower
bound of this class. However, algorithms of Combes et al.
(2015) and Degenne & Perchet (2016) are computationally
inefficient. The second question is studied by Kveton et al.
(2015), who give an efficient algorithm based on the UCB
algorithm of Auer et al. (2002). While being efficient, the
algorithm of Kveton et al. (2015) assumes the worst case
class of arbitrary correlated1 rewards, i.e., it does not exploit any properties of rewards and therefore does not match
the lower bound of Degenne & Perchet (2016).
On the other hand, efficient algorithms for matroid (Whitney, 1935) semi-bandits exist (Kveton et al., 2014; Talebi &
Proutiere, 2016) and their regret bounds match the asymptotic gap dependent lower bound, which is the same for
both sub-Gaussian and arbitrary correlated rewards. Among
these algorithms,
gap-free regret bound

√ the state-of-the-art
is of order O nmT log T , where T is the number of
rounds, n is the number of base arms, and m is the maximum action size (Kveton et al., 2014).
1

Any dependence can exist between rewards.

