Simple Stochastic Gradient Methods for
Non-Smooth Non-Convex Regularized Optimization

Michael R. Metel 1 Akiko Takeda 1 2

Abstract

where fj (w) = F (w, ξj ) and has a Lipschitz continuous
gradient.

Our work focuses on stochastic gradient methods
for optimizing a smooth non-convex loss function with a non-smooth non-convex regularizer.
Research on this class of problem is quite limited, and until recently no non-asymptotic convergence results have been reported. We present two
simple stochastic gradient algorithms, for finitesum and general stochastic optimization problems,
which have superior convergence complexities
compared to the current state-of-the-art. We also
compare our algorithms’ performance in practice
for empirical risk minimization.

1. Introduction
In this work we consider regularized optimization problems
of the form
min h(w) := f (w) + g(w),

w∈Rd

(1)

where f (w) has a Lipschitz continuous gradient and g(w)
has a proximal operator that can be efficiently computed. In
addition, we assume that
f (w) := Eξ [F (w, ξ)],

(2)

where ξ ∈ Rp is a random vector following a probability distribution P from which i.i.d. samples can be generated. We
will also consider what is known as the finite-sum problem,
where the expectation of F (w, ξ) is taken over an empirical
distribution function created by taking n samples of ξ, ξj
for j = 1, ..., n:
n

1X
f (w) :=
fj (w),
n j=1

(3)

1

RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Tokyo,
Japan 2 Department of Creative Informatics, Graduate School
of Information Science and Technology, the University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Michael R. Metel
<michaelros.metel@riken.jp>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Our motivation for studying this problem is empirical risk
minimization in machine learning. The purpose of g(w),
as a regularizer, is to induce a sparse solution when minimizing f (w). Non-convex regularizers have been shown to
outperform their convex counterparts with reduced bias in
parameter estimation, including smoothly clipped absolute
deviation (SCAD) (Fan & Li, 2001) and minimax concave
penalty (MCP) (Zhang, 2010), as well as possess enhanced
sparse signal recovery, such as the log-sum penalty (Candes
et al., 2008). In addition, improved generalization accuracy has been found using non-convex instead of convex
loss functions (Shen et al., 2003), with better robustness to
outliers and noisy sample data (Wu & Liu, 2007; Chapelle
et al., 2009). Smooth non-convex loss functions exhibiting
these beneficial qualities include the sigmoid loss, Lorenz
loss (Barbu et al., 2017), and Savage loss (Masnadi-Shirazi
& Vasconcelos, 2009).
The literature concerning first-order stochastic methods for
regularized optimization is vast, so we restrict our attention
to algorithms achieving non-asymptotic rates of convergence for a non-convex function f (w). Stochastic gradient
methods for the case of a convex regularizer has been an
active research area where algorithms with non-asymptotic
convergence results were first achieved in (Ghadimi et al.,
2016). For finite-sum problems, Reddi et al. (2016) were
the first to develop a proximal algorithm using the stochastic
variance reduced gradient approach of Johnson & Zhang
(2013). The current state-of-the-art for the finite-sum problem seems to be the work of Li & Li (2018) where one
can also find a table of the convergence complexities of
competing algorithms.
In the pursuit of solving (1) where neither function f (w)
nor g(w) are convex, the current body of research is quite
limited. A generalization of (Ghadimi et al., 2016) with
g(w) being quasi-convex can be found in (Kawashima &
Fujisawa, 2018), where the same convergence complexity is
achieved. The only other work for non-convex regularizers
to our knowledge is that of Xu et al. (2018), which
recently improved upon the stochastic difference of convex
(DC) algorithm of Nitanda & Suzuki (2017), considering

