Recurrent Kalman Networks:
Factorized Inference in High-Dimensional Deep Feature Spaces

Philipp Becker 1 2 3 Harit Pandya 4 Gregor Gebhardt 1 Cheng Zhao 5 James Taylor 6 Gerhard Neumann 4 2 3

Abstract
In order to integrate uncertainty estimates into
deep time-series modelling, Kalman Filters (KFs)
(Kalman et al., 1960) have been integrated with
deep learning models, however, such approaches
typically rely on approximate inference techniques such as variational inference which makes
learning more complex and often less scalable
due to approximation errors. We propose a new
deep approach to Kalman filtering which can be
learned directly in an end-to-end manner using
backpropagation without additional approximations. Our approach uses a high-dimensional factorized latent state representation for which the
Kalman updates simplify to scalar operations and
thus avoids hard to backpropagate, computationally heavy and potentially unstable matrix inversions. Moreover, we use locally linear dynamic
models to efficiently propagate the latent state to
the next time step. The resulting network architecture, which we call Recurrent Kalman Network
(RKN), can be used for any time-series data, similar to a LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997)
but uses an explicit representation of uncertainty.
As shown by our experiments, the RKN obtains
much more accurate uncertainty estimates than
an LSTM or Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs) (Cho
et al., 2014) while also showing a slightly improved prediction performance and outperforms
various recent generative models on an image imputation task.
1
Computational Learning for Autonomous Systems, TU Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany. 2 Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Renningen, Germany. 3 University of Tübingen, Tübingen,
Germany. 4 Lincoln Center for Autonomous Systems, University
of Lincoln, Lincoln, UK. 5 Extreme Robotics Lab, University of
Birmingham, Birmingham, UK. 6 Engineering Department, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK.. Correspondence to: Philipp
Becker <philippbecker93@googlemail.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
State-estimation in unstructured environments is a very challenging task as observations or measurements of the environment are often high-dimensional and only provide partial
information about the state. Images are a good example:
Even for low resolution, the number of pixels can quickly
exceed tens or hundreds of thousands and it is impossible
to obtain any information about the dynamics, such as velocities, from a single image. Additionally, the observations
may be noisy or may not contain useful information for the
task at hand. Such noise can, for example, be introduced by
poor illumination or motion blur and occlusions can prevent
us from observing some or all relevant aspects of the scene.
In addition to state estimation, it is also often desirable to
predict future states or observations, for example, in order
to assess the consequences of future actions. To this end, an
initial estimate of the current state is necessary which again
has to be inferred from observations. In such environments,
we typically also have to deal with high uncertainties in
the state estimates. Being able to model this uncertainty
is crucial in many decision making scenarios, e.g., if we
need to decide to perform an action now or wait until more
information about the scene is available.
Deep learning models have been very successful for timeseries modelling in unstructured environments. Classical
models such as LSTMs (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997)
or GRUs (Cho et al., 2014) perform well but fail to capture
the uncertainty of the state estimate. Recent probabilistic
deep learning approaches have used the Kalman Filter (KF)
as a tool to integrate uncertainty estimates into deep timeseries modelling (Haarnoja et al., 2016; Watter et al., 2015;
Archer et al., 2015; Fraccaro et al., 2017; Krishnan et al.,
2017). These approaches use the KF to perform inference
in a low-dimensional (latent) state space that is typically
defined by a deep encoder. However, using KF in such a
state space comes with two main limitations. In order to
be usable for non-linear dynamics, we have to introduce
approximations such as the extended KF (Haarnoja et al.,
2016) and variational inference methods (Krishnan et al.,
2017; Fraccaro et al., 2017). Moreover, the KF equations
require computationally expensive matrix inversions that
are hard to scale to high dimensional latent spaces for more

