Discovering Conditionally Salient Features with Statistical Guarantees
Jaime Roquero Gimenez 1 James Zou 2

Abstract
The goal of feature selection is to identify important features that are relevant to explain an
outcome variable. Most of the work in this domain has focused on identifying globally relevant
features, which are features that are related to the
outcome using evidence across the entire dataset.
We study a more fine-grained statistical problem:
conditional feature selection, where a feature may
be relevant depending on the values of the other
features. For example in genetic association studies, variant A could be associated with the phenotype in the entire dataset, but conditioned on
variant B being present it might be independent
of the phenotype. In this sense, variant A is globally relevant, but conditioned on B it is no longer
locally relevant in that region of the feature space.
We present a generalization of the knockoff procedure that performs conditional feature selection
while controlling a generalization of the false discovery rate (FDR) to the conditional setting. By
exploiting the feature/response model-free framework of the knockoffs, the quality of the statistical FDR guarantee is not degraded even when we
perform conditional feature selections. We implement this method and present an algorithm that
automatically partitions the feature space such
that it enhances the differences between selected
sets in different regions, and validate the statistical
theoretical results with experiments.

1. Introduction
Given d features X = (X1 , . . . , Xd ) and a response variable Y , in many settings only a small subset of Xi are relevant for Y . The goal of global statistical feature selection
is to identify those relevant features, while ideally provid1
Department of Statistics, Stanford University, Stanford
USA 2 Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford
University, Stanford USA. Correspondence to: James Zou
<jamesz@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

ing some statistical control on the rate of false discoveries.
This problem has been extensively studied in the statistics
and machine learning literature (Benjamini & Hochberg,
1995; Holm, 1979; Benjamini & Yekutieli, 2001; Efron,
2012). One scientific domain that requires extensive use
of feature selection is genomics. There Y corresponds to
a phenotype of interest (e.g. whether a patient has a disease or not), and X contains information about individual
mutations at genomic sites with high variability, or single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Researchers are interested
to identify the small subset of features/SNPs that affect the
disease risks based on information gathered from cohorts of
participants with and without the phenotype of interest in
genome-wide association studies (GWAS) (Hirschhorn &
Daly, 2005; McCarthy et al., 2008).
We call this global feature selection because its goal is
to identify the relevant features for Y regardless of their
location in the feature space. GWAS looks for the subset
of SNPs that best help to predict the phenotype, regardless
of the actual values of the SNPs themselves. The purpose
of this work is to extend the feature selection problem to
a conditional feature selection problem, where we want to
identify relevant features conditionally on being on a subregion of the feature space. One motivation for this comes
again from genomics. Given a SNP (or a set of SNPs) that
we believe is relevant for understanding a disease based
on prior biological knowledge, or from a previous GWAS
study, we want to run a GWAS conditionally on such SNP
having a prescribed value. As an example, a few SNPs in
a few loci have been identified as major potential causes
breast cancer, such as the mutations in the BRCA1/2 genes
(O’donovan & Livingston, 2010). We would like to run a
GWAS conditioned on not having these variants to identify
the other sources of genetic variation that are related to
breast cancer.
There are two main advantages when doing conditional
feature selection. First, a feature that is selected through a
global feature selection procedure may no longer be relevant
conditioned on a local scale. In genomics, the presence or
absence of a mutation can activate or deactivate different
biological pathways. Therefore another mutation can be
relevant or not for a given phenotype depending on whether
its pathway was activated by the first mutation. Being able
to distinguish between globally and locally relevant features

