Concrete Autoencoders: Differentiable Feature Selection and Reconstruction
Abubakar Abid * 1 Muhammed Fatih Balin * 2 James Zou 1 3 4

Abstract
We introduce the concrete autoencoder, an endto-end differentiable method for global feature
selection, which efficiently identifies a subset of
the most informative features and simultaneously
learns a neural network to reconstruct the input
data from the selected features. Our method is
unsupervised, and is based on using a concrete
selector layer as the encoder and using a standard
neural network as the decoder. During the training phase, the temperature of the concrete selector
layer is gradually decreased, which encourages a
user-specified number of discrete features to be
learned; during test time, the selected features
can be used with the decoder network to reconstruct the remaining input features. We evaluate
concrete autoencoders on a variety of datasets,
where they significantly outperform state-of-theart methods for feature selection and data reconstruction. In particular, on a large-scale gene expression dataset, the concrete autoencoder selects
a small subset of genes whose expression levels
can be used to impute the expression levels of the
remaining genes; in doing so, it improves on the
current widely-used expert-curated L1000 landmark genes, potentially reducing measurement
costs by 20%. The concrete autoencoder can be
implemented by adding just a few lines of code
to a standard autoencoder, and the code for the
algorithm and experiments is publicly available.

1. Introduction
High-dimensional datasets often pose a challenge for machine learning algorithms. Feature selection methods aim
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering,
Stanford University, Stanford, United States 2 Department of
Computer Engineering, Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey
3
Department of Biomedical Data Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, United States 4 Chan-Zuckerberg Biohub, San
Francisco, United States. Correspondence to: Abubakar Abid
<a12d@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

to reduce dimensionality of data by identifying the subset
of relevant features in a dataset. A large number of algorithms have been proposed for feature selection in both
supervised and unsupervised settings (Kohavi & John, 1997;
Wang et al., 2013). These methods provide insight into the
relationship between features in complex data and can simplify the process of training downstream models. Feature
selection is particularly useful if the data with the full set of
features is expensive or difficult to collect, as it can eliminate
the need to measure irrelevant or redundant features.
As a motivating example, consider a dataset that consists of
the expression of various genes across tissue samples. Such
“omics” measurements are increasingly carried out to fully
characterize biological samples at the individual and singlecell level (Bock et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2017). Yet it
remains expensive to conduct all of the biological assays that
are needed to characterize such samples. It is natural to ask:
what are the most important features in this dataset? Are
there redundant features that do not need to be measured?
The idea of only measuring a subset of biological features
and then reconstructing the remaining features is not new; in
fact, this line of thinking has motivated the identification of
the landmark genes, also known as the L1000 genes, which
are a small subset of the over 20,000 human genes. The
expression levels of the L1000 are strongly correlated with
the expression levels of other genes, and thus this subset can
be measured cheaply and then used to impute the remaining
gene expression levels (Lamb et al., 2006).
The problem of feature selection is different from the more
general problem of dimensionality reduction. Standard techniques for dimensionality reduction, such as principal components analysis (Hotelling, 1933) and autoencoders (Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006), are be able to represent data
with fewer dimensions while preserving maximal variance
or minimizing reconstruction loss. However, such methods
do not select a set of features present in the original dataset,
and thus cannot be directly used to eliminate redundant
features and reduce experimental costs. We emphasize the
unsupervised nature of this problem: specific prediction
tasks may not be known ahead of time, and thus it is important to develop methods that can identify a subset of features
while allowing imputation of the remaining features with
minimal distortion for arbitrary downstream tasks.
In this paper, we propose a new end-to-end method to per-

