GEOMetrics: Exploiting Geometric Structure for Graph-Encoded Objects

Edward J. Smith 1 Scott Fujimoto 1 2 Adriana Romero 3 1 David Meger 1

Abstract
Mesh models are a promising approach for encoding the structure of 3D objects. Current
mesh reconstruction systems predict uniformly
distributed vertex locations of a predetermined
graph through a series of graph convolutions, leading to compromises with respect to performance
or resolution. In this paper, we argue that the
graph representation of geometric objects allows
for additional structure, which should be leveraged for enhanced reconstruction. Thus, we propose a system which properly benefits from the
advantages of the geometric structure of graphencoded objects by introducing (1) a graph convolutional update preserving vertex information;
(2) an adaptive splitting heuristic allowing detail
to emerge; and (3) a training objective operating
both on the local surfaces defined by vertices as
well as the global structure defined by the mesh.
Our proposed method is evaluated on the task of
3D object reconstruction from images with the
ShapeNet dataset, where we demonstrate state
of the art performance, both visually and numerically, while having far smaller space requirements
by generating adaptive meshes.

1. Introduction
Surfaces in our physical world exhibit highly non-uniform
curvature; compare a plane’s wing to a microscopic screw
that fastens its engine. Traditionally, deep 3D understanding
systems have relied upon representations such as voxels and
point clouds, which capture structure with either uniform
volumetric or surface detail (Choy et al., 2016; Wu et al.,
2016; Fan et al., 2017). By representing unimportant, or
uninteresting, regions with high detail, these systems scale
1
Department of Computer Science, McGill University,
Montreal, Canada 2 Mila Québec AI Institute 3 Facebook
AI Research.
Correspondence to: Edward Smith <edward.smith@mail.mcgill.ca>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

(a) Voxels
(262144 units)

(b) Point cloud
(30000 points)

(c) Uniform mesh
(2416 vertices)

(d) Adaptive mesh
(120 vertices)

Figure 1. Comparison of 3D shape encoding techniques, including
their respective encoding sizes for the level of quality viewed.

poorly to higher resolutions and object complexity (see Figure 1a and 1b). While efforts have been made to rectify this
issue through intermediary representations (Tatarchenko
et al., 2017; Häne et al., 2017; Smith et al., 2018; Zhang
et al., 2018), these either continue to rely on sparse volumetric units, or maintain uniform detail through alternative
representations.
A triangle mesh is a graph-based shape representation that
encodes 3D structure through a set of vertices and corresponding planar faces. Recently, advances in deep learning on graphs have enabled mesh-based 3D shape methods (Kato et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2018; Kanazawa et al.,
2018; Jack et al., 2018; Henderson & Ferrari, 2018; Groueix
et al., 2018b). However, these approaches produce mesh
predictions which uniformly space vertices and faces over
their surface, providing no significant improvement over the
previously highlighted representations (see Figure 1c) and
hence, not exploiting the mesh representation advantages.
In particular, by placing many vertices in regions of fine
detail while using large triangles to summarize nearly planar regions, one could define adaptive meshes (see Figure
1d), enabling flexible scaling by effectively localizing complexity in object surfaces, and allowing for the 3D structure

