Calibrated Approximate Bayesian Inference

Hanwen Xing 1 Geoff K. Nicholls 1 Jeong Eun Lee 2

Abstract
We give a computational framework for estimating the bias in coverage resulting from making
approximations in Bayesian inference. Coverage
is the probability credible sets cover prior parameter values. We show how to estimate the coverage
an approximation scheme achieves when the ideal
but intractable observation model and the prior
can be simulated, but have been replaced, in the
Monte Carlo, with approximations. Coverage estimation procedures given in Lee et al. (2018) work
on simple problems, but do not scale well, as those
authors note. For example, Lee et al. (2018) calibrate a completely collapsed MCMC algorithm
for partition structure in a Dirichlet process model
for random effects in a hierarchical model and
a small data set, but they note it fails when the
model is applied to clustering on a larger dataset.
By exploiting the symmetry of the coverage error under permutation of low level group labels
and smoothing with Bayesian Additive Regression Trees, we show that the original approximate
inference had poor coverage for these data and
should not be trusted.

1. Introduction
Bayesian credible sets with stated nominal coverage are
a fundamental way to communicate statistical uncertainty.
However, we usually report approximate credible sets with
uncalibrated coverage as some approximation is inevitable
for large data sets and complex models. Approximation
comes in many forms. In MCMC samples are only asymptotically distributed according to the posterior. The precision
parameter is the run length. Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC, Pritchard et al. (1999)) typically has two
kinds of precision parameters, a distance threshold and a
1

Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, UK
Department of Statistics, University of Auckland, New Zealand.
Correspondence to: Hanwen Xing <hanwen.xing@stx.ox.ac.uk>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Monte Carlo sample. There are also “fixed” approximations with no precision parameters, in which a likelihood
evaluation is replaced by an approximation which cannot be
improved by varying a control parameter. Pseudo-likelihood
(Besag, 1975) and variational inference (Jordan et al., 1999;
Hoffman et al., 2013) often lead to a fixed approximation.
A number of methods have been developed to check the
approximation is acceptable. Recent new generic diagnostic
tools given in Talts et al. (2018) and Yao et al. (2018) are
related to earlier work in Prangle et al. (2014) and exploit
an idea, developed in Geweke (2004); Cook et al. (2006) as
a MCMC convergence diagnostic, and going back to Monahan & Boos (1992). In early related work, Menendez et al.
(2014) gives procedures for correcting credible sets under
conditions stronger than those required here and Rodrigues
et al. (2018) recalibrates ABC samples.
We consider an approximate Bayesian credible set with
given nominal level α. What coverage does the credible set
actually achieve? Wherever approximate Bayesian inference reports a credible set, an associated coverage measure
should be given. We do not build a new credible set with
improved coverage, although this is easy in our AIS method,
because we would then have to estimate the coverage of that
corrected credible set.
Let π(φ) be the prior for φ ∈ Ω, let p(y|φ) be the observation model (the likelihood) for data y ∈ Y and let
π(φ|y) ∝ π(φ)p(y|φ) be the posterior for φ given data
y. Let π̃(θ) and p̃(y|θ) be the approximate prior and likelihood for parameter θ ∈ Ω with approximate posterior
π̃(θ|y) ∝ π̃(θ)p̃(y|θ). This paper is motivated by problems
where we cannot in practice sample π(φ|y) using any known
Monte Carlo method. We assume a tractable approximation
π̃(θ|y) is available, and we assume it is possible to sample
φ ∼ π(·) and y 0 ∼ p(·|φ) (just as in ABC).
The estimated credible set is computed for a posterior distribution π̃(θ|y) which approximates the exact posterior
π(φ|y). The exact level α credible set Cy for the exact
posterior π(φ|y) satisfies
Z
α=
1φ∈Cy π(φ|y)dφ.
Ω

This set Cy has perfect Bayes coverage in the sense that, if
φ ∼ π(·) is a draw from the prior, and y ∼ p(·|φ) is a draw

