Multi-Frequency Vector Diffusion Maps

Yifeng Fan 1 Zhizhen Zhao 1

Abstract
We introduce multi-frequency vector diffusion
maps (MFVDM), a new framework for organizing and analyzing high dimensional datasets. The
new method is a mathematical and algorithmic
generalization of vector diffusion maps (VDM)
and other non-linear dimensionality reduction
methods. MFVDM combines different nonlinear embeddings of the data points defined with
multiple unitary irreducible representations of the
alignment group that connect two nodes in the
graph. We illustrate the efficacy of MFVDM on
synthetic data generated according to a random
graph model and cryo-electron microscopy image
dataset. The new method achieves better nearest
neighbor search and alignment estimation than the
state-of-the-arts VDM and diffusion maps (DM)
on extremely noisy data.

1. Introduction
Nonlinear dimensionality reduction methods, such as locally linear embedding (LLE) (Roweis & Saul, 2000),
ISOMAP (Tenenbaum et al., 2000), Hessian LLE (Donoho
& Grimes, 2003), Laplacian eigenmaps (Belkin & Niyogi,
2002; 2003), and diffusion maps (DM) (Coifman & Lafon,
2006) are invaluable tools for embedding complex data in
a low dimensional space and for regression problems on
graphs and manifolds. To this end, those methods assume
that the high-dimensional data lies on a low dimensional
manifold and local affinities in a weighted neighborhood
graph are used to learn the global structure of the data. Spectral clustering (Nadler et al., 2006; Von Luxburg, 2007),
semi-supervised learning (Zhu, 2006; Goldberg et al., 2009;
Yang et al., 2016), out-of-sample extension (Belkin et al.,
2006), image denoising (Gong et al., 2010; Singer et al.,
2009) share similar geometrical considerations. Those techniques are either directly or indirectly related to the heat
kernel for functions on the data. Vector diffusion maps
(VDM) (Singer & Wu, 2012) generalizes DM to define heat
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engeneering, Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, Illinois, USA. Correspondence to: Yifeng Fan
<yifengf2@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

kernel for vector fields on the data manifold. The corresponding adjacency matrix is based on edge weights and
orthogonal transformations between connected nodes. Using the spectral decomposition of the matrix, VDM defines
a metric for the data to indicate the closeness of the data
points on the manifold. For some applications, the vector
diffusion metric is beneficial, since it takes into account
linear transformations, and as a result, it provides a better
organization of the data. However, for extremely noisy data,
VDM nearest neighbor search may fail at identifying the
true nearby points on the manifold. This results in shortcut
edges that connect points with large geodesic distances on
the manifold.
To address this issue, we introduce a new algorithm called
multi-frequency vector diffusion maps (MFVDM) to represent and organize complex high-dimensional data, exhibiting a non-trivial group invariance. To this end, we
augment VDM with multiple irreducible representations
of the compact group to improve the rotationally invariant
nearest neighbor search and the alignment estimation between nearest neighbor pairs, when the initial estimation
contains a large number of outliers due to noise. Specifically, we define a set of kernels, denoted by Wk , using
multiple irreducible representations of the compact alignment group indexed by integer k and introduce the corresponding frequency-k-VDMs. The MFVDM is constructed
by concatenating all the frequency-k-VDMs up to a cutoff kmax . We use the new embeddings to identify nearest
neighbors. The eigenvectors of the normalized Wk are used
to estimate the pairwise alignments between nearest neighbors. This framework also extends the mathematical theory
of cryo-electron microscopy (EM) image analysis (Singer
et al., 2011; Hadani & Singer, 2011; Giannakis et al., 2012;
Schwander et al., 2012; Dashti et al., 2014). We show that
MFVDM outperforms VDM and DM for data sampled from
low-dimensional manifolds, when a large proportion of the
edge connections are corrupted. MFVDM is also able to improve the nearest neighbor search and rotational alignment
for 2-D class averaging in cryo-EM.

2. Preliminaries and Problem Setup
Given a dataset xi ∈ Rl for i = 1, . . . , n, we assume that the
data lie on or close to a low dimensional smooth manifold X
of intrinsic dimension d  l. Suppose that G is a compact
Lie group, which has unitary irreducible representations
according to Peter-Weyl theorem. The data space X is
closed under G if for all g ∈ G and all x ∈ X , g · x ∈ X ,

