Learning to Generalize from Sparse and Underspecified Rewards

Rishabh Agarwal 1 * Chen Liang 1 Dale Schuurmans 1 2 Mohammad Norouzi 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning from sparse
and underspecified rewards, where an agent receives a complex input, such as a natural language
instruction, and needs to generate a complex response, such as an action sequence, while only
receiving binary success-failure feedback. Such
success-failure rewards are often underspecified:
they do not distinguish between purposeful and
accidental success. Generalization from underspecified rewards hinges on discounting spurious
trajectories that attain accidental success, while
learning from sparse feedback requires effective
exploration. We address exploration by using
a mode covering direction of KL divergence to
collect a diverse set of successful trajectories, followed by a mode seeking KL divergence to train a
robust policy. We propose Meta Reward Learning
(MeRL) to construct an auxiliary reward function
that provides more refined feedback for learning.
The parameters of the auxiliary reward function
are optimized with respect to the validation performance of a trained policy. The MeRL approach
outperforms an alternative method for reward
learning based on Bayesian Optimization, and
achieves the state-of-the-art on weakly-supervised
semantic parsing. It improves previous work by
1.2% and 2.4% on W IKI TABLE Q UESTIONS and
W IKI SQL datasets respectively.

Rank Nation Gold Silver
1
USA 10 12
2
GBR 9
4
3
CHN 8
11
4
RUS 2
4
5
GER 2
2
6
JPN 2
1
7
FRA 2
1

x = “Which nation won the most
silver medal?”
R(a) = 1[Execute(a) = “USA”]
a1 = argmax row(Silver).Nation
a2 = argmax row(Gold).Nation
a3 = argmin row(Rank).Nation
R(a1 ) = R(a2 ) = R(a3 ) = 1

Figure 1. Semantic parsing from question-answer pairs. An agent
is presented with a natural language question x and is asked to
generate a SQL-like program a. The agent receives a reward of 1
if execution of a program a on the relevant data table leads to the
correct answer (e.g., USA). The reward is underspecified because
spurious programs (e.g., a2 , a3 ) can also achieve a reward of 1.
x = “Right Up Up Right”
R(a) = 1[Execute(•, a) = ?]
a1 = (→, ↑, ↑, →)
a2 = (←, →, →, ↑, ↑, →)
a3 = (↑, →, →, ↑)
R(a1 ) = R(a2 ) = R(a3 ) = 1
Figure 2. Instruction following in a simple maze. A blind agent is
presented with a sequence of (Left, Right, Up, Down) instructions.
Given the input text, the agent (•) performs a sequence of actions,
and only receives a reward of 1 if it reaches the goal (?).

*
Work done as part of the Google AI Residency Program.
Google Research, Brain Team 2 University of Alberta. Correspondence to: Rishabh Agarwal <rishabhagarwal@google.com>,
Mohammad Norouzi <mnorouzi@google.com>.

optimize language communication if it is expressed in terms
of achieving concrete goals. In this pursuit, researchers
have created a number of simulation environments where
a learning agent is provided with a natural language input
and asked to produce a sequence of actions for achieving a
goal specified in the input text (e.g., Long et al. (2016); Hermann et al. (2017); Chaplot et al. (2018); Fu et al. (2019);
Chevalier-Boisvert et al. (2018)). These tasks are typically
episodic, where the agent receives sparse binary successfailure feedback indicating whether an intended goal has
been accomplished. After training, the agent is placed in
new contexts and evaluated based on its ability to reach
novel goals, indicating the quality of its behavior policy and
language interpretation skills. The emphasis on generalization in these tasks makes them suitable for benchmarking
overfitting in RL (Cobbe et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018).

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Figure 1 and 2 illustrate two examples of contextual environments with sparse and underspecified rewards. The rewards
are sparse, since only a few trajectories in the combinatorial

1. Introduction
Effortlessly communicating with computers using natural
language has been a longstanding goal of artificial intelligence (Winograd, 1971). Reinforcement Learning (RL)
presents a flexible framework for optimizing goal oriented
behavior (Sutton & Barto, 2018). As such, one can use RL to
1

