Calibrated Model-Based Deep Reinforcement Learning
Ali Malik * 1 Volodymyr Kuleshov * 1 2 Jiaming Song 1 Danny Nemer 2 Harlan Seymour 2 Stefano Ermon 1

Abstract
Estimates of predictive uncertainty are important
for accurate model-based planning and reinforcement learning. However, predictive uncertainties
— especially ones derived from modern deep learning systems — can be inaccurate and impose a
bottleneck on performance. This paper explores
which uncertainties are needed for model-based
reinforcement learning and argues that good uncertainties must be calibrated, i.e. their probabilities should match empirical frequencies of
predicted events. We describe a simple way to
augment any model-based reinforcement learning
agent with a calibrated model and show that doing
so consistently improves planning, sample complexity, and exploration. On the H ALF C HEETAH
MuJoCo task, our system achieves state-of-the-art
performance using 50% fewer samples than the
current leading approach. Our findings suggest
that calibration can improve the performance of
model-based reinforcement learning with minimal computational and implementation overhead.

1. Introduction
Methods for accurately assessing predictive uncertainty
are important components of modern decision-making systems. Probabilistic methods have been used to improve the
safety, interpretability, and performance of decision-making
agents in various domains, including medicine (Saria, 2018),
robotics (Chua et al., 2018; Buckman et al., 2018), and operations research (Van Roy et al., 1997).
In model-based reinforcement learning — a setting in which
an agent learns a model of the world from past experience
and uses it to plan future decisions — capturing uncertainty in the agent’s model is particularly important (Deisen*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, USA 2 Afresh Technologies, San Francisco,
USA. Correspondence to: Ali Malik <malikali@stanford.edu>,
Volodymyr Kuleshov <kuleshov@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Modern model-based planning algorithms with probabilistic models can over-estimate their confidence (purple distribution), and overlook dangerous outcomes (e.g., a collision). We
show how to endow agents with a calibrated world model that
accurately captures true uncertainty (green distribution) and improves planning in high-stakes scenarios like autonomous driving
or industrial optimisation.

roth & Rasmussen, 2011). Planning with a probabilistic
model improves performance and sample complexity, especially when representing the model using a deep neural
network (Rajeswaran et al., 2016; Chua et al., 2018).
Despite their importance in decision-making, predictive
uncertainties can be unreliable, especially when derived
from deep neural networks (Guo et al., 2017a). Although
several modern approaches such as deep ensembles (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017b) and approximations of Bayesian
inference (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016a;b; Gal et al., 2017) provide uncertainties from deep neural networks, these methods
suffer from shortcomings that reduce their effectiveness for
planning (Kuleshov et al., 2018).
In this paper, we study which uncertainties are needed in
model-based reinforcement learning and argue that good
predictive uncertainties must be calibrated, i.e. their probabilities should match empirical frequencies of predicted
events. We propose a simple way to augment any modelbased reinforcement learning algorithm with a calibrated
model by adapting recent advances in uncertainty estimation
for deep neural networks (Kuleshov et al., 2018). We complement our approach with diagnostic tools, best-practices,

