On the Computation and Communication Complexity of Parallel SGD with
Dynamic Batch Sizes for Stochastic Non-Convex Optimization
Hao Yu 1 Rong Jin 1

Abstract

variables ⇣ ⇠ D refer to instance-label pairs and F (x; ⇣)
refers to the corresponding loss function. For example, consider a simple least squares linear regression problem: let
⇣i = (ai , bi ) 2 D be training data collected offline or online1 , where each ai is a feature vector and bi is its label,
then F (x; ⇣i ) = 12 (aTi x bi )2 . Throughout this paper, we
have the following assumption:

For SGD based distributed stochastic optimization, computation complexity, measured by the
convergence rate in terms of the number of
stochastic gradient calls, and communication complexity, measured by the number of inter-node
communication rounds, are two most important
performance metrics. The classical data-parallel
implementation of SGD over N workers can
achieve linear speedup of its convergence rate but
incurs an inter-node communication round at each
batch. We study the benefit of using dynamically
increasing batch sizes in parallel SGD for stochastic non-convex optimization by charactering the
attained convergence rate and the required number of communication rounds. We show that for
stochastic non-convex optimization under the P-L
condition, the classical data-parallel SGD with
exponentially increasing batch sizes can achieve
the fastest known O(1/(N T )) convergence with
linear speedup using only log(T ) communication
rounds. For general stochastic non-convex optimization, we propose a Catalyst-like
p algorithm
to achieve the fastestp
known O(1/ N T ) converT
gence with only O( N T log( N
)) communication rounds.

Assumption 1.
1. Smoothness: The objective function f (x) in problem
(1) is smooth with modulus L.
2. Unbiased gradients with bounded variances: Assume there exits a stochastic first-order oracle (SFO)
to provide independent unbiased stochastic gradients
rF (x; ⇣) satisfying
E⇣⇠D [rF (x; ⇣)] = rf (x), 8x.
The unbiased stochastic gradients have a bounded variance, i.e., there exits a constant > 0 such that
E⇣⇠D krF (x; ⇣)

1. Introduction
Consider solving the following stochastic optimization
min

x2Rm

f (x) = E⇣⇠D [F (x; ⇣)]

(1)

with a fixed yet unknown distribution D only by accessing
i.i.d. stochastic gradients rF (·; ⇣). Most machine learning
applications can be cast into the above stochastic optimization where x refers to the machine learning model, random
1

Machine Intelligence Technology Lab, Alibaba Group
(U.S.) Inc., Bellevue, WA. Correspondence to: Hao Yu
<eeyuhao@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

rf (x)k2 

2

(2)

When solving stochastic optimization (1) only with sampled
stochastic gradients, the computation complexity, which is
also known as the convergence rate, is measured by the
decay law of the solution error with respect to the number of access of the stochastic first-order oracle (SFO)
that provides sampled stochastic gradients (Nemirovsky &
Yudin, 1983; Ghadimi et al., 2016). For strongly convex
stochastic minimization, SGD type algorithms (Nemirovski
et al., 2009; Hazan & Kale, 2014; Rakhlin et al., 2012)
can achieve the optimal O(1/T ) convergence rate. That is,
the error is ensured to be at most O(1/T ) after T access
of stochastic gradients. For non-convex stochastic minimization, which is the case of training deep neural networks,
1
Note that if the training data is from a finite set collected offline, the stochastic optimization can also be written as a finite sum
minimization, which is a special case of the stochastic optimization
with known uniform distribution D. However, for online training,
since (ai , bi ) is generated gradually and disclosed to us one by
one, we need to solve the more challenging stochastic optimization
with unknown distribution D. The algorithms developed in this
paper does not requires any knowledge of distribution D.

