Repairing without Retraining:
Avoiding Disparate Impact with Counterfactual Distributions

Hao Wang 1 Berk Ustun 1 Flavio P. Calmon 1

Abstract
When the performance of a machine learning
model varies over groups defined by sensitive
attributes (e.g., gender or ethnicity), the performance disparity can be expressed in terms of the
probability distributions of the input and output
variables over each group. In this paper, we exploit this fact to reduce the disparate impact of
a fixed classification model over a population of
interest. Given a black-box classifier, we aim
to eliminate the performance gap by perturbing
the distribution of input variables for the disadvantaged group. We refer to the perturbed distribution
as a counterfactual distribution, and characterize
its properties for common fairness criteria. We
introduce a descent algorithm to learn a counterfactual distribution from data. We then discuss
how the estimated distribution can be used to build
a data preprocessor that can reduce disparate impact without training a new model. We validate
our approach through experiments on real-world
datasets, showing that it can repair different forms
of disparity without a significant drop in accuracy.

1. Introduction
A machine learning model has disparate impact when its
performance changes across groups defined by sensitive attributes such as race or gender (Barocas & Selbst, 2016).
Recent work has shown that models can exhibit significant
performance disparities between groups (see e.g. Angwin
et al., 2016; Dastin, 2018). Such disparities have led to
a plethora of research on fair machine learning, focusing
on how disparate impact arises (Chen et al., 2018; Datta
et al., 2016), how it can be measured (Žliobaitė, 2017; Pierson et al., 2017; Simoiu et al., 2017; Kilbertus et al., 2017;
1

Harvard University, MA, USA. Correspondence
to:
Hao Wang <hao_wang@g.harvard.edu>,
Berk
Ustun <berk@seas.harvard.edu>,
Flavio P. Calmon
<flavio@seas.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Kusner et al., 2017; Galhotra et al., 2017), and how it can
be mitigated (Feldman et al., 2015; Corbett-Davies et al.,
2017; Zafar et al., 2017; Calmon et al., 2017; Menon &
Williamson, 2018; Canetti et al., 2019). Despite these developments, disparate impact remains difficult to avoid in a
large class of real-world applications where:
•

Models are procured from a third-party vendor who has
the data or technical expertise required for model development (Guszcza et al., 2018).

•

Models are deployed on a population where the data distribution differs from the distribution of the training data
(i.e., due to dataset shift, Sugiyama et al., 2017).

In such settings, disparate impact is challenging to address,
let alone understand. Users typically have black-box access
to the model (e.g., via a prediction API), may not have
access to the training data (e.g., due to privacy concerns or
intellectual property rights), and may not be able to draw
conclusions from the training data (e.g., due to distributional
shifts in deployment).
In this paper, we aim to mitigate disparate impact in such
settings. Our object of interest is a hypothetical distribution of input variables that minimizes disparate impact in
the model’s deployment population. We refer to this distribution as a counterfactual distribution. As we will show,
an information-theoretic analysis of counterfactual distributions has much to offer. Given a fixed classifier, disparate
impact can be expressed in terms the distributions of input
and output variables between groups (cf. Figure 1). In turn,
a counterfactual distribution can be obtained by repeatedly
perturbing the distribution of input variables until a specific
measure of disparity is minimized over the deployment population. The counterfactual distribution can then be used
to repair the model so that it no longer exhibits disparate
impact in deployment.
Contributions

The main contributions of this paper are:

1. We introduce a theoretical framework to mitigate performance disparities for a black-box classifiers in deployment.
2. We develop machinery to learn counterfactual distributions from data. Our tools recover a counterfactual

