Scalable Nonparametric Sampling from Multimodal Posteriors
with the Posterior Bootstrap

Edwin Fong 1 2 Simon Lyddon 1 Chris Holmes 1 2

Abstract
Increasingly complex datasets pose a number of
challenges for Bayesian inference. Conventional
posterior sampling based on Markov chain Monte
Carlo can be too computationally intensive, is serial in nature and mixes poorly between posterior
modes. Furthermore, all models are misspecified,
which brings into question the validity of the
conventional Bayesian update. We present a scalable Bayesian nonparametric learning routine that
enables posterior sampling through the optimization of suitably randomized objective functions.
A Dirichlet process prior on the unknown data
distribution accounts for model misspecification,
and admits an embarrassingly parallel posterior
bootstrap algorithm that generates independent
and exact samples from the nonparametric posterior distribution. Our method is particularly
adept at sampling from multimodal posterior
distributions via a random restart mechanism, and
we demonstrate this on Gaussian mixture model
and sparse logistic regression examples.

1. Introduction
As datasets grow in complexity and size, Bayesian inference becomes increasingly difficult. The posterior is often
intractable, so we resort to simulation methods for inference via Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), which is
inherently serial and often too computationally expensive
in datasets with a large number of data points (Bardenet
et al., 2017). MCMC further struggles with multimodal
posteriors which arise in many settings including mixture
models (Jasra et al., 2005) or non-convex priors (Seeger
et al., 2007), as the MCMC sampler can become trapped in
local modes (Rudoy & Wolfe, 2006). Current methods to
1

Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom 2 The Alan Turing Institute, London, United Kingdom.
Correspondence to: Edwin Fong <edwin.fong@stats.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

sample from multimodal posteriors with MCMC include parallel tempering (Neal, 1996) and adaptive MCMC (Pompe
et al., 2018), but the associated computational cost is high.
Posterior approximation with variational Bayes (VB) (Blei
et al., 2017) is a faster alternative, but it is generally difficult
to quantify the quality of the approximation, and is thus
problematic if accurate uncertainty quantification is desired
(Giordano et al., 2015).
A further methodological issue facing Bayesian inference
is the fact that all models are false. The increasing scale of
datasets exacerbates the effects of model misspecification
(Walker, 2013), as the true sampling distribution is meaningfully different from the parametric family of distributions
of the model. There is rarely formal acknowledgement of
model misspecification which can lead to inconsistencies
(Watson et al., 2016; Grünwald & Van Ommen, 2017).
Bayesian nonparametric learning (NPL) introduced by Lyddon et al. (2018) allows for the use of statistical models
without assuming the model is true. NPL uses a nonparametric prior centred on a parametric model, and returns a
nonparametric posterior over the parameter of interest. The
method focuses on accounting for model misspecification
and for posterior approximation such as from Variational
Bayes (VB) by placing a mixture of Dirichlet processes
(Antoniak, 1974) prior on the sampling distribution. In
addition to the acknowledgement of model misspecification,
the method admits an embarrassingly parallel Monte Carlo
sampling scheme consisting of randomized maximizations.
However, in most cases this method requires sampling the
Bayesian posterior, which is computationally expensive for
complex models.
1.1. Our Contribution
In this work, we propose a simplified variant of NPL that
utilises a Dirichlet process (DP) prior on F0 instead of a
mixture of Dirichlet processes (MDP) prior. This allows us
to perform inference directly and detaches the nonparametric prior from the prior of the model parameter of interest.
Instead of centering on a Bayesian posterior, we center the
DP on a sampling distribution which encapsulates our prior
beliefs. This simpler choice of prior also has desirable
theoretical properties and is highly scalable as we no longer

