Characterizing Well-Behaved vs. Pathological Deep Neural Networks

Antoine Labatie 1

Abstract
We introduce a novel approach, requiring only
mild assumptions, for the characterization of deep
neural networks at initialization. Our approach
applies both to fully-connected and convolutional
networks and easily incorporates batch normalization and skip-connections. Our key insight is
to consider the evolution with depth of statistical
moments of signal and noise, thereby characterizing the presence or absence of pathologies in the
hypothesis space encoded by the choice of hyperparameters. We establish: (i) for feedforward networks, with and without batch normalization, the
multiplicativity of layer composition inevitably
leads to ill-behaved moments and pathologies; (ii)
for residual networks with batch normalization,
on the other hand, skip-connections induce powerlaw rather than exponential behaviour, leading to
well-behaved moments and no pathology.

1. Introduction
The feverish pace of practical applications has led in the recent years to many advances in neural network architectures,
initialization and regularization. At the same time, theoretical research has not been able to follow the same pace. In
particular, there is still no mature theory able to validate the
full choices of hyperparameters leading to state-of-the-art
performance. This is unfortunate since such theory could
also serve as a guide towards further improvement.
Amidst the research aimed at building this theory, an important branch has focused on networks at initialization. Due to
the randomness of model parameters at initialization, characterizing networks at that time can be seen as characterizing
the hypothesis space of input-output mappings that will be
favored or reachable during training, i.e. the inductive bias
encoded by the choice of hyperparameters. This view has
received strong experimental support, with well-behaved
1
Labatie-AI. Correspondence to: Antoine Labatie <antoine@labatie.ai>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

input-output mappings at initialization extensively found to
be predictive of trainability and post-training performance
(Schoenholz et al., 2017; Yang & Schoenholz, 2017; Xiao
et al., 2018; Philipp & Carbonell, 2018; Yang et al., 2019).
Yet, even this simplifying case of networks at initialization is challenging as it notably involves dealing with: (i)
the complex interplay of the randomness from input data
and from model parameters; (ii) the broad spectrum of potential pathologies; (iii) the finite number of units in each
layer; (iv) the difficulty to incorporate convolutional layers,
batch normalization and skip-connections. Complexities
(i), (ii) typically lead to restricting to specific cases of input data and pathologies, e.g. exploding complexity of
data manifolds (Poole et al., 2016; Raghu et al., 2017), exponential correlation or decorrelation of two data points
(Schoenholz et al., 2017; Balduzzi et al., 2017; Xiao et al.,
2018), exploding and vanishing gradients (Yang & Schoenholz, 2017; Philipp et al., 2018; Hanin, 2018; Yang et al.,
2019), exploding and vanishing activations (Hanin & Rolnick, 2018). Complexity (iii) commonly leads to making
simplifying assumptions, e.g. convergence to Gaussian processes for infinite width (Neal, 1996; Roux & Bengio, 2007;
Lee et al., 2018; Matthews et al., 2018; Borovykh, 2018;
Garriga-Alonso et al., 2019; Novak et al., 2019; Yang, 2019),
“typical” activation patterns (Balduzzi et al., 2017). Finally
complexity (iv) most often leads to limiting the number of
hard-to-model elements incorporated at a time. To the best
of our knowledge, all attempts have thus far been limited in
either their scope or their simplifying assumptions.
As the first contribution of this paper, we introduce a novel
approach for the characterization of deep neural networks at
initialization. This approach: (i) offers a unifying treatment
of the broad spectrum of pathologies without any restriction
on the input data; (ii) requires only mild assumptions; (iii)
easily incorporates convolutional layers, batch normalization and skip-connections.
As the second contribution, we use this approach to characterize deep neural networks with the most common choices
of hyperparameters. We identify the multiplicativity of layer
composition as the driving force towards pathologies in
feedforward networks: either with the neural network having its signal shrunk into a single point or line; or with the
neural network behaving as a noise amplifier with sensitivity

