Projections for Approximate Policy Iteration Algorithms

Riad Akrour 1 Joni Pajarinen 1 2 Gerhard Neumann 3 4 Jan Peters 1 5

Abstract
Approximate policy iteration is a class of reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms where the
policy is encoded using a function approximator
and which has been especially prominent in RL
with continuous action spaces. In this class of
RL algorithms, ensuring increase of the policy
return during policy update often requires to constrain the change in action distribution. Several
approximations exist in the literature to solve this
constrained policy update problem. In this paper,
we propose to improve over such solutions by introducing a set of projections that transform the
constrained problem into an unconstrained one
which is then solved by standard gradient descent.
Using these projections, we empirically demonstrate that our approach can improve the policy
update solution and the control over exploration of
existing approximate policy iteration algorithms.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) formulates a general machine
learning problem in which an agent has to take a sequence
of decisions to maximize a supervision signal (Sutton &
Barto, 1998; Szepesvari, 2010). Because the agent’s decisions influence the data gathering process, RL violates
the typical assumption of other machine learning settings
that data is independent and identically distributed (Bishop,
2006). To cope with this challenge, several RL algorithms
constrain the agent’s behavior to only slowly change. In
trajectory optimization and optimal control, a new policy is
made close to the policy around which the dynamics of the
system have been approximated through mixing (Todorov
& L., 2005; Tassa et al., 2014) or by a Kullback-Leibler
(KL) constraint (Levine & Abbeel, 2014b). In policy gra1

IAS, TU Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany 2 Tampere University, Finland 3 L-CAS, University of Lincoln, Lincoln, United Kingdom 4 Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence (BCAI), Germany
5
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany.
Correspondence to: Riad Akrour <riad@robot-learning.de>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

dient, a key breakthrough was the use of natural gradient
that follows the steepest descent in behavioral space rather
than parameter space (Bagnell & Schneider, 2003; Peters &
Schaal, 2008; Bhatnagar et al., 2009), i.e. seeking maximal
objective improvement with minimal behavioral change.
Constraining successive policies to be close to each other
in approximate policy iteration is justified in the seminal
work of Kakade & Langford 2002 by the mismatch between
what the policy update should optimize and what is optimized in practice. As in optimal control closeness can be
achieved by mixing policies (Kakade & Langford, 2002;
Pirotta et al., 2013), limiting deviation of their probability
ratio to one (Schulman et al., 2017) or constraining their KL
(Schulman et al., 2015; Abdolmaleki et al., 2018; Tangkaratt
et al., 2018; Akrour et al., 2018). To solve KL constrained
policy updates, Schulman et al. 2015 use a quadratic approximation of the KL which augments natural policy gradient algorithms with a line-search step critically ensuring
KL constraint satisfaction; while Abdolmaleki et al. 2018,
Tangkaratt et al. 2018 and Akrour et al. 2018 rely on the
method of Lagrange multipliers to derive a general solution
in closed form before using sample-based approximations
to fit the policy to this solution.
We propose in this paper an alternative approach to policy
update under KL and entropy constraints. The core of our
approach lies in deriving a projection g mapping the parametric policy space to a subspace thereof complying with
the constraints. The constrained maximization of the policy update objective f is then solved by an unconstrained
maximization of f ◦ g. The projections derived in this paper
are independent of f and are shown to be relevant in several scenarios pertaining to RL such as direct policy search
and approximate policy iteration, respectively introduced in
Sec. 2.1 and 2.2. We derive projections for entropy and KL
constraints of Gaussian search distributions in Sec. 3.1 before extending them to state-conditioned policies in Sec. 3.2.
In the experimental section we show for direct policy search
that our more direct approach to constrained optimization
sidesteps the need for sample based approximations, yielding an algorithm more robust to low sample counts. We
additionally show that the same optimization scheme results
in large performance gains by improving the policy update
of two existing approximate policy iteration algorithms.

