Generalized Majorization-Minimization

Sobhan Naderi 1 Kun He 2 Reza Aghajani 3 Stan Sclaroff 4 Pedro Felzenszwalb 5

Abstract
Non-convex optimization is ubiquitous in machine learning.
Majorization-Minimization
(MM) is a powerful iterative procedure for optimizing non-convex functions that works by optimizing a sequence of bounds on the function.
In MM, the bound at each iteration is required to
touch the objective function at the optimizer of
the previous bound. We show that this touching
constraint is unnecessary and overly restrictive.
We generalize MM by relaxing this constraint,
and propose a new optimization framework,
named Generalized Majorization-Minimization
(G-MM), that is more flexible. For instance, GMM can incorporate application-specific biases
into the optimization procedure without changing the objective function. We derive G-MM algorithms for several latent variable models and
show empirically that they consistently outperform their MM counterparts in optimizing nonconvex objectives. In particular, G-MM algorithms appear to be less sensitive to initialization.

1. Introduction
Non-convex optimization is ubiquitous in machine learning. For example, data clustering (MacQueen, 1967;
Arthur & Vassilvitskii, 2007), training classifiers with latent variables (Yu & Joachims, 2009; Felzenszwalb et al.,
2010; Pirsiavash & Ramanan, 2014; Azizpour et al., 2015),
and training visual object detectors from weakly labeled
data (Song et al., 2014; Rastegari et al., 2015; Ries et al.,
2015) all lead to non-convex optimization problems.
Majorization-Minimization (MM) (Hunter et al., 2000) is
an optimization framework for designing well-behaved optimization algorithms for non-convex functions. MM algo* The paper was written when Kun He was at Boston University. 1 Google Research 2 Facebook Reality Labs 3 University
of California San Diego 4 Boston University 5 Brown University.
Correspondence to: Sobhan Naderi <sobhan@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

rithms work by iteratively optimizing a sequence of easyto-optimize surrogate functions that bound the objective.
Two of the most successful instances of MM algorithms are
Expectation-Maximization (EM) (Dempster et al., 1977)
and the Concave-Convex Procedure (CCP) (Yuille & Rangarajan, 2003). However, both have a number of drawbacks
in practice, such as sensitivity to initialization and lack of
uncertainty modeling for latent variables. This has been
noted in (Neal & Hinton, 1998; Felzenszwalb et al., 2010;
Parizi et al., 2012; Kumar et al., 2012; Ping et al., 2014).
We propose a new procedure, Generalized MajorizationMinimization (G-MM), for non-convex optimization. Our
approach is inspired by MM, but we generalize the bound
construction process to allow for a set of valid bounds to be
used, while still maintaining algorithmic convergence. This
generalization gives us more freedom in bound selection
and can be used to design better optimization algorithms.
In training latent variable models and in clustering problems, MM algorithms such as CCP and k-means are known
to be sensitive to the initial values of the latent variables or
cluster memberships. We refer to this problem as stickiness
of the algorithm to the initial latent values. Our experimental results show that G-MM leads to methods that tend to
be less sticky to initialization. We demonstrate the benefit
of using G-MM on multiple problems, including k-means
clustering and applications of Latent Structural SVMs to
image classification with latent variables.
1.1. Related Work
One of the most popular and well studied iterative methods
for non-convex optimization is the EM algorithm (Dempster et al., 1977). EM is best understood in the context of
maximum likelihood estimation in the presence of missing
data, or latent variables. EM is a bound optimization algorithm: in each E-step, a lower bound on the likelihood is
constructed, and the M-step maximizes this bound.
Countless efforts have been made to extend the EM algorithm since its introduction. In (Neal & Hinton, 1998) it
is shown that, while both steps in EM involve optimizing some functions, it is not necessary to fully optimize
the functions in each step; in fact, each step only needs
to “make progress”. This relaxation can potentially avoid
sharp local minima and even speed up convergence.

