Understanding and Utilizing Deep Neural Networks
Trained with Noisy Labels

Pengfei Chen 1 2 Benben Liao 2 Guangyong Chen 2 Shengyu Zhang 1 2

Abstract
Noisy labels are ubiquitous in real-world datasets,
which poses a challenge for robustly training deep
neural networks (DNNs) as DNNs usually have
the high capacity to memorize the noisy labels. In
this paper, we find that the test accuracy can be
quantitatively characterized in terms of the noise
ratio in datasets. In particular, the test accuracy
is a quadratic function of the noise ratio in the
case of symmetric noise, which explains the experimental findings previously published. Based
on our analysis, we apply cross-validation to randomly split noisy datasets, which identifies most
samples that have correct labels. Then we adopt
the Co-teaching strategy which takes full advantage of the identified samples to train DNNs robustly against noisy labels. Compared with extensive state-of-the-art methods, our strategy consistently improves the generalization performance of
DNNs under both synthetic and real-world training noise.

1. Introduction
The remarkable success of DNNs on supervised learning
tasks heavily relies on a large number of training samples
with accurate labels. Correctly labeling extensive data is
too costly while alternating methods such as crowdsourcing (Yan et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2017) and online queries
(Schroff et al., 2011; Divvala et al., 2014) inexpensively obtain data, but unavoidably yield noisy labels. Training with
too many noisy labels reduces generalization performance
of DNNs since the networks can easily overfit on corrupted
labels (Zhang et al., 2017; Arpit et al., 2017). To utilize
extensive noisy data, understanding how noisy labels affect
training and generalization of DNNs is the very first step,
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Tencent Technology. Correspondence to: Guangyong Chen <gycchen@tencent.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

based on which we can design specific methods to train
DNNs robustly in practical applications.
Numerous methods have been proposed to deal with noisy
labels. Several methods focus on estimating the noise transition matrix and correcting the objective function accordingly, e.g., forward or backward correction (Patrini et al.,
2017), S-model (Goldberger & Ben-Reuven, 2017). However, it is a challenge to estimate the noise transition matrix
accurately. An alternative approach is training on selected
or weighted samples, e.g., Decoupling (Malach & ShalevShwartz, 2017), MentorNet (Jiang et al., 2018), gradientbased reweighting (Ren et al., 2018) and Co-teaching (Han
et al., 2018). A remaining issue is to design a reliable
and convincing criteria of selecting or weighting samples.
Another approach proposes to correct labels using the predictions of DNNs, e.g., Bootstrap (Reed et al., 2015), Joint
Optimization (Tanaka et al., 2018) and D2L (Ma et al.,
2018), all of which are vulnerable to overfitting. To improve
the robustness, Joint Optimization introduces regularization
terms requiring a prior knowledge of how actual classes
distribute among all training samples. However, the prior
knowledge is usually unavailable in practice.
How noisy labels affect training and generalization of DNNs
is not well understood, which deserves more attention since
it may promote fundamental approaches of robustly training
DNNs against noise. Without label corruption, the generalization error can be bounded by complexity measures
such as VC dimension (Vapnik, 1998), Rademacher complexity (Bartlett & Mendelson, 2002) and uniform stability
(Mukherjee et al., 2002; Bousquet & Elisseeff, 2002; Poggio
et al., 2004). But the bounds become trivial in the presence
of noisy labels. Zhang et al. (2017) demonstrated that DNNs
have the high capacity to fit even random labels, but obtain a
large generalization error. Zhang et al. (2017) also showed a
positive correlation between generalization error and noise
ratio, which implies DNNs do capture some useful information out of the noisy data. Arpit et al. (2017) showed
that during training, DNNs tend to learn simple patterns
first, then gradually memorize all samples, which justifies
the widely used small-loss criteria: treating samples with
small training loss as clean ones (Han et al., 2018; Jiang
et al., 2018). Ma et al. (2018) qualitatively attributed the

