Learning Latent Dynamics for Planning from Pixels

Danijar Hafner 1 2 Timothy Lillicrap 3 Ian Fischer 4 Ruben Villegas 1 5
David Ha 1 Honglak Lee 1 James Davidson 1

Abstract
Planning has been very successful for control
tasks with known environment dynamics. To
leverage planning in unknown environments,
the agent needs to learn the dynamics from
interactions with the world. However, learning
dynamics models that are accurate enough for
planning has been a long-standing challenge,
especially in image-based domains. We propose
the Deep Planning Network (PlaNet), a purely
model-based agent that learns the environment
dynamics from images and chooses actions
through fast online planning in latent space. To
achieve high performance, the dynamics model
must accurately predict the rewards ahead for
multiple time steps. We approach this using a
latent dynamics model with both deterministic
and stochastic transition components. Moreover,
we propose a multi-step variational inference
objective that we name latent overshooting.
Using only pixel observations, our agent solves
continuous control tasks with contact dynamics,
partial observability, and sparse rewards, which
exceed the difficulty of tasks that were previously
solved by planning with learned models. PlaNet
uses substantially fewer episodes and reaches final
performance close to and sometimes higher than
strong model-free algorithms.

1. Introduction
Planning is a natural and powerful approach to decision
making problems with known dynamics, such as game playing and simulated robot control (Tassa et al., 2012; Silver
et al., 2017; Moravčík et al., 2017). To plan in unknown
environments, the agent needs to learn the dynamics from
experience. Learning dynamics models that are accurate
1

Google Brain 2 University of Toronto 3 DeepMind 4 Google
Research 5 University of Michigan. Correspondence to: Danijar
Hafner <mail@danijar.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

enough for planning has been a long-standing challenge.
Key difficulties include model inaccuracies, accumulating
errors of multi-step predictions, failure to capture multiple
possible futures, and overconfident predictions outside of
the training distribution.
Planning using learned models offers several benefits over
model-free reinforcement learning. First, model-based planning can be more data efficient because it leverages a richer
training signal and does not require propagating rewards
through Bellman backups. Moreover, planning carries the
promise of increasing performance just by increasing the
computational budget for searching for actions, as shown
by Silver et al. (2017). Finally, learned dynamics can be
independent of any specific task and thus have the potential
to transfer well to other tasks in the environment.
Recent work has shown promise in learning the dynamics of
simple low-dimensional environments (Deisenroth & Rasmussen, 2011; Gal et al., 2016; Amos et al., 2018; Chua
et al., 2018; Henaff et al., 2018). However, these approaches
typically assume access to the underlying state of the world
and the reward function, which may not be available in practice. In high-dimensional environments, we would like to
learn the dynamics in a compact latent space to enable fast
planning. The success of such latent models has previously
been limited to simple tasks such as balancing cartpoles and
controlling 2-link arms from dense rewards (Watter et al.,
2015; Banijamali et al., 2017).
In this paper, we propose the Deep Planning Network
(PlaNet), a model-based agent that learns the environment
dynamics from pixels and chooses actions through online
planning in a compact latent space. To learn the dynamics,
we use a transition model with both stochastic and deterministic components. Moreover, we experiment with a novel
generalized variational objective that encourages multi-step
predictions. PlaNet solves continuous control tasks from
pixels that are more difficult than those previously solved
by planning with learned models.
Key contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
• Planning in latent spaces We solve a variety of tasks
from the DeepMind control suite, shown in Figure 1, by
learning a dynamics model and efficiently planning in

