Improving Neural Language Modeling via Adversarial Training

Dilin Wang * 1 Chengyue Gong * 1 Qiang Liu 1

Abstract
Recently, substantial progress has been made in
language modeling by using deep neural networks. However, in practice, large scale neural
language models have been shown to be prone
to overfitting. In this paper, we present a simple
yet highly effective adversarial training mechanism for regularizing neural language models.
The idea is to introduce adversarial noise to the
output embedding layer while training the models. We show that the optimal adversarial noise
yields a simple closed form solution, thus allowing us to develop a simple and time efficient algorithm. Theoretically, we show that
our adversarial mechanism effectively encourages the diversity of the embedding vectors, helping to increase the robustness of models. Empirically, we show that our method improves on
the single model state-of-the-art results for language modeling on Penn Treebank (PTB) and
Wikitext-2, achieving test perplexity scores of
46.01 and 38.65, respectively. When applied to
machine translation, our method improves over
various transformer-based translation baselines
in BLEU scores on the WMT14 English-German
and IWSLT14 German-English tasks.

1. Introduction
Statistical language modeling is a fundamental task in machine learning, with wide applications in various areas, including automatic speech recognition (e.g., Yu & Deng,
2016), machine translation (e.g., Koehn, 2009) and computer vision (e.g., Xu et al., 2015), to name a few. Recently, deep neural network models, especially recurrent
neural networks (RNN) based models, have emerged to be
one of the most powerful approaches for language modeling (e.g., Merity et al., 2018a; Yang et al., 2018; Vaswani
et al., 2017; Anderson et al., 2018).
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, UT
Austin. Correspondence to: Dilin Wang <dilin@cs.utexas.edu>,
Chengyue Gong <cygong@cs.utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Unfortunately, a major challenge in training large scale
RNN-based language models is their tendency to overfit;
this is caused by the high complexity of RNN models and
the discrete nature of language inputs. Although various
regularization techniques, such as early stop and dropout
(e.g., Gal & Ghahramani, 2016), have been investigated,
severe overfitting is still widely observed in state-of-the-art
benchmarks, as evidenced by the large gap between training and testing performance.
In this paper, we develop a simple yet surprisingly efficient
minimax training strategy for regularization. Our idea is
to inject an adversarial perturbation on the word embedding vectors in the softmax layer of the language models,
and seek to find the optimal parameters that maximize the
worst-case performance subject to the adversarial perturbation. Importantly, we show that the optimal perturbation
vectors yield a simple and computationally efficient form
under our construction, allowing us to derive a simple and
fast training algorithm (see Algorithm 1), which can be easily implemented based a minor modification of the standard
maximum likelihood training and does not introduce additional training parameters.
An intriguing theoretical property of our method is that it
provides an effective mechanism to encourage diversity of
word embedding vectors, which is widely observed to yield
better generalization performance in neural language models (e.g., Mu et al., 2018; Gao et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2018b;
Cogswell et al., 2016; Khodak et al., 2018). In previous
works, the diversity is often enforced explicitly by adding
additional diversity penalty terms (e.g., Gao et al., 2019),
which may impact the likelihood optimization and are computationally expensive when the vocabulary size is large.
Interestingly, we show that our adversarial training effectively enforces diversity without explicitly introducing the
additional diversity penalty, and is significantly more computationally efficient than direct regularizations.
Empirically, we find that our adversarial method can significantly improve the performance of state-of-the-art largescale neural language modeling and machine translation.
For language modeling, we establish a new single model
state-of-the-art result for the Penn Treebank (PTB) and
WikiText-2 (WT2) datasets to the best of our knowledge,
achieving 46.01 and 38.65 test perplexity scores, respectively. On the large scale WikiText-103 (WT3) dataset,

