Blended Conditional Gradients:
The Unconditioning of Conditional Gradients

Gábor Braun 1 Sebastian Pokutta 1 Dan Tu 1 Stephen Wright 2

Abstract
We present a blended conditional gradient approach for minimizing a smooth convex function
over a polytope P , combining the Frank–Wolfe
algorithm (also called conditional gradient) with
gradient-based steps, different from away steps
and pairwise steps, but still achieving linear convergence for strongly convex functions, along
with good practical performance. Our approach
retains all favorable properties of conditional gradient algorithms, notably avoidance of projections
onto P and maintenance of iterates as sparse convex combinations of a limited number of extreme
points of P . The algorithm is lazy, making use
of inexpensive inexact solutions of the linear programming subproblem that characterizes the conditional gradient approach. It decreases measures
of optimality rapidly, both in the number of iterations and in wall-clock time, outperforming even
the lazy conditional gradient algorithms of (Braun
et al., 2017). We also present a streamlined version of the algorithm that applies when P is the
probability simplex.

1. Introduction
A common paradigm in convex optimization is minimization of a smooth convex function f over a polytope P .
The conditional gradient (CG) algorithm, also known as
“Frank–Wolfe” (Frank & Wolfe, 1956), (Levitin & Polyak,
1966) is enjoying renewed popularity because it can be implemented efficiently to solve important problems in data
analysis. It is a first-order method, requiring access to gradients ∇f (x) and function values f (x). In its original form,
1
ISyE, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA
Computer Sciences Department, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI. Correspondence to: Gábor Braun <gabor.braun@isye.gatech.edu>, Sebastian Pokutta <sebastian.pokutta@isye.gatech.edu>, Dan Tu <dan.tu@gatech.edu>,
Stephen Wright <swright@cs.wisc.edu>.

CG employs a linear programming (LP) oracle to minimize
a linear function over the polytope P at each iteration. The
cost of this operation depends on the complexity of P .
In this work, we describe a blended conditional gradient
(BCG) approach, which takes one of several types of steps
on the basis of the gradient ∇f at the current point. Our approach maintains an “active vertex set,” consisting of some
solutions from previous iterations. Building on (Braun et al.,
2017), BCG uses a “weak-separation oracle” to find a vertex
of P for which the linear objective attains some fraction
of the reduction in f promised by the LP oracle, typically
by searching among the current set of active vertices. If no
vertex yielding acceptable reduction can be found, the LP
oracle used in the original FW algorithm may be deployed.
On other iterations, BCG employs a “simplex descent oracle,” which takes a step within the convex hull of the active
vertices, yielding progress either via reduction in function
value (a “descent step”) or via culling of the active vertex
set (a “drop step”). The size of the active vertex set typically remains small, which benefits both the efficiency of
the method and the “sparsity” of the final solution (i.e., its
representation as a convex combination of a relatively small
number of vertices).
BCG has similar theoretical convergence rates to several
other variants of CG that have been studied recently, including pairwise-step and away-step variants and the lazy
variants of (Braun et al., 2017). In several cases, we observe
better empirical convergence for BCG than for these other
variants. While the lazy variant of (Braun et al., 2017) has
an advantage over baseline CG when the LP oracle is expensive, our BCG approach consistently outperforms the other
variants in more general circumstances, both in per-iteration
progress and in wall-clock time.
Related work

2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

There has been an extensive body of work on conditional
gradient algorithms; see the excellent overview of (Jaggi,
2013). Here we review only those papers most closely
related to our work.
Our main inspiration comes from (Braun et al., 2017; Lan
et al., 2017), which introduces the weak-separation oracle

