Learning Deep Kernels for Exponential Family Densities

Li K. Wenliang * 1 Danica J. Sutherland * 1 Heiko Strathmann 1 Arthur Gretton 1

Abstract
The kernel exponential family is a rich class of
distributions, which can be fit efficiently and with
statistical guarantees by score matching. Being
required to choose a priori a simple kernel such as
the Gaussian, however, limits its practical applicability. We provide a scheme for learning a kernel
parameterized by a deep network, which can find
complex location-dependent features of the local
data geometry. This gives a very rich class of density models, capable of fitting complex structures
on moderate-dimensional problems. Compared
to deep density models fit via maximum likelihood, our approach provides a complementary
set of strengths and tradeoffs: in empirical studies, deep maximum-likelihood models can yield
higher likelihoods, while our approach gives better estimates of the gradient of the log density, the
score, which describes the distribution’s shape.

1. Introduction
Density estimation is a foundational problem in statistics
and machine learning (Devroye & Györfi, 1985; Wasserman,
2006), lying at the core of both supervised and unsupervised
machine learning problems. Classical techniques such as
kernel density estimation, however, struggle to exploit the
structure inherent to complex problems, and thus can require
unreasonably large sample sizes for adequate fits. For instance, assuming only twice-differentiable densities, the L2
risk of density estimation with N samples in D dimensions
scales as O(N −4/(4+D) ) (Wasserman, 2006, Section 6.5).
One promising approach for incorporating this necessary
structure is the kernel exponential family (Canu & Smola,
2006; Fukumizu, 2009; Sriperumbudur et al., 2017). This
*
Equal contribution 1 Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit,
University College London, London, U.K.. Correspondence to: Li
K. Wenliang <wenliang2012@gmail.com>, Danica J. Sutherland
<djs@djsutherland.ml>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

model allows for any log-density which is suitably smooth
under a given kernel, i.e. any function in the corresponding reproducing kernel Hilbert space. Choosing a finitedimensional kernel recovers any classical exponential family, but when the kernel is sufficiently powerful the class
becomes very rich: dense in the family of continuous probability densities on compact domains in KL, TV, Hellinger,
and Lr distances (Sriperumbudur et al., 2017, Corollary 2).
The normalization constant is not available in closed form,
making fitting by maximum likelihood difficult, but the alternative technique of score matching (Hyvärinen, 2005)
allows for practical usage with theoretical convergence guarantees (Sriperumbudur et al., 2017).
The choice of kernel directly corresponds to a smoothness
assumption on the model, allowing one to design a kernel
corresponding to prior knowledge about the target density.
Yet explicitly deciding upon a kernel to incorporate that
knowledge can be complicated. Indeed, previous applications of the kernel exponential family model have exclusively employed simple kernels, such as the Gaussian, with
a small number of parameters (e.g. the length scale) chosen
by heuristics or cross-validation (e.g. Sasaki et al., 2014;
Strathmann et al., 2015). These kernels are typically spatially invariant, corresponding to a uniform smoothness
assumption across the domain. Although such kernels are
sufficient for consistency in the infinite-sample limit, the
induced models can fail in practice on finite datasets, especially if the data takes differently-scaled shapes in different
parts of the space. Figure 1 (left) illustrates this problem
when fitting a simple mixture of Gaussians. Here there are
two “correct” bandwidths, one for the broad mode and one
for the narrow mode. A translation-invariant kernel must
pick a single one, e.g. an average between the two, and any
choice will yield a poor fit on at least part of the density.
In this work, we propose to learn the kernel of an exponential family directly from data. We can then achieve far more
than simply tuning a length scale, instead learning locationdependent kernels that adapt to the underlying shape and
smoothness of the target density. We use kernels of the form
k(x, y) = κ(φ(x), φ(y)),

(1)

where the deep network φ extracts features of the input
and κ is a simple kernel (e.g. a Gaussian) on those features. These types of kernels have seen success in super-

