Self-Supervised Exploration via Disagreement

Deepak Pathak * 1 Dhiraj Gandhi * 2 Abhinav Gupta 2 3

Abstract
Efficient exploration is a long-standing problem
in sensorimotor learning. Major advances have
been demonstrated in noise-free, non-stochastic
domains such as video games and simulation.
However, most of these formulations either get
stuck in environments with stochastic dynamics
or are too inefficient to be scalable to real robotics
setups. In this paper, we propose a formulation for
exploration inspired by the work in active learning literature. Specifically, we train an ensemble of dynamics models and incentivize the agent
to explore such that the disagreement of those
ensembles is maximized. This allows the agent
to learn skills by exploring in a self-supervised
manner without any external reward. Notably,
we further leverage the disagreement objective
to optimize the agent’s policy in a differentiable
manner, without using reinforcement learning,
which results in a sample-efficient exploration.
We demonstrate the efficacy of this formulation
across a variety of benchmark environments including stochastic-Atari, Mujoco and Unity. Finally, we implement our differentiable exploration
on a real robot which learns to interact with objects completely from scratch. Project videos and
code are at https://pathak22.github.
io/exploration-by-disagreement/.

1. Introduction
Exploration is a major bottleneck in both model-free and
model-based approaches to sensorimotor learning. In modelbased learning, exploration is a critical component in collecting diverse data for training the model in the first place.
On the other hand, exploration is indispensable in modelfree reinforcement learning (RL) when rewards extrinsic
*

1
Equal contribution
UC Berkelely
AI Research.
Correspondence to:
<pathak@cs.berkeley.edu>.

2

CMU 3 Facebook
Deepak Pathak

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

to the agent are sparse. The common approach to exploration has been to generate “intrinsic” rewards, i.e., rewards
automatically computed based on the agents model of the
environment. Existing formulations of intrinsic rewards include maximizing “visitation count” (Bellemare et al., 2016;
Lopes et al., 2012; Poupart et al., 2006) of less-frequently
visited states, “curiosity” (Oudeyer & Kaplan, 2009; Pathak
et al., 2017; Schmidhuber, 1991a) where prediction error is
used as reward signal and “diversity rewards” (Eysenbach
et al., 2018; Lehman & Stanley, 2011a;b) which incentivize
diversity in the visited states. These rewards provide continuous feedback to the agent when extrinsic rewards are
sparse, or even absent altogether.
Generating intrinsic rewards requires building some form
of a predictive model of the world. However, there is a key
challenge in learning predictive models beyond noise-free
simulated environments: how should the stochastic nature
of agent-environment interaction be handled? Stochasticity
could be caused by several sources: (1) noisy environment
observations (e.g, TV playing noise), (2) noise in the execution of agent’s action (e.g., slipping) (3) stochasticity as an
output of the agent’s action (e.g., agent flipping coin). One
straightforward solution to learn a predictive forward model
that is itself stochastic! Despite several methods to build
stochastic models in low-dimensional state space (Chua
et al., 2018; Houthooft et al., 2016), scaling it to high dimensional inputs (e.g., images) still remains challenging.
An alternative is to build deterministic models but encode
the input in a feature space that is invariant to stochasticity. Recent work proposed building such models in inverse
model feature space (Pathak et al., 2017) which can handle
stochastic observations but fail when the agent itself is the
source of noise (e.g. TV with remote (Burda et al., 2019)).
Beyond handling stochasticity, a bigger issue in the current
intrinsic reward formulations is that of sample efficiency.
The agent performs an action and then computes the reward
based on its own prediction and environment behavior. For
instance, in curiosity (Oudeyer & Kaplan, 2009; Pathak
et al., 2017), the policy is rewarded if the prediction model
and the observed environment disagree. From an exploration viewpoint, this seems like a good formulation, i.e,
rewarding actions whose effects are poorly modeled. But
this reward is a function of environment dynamics with
respect to the performed action. Since the environment

