Learning to Route in Similarity Graphs

Dmitry Baranchuk 1 2 Dmitry Persiyanov 3 Anton Sinitsin 1 4 Artem Babenko 1 4

Abstract
Recently similarity graphs became the leading
paradigm for efficient nearest neighbor search,
outperforming traditional tree-based and LSHbased methods. Similarity graphs perform the
search via greedy routing: a query traverses the
graph and in each vertex moves to the adjacent
vertex that is the closest to this query. In practice, similarity graphs are often susceptible to local minima, when queries do not reach its nearest
neighbors, getting stuck in suboptimal vertices. In
this paper we propose to learn the routing function
that overcomes local minima via incorporating information about the graph global structure. In particular, we augment the vertices of a given graph
with additional representations that are learned
to provide the optimal routing from the start vertex to the query nearest neighbor. By thorough
experiments, we demonstrate that the proposed
learnable routing successfully diminishes the local minima problem and significantly improves
the overall search performance.

1. Introduction
Nearest neighbor search (NNS) is an extensively used subroutine in a whole range of machine learning systems for
non-parametric classification/regression, language modeling, information retrieval, recommendations and others.
Modern applications have to work with vast data volumes,
hence the scalability of the NNS approaches became a problem of great interest for the machine learning community.
Formally the NNS problem is stated as follows. Given the
database S = {v1 , . . . , vN } ⊂ RD and a query q ∈ RD ,
one needs to find the datapoint v ∈ S that is the closest to
the query in terms of some metric (e.g. Euclidean distance).
1

Yandex, Russia 2 Lomonosov Moscow State University,
Russia 3 Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Russia 4 National Research University Higher School of Economics, Russia.
Correspondence to: Dmitry Baranchuk
<dmitry.baranchuk@graphics.cs.msu.ru>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

The current approaches for efficient NNS mostly belong to
three separate lines of research. The first family of methods, based on partition trees (Bentley, 1975; Sproull, 1991;
McCartin-Lim et al., 2012; Dasgupta & Freund, 2008; Dasgupta & Sinha, 2013), hierarchically split the search space
into a large number of regions, corresponding to tree leaves,
and query visits only a limited number of promising regions
when searching. The second, locality-sensitive hashing
methods (Indyk & Motwani, 1998; Datar et al., 2004; Andoni & Indyk, 2008; Andoni et al., 2015) map the database
points into a number of buckets using several hash functions such that the probability of collision is much higher
for nearby points than for points that are further apart. At
the search stage, a query is also hashed, and distances to
all the points from the corresponding buckets are evaluated.
Finally, similarity graphs methods (Navarro, 2002; Malkov
& Yashunin, 2016; Fu & Cai, 2016; Fu et al., 2017) represent the database as a graph, and on the search stage, a
query traverses the graph via greedy exploration. The empirical performance of similarity graphs was shown to be
much higher compared to LSH-based and tree-based methods(Malkov & Yashunin, 2016), and our paper falls in this
line of work on NNS.
In more details, the typical search process in similarity
graphs performs as follows. The database is organized in
a graph, where each vertex corresponds to some datapoint,
and the vertices, corresponding to the neighboring datapoints, are connected by edges. The search algorithm picks
a vertex (random or predefined) and iteratively explores the
graph from there. On each iteration, the query tries to greedily improve its position via moving to an adjacent vertex
that is closest to the query. The routing process stops when
there are no closer adjacent vertices, or the runtime budget
is exceeded.
It was shown(Navarro, 2002) that if the similarity graph
contains all the edges from the Delaunay graph, constructed
for the database S, then the greedy routing, described above,
is guaranteed to find the exact nearest neighbor. However,
for high-dimensional data, both storage and traversal of
the full Delaunay graph would be infeasible, due to a very
high number of edges(Beaumont et al., 2007). Hence, the
state-of-the-art practical methods use approximate Delaunay graphs, restricting maximal vertex degrees by a fixed
value. Unfortunately, this approximation often results in

