Sliced-Wasserstein Flows: Nonparametric Generative Modeling via Optimal
Transport and Diffusions

Antoine Liutkus 1 Umut Şimşekli 2 Szymon Majewski 3 Alain Durmus 4 Fabian-Robert Stöter 1

Abstract
By building upon the recent theory that established the connection between implicit generative
modeling (IGM) and optimal transport, in this
study, we propose a novel parameter-free algorithm for learning the underlying distributions of
complicated datasets and sampling from them.
The proposed algorithm is based on a functional
optimization problem, which aims at finding a
measure that is close to the data distribution as
much as possible and also expressive enough for
generative modeling purposes. We formulate the
problem as a gradient flow in the space of probability measures. The connections between gradient flows and stochastic differential equations let
us develop a computationally efficient algorithm
for solving the optimization problem. We provide
formal theoretical analysis where we prove finitetime error guarantees for the proposed algorithm.
To the best of our knowledge, the proposed algorithm is the first nonparametric IGM algorithm
with explicit theoretical guarantees. Our experimental results support our theory and show that
our algorithm is able to successfully capture the
structure of different types of data distributions.

1. Introduction
Implicit generative modeling (IGM) (Diggle & Gratton,
1984; Mohamed & Lakshminarayanan, 2016) has become
very popular recently and has proven successful in various
fields; variational auto-encoders (VAE) (Kingma & Welling,
1

Inria and LIRMM, Univ.
of Montpellier, France
LTCI, Télécom Paristech, Université Paris-Saclay, Paris,
France 3 Institute of Mathematics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland 4 CNRS, ENS Paris-Saclay,Université
Paris-Saclay, Cachan, France.
Correspondence to: Antoine Liutkus <antoine.liutkus@inria.fr>, Umut Şimşekli
<umut.simsekli@telecom-paristech.fr>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

2013) and generative adversarial networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) being its two well-known examples. The
goal in IGM can be briefly described as learning the underlying probability measure of a given dataset, denoted as
ν ∈ P(Ω), where P is the space of probability measures on
the measurable space (Ω, A), Ω ⊂ Rd is a domain and A is
the associated Borel σ-field.
Given a set of data points {y1 , . . . , yP } that are assumed to
be independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) samples
drawn from ν, the implicit generative framework models
them as the output of a measurable map, i.e. y = T (x), with
T : Ωµ 7→ Ω. Here, the inputs x are generated from a known
and easy to sample source measure µ on Ωµ (e.g. Gaussian
or uniform measures), and the outputs T (x) should match
the unknown target measure ν on Ω.
Learning generative networks have witnessed several
groundbreaking contributions in recent years. Motivated
by this fact, there has been an interest in illuminating the
theoretical foundations of VAEs and GANs (Bousquet et al.,
2017; Liu et al., 2017). It has been shown that these implicit
models have close connections with the theory of Optimal
Transport (OT) (Villani, 2008). As it turns out, OT brings
new light on the generative modeling problem: there have
been several extensions of VAEs (Tolstikhin et al., 2017;
Kolouri et al., 2018) and GANs (Arjovsky et al., 2017; Gulrajani et al., 2017; Guo et al., 2017; Lei et al., 2017), which
exploit the links between OT and IGM.
OT studies whether it is possible to transform samples from
a source distribution µ to a target distribution ν. From this
perspective, an ideal generative model is simply a transport
map from µ to ν. This can be written by using some ‘pushforward operators’: we seek a mapping T that ‘pushes µ
onto ν’, and is formally defined as ν(A) = µ(T −1 (A)) for
all Borel sets A ⊂ A. If this relation holds, we denote the
push-forward operator T# , such that T# µ = ν. Provided
mild conditions on these distributions hold (notably µ is nonatomic (Villani, 2008)), existence of such a transport map is
guaranteed; however, it remains a challenge to construct it
in practice.
One common point between VAE and GAN is to adopt
an approximate strategy and consider transport maps that

