A Baseline for Any Order Gradient Estimation
in Stochastic Computation Graphs

Jingkai Mao * 1 Jakob Foerster * 2 Tim Rocktäschel 3 Maruan Al-Shedivat 4 Gregory Farquhar 2
Shimon Whiteson 2

Abstract
By enabling correct differentiation in stochastic
computation graphs (SCGs), the infinitely differentiable Monte-Carlo estimator (DiCE) can generate correct estimates for the higher order gradients that arise in, e.g., multi-agent reinforcement
learning and meta-learning. However, the baseline term in DiCE that serves as a control variate
for reducing variance applies only to first order
gradient estimation, limiting the utility of higherorder gradient estimates. To improve the sample
efficiency of DiCE, we propose a new baseline
term for higher order gradient estimation. This
term may be easily included in the objective, and
produces unbiased variance-reduced estimators
under (automatic) differentiation, without affecting the estimate of the objective itself or of the
first order gradient estimate. It reuses the same
baseline function (e.g., the state-value function in
reinforcement learning) already used for the first
order baseline. We provide theoretical analysis
and numerical evaluations of this new baseline,
which demonstrate that it can dramatically reduce
the variance of DiCE’s second order gradient estimators and also show empirically that it reduces
the variance of third and fourth order gradients.
This computational tool can be easily used to estimate higher order gradients with unprecedented
efficiency and simplicity wherever automatic differentiation is utilised, and it has the potential to
unlock applications of higher order gradients in
reinforcement learning and meta-learning.
*

Equal contribution 1 Man AHL, London, UK. Work done at
the University of Oxford. 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 3 Department of Computer Science,
University College London, London, UK 4 School of Computer
Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
USA. Correspondence to: Jakob Foerster <jnf@fb.com>, Jingkai
Mao <jingkai.mao@man.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Machine learning problems with intractable stochasticity
often yield objectives that are not directly differentiable. In
reinforcement learning, for example, the expected return
involves an expectation over the stochasticity induced by
both the policy and the environment dynamics. As a result, the gradient of this objective with respect to the policy
parameters cannot be directly calculated.
Instead, we must construct Monte Carlo estimates of the
gradient from samples, and then apply gradient-based optimisation methods. In such problems, the score function
trick (Fu, 2006) may be used to easily define estimates of
the first order gradients of the stochastic objective. However,
to calculate these gradient estimates in practice, we need to
leverage the powerful toolbox of automatic differentiation.
To this end, Schulman et al. (2015) introduce the surrogate
loss (SL) within the formalism of stochastic computation
graphs (SCG). Single differentiation of the SL produces an
unbiased gradient estimator for the first order gradient of
the primary objective.
However, in many settings this is not sufficient because it
might also be essential to estimate higher order gradients of
these stochastic objectives. For example, in the multi-agent
learning method learning with opponent-learning awareness (LOLA) (Foerster et al., 2018a), the expected return
of one agent is differentiated through the learning step of
another agent. Similarly, when gradient-based approaches
to meta-learning are applied to reinforcement learning problems, (Finn et al., 2017; Al-Shedivat et al., 2017), the objective function is repeatedly differentiated through a hierarchy
of learning processes. Furthermore, higher order gradients
are used directly by some optimisation algorithms, such as
the quasi-Newton algorithm (Wright & Nocedal, 1999).
Estimating higher order gradients accurately and efficiently
in such applications is challenging because such estimators
are complex to construct and often have extremely high
variance. It is therefore critical to develop methods that
produce low variance estimates of higher order gradients
while also being easy to use in practice through automatic
differentiation.

