Wasserstein of Wasserstein Loss for Learning Generative Models

Yonatan Dukler * 1 Wuchen Li * 1 Alex Tong Lin * 1 Guido Montúfar * 1 2 3

Abstract
The Wasserstein distance serves as a loss function for unsupervised learning which depends on
the choice of a ground metric on sample space.
We propose to use a Wasserstein distance as the
ground metric on the sample space of images.
This ground metric is known as an effective distance for image retrieval, since it correlates with
human perception. We derive the Wasserstein
ground metric on image space and define a Riemannian Wasserstein gradient penalty to be used
in the Wasserstein Generative Adversarial Network (WGAN) framework. The new gradient
penalty is computed efficiently via convolutions
on the L2 (Euclidean) gradients with negligible
additional computational cost. The new formulation is more robust to the natural variability of
images and provides for a more continuous discriminator in sample space.

1. Introduction
In recent years, optimal transport has become increasingly
important in the formulation of training objectives for machine learning applications (Frogner et al., 2015; Montavon
et al., 2016; Arjovsky et al., 2017). In contrast to traditional
information divergences (arising in maximum likelihood
estimation), the Wasserstein distance between probability
distributions incorporates the distance between samples via
a ground metric of choice. In this way, it provides a continuous loss function for learning probability models supported
on possibly disjoint, lower dimensional subsets of the sample space. These properties are especially useful for training
implicit generative models, with a prominent example being
*

1
Equal contribution
Department of Mathematics and
Department of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095. 3 Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in
the Sciences, 04103 Leipzig, Germany. Correspondence to:
Guido Montúfar <montufar@math.ucla.edu>, Alex Tong Lin
<atlin@math.ucla.edu>, Wuchen Li <wcli@math.ucla.edu>,
Yonatan Dukler <ydukler@math.ucla.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). The application
of the Wasserstein metric to define the objective function of
GANs is known as Wasserstein GANs (WGANs) (Frogner
et al., 2015; Arjovsky et al., 2017; Deshpande et al., 2018).
When training WGANs, one problem that remains is that
of choosing a suitable ground metric for the sample space.
The choice of the ground metric plays a crucial role in the
training quality of WGANs. Usually the distance between
two sample images is taken to be the mean square difference over the features, i.e., the L2 (Euclidean) norm. This,
however, does not incorporate additional knowledge that we
have about the space of natural images. In order to improve
training and direct focus to selected features, other Sobolev
norms in image space have been studied (Adler & Lunz,
2018). Recent works are also investigating distances based
on higher level representations of the samples, which can be
obtained by means of techniques such as vector embeddings
(Mroueh et al., 2017), auto-encoders, or other unsupervised
and semi-supervised feature learning techniques (Nowak
et al., 2006). Meanwhile, another distance that has been very
successful in comparing images, has remained unnoticed
in the context of WGANs, namely the Wasserstein distance
on images (also named Earth Mover’s distance or MongeKantorvich distance). In particular, the Wasserstein distance
has been successful in image retrieval problems (Rubner
et al., 2000; Zhang et al., 2007). It is known to correlate
well with human perception for natural images, e.g., being
robust to translations and rotations (Engquist & Yang, 2018;
Puthawala et al., 2018). See Figure 1. In addition, this distance is very natural and does not require computing higher
level representations of the images or any feature selection.
In this paper, we propose to apply the Wasserstein distance
over the sample space of images with a ground metric over
the discrete space of pixels for learning generative models.
We call this ground metric the Wasserstein ground metric,
and call the Wasserstein loss over the Wasserstein ground
metric the Wasserstein of Wasserstein loss. At first sight,
it may appear overly complicated to define a loss function
of this form. Since computing the Wasserstein distance is
already quite involved, a Wasserstein loss based on another
Wasserstein ground metric may seem infeasible. Nonetheless, we will show that it is possible to derive an equivalent
expression in the settings of gradient penalty of WGANs
(Petzka et al., 2017). In details, the Wasserstein-2 ground

