Learning from a Learner

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel setting for
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL), namely
“Learning from a Learner” (LfL). As opposed to
standard IRL, it does not consist in learning a
reward by observing an optimal agent, but from
observations of another learning (and thus suboptimal) agent. To do so, we leverage the fact that
the observed agent’s policy is assumed to improve
over time. The ultimate goal of this approach is
to recover the actual environment’s reward and
to allow the observer to outperform the learner.
To recover that reward in practice, we propose
methods based on the entropy-regularized policy iteration framework. We discuss different approaches to learn solely from trajectories in the
state-action space. We demonstrate the genericity
of our method by observing agents implementing
various reinforcement learning algorithms. Finally, we show that, on both discrete and continuous state/action tasks, the observer’s performance
(that optimizes the recovered reward) can surpass
those of the observed learner.

1. Introduction
Imagine two friends from different nationalities: Bob is
French and Alice is Japanese. During holidays, Bob is visiting Alice’s family and wishes to discover the Japanese
culture. One day, Alice’s grandfather decides to teach Alice
and Bob a traditional board game. Neither Bob nor Alice
know that game. Unfortunately, Alice and her grandfather
only speak Japanese, while Bob only speaks French. However, Alice decides to learn the game by playing against her
grandfather. She hence practices the game until she is able
to defeat him. As the old man was not an expert, she needed
just a few trials to reach that level. During that time, Bob
was observing Alice’s strategy improvements. Now, we ask
1

Google Brain, Paris, France 2 INESC-ID, IST, University of Lisbon.
Correspondence to: Alexis D. Jacq
<alexis.jacq@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Distance to optimality

Alexis D. Jacq 1 2 Matthieu Geist 1 Ana Paiva 2 Olivier Pietquin 1

Learner trajectory

Expert trajectory

0
Time to learn

Figure 1. In standard IRL, the goal is to recover the reward from
demonstrated trajectories that follow a stationary optimal policy
(expert trajectory). In the LfL setting, we aim at recovering the
reward from trajectories of a learning agent that is also discovering
the problem. Such trajectories follow a sequence of sub-optimal
policies, assumed to improve with time (learner trajectories).

the question: is Bob able to deduce the rules of the game
and to derive his own strategy that may outperform both
Alice and her grandfather?
Agents modelling is required in various fields of computational and social sciences in order to predict behaviours
for better coordination. In the reinforcement learning (RL)
paradigm, the behaviour of an agent is determined by a reward function. However, in many cases, it is impossible
for agents to share their reward functions. This is especially the case in Human-Machine Interaction – or even
Human-Human Interaction, because the complexity of human motivations hardly translates in terms of quantitative
values. Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) (Ng et al.,
2000) addresses this problem by inferring a reward function
so that it explains an agent’s trajectories in its state-action
space. In the standard approach, the observed agent (the expert) is thus supposed to follow an optimal policy according
to some unknown reward function and the observing agent
tries to infer that underlying reward function. The optimality assumption is essential in many scenarios, especially
in training robots at complex tasks requiring help from a
human expert. However, even if the expert’s policy is given,
an infinite number of solutions explains it, including the null
reward function (for which any policy is optimal). Many
different approaches aiming at addressing this issue can be
found in the literature based either on game theory (Syed &
Schapire, 2008), maximum entropy (Ziebart et al., 2008),
relative entropy (Boularias et al., 2011) or supervised learning (Klein et al., 2013), among others.

