Gradient Descent Finds Global Minima of Deep Neural Networks

Simon S. Du * 1 Jason D. Lee * 2 Haochuan Li * 3 4 Liwei Wang * 5 4 Xiyu Zhai * 6

Abstract
Gradient descent finds a global minimum in
training deep neural networks despite the objective function being non-convex. The current paper proves gradient descent achieves zero training loss in polynomial time for a deep overparameterized neural network with residual connections (ResNet). Our analysis relies on the particular structure of the Gram matrix induced by
the neural network architecture. This structure allows us to show the Gram matrix is stable throughout the training process and this stability implies
the global optimality of the gradient descent algorithm. We further extend our analysis to deep
residual convolutional neural networks and obtain
a similar convergence result.

1. Introduction
One of the mysteries in deep learning is randomly initialized first-order methods like gradient descent achieve zero
training loss, even if the labels are arbitrary (Zhang et al.,
2016). Over-parameterization is widely believed to be the
main reason for this phenomenon as only if the neural network has a sufficiently large capacity, it is possible for this
neural network to fit all the training data. For example, Lu
et al. (2017) proved that except for a measure zero set, all
functions cannot be approximated by ReLU networks with a
width less than the input dimension. In practice, many neural network architectures are highly over-parameterized. For
example, Wide Residual Networks have 100x parameters
than the number of training data (Zagoruyko & Komodakis,
2016).
*
Equal contribution 1 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie
Mellon University 2 Data Science and Operations Department, University of Southern California 3 School of Physics, Peking University 4 Center for Data Science, Peking University, Beijing Institute
of Big Data Research 5 Key Laboratory of Machine Perception,
MOE, School of EECS, Peking University 6 Department of EECS,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Simon
S. Du <ssdu@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

The second mysterious phenomenon in training deep neural
networks is “deeper networks are harder to train.” To solve
this problem, He et al. (2016) proposed the deep residual
network (ResNet) architecture which enables randomly initialized first order method to train neural networks with an
order of magnitude more layers. Theoretically, Hardt & Ma
(2016) showed that residual links in linear networks prevent
gradient vanishing in a large neighborhood of zero, but for
neural networks with non-linear activations, the advantages
of using residual connections are not well understood.
In this paper, we demystify these two mysterious phenomena. We consider the setting where there are n data points,
and the neural network has H layers with width m. We
focus on the least-squares loss and assume the activation
function is Lipschitz and smooth. This assumption holds
for many activation functions including the soft-plus and
sigmoid. Our contributions are summarized below.
• As a warm-up, we first consider a fully-connected
feedforward network.
We show if m =

Ω poly(n)2O(H) 1 , then randomly initialized gradient descent converges to zero training loss at a linear
rate.
• Next, we consider the ResNet architecture. We show
as long as m = Ω (poly(n, H)), then randomly initialized gradient descent converges to zero training loss at
a linear rate. Comparing with the first result, the dependence on the number of layers improves exponentially
for ResNet. This theory demonstrates the advantage of
using residual architectures.
• Lastly, we apply the same technique to analyze convolutional ResNet. We show if m = poly(n, p, H)
where p is the number of patches, then randomly initialized gradient descent achieves zero training loss.
Our proof builds on two ideas from previous work on gradient descent for two-layer neural networks. First, we use
the observation by (Li & Liang, 2018) that if the neural
network is over-parameterized, every weight matrix is close
to its initialization. Second, following (Du et al., 2018b),
1
The precise polynomials and data-dependent parameters are
stated in Section 5, 6, 7.

