Making Decisions that Reduce Discriminatory Impact
Matt J. Kusner 1 2 Chris Russell 1 3 Joshua R. Loftus 4 Ricardo Silva 1 5

Abstract
As machine learning algorithms move into realworld settings, it is crucial to ensure they are
aligned with societal values. There has been
much work on one aspect of this, namely the
discriminatory prediction problem: How can
we reduce discrimination in the predictions themselves? While an important question, solutions to
this problem only apply in a restricted setting, as
we have full control over the predictions. Often
we care about the non-discrimination of quantities we do not have full control over. Thus, we
describe another key aspect of this challenge, the
discriminatory impact problem: How can we
reduce discrimination arising from the real-world
impact of decisions? To address this, we describe
causal methods that model the relevant parts of
the real-world system in which the decisions are
made. Unlike previous approaches, these models not only allow us to map the causal pathway
of a single decision, but also to model the effect
of interference–how the impact on an individual
depends on decisions made about other people.
Often, the goal of decision policies is to maximize a beneficial impact overall. To reduce the
discrimination of these benefits, we devise a constraint inspired by recent work in counterfactual
fairness (Kusner et al., 2017), and give an efficient
procedure to solve the constrained optimization
problem. We demonstrate our approach with an
example: how to increase students taking college
entrance exams in New York City public schools.

1. Introduction
Machine learning (ML) is used by companies, governments,
and institutions to make life-changing decisions about indi1
The Alan Turing Institute 2 University of Oxford 3 University
of Surrey 4 New York University 5 University College London. Correspondence to: Matt J. Kusner <matthew.kusner@cs.ox.ac.uk>,
Chris Russell <crussell@turing.ac.uk>.
th

Proceedings of the 36 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

viduals, such as how much to charge for insurance (Peters,
2017), how to target job ads (Yang et al., 2017), and who
may likely commit a crime (Zeng et al., 2017).
However, the number of recent examples where ML algorithms have made discriminatory decisions against individuals because of their race, sex, or otherwise, poses a serious
impediment to their use in the real world. For example,
Google’s advertisement system was more likely to show ads
implying a person had been arrested when the search term
was a name commonly associated with African Americans
(Sweeney, 2013). In another case, algorithms that learn
word embeddings produced embeddings with sexist associations such as “woman” being associated with “homemaker”
(Bolukbasi et al., 2016).
In response to these and other examples, there has been
much recent work aimed at quantifying and removing
discrimination (Berk et al., 2017; Bolukbasi et al., 2016;
Chouldechova, 2017; Dwork et al., 2012; 2018; Edwards &
Storkey, 2015; Hardt et al., 2016; Kamiran & Calders, 2009;
Kamishima et al., 2012; Kilbertus et al., 2017; Kleinberg
et al., 2016; Kusner et al., 2017; Larson et al., 2016; Liu
et al., 2018; Nabi & Shpitser, 2018; Pleiss et al., 2017; Zafar
et al., 2017; Zemel et al., 2013; Zhang & Bareinboim, 2018).
All of these works focus on what we call the discriminatory prediction problem: how to reduce discrimination of
the predictions themselves. While important, the prediction
problem isolates the problem of discrimination to the predictions: as long as we adjust them to agree with our definition
of reduced discrimination we have solved the problem. Importantly, we have full control over what the predictions are.
But frequently, we care about reducing the discrimination of
quantities, which we call impact, that depend both on a decision we make and upon other real-world factors we cannot
control. For instance, imagine a university with the power
to make law school admission decisions. How do these decisions impact on: a person’s salary 5 years later, whether the
person graduates, or how able the person is to pay back any
loans? Each of these has significant life-changing effects.
Crucially, we define an impact as follows:
Definition 1. An impact is a real-world event that is caused
jointly by controllable (algorithmic) decisions, and other uncontrollable real-world factors (e.g., societal factors, human
decision-makers) that may themselves be biased.

