DL2: Training and Querying Neural Networks with Logic

Marc Fischer 1 Mislav Balunović 1 Dana Drachsler-Cohen 1 Timon Gehr 1 Ce Zhang 1 Martin Vechev 1

Abstract
We present DL2, a system for training and querying neural networks with logical constraints. Using DL2, one can declaratively specify domain
knowledge constraints to be enforced during training, as well as pose queries on the model to find
inputs that satisfy a set of constraints. DL2 works
by translating logical constraints into a loss function with desirable mathematical properties. The
loss is then minimized with standard gradientbased methods. We evaluate DL2 by training
networks with interesting constraints in unsupervised, semi-supervised and supervised settings.
Our experimental evaluation demonstrates that
DL2 is more expressive than prior approaches
combining logic and neural networks, and its loss
functions are better suited for optimization. Further, we show that for a number of queries, DL2
can find the desired inputs in seconds (even for
large models such as ResNet-50 on ImageNet).

1. Introduction
With the success of neural networks across a wide range
of application domains, an important emerging challenge
is creating better, more flexible mechanisms for experts
to interact with the network. For example, one may wish
the network to capture certain background knowledge not
easily available as labeled training data or to inquire how the
network’s decision changes under particular domain-specific
inputs. Fundamentally, to cleanly capture such interactions,
one needs some form of logical reasoning and a way to
combine this reasoning with the neural network’s training
and decision making procedures. Indeed, recent work (Hu
et al., 2016; Xu et al., 2018) has started investigating novel
combinations of neural and logical reasoning. However,
while promising, as we show later, these approaches lack
generality and cannot capture important use cases.
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Marc Fischer <marc.fischer@inf.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

We introduce a new method and system, called DL22
(acronym for Deep Learning with Differentiable Logic),
which can be used to: (i) query networks for inputs meeting
logical constraints, and (ii) train networks to meet logical
specifications, all in a declarative way. Our constraint language can express rich combinations of comparisons over
inputs, neurons and outputs of neural networks using negations, conjunctions, and disjunctions. Thanks to its expressiveness, DL2 enables users to easily incorporate domain
knowledge during training and to interact with the network
using queries in order to inquire about its decision making.
Technically, DL2 translates logical constraints into nonnegative loss functions with two key properties: (i) the loss
is zero exactly if the constraints are satisfied, and (ii) the
loss is differentiable almost everywhere. Combined, these
properties enable us to train and query with constraints by
minimizing a loss with off-the-shelf optimizers.
Training with DL2 To make optimization tractable, we
extract constraints on inputs that capture certain kinds of
convex sets and use them as optimization constraints instead
of including them in the optimization goal. We then optimize with projected gradient descent (PGD), which has
already been shown successful in training with robustness
constraints (Madry et al., 2018). The expressiveness of DL2
along with tractable optimization with PGD enables us to
train with new, interesting constraints. For example, we can
declaratively express constraints over quantities which are
not explicitly computed by the network, such as
pθ (x)people <  ∨ pθ (x)people > 1 − .
This constraint on the output activations of a CIFAR-100
classifier pθ says that for a network input x, the probability
of people, denoted pθ (x)people , is either very small or very
large. As CIFAR-100 does not have a class people, we
define it as a function of other output activations:
pθ (x)people = pθ (x)baby + pθ (x)boy + pθ (x)woman + · · ·
We show that DL2 can make misclassifications less severe
(e.g., a boy is misclassified as a man instead of as a bicycle) and it can even increase the accuracy of CIFAR-100
networks in the semi-supervised setting.
2

https://github.com/eth-sri/dl2

