Bayesian Counterfactual Risk Minimization

Ben London 1 Ted Sandler 1

Abstract
We present a Bayesian view of counterfactual
risk minimization (CRM) for offline learning
from logged bandit feedback. Using PACBayesian analysis, we derive a new generalization bound for the truncated inverse propensity
score estimator. We apply the bound to a class
of Bayesian policies, which motivates a novel,
potentially data-dependent, regularization technique for CRM. Experimental results indicate
that this technique outperforms standard L2 regularization, and that it is competitive with variance regularization while being both simpler to
implement and more computationally efficient.

1. Introduction
In industrial applications of machine learning, model development is typically an iterative process, involving multiple trials of offline training and online experimentation.
For example, a content streaming service might explore
various recommendation strategies in a series of A/B tests.
The data that is generated by this process—e.g., impression and interaction logs—can be used to augment training
data and further refine a model. However, learning from
logged interactions poses two fundamental challenges: (1)
the feedback obtained from interaction is always incomplete, since one only observes responses (usually referred
to as rewards) for actions that were taken; (2) the distribution of observations is inherently biased by the policy that
determined which action to take in each context.
This problem of learning from logged data has been studied under various names by various authors (Strehl et al.,
2010; Dudı́k et al., 2011; Bottou et al., 2013; Swaminathan
and Joachims, 2015a). We adopt the moniker counterfactual risk minimization (CRM), introduced by Swaminathan
and Joachims (2015a), though it is also known as offline
policy optimization in the reinforcement learning literature.
1
Amazon, Seattle, WA, USA. Correspondence to: Ben London
<blondon@amazon.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

The goal of CRM is to learn a policy from data that was
logged by a previous policy so as to maximize expected
reward (alternatively, minimize risk) over draws of future
contexts. Using an analysis based on Bennett’s inequality,
Swaminathan and Joachims derived an upper bound on the
risk of a stochastic policy,1 which motivated learning with
variance-based regularization.
In this work, we study CRM from a Bayesian perspective,
in which one’s uncertainty over actions becomes uncertainty over hypotheses. We view a stochastic policy as a
distribution over hypotheses, each of which is a mapping
from contexts to actions. Our work bridges the gap between CRM, which has until now been approached from
the frequentist perspective, and Bayesian methods, which
are often used to balance exploration and exploitation in
contextual bandit problems (Chapelle and Li, 2011).
Using a PAC-Bayesian analysis, we prove an upper bound
on the risk of a Bayesian policy trained on logged data. We
then apply this bound to a class of Bayesian policies based
on the mixed logit model. This analysis suggests an intuitive regularization strategy for Bayesian CRM based on
the L2 distance from the logging policy’s parameters. Our
logging policy regularization (LPR) is effectively similar
to variance regularization, but simpler to implement and
more computationally efficient. We derive two Bayesian
CRM objectives based on LPR, one of which is convex.
We also consider the scenario in which the logging policy
is unknown. In this case, we propose a two-step procedure
to learn the logging policy, and then use the learned parameters to regularize training a new policy. We prove a corresponding risk bound for this setting using a distributiondependent prior.
We end with an empirical study of our theoretical results.
First, we show that LPR outperforms standard L2 regularization whenever the logging policy is better than a uniform
distribution. Second, we show that LPR is competitive with
variance regularization, and even outperforms it on certain
problems. Finally, we demonstrate that it is indeed possible
to learn the logging policy for LPR with negligible impact
on performance. These findings establish LPR as a simple,
effective method for Bayesian CRM.
1

In a similar vein, Strehl et al. (2010) proved a lower bound
on the expected reward of a deterministic policy.

