Adaptive Scale-Invariant Online Algorithms for Learning Linear Models

Michał Kempka 1 Wojciech Kotłowski 1 Manfred K. Warmuth 2

Abstract
We consider online learning with linear models,
where the algorithm predicts on sequentially revealed instances (feature vectors), and is compared against the best linear function (comparator) in hindsight. Popular algorithms in this framework, such as Online Gradient Descent (OGD),
have parameters (learning rates), which ideally
should be tuned based on the scales of the features
and the optimal comparator, but these quantities
only become available at the end of the learning process. In this paper, we resolve the tuning
problem by proposing online algorithms making
predictions which are invariant under arbitrary
rescaling of the features. The algorithms have
no parameters to tune, do not require any prior
knowledge on the scale of the instances or the
comparator, and achieve regret bounds matching
(up to a logarithmic factor) that of OGD with optimally tuned separate learning rates per dimension,
while retaining comparable runtime performance.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of online learning with linear models, in which at each trial t = 1, . . . , T , the algorithm receives an input instance (feature vector) xt ∈ Rd , upon
which it predicts ybt ∈ R. Then, the true label yt is revealed and the algorithm suffers loss `(yt , ybt ), convex in
ybt . The goal of the algorithm is have its cumulative loss
not much larger to that of any linear predictor of the form
x 7→ x> u for u ∈ Rd , i.e. to have small regret against
any comparator u. This problem encompasses linear regression and classification (with convex surrogate losses)
and has been extensively studied in numerous past works
(Littlestone et al., 1991; Cesa-Bianchi et al., 1996; Shalev1

Poznan University of Technology, Poznan, Poland 2 Google
Inc. Zürich & UC Santa Cruz. Correspondence to: Michał
Kempka <mkempka@cs.put.poznan.pl>, Wojciech Kotłowski
<wkotlowski@cs.put.poznan.pl>, Manfred K. Warmuth <manfred@ucsc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Shwartz, 2011; Hazan, 2015).
One of the most popular algorithms in this framework is
Online Gradient Descent (OGD) (Cesa-Bianchi et al., 1996).
Its predictions are given by ybt = x>
t wt for a weight vector
wt ∈ Rd updated using a simple rule
wt+1 = wt − η∇t ,

(1)

where ∇t is a (sub)gradient of the loss `(yt , ybt ) at wt , and
η is a parameter of the algorithm, called the learning rate.
With the optimal “oracle” tuning of η (which involves the
norm of the comparator u and of the observed gradients,
unknown to the algorithm in advance), OGD would
pP achieve
2
a bound on the regret against u of order kuk
t k∇t k
(Zinkevich, 2003). Unfortunately, this bound might be very
poor if the features have distinct scales. To see that first note
that ∇t is proportional to xt due to linear dependence of
ybt on xt . Now, let u be the comparator which minimizes
the total loss (assume such exists). If we scale the first
coordinate of each xt by a factor of c, the first coordinate of
the optimal comparator u will scale down by a factor of c−1 ,
so its prediction and (optimal) loss remain the same, and
the bound above will in general become worse by a factor
of max{c, c−1 } (Ross et al., 2013). This is a well known
issue with gradient descent, and is usually solved by prior
normalization of the features. However, such pre-processing
step cannot be done in an online setting.
The problem described above becomes apparent if we make
an analogy from physics and imagine that all features have
physical units. In particular, if we assigned a unit [xi ] to
feature i, and assumed for simplicity that the prediction and
the label are unitless (as in, e.g., classification), the corresponding coordinate of the weight vector would need to
have unit 1/[xi ]. However, the units in the OGD update (1)
are mismatched, because ∇t,i has unit [xi ] (as ∇t is proportional to xt ), while wt,i has unit 1/[xi ]; even assigning a
unit to η does not help as a single number cannot compensate different units. A reasonable solution to this “unit clash”
problem is to use one learning rate per dimension, i.e. to
modify (1) to:
wt+1,i = wt,i − ηi ∇t,i ,

i = 1, . . . , d.

(2)

If we choose the oracle tuning of the learning rates to
minimize the regret against comparator u, it follows that

