Distributional Reinforcement Learning for Efficient Exploration

Borislav Mavrin 1 2 Hengshuai Yao 3 Linglong Kong 1 2 Kaiwen Wu 4 Yaoliang Yu 4

Abstract
In distributional reinforcement learning (RL), the
estimated distribution of value function models
both the parametric and intrinsic uncertainties.
We propose a novel and efficient exploration
method for deep RL that has two components.
The first is a decaying schedule to suppress the
intrinsic uncertainty. The second is an exploration
bonus calculated from the upper quantiles of the
learned distribution. In Atari 2600 games, our
method outperforms QR-DQN in 12 out of 14
hard games (achieving 483 % average gain across
49 games in cumulative rewards over QR-DQN
with a big win in Venture). We also compared our
algorithm with QR-DQN in a challenging 3D driving simulator (CARLA). Results show that our
algorithm achieves near-optimal safety rewards
twice faster than QRDQN.

1. Introduction
Exploration is a long standing problem in Reinforcement
Learning (RL), where optimism in the face of uncertainty is
one fundamental principle (Lai & Robbins, 1985; Strehl &
Littman, 2005). Here the uncertainty refers to parametric
uncertainty, which arises from the variance in the estimates
of certain parameters given finite samples. Both count-based
methods (Auer, 2002; Kaufmann et al., 2012; Bellemare
et al., 2016; Ostrovski et al., 2017; Tang et al., 2017) and
Bayesian methods (Kaufmann et al., 2012; Chen et al., 2017;
O’Donoghue et al., 2017) follow this optimism principle. In
this paper, we propose to use distributional RL methods to
achieve this optimism.
Different from classical RL methods, where an expectation
of value function is learned (Sutton, 1988; Watkins & Dayan,
1992; Mnih et al., 2015), distributional RL methods (Jaquette, 1973; Bellemare et al., 2017) maintain a full distribution
1

University of Alberta 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark 3 Huawei Hi-Silicon
University of Waterloo. Correspondence to: Hengshuai Yao
<hengshuai.yao@huawei.com>.

4

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Deterministic environment

i
Init

i
al d

tion

bu
stri

etr

am
Par

QR update

inty
rta
nce
u
ic

istr
ed
Tru

tion

ibu

QR update

(a) Intrinsic uncertainty.
Stochastic environment
ic

ion
but

s
trin
+ In
tric inty
e
am rta
Par unce

QR update

QR update

ial

Init

di

stri

istr
ed

tion

ibu

Tru

(b) Intrinsic and parametric uncertainties.
Figure 1. Uncertainties in deterministic and stochastic environments.

of future return. In the limit, distributional RL captures the
intrinsic uncertainty of an MDP (Bellemare et al., 2017;
Dabney et al., 2017; 2018; Rowland et al., 2018). Intrinsic
uncertainty arises from the stochasticity of the environment,
which is parameter and sample independent. However, it is
not trivial to quantify the effects of parametric and intrinsic
uncertainties in distribution learning. To investigate this,
let us look closer at a simple setup of distribution learning.
Here we use Quantile Regression (QR) (detailed in Section
2.2), but the example presented here holds for other distribution learning methods. Here the random samples are drawn
from any stationary distribution. The initial estimated distribution is set to be the uniform one (left plots). At each time
step, QR updates its estimate in an on-line fashion by minimizing some loss function. In the limit the estimated QR
distribution converges to the true distribution (right plots).
The two middle plots examine the intermediate estimated
distributions before convergence in two distinct cases.

