Fast and Simple Natural-Gradient Variational Inference
with Mixture of Exponential-family Approximations

Wu Lin 1 Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan 2 Mark Schmidt 1

Abstract
Natural-gradient methods enable fast and simple
algorithms for variational inference, but due to
computational difficulties, their use is mostly limited to minimal exponential-family (EF) approximations. In this paper, we extend their application to estimate structured approximations such
as mixtures of EF distributions. Such approximations can fit complex, multimodal posterior
distributions and are generally more accurate than
unimodal EF approximations. By using a minimal
conditional-EF representation of such approximations, we derive simple natural-gradient updates.
Our empirical results demonstrate a faster convergence of our natural-gradient method compared to
black-box gradient-based methods. Our work expands the scope of natural gradients for Bayesian
inference and makes them more widely applicable
than before.

1. Introduction
Variational Inference (VI) provides a cheap and quick approximation to the posterior distribution, and is now widely
used in many areas of machine learning (Kingma & Welling,
2013; Furmston & Barber, 2010; Wainwright & Jordan,
2008; Hensman et al., 2013; Nguyen et al., 2017). In recent
years, many natural-gradient methods have been proposed
for VI (Sato, 2001; Honkela et al., 2007; 2011; Hensman
et al., 2012; Hoffman et al., 2013; Khan & Lin, 2017). These
works have shown that, for specific types of models and approximations, natural-gradient methods can result in simple
updates which converge faster than gradient-based methods.
For example, stochastic variational inference (SVI) (Hoffman et al., 2013) is a popular natural-gradient method for
conjugate exponential-family models. Unfortunately, the
1

University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. 2 RIKEN
Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Wu Lin <wlin2018@cs.ubc.ca>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Mixture of EF
Curved EF
Minimal
Conditionally
EF (MCEF)

Minimal EF

Examples of MCEFs
Finite Mixture of Gaussians
Birnbaum-Saunders Distribution
Multivariate Student’s T-distribution
Multivariate Normal Inverse Gaussian
Multivariate Skew-Gaussian
Multivariate Exponentially Modified Gaussian
Low-rank Covariance Gaussian

Figure 1. We derive simple natural-gradient updates for approximations with a minimal-conditional EF (MCEF) representation. Such
approximations include all minimal (normalized) EF distributions,
and some curved and mixture of EF distributions.

simplicity of natural-gradient updates is currently limited
to VI with minimal exponential-family (EF) approximations. For such approximations, we can efficiently compute
natural-gradients in the natural-parameter space without
explicitly computing the Fisher information matrix (FIM)
(Khan & Nielsen, 2018). Unfortunately, this property does
not extend to many other approximations such as mixtures
of EF distributions. Such structured approximations are
more appropriate for complex and multi-modal posterior
distributions, giving a more accurate fit than minimal EF
distributions. However, computation of natural-gradients is
challenging for them.
In this paper, we propose a simple new natural-gradient
method for VI with structured approximations. We define a
class of distributions which take a minimal conditional-EF
(MCEF) form. This includes many members of mixture
and curved EF distributions (see Fig. 1). Using the MCEF
representation and an expectation parameterization associated with it, we derive simple natural-gradient updates.
We show examples on a variety of models where simple
natural-gradient updates can be used to estimate flexible
and accurate structured approximations. Our empirical results show faster convergence of our method compared to
gradient descent for VI. Our work extends the simplicity of
natural-gradient methods making them more widely applicable than before, while maintaining their fast convergence.
1.1. Related Works
Existing work on natural-gradient VI to obtain EF approximations all assume a minimal representation to ensure invertiblility of the FIM. Such methods show fast convergence,

