Discovering Options for Exploration by Minimizing Cover Time

Yuu Jinnai 1 Jee Won Park 1 David Abel 1 George Konidaris 1

Abstract
One of the main challenges in reinforcement learning is solving tasks with sparse reward. We show
that the difficulty of discovering a distant rewarding state in an MDP is bounded by the expected
cover time of a random walk over the graph induced by the MDP’s transition dynamics. We
therefore propose to accelerate exploration by
constructing options that minimize cover time.
We introduce a new option discovery algorithm
that diminishes the expected cover time by connecting the most distant states in the state-space
graph with options. We show empirically that the
proposed algorithm improves learning in several
domains with sparse rewards.

options guaranteed to reduce the expected cover time using
the transition function either given to or learned by the agent.
Finding a set of edges that minimizes expected cover time
is an extremely hard combinatorial optimization problem
(Braess, 1968; Braess et al., 2005). Thus, our algorithm
instead seeks to minimize the upper bound of the expected
cover time given as a function of the algebraic connectivity
of the graph Laplacian (Fiedler, 1973; Broder & Karlin,
1989; Chung, 1996) using the heuristic method by Ghosh &
Boyd (2006).
Finally, we evaluate our option discovery algorithm in six
discrete domains where the agent is given the state-space
graph but must learn the location of the reward online. Our
empirical results demonstrate that the approach outperforms
previous state-of-the-art methods.

2. Background
1. Introduction
A major challenge in reinforcement learning is how to explore in environments where reward is sparse.
One approach is the construction of temporally extended
actions, or options (Sutton et al., 1999) for exploration
(Machado et al., 2017). However, existing approaches lack
a principled theoretical grounding and their effectiveness
can only be evaluated empirically.
We introduce an option discovery method that explicitly
aims to improve exploration in sparse reward domains by
minimizing the expected number of steps required to reach
an unknown rewarding state. First, we model the behavior
of an agent early in its learning process (that is, before
observing the reward signal) as a uniform random walk over
the graph induced by the MDP’s transition dynamics. We
show that minimizing the graph cover time—the number
of steps required for a random walk to visit every state
(Broder & Karlin, 1989)—reduces the expected number of
steps required to reach an unknown rewarding state. We
then introduce a polynomial time algorithm to find a set of
1
Brown University, Providence, RI, United States. Correspondence to: Yuu Jinnai <yuu jinnai@brown.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

2.1. Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement learning is the problem of learning a policy
that maximizes the total expected reward obtained by an
agent interacting with an environment. The environment
is often modeled as a Markov Decision Process (MDP)
(Puterman, 1994). An MDP is a five tuple (S, A, T, R, γ),
where S is a set of states, A is a set of actions, T : S × A ×
S → [0, 1] is a state transition function, R : S × A → R is
a reward function, γ → [0, 1] is a discount factor.
The agent selects actions according to a policy π : S ×
A → [0, 1] mapping states to actions. The expected total
discounted reward from state s following a policy π is the
value of the state:
X
V π (s) = R(s, π(s)) + γ
T (s, π(s), s0 )V π (s0 ). (1)
s0 ∈S

This function is called a value function. The action-value
function of a policy is an expected total discount reward
received by executing an action a and then follow policy π:
Qπ (s, a) = R(s, a) + γ

X

T (s, a, s0 )V π (s0 ).

(2)

s0 ∈S

The goal of the agent is to learn an optimal policy π ∗
which maximizes the total discounted reward: π ∗ =

