Width Provably Matters in Optimization for Deep Linear Neural Networks
Simon S. Du * 1 Wei Hu * 2

Abstract
We prove that for an L-layer fully-connected linear neural network, if the width of every hidden
layer is e
⌦ L · r · dout · 3 , where r and  are
the rank and the condition number of the input
data, and dout is the output dimension, then gradient descent with Gaussian random initialization
converges to a global minimum at a linear rate.
The number of iterations to find an ✏-suboptimal
solution is O( log( 1✏ )). Our polynomial upper
bound on the total running time for wide deep
linear networks and the exp (⌦ (L)) lower bound
for narrow deep linear neural networks [Shamir,
2018] together demonstrate that wide layers are
necessary for optimizing deep models.

1. Introduction
Recent success in machine learning involves training deep
neural networks using randomly initialized first order methods, which requires optimizing highly non-convex functions.
Compared with nonlinear deep neural networks, deep linear
networks are arguably more amenable to theoretical analysis. It is widely believed that deep linear networks already
captures important aspects of optimization in deep learning (Saxe et al., 2014). Therefore, theoreticians have tried
to study this problem in recent years. However, a strong
global convergence guarantee is still missing.
A series of recent papers analyzed landscape of the deep linear network optimization problem (Kawaguchi, 2016; Hardt
& Ma, 2016; Lu & Kawaguchi, 2017; Yun et al., 2017; Zhou
& Liang, 2018; Laurent & Brecht, 2018). However, these
results do not imply convergence of gradient-based methods
to the global minimum. Recently, Bartlett et al. (2018);
Arora et al. (2018a) directly analyzed the trajectory generated by gradient descent, and showed that gradient descent
*

Alphebetical order 1 Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh,
PA, USA 2 Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA. Correspondence to: Simon S. Du <ssdu@cs.cmu.edu>, Wei Hu
<huwei@cs.princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

converges to global minimum under further assumptions
on both data and global minimum. These results require
specially designed initialization schemes, and do not apply
to commonly used random initializations. In Section 2.1 we
describe above results in more details.
A recent work by Shamir (2018) showed an exponential
lower bound of randomly initialized gradient descent for
narrow linear neural networks. More precisely, he showed
that for an L-layer linear neural network in which the input,
output and all hidden dimensions are equal to 1, gradient
descent with Xavier initialization (Glorot & Bengio, 2010)
requires at least exp (⌦ (L)) iteration to converge. This result demonstrates the intrinsic difficulty of optimizing deep
networks: even in the basic setting, the convergence time for
randomly initialized gradient descent can be exponential in
depth. Nevertheless, this lower bound only holds for narrow
neural networks. It is possible that making the hidden layers
wider (which is usually the case in practice) can eliminate
such exponential dependence on depth. This gives rise to
the following questions:
Can randomly initialized gradient descent optimize wide
deep linear networks in polynomial time? If so, what is a
sufficient width in hidden layers?
Our Contribution: We answer the first question positively and give a concrete quantitative result for the second
question. We prove that as long as the width of hidden layers
is at least ˜
⌦(L)1 , gradient descent with Xavier initialization
with high probability converges to the global minimum of
the `2 loss at a linear rate under no assumption. To our
knowledge, this is the first polynomial time global convergence guarantee for randomly initialized gradient descent
for deep linear networks. Furthermore, our convergence
rate is tight in the sense that it matches the convergence rate
of applying gradient descent to the convex (1-layer) linear
regression problem.
Compared with previous work (Bartlett et al., 2018; Arora
et al., 2018a) that gave convergence rate guarantees for
linear neural networks, our result has several advantages:
• Our result applies to the widely used Xavier random
1
We omit dependence on other parameters here. See Theorem 4.1 for the precise requirements.

