LIT: Learned Intermediate Representation Training for Model Compression

Animesh Koratana * 1 Daniel Kang * 1 Peter Bailis 1 Matei Zaharia 1

Abstract
Researchers have proposed a range of model compression techniques to reduce the computational
and memory footprint of deep neural networks
(DNNs). In this work, we introduce Learned
Intermediate representation Training (LIT), a
novel model compression technique that outperforms a range of recent model compression techniques by leveraging the highly repetitive structure of modern DNNs (e.g., ResNet). LIT uses a
teacher DNN to train a student DNN of reduced
depth by leveraging two key ideas: 1) LIT directly compares intermediate representations of
the teacher and student model and 2) LIT uses
the intermediate representation from the teacher
model’s previous block as input to the current
student block during training, improving stability of intermediate representations in the student
network. We show that LIT can substantially reduce network size without loss in accuracy on a
range of DNN architectures and datasets. For example, LIT can compress ResNet on CIFAR10 by
3.4× outperforming network slimming and FitNets. Furthermore, LIT can compress, by depth,
ResNeXt 5.5× on CIFAR10 (image classification), VDCNN by 1.7× on Amazon Reviews
(sentiment analysis), and StarGAN by 1.8× on
CelebA (style transfer, i.e., GANs).

1. Introduction
Modern deep networks have improved in accuracy at the
cost of higher computational overhead (Ioffe & Szegedy,
2015; He et al., 2016). In response, researchers have proposed many compression techniques to reduce this computational overhead at inference time, which broadly fall
into two categories. The first category are student/teacher
methods—introduced in knowledge distillation (KD) (Hin*
Equal contribution 1 Stanford University, DAWN Project. Correspondence to: Daniel Kang <ddkang@stanford.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 36 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

ton et al., 2014) and further extended (Romero et al., 2015;
Kim & Rush, 2016; Furlanello et al., 2018)—in which a
smaller student model learns from a large teacher model
(e.g., by matching the logits of the teacher and student models). The second category is deep compression (Han et al.,
2016b; Zhu et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017; Hubara et al., 2017),
in which parts of a model are pruned or quantized to reduce
the number of weights and/or the computational footprint.
In this work, we refer to this class of methods as “deep compression” and methods to reduce model size more generally
as “model compression.”
We focus on student/teacher methods since the student
model can be designed to leverage existing hardware, e.g.,
hardware that is optimized for dense matrix multiplication.
In contrast, deep compression typically requires new hardware (such as sparse multipliers) for inference improvements (Han et al., 2016a). Additionally, weight pruning methods achieve lower compression ratios on modern
DNNs. The majority of compression on older DNNs comes
from compressing fully connected layers: ResNet can only
be pruned by ~1.5× (Liu et al., 2019) compared to ~10×
for older networks (Han et al., 2016b).
In this work, we introduce Learned Intermediate representation Training (LIT), a student/teacher compression technique that outperforms a range of model compression techniques on modern networks without requiring changes in
hardware. LIT targets highly structured, modern networks
that consist of repetitive blocks (i.e., groups of layers) that
can be scaled up/down for accuracy/speed trade-offs. For
example, ResNets have standard configurations from 20
to hundreds of layers (He et al., 2016) across four blocks.
LIT leverages two key ideas to directly reduce the depth of
student networks as we illustrate in Figure 1.1 First, LIT
directly penalizes deviations of one or more student and
teacher intermediate representations (IRs, i.e., the output
from a hidden layer). Second, LIT uses the IR from the
previous block in the teacher model as input to the current student block during training; each student block is
effectively trained in isolation to match the corresponding
(deeper) block in the teacher. This improves stability of
1

LIT is similar to FitNets (Romero et al., 2015) but targets
modern networks. The key difference is using the teacher model’s
intermediates as input to the student model. We discuss further
differences in Section 2.

