Insertion Transformer:
Flexible Sequence Generation via Insertion Operations

Mitchell Stern 1 2 William Chan 1 Jamie Kiros 1 Jakob Uszkoreit 1

Abstract
We present the Insertion Transformer, an iterative, partially autoregressive model for sequence
generation based on insertion operations. Unlike
typical autoregressive models which rely on a
fixed, often left-to-right ordering of the output,
our approach accommodates arbitrary orderings
by allowing for tokens to be inserted anywhere
in the sequence during decoding. This flexibility confers a number of advantages: for instance,
not only can our model be trained to follow specific orderings such as left-to-right generation or
a binary tree traversal, but it can also be trained
to maximize entropy over all valid insertions for
robustness. In addition, our model seamlessly accommodates both fully autoregressive generation
(one insertion at a time) and partially autoregressive generation (simultaneous insertions at multiple locations). We validate our approach by analyzing its performance on the WMT 2014 EnglishGerman machine translation task under various
settings for training and decoding. We find that
the Insertion Transformer outperforms many prior
non-autoregressive approaches to translation at
comparable or better levels of parallelism, and
successfully recovers the performance of the original Transformer while requiring only logarithmically many iterations during decoding.

1. Introduction
Neural sequence models (Sutskever et al., 2014; Cho et al.,
2014) have been successfully applied to many applications,
including machine translation (Bahdanau et al., 2015; Luong et al., 2015), speech recognition (Bahdanau et al., 2016;
1
Google Brain, Mountain View, Toronto, Berlin
University of California, Berkeley.
Correspondence to:
Mitchell Stern <mitchell@berkeley.edu>, William Chan
<williamchan@google.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Chan et al., 2016), speech synthesis (Oord et al., 2016a;
Wang et al., 2017), image captioning (Vinyals et al., 2015b;
Xu et al., 2015) and image generation (Oord et al., 2016b;c).
These models have a common theme: they rely on the chainrule factorization and have an autoregressive left-to-right
structure. This formulation bestows many advantages in
both training and inference. Log-likelihood computation is
tractable, allowing for efficient maximum likelihood learning. Efficient approximate inference is also made possible
through beam search decoding. However, the autoregressive
framework does not easily accommodate for parallel token
generation or more elaborate generation orderings (e.g., tree
orders).
More recently, there has been work on non-autoregressive
sequence models such as the Non-Autoregressive Transformer (NAT) (Gu et al., 2018) and the Iterative Refinement
model (Lee et al., 2018). In both of these models, the decoder is seeded with an initial input derived from the source
sequence, then produces the entire target sequence in parallel. Lee et al. (2018) adds an iterative refinement stage to the
decoder in which a new hypothesis is produced conditioning
on the input and the previous output.
While allowing for highly parallel generation, there are a
few drawbacks to such approaches. The first is that the target
sequence length needs to be chosen up front, preventing the
output from growing dynamically as generation proceeds.
This can be problematic if the chosen length is too short
to accommodate the desired target, or can be wasteful if
it is too long. In the case of Gu et al. (2018), there is
also a strong conditional independence assumption between
output tokens, limiting the model’s expressive power. Lee
et al. (2018) relaxes this assumption but in turn requires two
separate decoders for the initial hypothesis generation and
the iterative refinement stage.
In this work, we present a flexible sequence generation
framework based on insertion operations. The Insertion
Transformer is an iterative, partially autoregressive model
which can be trained in a fully end-to-end fashion. Generation is accomplished by repeatedly making insertions
into an initially-empty output sequence until a termination
condition is met. Our approach bypasses the problem of
needing to predict the target sequence length ahead of time

