Neural Network Attributions: A Causal Perspective

Aditya Chattopadhyay 1 Piyushi Manupriya 2 Anirban Sarkar 2 Vineeth N Balasubramanian 2

Abstract

way for a new paradigm, “explainable machine learning”.

We propose a new attribution method for neural networks developed using first principles of
causality (to the best of our knowledge, the first
such). The neural network architecture is viewed
as a Structural Causal Model, and a methodology
to compute the causal effect of each feature on
the output is presented. With reasonable assumptions on the causal structure of the input data,
we propose algorithms to efficiently compute the
causal effects, as well as scale the approach to data
with large dimensionality. We also show how this
method can be used for recurrent neural networks.
We report experimental results on both simulated
and real datasets showcasing the promise and usefulness of the proposed algorithm.

While the field is nascent, several broad approaches have
emerged (Simonyan et al., 2013; Yosinski et al., 2015; Frosst
& Hinton, 2017; Letham et al., 2015), each having its own
perspective to explainable machine learning. In this work,
we focus on a class of interpretability algorithms called
“attribution-based methods”. Formally, attributions are defined as the effect of an input feature on the prediction
function’s output (Sundararajan et al., 2017). This is an
inherently causal question, which motivates this work. Current approaches involve backpropagating the signals to input to decipher input-output relations (Sundararajan et al.,
2017; Selvaraju et al., 2016; Bach et al., 2015; Ribeiro et al.,
2016) or approximating the local decision boundary (around
the input data point in question) via “interpretable” regressors like linear classifiers (Ribeiro et al., 2016; Selvaraju
et al., 2016; Zhou & Troyanskaya, 2015; Alvarez-Melis &
Jaakkola, 2017) or decision trees.

1. Introduction
Over the last decade, deep learning models have been highly
successful in solving complex problems in various fields
ranging from vision, speech to more core fields such as
chemistry and physics (Deng et al., 2014; Sadowski et al.,
2014; Gilmer et al., 2017). However, a key bottleneck in accepting such models in real-life applications, especially risksensitive ones, is the “interpretability problem”. Usually,
these models are treated as black boxes without any knowledge of their internal workings. This makes troubleshooting
difficult in case of erroneous behaviour. Moreover, these
algorithms are trained on a limited amount of data which
most often is different from real-world data. Artifacts that
creep into the training dataset due to human error or unwarranted correlations in data creation have an adverse effect on
the hypothesis learned by these models. If treated as black
boxes, there is no way of knowing whether the model actually learned a concept or a high accuracy was just fortuitous.
This limitation of black-box deep learned models has paved
1

Center for Imaging Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA. 2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, Telangana, India.
Correspondence to: Aditya Chattopadhyay <achatto1@jhu.edu>,
Vineeth N Balasubramanian <vineethnb@iith.ac.in>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

In the former category of methods, while gradients answer
the question “How much would perturbing a particular input
affect the output?”, they do not capture the causal influence
of an input on a particular output neuron. The latter category
of methods that rely on “interpretable” regression is also
prone to artifacts as regression primarily maps correlations
rather than causation. In this work, we propose a neural
network attribution methodology built from first principles
of causality. To the best of our knowledge, while neural
networks have been modeled as causal graphs (Kocaoglu
et al., 2017), this is the first effort on a causal approach to
attribution in neural networks.
Our approach views the neural network as a Structural
Causal Model (SCM), and proposes a new method to compute the Average Causal Effect of an input neuron on an
output neuron. Using standard principles of causality to
make the problem tractable, this approach induces a setting where input neurons are not causally related to each
other, but can be jointly caused by a latent confounder (say,
data-generating mechanisms). This setting is valid in many
application domains that use neural networks, including images where neighboring pixels are often affected jointly by
a latent confounder, rather than direct causal influence (a
“doer” can take a paint brush and oddly color a certain part of
an image, and the neighboring pixels need not change). We

