Recursive Sketches for Modular Deep
Learning

Badih Ghazi * 1 Rina Panigrahy * 1
Joshua R. Wang * 1

Abstract
We present a mechanism to compute a sketch (succinct summary) of how a complex modular deep
network processes its inputs. The sketch summarizes essential information about the inputs and
outputs of the network and can be used to quickly
identify key components and summary statistics
of the inputs. Furthermore, the sketch is recursive
and can be unrolled to identify sub-components of
these components and so forth, capturing a potentially complicated DAG structure. These sketches
erase gracefully; even if we erase a fraction of
the sketch at random, the remainder still retains
the “high-weight” information present in the original sketch. The sketches can also be organized
in a repository to implicitly form a “knowledge
graph”; it is possible to quickly retrieve sketches
in the repository that are related to a sketch of
interest; arranged in this fashion, the sketches can
also be used to learn emerging concepts by looking for new clusters in sketch space. Finally, in
the scenario where we want to learn a ground
truth deep network, we show that augmenting
input/output pairs with these sketches can theoretically make it easier to do so.

1. Introduction
Machine learning has leveraged our understanding of how
the brain functions to devise better algorithms. Much of
classical machine learning focuses on how to correctly compute a function; we utilize the available data to make more
accurate predictions. More recently, lines of work have
considered other important objectives as well: we might
*

Equal contribution 1 Google Research, Mountain View,
CA, USA..
Correspondence to: Rina Panigrahy <rinap@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

like our algorithms to be small, efficient, and robust. This
work aims to further explore one such sub-question: can we
design a system on top of neural nets that efficiently stores
information?
Our motivating example is the following everyday situation.
Imagine stepping into a room and briefly viewing the objects
within. Modern machine learning is excellent at answering
immediate questions about this scene: “Is there a cat? How
big is said cat?” Now, suppose we view this room every day
over the course of a year. Humans can reminisce about the
times they saw the room: “How often did the room contain
a cat? Was it usually morning or night when we saw the
room?”; can we design systems that are also capable of
efficiently answering such memory-based questions?
Our proposed solution works by leveraging an existing (already trained) machine learning model to understand individual inputs. For the sake of clarity of presentation, this
base machine learning model will be a modular deep network.1 We then augment this model with sketches of its
computation. We show how these sketches can be used to
efficiently answer memory-based questions, despite the fact
that they take up much less memory than storing the entire
original computation.
A modular deep network consists of several independent
neural networks (modules) which only communicate via
one’s output serving as another’s input. Figure 1 presents
a cartoon depiction of a modular network for our example. Modular networks have both a biological basis (Azam,
2000) and evolutionary justification (Clune et al., 2013).
They have inspired several practical architectures such as
neural module networks (Andreas et al., 2016; Hu et al.,
2017), capsule neural networks (Hinton et al., 2000; 2011;
Sabour et al., 2017), and PathNet (Fernando et al., 2017)
and have connections to suggested biological models of intelligence such as hierarchical temporal memory (Hawkins
& Blakeslee, 2007). We choose them as a useful abstraction
to avoid discussing specific network architectures.
What do these modules represent in the context of our room
task? Since we are searching for objects in the room, we
think of each module as attempting to identify a particular
type of object, from the low level edge to the high level cat.
For the reader familiar with convolutional neural networks,
it may help to think of each module as a filter or kernel.
We denote the event where a module produces output as
an object, the produced output vector as an attribute vector,
and all objects produced by a module as a class. In fact, our
sketching mechanism will detail how to sketch each object,
and these sketches will be recursive, taking into account the
sketches corresponding to the inputs of the module.
1
Of course, it is possible to cast many models as deep modular
networks by appropriately separating them into modules.

