Leveraging Low-Rank Relations Between Surrogate Tasks
in Structured Prediction
Giulia Luise 1 Dimitris Stamos 1 Massimiliano Pontil 1 2 Carlo Ciliberto 1 3

Abstract
We study the interplay between surrogate methods for structured prediction and techniques from
multitask learning designed to leverage relationships between surrogate outputs. We propose an
efficient algorithm based on trace norm regularization which, differently from previous methods,
does not require explicit knowledge of the coding/decoding functions of the surrogate framework. As a result, our algorithm can be applied to
the broad class of problems in which the surrogate
space is large or even infinite dimensional. We
study excess risk bounds for trace norm regularized structured prediction proving the consistency
and learning rates for our estimator. We also identify relevant regimes in which our approach can
enjoy better generalization performance than previous methods. Numerical experiments on ranking problems indicate that enforcing low-rank relations among surrogate outputs may indeed provide a significant advantage in practice.

1. Introduction
The problem of structured prediction is receiving increasing attention in machine learning, due to its wide practical
importance (Bakir et al., 2007; Nowozin et al., 2011) and
the theoretical challenges in designing principled learning
procedures (Taskar et al., 2004; 2005; London et al., 2016;
Cortes et al., 2016). A key aspect of this problem is the
non-vectorial nature of the output space, e.g. graphs, permutations, and manifolds. Consequently, traditional regression
and classification algorithms are not well-suited to these settings and more sophisticated methods need to be developed.
1

Department of Computer Science, University College London,
London, UK 2 Computational Statistics and Machine Learning,
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genoa 3 Department of Electrical
and Electronic Engineering,Imperial College London, London,
UK. Correspondence to: Giulia Luise <g.luise.16@ucl.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Among the most well-established strategies for structured
prediction are the so-called surrogate methods (Bartlett
et al., 2006). Within this framework, a coding function
is designed to embed the structured output into a linear
space, where the resulting problem is solved via standard
supervised learning methods. Then, the solution of the surrogate problem is pulled back to the original output space
by means of a decoding procedure, which allows one to
recover the structured prediction estimator under suitable
assumptions. In most cases, the surrogate learning problem
amounts to a vector-valued regression in a possibly infinite
dimensional space. The prototypical choice for such surrogate estimator is a regularized least squares in a reproducing
kernel Hilbert space, as originally considered in (Weston
et al., 2003; Cortes et al., 2005; Bartlett et al., 2006) and
then explored in (Mroueh et al., 2012; Kadri et al., 2013;
Brouard et al., 2016; Ciliberto et al., 2016; Osokin et al.,
2017; Rudi et al., 2018; Luise et al., 2018).
The principal goal of this paper is to extend the surrogate
approaches to methods that encourage structure among the
outputs. Indeed, a large body of work from traditional multitask learning has shown that leveraging the relations among
multiple outputs may often lead to better estimators (Alvarez
et al., 2012; Argyriou et al., 2008; Caponnetto & De Vito,
2007; Maurer, 2006; Micchelli et al., 2013). However, previous methods that propose to apply multitask strategies to
surrogate frameworks (see e.g. Alvarez et al., 2012; Fergus
et al., 2010) heavily rely on the explicit knowledge of the
encoding function of a surrogate framework. As a consequence they are not applicable when the surrogate space is
large or even infinite dimensional.
Contributions. We propose a new algorithm based on
low-rank regularization for structured prediction that builds
upon the surrogate framework in (Ciliberto et al., 2016;
2017). Differently from previous methods in the literature
on surrogate methods, our approach does not require explicit
knowledge of the encoding function, by leveraging intrinsic
properties of the loss function. In particular, exploiting approaches based on the variational formulation of trace norm
regularization (Srebro et al., 2005), we are able to derive
an efficient learning algorithm also in the case of infinite
dimensional surrogate spaces.

