Lossless or Quantized Boosting with Integer Arithmetic

Richard Nock 1 2 3 Robert C. Williamson 2 1

Abstract
In supervised learning, efficiency often starts with
the choice of a good loss: support vector machines
popularised Hinge loss, Adaboost popularised the
exponential loss, etc. Recent trends in machine
learning have highlighted the necessity for training routines to meet tight requirements on communication, bandwidth, energy, operations, encoding,
among others. Fitting the often decades-old state
of the art training routines into these new constraints does not go without pain and uncertainty
or reduction in the original guarantees.
Our paper starts with the design of a new
strictly proper canonical, twice differentiable loss
called the Q-loss. Importantly, its mirror update over (arbitrary) rational inputs uses only integer arithmetics – more precisely, the sole use
of +, −, /, ×, |.|. We build a learning algorithm
which is able, under mild assumptions, to achieve
a lossless boosting-compliant training. We give
conditions for a quantization of its main memory footprint, weights, to be done while keeping
the whole algorithm boosting-compliant. Experiments display that the algorithm can achieve a
fast convergence during the early boosting rounds
compared to AdaBoost, even with a weight storage that can be 30+ times smaller. Lastly, we
show that the Bayes risk of the Q-loss can be used
as node splitting criterion for decision trees and
guarantees optimal boosting convergence.

1. Introduction
More often than not, today’s supervised machine learning
(ML) toolkit exploits ideas and algorithms grounded in
decades-old approaches: stochastic gradient descent (SGD,
Robbins & Monro (1951)), backpropagation (Rumelhart
et al., 1986), boosting (Freund & Schapire, 1997), support
1

Data61, 2 The Australian National University, Canberra &
The University of Sydney, Sydney (Australia). Correspondence to:
<richard.nock@data61.csiro.au, bob.williamson@anu.edu.au>.
3

th

Proceedings of the 36 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

vector machines (Boser et al., 1992), etc. . To be carried out
in today’s settings, such long-lived algorithms require care
and caution to cope with practical constraints on parallel and
distributed processing, memory, communication, bandwidth
or energy, the availability of reduced sets of operations, the
coding size of models, etc. These constraints are non exclusive and arise for a number of reasons that were just mostly
not in the original bills of specifications for those algorithms,
essentially "reduced" to the optimisation of a risk (Vapnik,
1998). Many started to be formally studied a decade later
(Bottou & Bousquet, 2007), only to become almost a further
decade later a focus of attention for the whole field.
To adapt, tailor and run such algorithms, three important
tools (not independent from each other) emerge that we
refer to as (i) quantization, (ii) encoding and (iii)
operations. (i-ii) deal with parameters stored: in (i),
we limit the number of different values (and eventually the
values) that may be coded; in (ii) we tune the encoding of
those values. In (iii) we control the set of operations used to
train or classify. Tools from (i-iii) can cover the complete
training or classification phases (See section 2). Most of the
state of the art has been focusing in using (i-iii) for adapting
the aforementioned algorithms to today’s constraints. While
this has met with unquestionable empirical success, there
has been comparatively little formal understanding of the
impacts of changes; furthermore, the resulting algorithms
are not a panacea for such constraints, to the extent that there
are calls to redesign learning algorithms when possible to
be constraint friendly from the start (Goldwasser, 2018).
Such is the starting point of our contribution: we design a
new boosting algorithm for ensembles, compliant with the
original boosting theory requirements (Kearns, 1988), with
the following characteristics with respect to (i-iii) above:
(i) quantization: conditions are given for boosting weights to be quantized without loosing boostingcompliance;
(ii) encoding: if the inputs are rational then the full algorithm and the output model’s classification can be carried
out with no precision loss using integer arithmetic;
(iii) operations: the algorithm just needs +, −, ×, /, |.|.
In other words, under mild conditions, the algorithm is able
to compute a lossless solution to the boosting problem. Popular boosting algorithms like AdaBoost (Freund & Schapire,

