GDPP: Learning Diverse Generations using Determinantal Point Processes

Mohamed Elfeki 1 Camille Couprie 2 Morgane Rivière 2 Mohamed Elhoseiny 2 3

Abstract
Generative models have proven to be an outstanding tool for representing high-dimensional probability distributions and generating realistic looking images. An essential characteristic of generative models is their ability to produce multimodal outputs. However, while training, they are
often susceptible to mode collapse, that is models are limited in mapping input noise to only a
few modes of the true data distribution. In this
work, we draw inspiration from Determinantal
Point Process (DPP) to propose an unsupervised
penalty loss that alleviates mode collapse while
producing higher quality samples. DPP is an elegant probabilistic measure used to model negative
correlations within a subset and hence quantify
its diversity. We use DPP kernel to model the
diversity in real data as well as in synthetic data.
Then, we devise an objective term that encourages generator to synthesize data with a similar
diversity to real data. In contrast to previous stateof-the-art generative models that tend to use additional trainable parameters or complex training
paradigms, our method does not change the original training scheme. Embedded in an adversarial
training and variational autoencoder, our Generative DPP approach shows a consistent resistance
to mode-collapse on a wide-variety of synthetic
data and natural image datasets including MNIST,
CIFAR10, and CelebA, while outperforming stateof-the-art methods for data-efficiency, generation
quality, and convergence-time whereas being 5.8x
faster than its closest competitor. 1
1

University of Central Florida 2 Facebook Artificial Intelligence
Research 3 King Abdullah University of Science and Technology.
Correspondence to: Mohamed Elfeki <elfeki@cs.ucf.edu>, Couprie,Rivière <{coupriec,mriviere}@fb.com>, Mohamed Elhoseiny <mohamed.elhoseiny@kaust.edu.sa>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).
1
https://github.com/M-Elfeki/GDPP

Figure 1. Inspired by DPP, we model a batch diversity using a
kernel L. Our loss encourages generator G to synthesize a batch
SB of a diversity LSB similar to the real data diversity LDB , by
matching their eigenvalues and eigenvectors. Generation loss aims
at generating similar data points to the real, and diversity loss aims
at matching the diversity manifold structures.

1. Introduction
Deep generative models have gained great research interest in recent years as a powerful framework to represent
high dimensional data in an unsupervised fashion. Among
many generative approaches, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) and Variational
AutoEncoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2013) took a
place among the most prominent approaches for synthesizing realistic images. They consist of two networks: a
generator (decoder) and a discriminator (encoder), where
the generator attempts to map latent code to fake data points
that simulate the distribution of real data. Nevertheless, in
the process of learning multi-modal complex distributions,
both models may converge to a trivial solution where the
generator learns to produce few modes exclusively, which
referred to by mode collapse.
To address this, we propose using Determinantal Point Processes (DPP) to model the diversity within data samples.
DPP is a probabilistic model that has been mainly adopted
for solving subset selection problems with diversity constraints (Kulesza & Taskar, 2011), such as video and document summarization. In such cases, representative sampling
requires quantifying the diversity of 2N subsets, where N
is the size of the ground set. However, this renders DPP
sampling from true data to be computationally inefficient

