Learning Linear-Quadratic Regulators Efficiently with only

√

T Regret

Alon Cohen 1 2 Tomer Koren 3 Yishay Mansour 1 4

Abstract
We present the first
√ computationally-efficient algorithm with e
O( T) regret for learning in Linear Quadratic Control systems with unknown dynamics. By that, we resolve an open question of
Abbasi-Yadkori and Szepesvári (2011) and Dean,
Mania, Matni, Recht, and Tu (2018).

1. Introduction
Optimal control theory dates back to the 1950s, and has
been applied successfully to numerous real-world engineering problems (e.g., Bermúdez and Martinez, 1994; Chen and
Islam, 2005; Lenhart and Workman, 2007; Geering, 2007).
Classical results in control theory pertain to asymptotic convergence and stability of dynamical systems, and recently,
there has been a renewed interest in such problems from a
learning-theoretic perspective with a focus on finite-time
convergence guarantees and computational tractability.
Perhaps the most well-studied model in optimal control is
Linear-Quadratic (LQ) control. In this model, both the state
and the action are real-valued vectors. The dynamics of
the environment are linear in both the state and action, and
are perturbed by Gaussian noise; the cost is quadratic in
the state and action vectors. When the costs and dynamics
are known, the optimal control policy, which minimizes the
steady-state cost, selects its actions as a linear function of
the state vector, and can be derived by solving the algebraic
Ricatti equations (e.g., Bertsekas et al., 2005).
Among the most challenging problems in LQ control is that
of adaptive control: regulating a system with parameters
which are initially unknown and have to be learned while
incurring the associated costs. This problem is exceptionally challenging since the system might become unstable.
Specifically, the controller must control the magnitude of
the state vectors or its cost might grow arbitrarily.
1

Google Research, Tel-Aviv 2 Technion—Israel Inst. of Technology 3 Google Brain, Mountain View 4 Tel-Aviv University. Correspondence to: Alon Cohen <alon.cohen@technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Abbasi-Yadkori and Szepesvári (2011) were the first to address the adaptive control problem from a learning-theoretic
perspective. In their setting, there is a learning agent who
knows the quadratic costs, yet has no knowledge regarding
the dynamics of the system. The agent acts for T rounds;
at each round she observes the current state then chooses
an action. Her goal is to minimize her regret, defined as the
difference between her total cost and T times the steadystate cost of the optimal policy—one that is computed using
complete knowledge of the dynamics.
√
Abbasi-Yadkori and Szepesvári (2011) gave O( T)-type
regret bounds for LQ control where the dependency on the
dimensionality is exponential, which was later improved by
Ibrahimi et al. (2012) to a polynomial dependence. However,
the algorithms given in these works are not computationally efficient and require solving a complex non-convex
optimization problem √
at each step. Developing an efficient algorithm with O( T) regret has been a long standing
open problem. Recently, Dean et al. (2018) proposed a
computationally-efficient algorithm attaining an O(T 2/3 ) regret
√ bound, and stated as an open problem providing an
O( T) regret efficient algorithm.
In this paper, we give the
√ first computationally-efficient algorithm that attains e
O( T) regret for learning LQ systems,
thus resolving the open problem of Abbasi-Yadkori and
Szepesvári (2011) and Dean et al. (2018). The key to the efficiency of our algorithm is in reformulating the LQ control
problem as a convex semi-definite program. Our algorithm
solves a sequence of semi-definite relaxations of the infinite
horizon LQ problem, the solutions of which are used to
compute “optimistic” policies for the underlying unknown
LQ system. As time progresses and the algorithm receives
more samples from the system, these relaxations become
tighter and serve as a better approximation of the actual
LQ system. In this context, an optimistic policy is one that
balances between exploration and exploitation; that is, between myopically utilizing its current information about the
system parameters versus collecting new samples in order
to obtain better estimates for subsequent predictions.
1.1. Related work
The techniques used in Abbasi-Yadkori and Szepesvári
(2011); Ibrahimi et al. (2012) as well as those in this paper,

