Composing Entropic Policies using Divergence Correction

Jonathan J Hunt 1 Andre Barreto 1 Timothy P Lillicrap 1 Nicolas Heess 1

Abstract
Composing skills mastered in one task to solve
novel tasks promises dramatic improvements in
the data efficiency of reinforcement learning.
Here, we analyze two recent works composing
behaviors represented in the form of action-value
functions and show that they perform poorly in
some situations. As part of this analysis, we extend an important generalization of policy improvement to the maximum entropy framework
and introduce an algorithm for the practical implementation of successor features in continuous
action spaces. Then we propose a novel approach
which addresses the failure cases of prior work
and, in principle, recovers the optimal policy during transfer. This method works by explicitly
learning the (discounted, future) divergence between base policies. We study this approach in the
tabular case and on non-trivial continuous control
problems with compositional structure and show
that it outperforms or matches existing methods
across all tasks considered.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms coupled with powerful function approximators have recently achieved a series
of successes (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016; Lillicrap
et al., 2015; Kalashnikov et al., 2018). Unfortunately, all
of these approaches still require a large number of interactions with the environment. One reason for this is that
the algorithms are typically applied “from scratch,” rather
than leveraging experience from prior tasks. This reduces
their applicability in domains where generating experience
is expensive, or learning from scratch is challenging.
In humans, the development of complex motor skills, such
as bipedal locomotion or high-speed manipulation, also
requires large amounts of experience and practice (Adolph
1
DeepMind.
Correspondence to:
<jjhunt@google.com>.

Jonathan J Hunt

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

et al., 2012; Haith & Krakauer, 2013) However, once such
skills have been acquired humans rapidly put them to work
in new contexts and to solve new tasks, suggesting transfer
learning as an important mechanism for data efficiency.
Motivated by this observation, we are interested in RL methods for transfer that are suitable for high-dimensional motor
control. We focus on model-free approaches which are evident in human motor control (Haith & Krakauer, 2013) and
underlie the recent successes of Deep RL cited above.
Transfer may be especially valuable in domains where a
small set of skills can be composed, in different combinations, to solve a variety of tasks. Different notions of compositionality have been considered in the RL and robotics
literature. For instance, ‘options’ tend to be associated with
discrete units of behavior that can be sequenced, thus emphasizing composition in time (Precup et al., 1998). In
this paper we are concerned with a rather distinct notion
of compositionality, namely how to combine and blend potentially concurrent behaviors. This form of composition is
particularly relevant in high-dimensional continuous action
spaces, where it is possible to achieve more than one task
simultaneously (e.g. walking somewhere while juggling).
One approach to this challenge is via the composition of
task rewards. Specifically, we are interested in the following
question: If we have previously solved a set of tasks with
similar transition dynamics but different reward functions,
how can we leverage this knowledge to solve new tasks
which can be expressed as a convex combination of those
reward functions?
This question has recently been studied in two independent
lines of work: by Barreto et al. (2017; 2018) in the context of
successor feature (SF) representations used for Generalized
Policy Improvement (GPI) with deterministic policies, and
by Haarnoja et al. (2018a); van Niekerk et al. (2018) in
the context of maximum entropy (max-ent) policies. These
approaches operate in distinct frameworks but both achieve
skill composition by combining the Q-functions associated
with previously learned skills.
In this paper, we clarify the relationship between the two approaches and show that both perform well in some situations
but that they fail in complementary ways. We introduce a
novel method of behavior composition that can consistently

