Efficient Off-Policy Meta-Reinforcement Learning via
Probabilistic Context Variables
Kate Rakelly 1 * Aurick Zhou 1 * Deirdre Quillen 1 Chelsea Finn 1 Sergey Levine 1

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning algorithms require
large amounts of experience to learn an individual
task. While meta-reinforcement learning (metaRL) algorithms can enable agents to learn new
skills from small amounts of experience, several
major challenges preclude their practicality. Current methods rely heavily on on-policy experience, limiting their sample efficiency. They also
lack mechanisms to reason about task uncertainty
when adapting to new tasks, limiting their effectiveness on sparse reward problems. In this paper,
we address these challenges by developing an offpolicy meta-RL algorithm that disentangles task
inference and control. In our approach, we perform online probabilistic filtering of latent task
variables to infer how to solve a new task from
small amounts of experience. This probabilistic interpretation enables posterior sampling for
structured and efficient exploration. We demonstrate how to integrate these task variables with
off-policy RL algorithms to achieve both metatraining and adaptation efficiency. Our method
outperforms prior algorithms in sample efficiency
by 20-100x as well as in asymptotic performance
on several meta-RL benchmarks.

1. Introduction
The combination of reinforcement learning (RL) with powerful non-linear function approximators has led to a wide
range of advances in sequential decision making problems.
However, conventional RL methods learn a separate policy per task, each often requiring millions of interactions
with the environment. Learning large repertoires of behaviors with such methods quickly becomes prohibitive.
*
1
Equal contribution
EECS Department, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
Kate
Rakelly
<rakelly@eecs.berkeley.edu>,
Aurick
Zhou
<azhou@eecs.berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Fortunately, many of the problems we would like our autonomous agents to solve share common structure. For
example screwing a cap on a bottle and turning a doorknob
both involve grasping an object in the hand and rotating
the wrist. Exploiting this structure to learn new tasks more
quickly remains an open and pressing topic. Meta-learning
methods learn this structure from experience by making use
of large quantities of experience collected across a distribution of tasks. Once learned, these methods can adapt quickly
to new tasks given a small amount of experience.
While meta-learned policies adapt to new tasks with only a
few trials, during training, they require massive amounts of
data drawn from a large set of distinct tasks, exacerbating
the problem of sample efficiency that plagues RL algorithms.
Most current meta-RL methods require on-policy data during both meta-training and adaptation (Finn et al., 2017;
Wang et al., 2016; Duan et al., 2016; Mishra et al., 2018;
Rothfuss et al., 2018; Houthooft et al., 2018), which makes
them exceedingly inefficient during meta-training. However, making use of off-policy data for meta-RL poses new
challenges. It is inherently difficult to meta-train a policy to
adapt using off-policy data, because this data is systematically different from the data the policy would see when it
explores (on-policy) in a new task at meta-test time. Furthermore, in contrast to off-policy algorithms, on-policy methods can learn exploration strategies during meta-training
because they directly control the adaptation data distribution (Duan et al., 2016; Rothfuss et al., 2018). Without
this control, off-policy meta-learning methods must employ
additional mechanisms to enable effective exploration.
In this paper, we tackle the problem of efficient off-policy
meta-reinforcement learning. To achieve both meta-training
efficiency and rapid adaptation, we propose an approach that
integrates online inference of probabilistic context variables
with existing off-policy RL algorithms. Rapid adaptation
requires reasoning about distributions: when exposed to a
new task for the first time, the optimal meta-learned policy
must carry out a stochastic exploration procedure to visit
potentially rewarding states, as well as adapt to the task
at hand (Gupta et al., 2018). During meta-training, we
learn a probabilistic encoder that accumulates the necessary
statistics from past experience into the context variables that
enable the policy to perform the task. At meta-test time,

