Communication-Constrained Inference and the Role of Shared Randomness
Jayadev Acharya 1 Clément Canonne 2 Himanshu Tyagi 3

Abstract
A central server needs to perform statistical inference based on samples that are distributed
over multiple users who can each send a message of limited length to the center. We study
problems of distribution learning and identity testing in this distributed inference setting and examine the role of shared randomness as a resource.
We propose a general purpose simulate-and-infer
strategy that uses only private-coin communication protocols and is sample-optimal for distribution learning. This general strategy turns out
to be sample-optimal even for distribution testing among private-coin protocols. Interestingly,
we propose a public-coin protocol that outperforms simulate-and-infer for distribution testing
and is, in fact, sample-optimal. Underlying our
public-coin protocol is a random hash that when
applied to the samples minimally contracts the
chi-squared distance of their distribution from the
uniform distribution.

1. Introduction
Sample-optimal statistical inference has taken center-stage
in modern data analytics where the number of samples can
be comparable to the dimensions of the data. In many emerging applications, especially those arising in sensor networks
and the Internet of Things (IoT), we are not only constrained
in the number of samples but are also given access to only
limited communication about the samples. We consider
such a distributed inference setting and seek sample-optimal
algorithms for inference under communication constraints.
In our setting, n players get independent samples from an
unknown k-ary distribution and each can send only ` bits
about their observed sample to a central referee using a
simultaneous message passing (SMP) protocol for communication. The referee uses communication from the players
to accomplish an inference task P.
*

Equal contribution 1 Cornell University 2 Stanford University
Indian Institute of Science Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Clément Canonne <ccanonne@cs.stanford.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Question 1.1. What is the minimum number of players n
required by an SMP protocol that successfully accomplishes
P, as a function of k, `, and the relevant parameters of P?
Our first contribution is a general simulate-and-infer strategy for inference under communication constraints where
we use the communication to simulate samples from the unknown distribution at the referee. To describe this strategy,
we introduce a natural notion of distributed simulation: n
players observing an independent sample each from an unknown k-ary distribution p can send `-bits each to a referee.
A distributed simulation protocol consists of an SMP protocol and a randomized decision map that enables the referee
to generate a sample from p using the communication from
the players. Clearly, when1 ` ≥ log k such a sample can
be obtained by getting the sample of any one player. But
what can be done in the communication-starved regime of
` < log k?
We first show that perfect simulation is impossible using
any finite number of players in the communication-starved
regime. But perfect simulation is not even required for our
application. When we allow a small probability of declaring
failure, namely admit Las Vegas simulation schemes, we
obtain a distributed
simulation scheme that requires an opti
mal O k/2` players to simulate k-ary distributions using
` bits of communication per player. Thus, our proposed
simulate-and-infer strategy can accomplish P with a blow
up in sample-complexity by an extra factor of O k/2` .
The specific inference tasks we consider are those of distribution learning, where we seek to estimate the unknown
k-ary distribution to an accuracy of ε in total variation distance, and identity testing where we seek to know if the
unknown distribution is q or ε-far from it in total variation
distance. For distribution learning, the simulate-and-infer
strategy matches the lower bound from (Han et al., 2018b)
and is therefore sample-optimal. For identity testing, the
plot thickens.
Recently, a lower bound for the sample complexity of identity testing using only private-coin protocols was established (Acharya et al., 2018b). The simulate-and-infer protocol is indeed a private-coin protocol and it attains this
lower bound. When public coins (shared randomness) are
available, (Acharya et al., 2018b) derived a different, more
relaxed lower bound. The performance of simulate-and1

We assume throughout that log k is an integer.

