Bayesian Action Decoder for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Jakob N. Foerster * 1 2 H. Francis Song * 3 Edward Hughes 3 Neil Burch 3 Iain Dunning 3 Shimon Whiteson 1
Matthew M. Botvinick 3 Michael Bowling 3

Abstract
When observing the actions of others, humans
make inferences about why they acted as they
did, and what this implies about the world; humans also use the fact that their actions will be
interpreted in this manner, allowing them to act informatively and thereby communicate efficiently
with others. Although learning algorithms have
recently achieved superhuman performance in a
number of two-player, zero-sum games, scalable
multi-agent reinforcement learning algorithms
that can discover effective strategies and conventions in complex, partially observable settings
have proven elusive. We present the Bayesian
action decoder (BAD), a new multi-agent learning method that uses an approximate Bayesian
update to obtain a public belief that conditions on
the actions taken by all agents in the environment.
BAD introduces a new Markov decision process,
the public belief MDP, in which the action space
consists of all deterministic partial policies, and
exploits the fact that an agent acting only on this
public belief state can still learn to use its private
information if the action space is augmented to
be over all partial policies mapping private information into environment actions. The Bayesian
update is closely related to the theory of mind
reasoning that humans carry out when observing others’ actions. We first validate BAD on a
proof-of-principle two-step matrix game, where
it outperforms policy gradient methods; we then
evaluate BAD on the challenging, cooperative
partial-information card game Hanabi, where, in
the two-player setting, it surpasses all previously
published learning and hand-coded approaches,
establishing a new state of the art.
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Oxford, UK 2 Work done at
DeepMind. JF has since moved to Facebook AI Research, Menlo
Park, USA. 3 DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to: Jakob
Foerster <jnf@fb.com>, Francis Song <songf@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
In multi-agent reinforcement learning (RL), agents must
learn to act in an environment that contains multiple learning agents, often under partial observability (Littman, 1994).
In recent years, a variety of deep RL methods have been
adapted to this setting (Foerster et al., 2016a; Lowe et al.,
2017; Perolat et al., 2017; Jaderberg et al., 2018). In the particular case of cooperative, partially observable multi-agent
settings, a key challenge is to discover communication protocols while simultaneously learning policies. Such protocols
are essential for many real-world tasks where agents must
interact and communicate seamlessly with other agents.
State-of-the-art deep RL methods for learning communication protocols mostly use backpropagation across a communication channel (Sukhbaatar et al., 2016; Foerster et al.,
2016a). This approach has two limitations. First, it can only
be applied to cheap-talk channels in which the communication action has no effect on the environment. Second, it
misses the conceptual connection between communication
and reasoning over the beliefs of others, which is known to
be important to how humans learn to communicate (Grice,
1975; Frank & Goodman, 2012).
A well-known domain that highlights these challenges is
Hanabi, a popular, fully cooperative card game of incomplete information that is difficult even for humans (Hanabi
won the Spiel des Jahres award in 2013). A distinguishing
feature of the game is that players see everyone’s hands but
their own and must find effective conventions for communication to succeed. Since there is no cheap-talk channel,
most recent methods for emergent communication are inapplicable, necessitating a novel approach. Because of these
unique features, Hanabi has recently been proposed as a
new benchmark for multi-agent learning (Bard et al., 2019).
The goal in Hanabi is to play a legal sequence of cards and,
to aid this process, players are allowed to give each other
hints indicating which cards are of a specific rank or colour.
These hints have two levels of semantics. The first level is
the surface-level content of the hint, which is grounded in
the properties of the cards that they describe. This level of
semantics is independent of any possible intent of the agent
in providing the hint, and would be equally meaningful if
provided by a random agent. For example, knowing which

