Learning Discrete and Continuous Factors of Data
via Alternating Disentanglement

Yeonwoo Jeong 1 Hyun Oh Song 1

Abstract
We address the problem of unsupervised disentanglement of discrete and continuous explanatory
factors of data. We first show a simple procedure for minimizing the total correlation of the
continuous latent variables without having to use
a discriminator network or perform importance
sampling, via cascading the information flow in
the β-vae framework. Furthermore, we propose a
method which avoids offloading the entire burden
of jointly modeling the continuous and discrete
factors to the variational encoder by employing a
separate discrete inference procedure.
This leads to an interesting alternating minimization problem which switches between finding the most likely discrete configuration given
the continuous factors and updating the variational encoder based on the computed discrete
factors. Experiments show that the proposed
method clearly disentangles discrete factors and
significantly outperforms current disentanglement
methods based on the disentanglement score
and inference network classification score. The
source code is available at https://github.com/snumllab/DisentanglementICML19.

1. Introduction
Learning to disentangle the underlying explanatory factors
of data without supervision is a crucial task for representation learning in AI-related tasks such as speech, object recognition, natural language processing, and transfer learning
(Bengio et al., 2013). While establishing a clear quantifiable
objective is difficult, in a successfully disentangled representation, a single latent unit of the representation should
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul
National University, Seoul, Korea. Correspondence to: Hyun Oh
Song <hyunoh@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

correspond to a change in a single generative factor of the
data while being relatively invariant to others.
To this end, a line of research on unsupervised disentanglement has been pursued under the Variational Autoencoder
framework (Higgins et al., 2017; Kim & Mnih, 2018; Chen
et al., 2018; Gao et al., 2018). The common theme among
the recently proposed methods is to penalize the total correlation among the latent variables so that the model is
encouraged to learn statistically independent factors of data.
Although penalizing the total correlation is important we
argue that this alone is not sufficient for learning disentangled representations. Most recent methods focus on learning
only the continuous factors of variation and jointly modeling both the continuous and discrete factors of variation is
relatively much less studied. When modeling complex and
high-dimensional data such as raw images, it becomes difficult to disentangle the discrete factors of data (i.e. number
of light sources, categorical shape of present objects) from
continuous factors (i.e. translation, rotation, color) under
these methods. Makhzani et al. (2015) have demonstrated
that providing the true discrete factors of data to the autoencoder via supervision drastically improves the quality
of the learned continuous factors compared to the purely
unsupervised case. We hypothesize that lumping both the
continuous and discrete factors into a single latent vector
and optimizing for the joint variational posterior severely deteriorates the disentanglement performance as this imposes
too much modeling burden to the posterior.
In this paper, we first propose a simple procedure for penalizing the total correlation which does not require any extra
discriminator network or having to run expensive importance sampling in the β-VAE framework. Then, we propose
an alternating disentanglement method where it alternates
between finding the most likely configuration of the discrete factors given the continuous factors and updating the
inference parameters given the discrete configuration. The
empirical results show that decoupling the disentanglement
process for continuous and discrete factors via the proposed
alternating method leads to strong disentanglement performance both qualitatively and quantitatively.
Our quantitative results on 1) dSprites (Matthey et al., 2017)

