Dynamic Weights in Multi-Objective Deep Reinforcement Learning

Axel Abels 1 2 Diederik M. Roijers 3 Tom Lenaerts 1 2 Ann Nowé 2 Denis Steckelmacher 2

Abstract
Many real world decision problems are characterized by multiple conflicting objectives which
must be balanced based on their relative importance. In the dynamic weights setting the relative importance changes over time and specialized algorithms that deal with such change, such
as the tabular Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithm by Natarajan & Tadepalli (2005), are required. However, this earlier work is not feasible
for RL settings that necessitate the use of function approximators. We generalize across weight
changes and high-dimensional inputs by proposing a multi-objective Q-network whose outputs
are conditioned on the relative importance of objectives, and introduce Diverse Experience Replay
(DER) to counter the inherent non-stationarity
of the dynamic weights setting. We perform an
extensive experimental evaluation and compare
our methods to adapted algorithms from Deep
Multi-Task/Multi-Objective RL and show that
our proposed network in combination with DER
dominates these adapted algorithms across weight
change scenarios and problem domains.

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 1998), an
agent learns to behave in an unknown environment based
on the rewards it receives. In single objective RL these rewards are scalar. However, most real-life problems are more
naturally expressed with multiple objectives. For example,
autonomous drivers need to minimize travel time and fuel
consumption, while maximizing safety (Xiong et al., 2016).
When user utility in a multi-objective problem is defined
1

Machine Learning Group, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium 2 Artificial Intelligence Lab, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium 3 Computational Intelligence, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Correspondence
to: Axel Abels <aabels@ulb.ac.be>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

as a linear scalarization with weights per objective that are
known in advance and fixed throughout learning and execution, the problem can be solved via single-objective RL.
However, in many cases the weights can not be determined
in advance (Roijers & Whiteson, 2017) or linear scalarization does not apply because the user utility cannot be
expressed with a linear function (Moffaert & Nowé, 2014).
In this paper, we focus on the setting where the weights
are linear, but not fixed. Specifically, the parameters of the
scalarization function change over time. For example, if
fuel costs increase, a shorter travel time could no longer be
worth the increased fuel consumption. This is called the
dynamic weights setting (Natarajan & Tadepalli, 2005).
Many RL problems necessitate learning from raw input, e.g.,
images captured by cameras mounted on a car. Recently,
Deep RL (Mnih et al., 2013) has enabled RL to be applied to
problems where the input consists of images. However, most
Deep RL research focuses on single-objective problems.
In this paper, we study the possibilities of Deep RL in the
dynamic weights setting and show how transfer learning
techniques can be leveraged to increase the learning speed
by exploiting information from past policies. For tabular RL,
these principles have previously been applied to, e.g., Buridan’s ass problem (Natarajan & Tadepalli, 2005). However,
because of its small and discrete state space this problem is
not representative of complex real-world problems which
often have vast or even continuous state spaces. In such
complex problems, tabular RL is not feasible.
To tackle high-dimensional problems, we show that algorithms from related settings can be adapted to the dynamic
weights settings but are inadequate. We therefore propose
the conditioned network (CN), in which a Q-Network is
augmented to output weight-dependent multi-objective Qvalue-vectors. To efficiently train this network, we propose
an update rule specific to the dynamic weights setting. We
further propose Diverse Experience Replay (DER), to improve sample-efficiency and reduce replay buffer bias.
To benchmark the quality of our algorithms, we propose
the first non-trivial high-dimensional multi-objective benchmark problem: Minecart. From raw visual input, an agent in
Minecart must learn to adapt to the day’s valuation of different resources to efficiently mine them while minimizing fuel
consumption. We test the performance of our algorithms on

