SGD without Replacement: Sharper Rates for General Smooth Convex
Functions
Dheeraj Nagaraj 1 Praneeth Netrapalli 2 Prateek Jain 2

Abstract
We study stochastic gradient descent without replacement (SGDo) for smooth convex functions.
SGDo is widely observed to converge faster than
true SGD where each sample is drawn independently with replacement (Bottou, 2009) and hence,
is more popular in practice. But it’s convergence
properties are not well understood as sampling
without replacement leads to coupling between
iterates and gradients. By using method of exchangeable pairs to bound Wasserstein distance,
we provide the first non-asymptotic results for
SGDo when applied to general smooth, stronglyconvex functions. In particular, we show that
SGDo converges at a rate of O(1/K 2 ) while
SGD is known to converge at O(1/K) rate, where
K denotes the number of passes over data and is
required to be large enough. Existing results for
SGDo in this setting require additional Hessian
Lipschitz assumption (Gürbüzbalaban et al., 2015;
HaoChen & Sra, 2018). For small K, we show
SGDo can achieve same convergence rate as SGD
for general smooth strongly-convex functions. Existing results in this setting require K = 1 and
hold only for generalized linear models (Shamir,
2016). In addition, by careful analysis of the coupling, for both large and small K, we obtain better dependence on problem dependent parameters
like condition number.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we study the standard finite sum optimization problem that arises in most machine
Pn learning based
optimization problems: F (x) := n1 i=1 f (x; i), where
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA 2 Microsoft Research, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India. Correspondence to: Dheeraj Nagaraj <dheeraj@mit.edu>,
Praneeth Netrapalli <praneeth@microsoft.com>, Prateek Jain
<prajain@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

f (x; i) : Rd → R is the i-th component function. For example, in standard ERM and deep learning training f (x; i)
denotes the loss function w.r.t. the i-th data point. Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD), originally proposed by Robbins
& Monro (1985), has emerged as one of the most popular
techniques to solve this problem.
At t-th step, SGD updates the iterate by xt+1 = xt −
η∇f (xt ; it ) where ∇f (xt ; it ) is the gradient of f (xt ; it )
and it is selected uniformly at random with replacement
yielding Eit [∇f (xt ; it )] = ∇F (xt ). SGD has been extensively studied in literature and a vast number of results are
known in many different settings, most prominent being
that of convex optimization (Benaı̈m, 1999; Borkar, 2009;
Kushner & Yin, 2003; Bubeck, 2015; Bottou et al., 2018;
Schmidt & Roux, 2013; Gower et al., 2019; Nguyen et al.,
2018; Vaswani et al., 2018). While SGD holds the rare
distinction of being both theoretically well understood and
practically widely used, there are still significant differences
between the versions of SGD that are studied in theory vs
those used in practice. Resolving this discrepancy is an
important open question. One of the major differences is
that SGD is widely used in practice with out replacement
(SGDo). SGDo uses the standard SGD update but in each
epoch/pass over data, every i ∈ [n] is sampled exactly once
but in a uniformly random position i.e., without replacement.
This implies, that Eit [∇f (xt ; it )] = ∇F (xt ) does not hold
anymore, making the analysis of SGDo significantly more
challenging.
Studies however, have shown empirically that SGDo converges significantly faster than SGD (Bottou, 2009).
Gürbüzbalaban et al. (2015) provided first formal guarantee for this observation and proved that the suboptimal
ity of SGDo after K epochs behaves as O 1/K 2 , where
as the suboptimality of SGD is known to be O (1/nK)
(and this bound is tight). Under the same assumptions, (HaoChen & Sra, 2018) improve upon the result
of (Gürbüzbalaban et al., 2015) and show a suboptimality
bound of O 1/n2 K 2 + 1/K 3 where n is the number of
samples and K is the number of epochs. However, both the
above given guarantees require Hessian Lipschitz, gradient
Lipschitz (also known as smoothness) and strong convexity
assumptions on F . In contrast, SGD’s rate of O (1/nK)
requires only strong convexity. It is also known that this

