End-to-End Probabilistic Inference for Nonstationary Audio Analysis

William J. Wilkinson 1 2 Michael Riis Andersen 2 3 Joshua D. Reiss 1 Dan Stowell 1 Arno Solin 2

1. Introduction
Uncovering the high-resolution spectral and temporal information present in a natural auditory scene is a challenging
task. Loosely following the approach taken by the human
auditory system, we decompose a one-dimensional audio
signal into its high-dimensional set of time-varying spectral
components, and then utilise the statistical features of these
components to perform some auditory task such as classification or source separation. The highly ill-posed nature
of this decomposition necessitates the use of prior information about the behaviour of the spectral components, which
strongly encourages a probabilistic modelling perspective.
1

Centre for Digital Music, Queen Mary University of London,
United Kingdom 2 Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland 3 Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science, Technical University of Denmark, Denmark. Correspondence to: William J. Wilkinson <william.wilkinson@aalto.fi>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

×

Fre

q.

(Hz

)

GP carrier
GP
= subbands
zd (t) × spectrogram

A typical audio signal processing pipeline includes multiple disjoint analysis stages, including calculation of a time-frequency representation
followed by spectrogram-based feature analysis.
We show how time-frequency analysis and nonnegative matrix factorisation can be jointly formulated as a spectral mixture Gaussian process
model with nonstationary priors over the amplitude variance parameters. Further, we formulate
this nonlinear model’s state space representation,
making it amenable to infinite-horizon Gaussian
process regression with approximate inference via
expectation propagation, which scales linearly in
the number of time steps and quadratically in the
state dimensionality. By doing so, we are able to
process audio signals with hundreds of thousands
of data points. We demonstrate, on various tasks
with empirical data, how this inference scheme
outperforms more standard techniques that rely
on extended Kalman filtering.

GP spectrogram = NMF weights (W) × positive modulator GPs (gn (t))

Audio
signal yk

Abstract

Time (sampled at 16 kHz)

Figure 1. Nonstationary modelling of audio data: a recording of
female speech (bottom). We decompose the signal into Gaussian
process carrier waverforms (blue block) multiplied by a spectrogram (red block). The spectrogram is learned from data as a
nonnegative weight matrix times positive modulators (top).

A typical (non-probabilistic) way to perform feature analysis on an audio signal is to apply nonnegative matrix factorisation (NMF) to the amplitude components of a timefrequency (TF) representation – the spectrogram. As outlined in (Turner & Sahani, 2014), this approach is limited
since it discards phase information calculated during the TF
stage, as well as dependencies between TF coefficients. It
also fails to capture and share any uncertainty information
between the analysis stages.
Moreover, the map that takes the waveform to the space
of TF coefficients is not a bijection. This means that any
function operating on the signal in the TF domain, e.g. noise
removal, might push the signal outside the manifold of
realisable waveforms (Turner, 2010). Hence, the modified
TF representation must be projected back to the manifold
of valid TF representations before the waveform can be resynthesized (e.g., Griffin & Lim, 1984). This projection
might distort the signal and introduce undesirable artefacts.

