Graph Neural Network for Music Score Data
and Modeling Expressive Piano Performance

Dasaem Jeong 1 Taegyun Kwon 1 Yoojin Kim 1 Juhan Nam 1

Abstract
Music score is often handled as one-dimensional
sequential data. Unlike words in a text document,
notes in music score can be played simultaneously
by the polyphonic nature and each of them has
its own duration. In this paper, we represent the
unique form of musical score using graph neural network and apply it for rendering expressive
piano performance from the music score. Specifically, we design the model using note-level gated
graph neural network and measure-level hierarchical attention network with bidirectional long shortterm memory with an iterative feedback method.
In addition, to model different styles of performance for a given input score, we employ a variational auto-encoder. The result of the listening test
shows that our proposed model generated more
human-like performances compared to a baseline
model and a hierarchical attention network model
that handles music score as a word-like sequence.

1. Introduction
“To be or not to be, that is the question.” Imagine a professional actor speaking this sentence. Although the text itself
he or she speaks is not changed, every detail such as tempo,
accent, nuance, pause, and rhythm will be different from the
speech of the same text by non-trained people. One needs a
thorough understanding of the text and context, and skills
to evoke listeners’ emotion. The detailed difference makes
some actor “great” or “special”.
A similar difference is found in the performance of music
as well. It is the role of instrument performers to decide
the exact tempo and its subtle change, and dynamics and
articulation of every note, which are notated in the score only
1
Graduate School of Culture Technology, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Dajeon, South Korea.
Correspondence to: Dasaem Jeong <jdasam@kaist.ac.kr>, Juhan
Nam <juhannam@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

in general and qualitative directions such as Allegro, or poco
crescendo. Therefore, music performance can be regarded
as an instance of a performer’s interpretation of the given
music score. The artistic quality of interpretation is often
measured and ranked quantitatively in music competitions,
and some pianists gain international and historical fame for
their interpretation. Revealing the secret of great pianists
was one of the long-cherished goals in music performance
analysis (Widmer et al., 2003).
Modeling expressive performance with computational methods is a task that challenges the imitation of the complex and
artistic activity of expert human musicians. Starting from
the rule-based approach in early period (Sundberg et al.,
1983), many researchers have tackled this task with various
methods, such as Gaussian Process (Teramura et al., 2008),
switching Kalman Filter(Gu & Raphael, 2012), Bayesian
networks (Flossmann et al., 2013), and conditional random fields (Kim et al., 2013). Some of recent research
employed recurrent neural network (RNN) (Lauly, 2010;
Chacón & Grachten, 2016; Malik & Ek, 2017; Jeong et al.,
2018; Maezawa, 2018). However, research using deep neural networks still lacks in this task despite of the potential
capability.
Recently, generative models using deep neural network
achieved remarkable results in visual and audio domains
such as image synthesis (Van den Oord et al., 2016; Wang
et al., 2018b), video generation (Tulyakov et al., 2018), and
speech synthesis (Van Den Oord et al., 2016; Wang et al.,
2017). There have been also notable achievements in music generation tasks such as automatic music composition
(Huang et al., 2019), and automatic music transcription and
sound synthesis (Hawthorne et al., 2019).
One of the main issues in applying neural networks to music
data, particularly, music score data is defining the input
structure. Music score data is often handled as 1D sequential
data by ordering note events with its time position and pitch
(Simon & Oore, 2017; Oore et al., 2018; Jeong et al., 2018).
But this is dissimilar to a sequence of word or audio samples
because of distinct characteristics of musical notes. For
example, two notes can be a sequence in one voice but
also they can be in polyphony. In some cases, a rest can
be inserted between the two, or the preceding note can be

