Statistical Foundations of Virtual Democracy

Anson Kahng 1 Min Kyung Lee 1 Ritesh Noothigattu 1 Ariel D. Procaccia 1 Alexandros Psomas 1

Abstract
Virtual democracy is an approach to automating
decisions, by learning models of the preferences
of individual people, and, at runtime, aggregating the predicted preferences of those people on
the dilemma at hand. One of the key questions
is which aggregation method — or voting rule —
to use; we offer a novel statistical viewpoint that
provides guidance. Specifically, we seek voting
rules that are robust to prediction errors, in that
their output on people’s true preferences is likely
to coincide with their output on noisy estimates
thereof. We prove that the classic Borda count
rule is robust in this sense, whereas any voting
rule belonging to the wide family of pairwisemajority consistent rules is not. Our empirical
results further support, and more precisely measure, the robustness of Borda count.

1. Introduction
One of the most basic ideas underlying democracy is that
complicated decisions can be made by asking a group of people to vote on the alternatives at hand. As a decision-making
framework, this paradigm is versatile, because people can
express a sensible opinion about a wide range of issues.
One of its seemingly inherent shortcomings, though, is that
voters must take the time to cast a vote — hopefully an
informed one — every time a new dilemma arises.
But what if we could predict the preferences of voters —
instead of explicitly asking them each time — and then aggregate those predicted preferences to arrive at a decision?
This is exactly the idea behind the work of Noothigattu et al.
(2018), who are motivated by the challenge of automating
ethical decisions. Specifically, their approach consists of
three1 steps: first, collect preferences from voters on exam1
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA. Correspondence to: Anson Kahng
<akahng@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).
1
Technically four, see Section 1.2.

ple dilemmas; second, learn models of their preferences,
which generalize to any (previously unseen) dilemma; and
third, at runtime, use those models to predict the voters’
preferences on the current dilemma, and aggregate the predicted preferences to reach a decision. The idea is that we
would ideally like to consult the voters on each decision,
but in order to automate those decisions we instead use the
models that we have learned as a proxy for the flesh and
blood voters. In other words, the models serve as virtual
voters, which is why we refer to this paradigm as virtual
democracy.
Since 2017, we have been building on this approach in a
collaboration with a Pittsburgh-based non-profit, 412 Food
Rescue, that provides on-demand food donation distribution
services. The goal is to design and deploy an algorithm
that would automatically make the decisions they most frequently face: given an incoming food donation, which recipient organization (such as a housing authority or food
pantry) should receive it? The voters in our implementation
are stakeholders: donors, recipients, volunteers (who pick
up the food from the donor and deliver it to the recipient),
and employees. We have collected roughly 100 pairwise
comparisons from each voter, where in each comparison,
the voter is provided information about the type of donation,
as well as seven relevant features of the two alternatives
that are being compared, e.g., the distance between donor
and recipient, and when the recipient last received a donation. Using this data, we have learned a model of the
preferences of each voter, which allows us to predict the
voter’s preference ranking over hundreds of recipients. And
given a predicted ranking for each voter, we map them into
a ranking over the alternatives by applying a voting rule.
While this implementation sounds simple enough, the choice
of voting rule can have a major impact on the efficacy of
the system. In fact, the question of which voting rule to
employ is one of the central questions in computational social choice (Brandt et al., 2016), and in social choice theory
more broadly. A long tradition of impossibility results establishes that there are no perfect voting rules (Arrow, 1951),
so the answer, such as it is, is often context-dependent.
The central premise of this paper is that, in the context of
virtual democracy, certain statistical considerations should
guide the choice of voting rule. Indeed, the voting rule

