N ATTACK: Learning the Distributions of Adversarial Examples for an
Improved Black-Box Attack on Deep Neural Networks

Yandong Li * 1 Lijun Li * 1 Liqiang Wang 1 Tong Zhang 2 Boqing Gong 3

Abstract
Powerful adversarial attack methods are vital for
understanding how to construct robust deep neural
networks (DNNs) and thoroughly testing defense
techniques. In this paper, we propose a black-box
adversarial attack algorithm that can defeat both
vanilla DNNs and those generated by various defense techniques developed recently. Instead of
searching for an “optimal” adversarial example
for a benign input to a targeted DNN, our algorithm finds a probability density distribution over
a small region centered around the input, such that
a sample drawn from this distribution is likely an
adversarial example, without the need of accessing the DNN’s internal layers or weights. Our
approach is universal as it can successfully attack
different neural networks by a single algorithm.
It is also strong; according to the testing against
2 vanilla DNNs and 13 defended ones, it outperforms state-of-the-art black-box or white-box
attack methods for most test cases. Additionally,
our results reveal that adversarial training remains
one of the best defense techniques, and the adversarial examples are not as transferable across
defended DNNs as them across vanilla DNNs.

1. Introduction
This paper is concerned with the robustness of deep neural
networks (DNNs). We aim at providing a strong adversarial
attack method that can universally defeat a variety of DNNs
and associated defense techniques. Our experiments mainly
focus on attacking the recently developed defense methods,
following (Athalye et al., 2018). Unlike their work, however,
we do not need to tailor our algorithm to various forms for
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Central Florida 2 Hong Kong
University of Science and Technology 3 Google. Correspondence
to: Yandong Li <lyndon.leeseu@outlook.com>, Boqing Gong
<BoqingGo@outlook.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

tackling different defenses. Hence, it may generalize better
to new defense methods in the future. Progress on powerful
adversarial attack algorithms will significantly facilitate the
research toward more robust DNNs that are deployed in
uncertain or even adversarial environments.
Szegedy et al. (2013) found that DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial examples whose changes from the benign ones are
imperceptible and yet can mislead DNNs to make wrong predictions. A rich line of work furthering their finding reveals
more worrisome results. Notably, adversarial examples are
transferable, meaning that one can design adversarial examples for one DNN and then use them to fail others (Papernot
et al., 2016a; Szegedy et al., 2013; Tramèr et al., 2017b).
Moreover, adversarial perturbation could be universal in the
sense that a single perturbation pattern may convert many
images to adversarial ones (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2017).
The adversarial examples raise a serious security issue as
DNNs become increasingly popular (Silver et al., 2016;
Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Hinton et al., 2012; Li et al., 2018;
Gan et al., 2017). Unfortunately, the cause of the adversarial examples remains unclear. Goodfellow et al. (2014b)
conjectured that DNNs behave linearly in the high dimensional input space, amplifying small perturbations when
their signs follow the DNNs’ intrinsic linear weights. Fawzi
et al. (2018) experimentally studied the topology and geometry of adversarial examples and Xu et al. (2019) provide
the image-level interpretability of adversarial examples. Ma
et al. (2018) characterized the subspace of adversarial examples. Nonetheless, defense methods (Papernot et al.,
2015; Tramèr et al., 2017a; Rozsa et al., 2016; Madry et al.,
2018) motivated by them were broken in a short amount of
time (He et al., 2017; Athalye et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2017;
Sharma & Chen, 2017), indicating that better defense techniques are yet to be developed, and there may be unknown
alternative factors that play a role in the DNNs’ sensitivity.
Powerful adversarial attack methods are key to better understanding of the adversarial examples and for thorough
testing of defense techniques.
In this paper, we propose a black-box adversarial attack
algorithm that can generate adversarial examples to defeat
both vanilla DNNs and those recently defended by various

