Beating Stochastic and Adversarial Semi-bandits
Optimally and Simultaneously
Julian Zimmert 1 Haipeng Luo 2 Chen-Yu Wei 2

Abstract
We develop the ﬁrst general semi-bandit algorithm that simultaneously achieves O(log
√T ) regret for stochastic environments and O( T ) regret for adversarial environments without prior
knowledge of the regime or the number of rounds
T . The leading problem-dependent constants of
our bounds are not only optimal in a certain worstcase sense studied previously, but also optimal for
two concrete instances of semi-bandit problems.
Our algorithm and analysis extend the recent work
of Zimmert & Seldin (2019) for the special case
of multi-armed bandits, but importantly requires
a novel hybrid regularizer designed speciﬁcally
for semi-bandit. Experimental results on synthetic
data show that our algorithm indeed performs well
over different environments. Finally, we provide
a preliminary extension of our results to the full
bandit feedback.

1. Introduction
The multi-armed bandit is one of the most fundamental online learning problems with partial information feedback.
In this problem a learner repeatedly selects one of d arms
and observes its loss generated by the environment, with the
goal of minimizing her regret, the difference between her
total loss and the loss of the best ﬁxed arm in hindsight. It is
well known that in the stochastic environment where each
arm’s loss is drawn independently from a ﬁxed distribution,
the minimax optimal regret is of order O(log T ) where T is
the number of rounds (dependence on all other parameters
is omitted) (Lai & Robbins, 1985), while in the adversarial
environment where each arm’s loss can be completely arbi1

Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark 2 Department of Computer Science,
University of Southern California, United States. Correspondence to: Julian Zimmert <zimmert@di.ku.dk>, Haipeng Luo
<haipengl@usc.edu>, Chen-Yu Wei <chenyu.wei@usc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

√
trary, the minimax optimal regret is of order O( T ) (Auer
et al., 2002).
Several recent works (Bubeck & Slivkins, 2012; Seldin &
Slivkins, 2014; Auer & Chiang, 2016; Seldin & Lugosi,
2017; Wei & Luo, 2018; Zimmert & Seldin, 2019) develop
“best-of-both-worlds” results for multi-armed bandits and
propose adaptive algorithms that achieve O(log T ) regret
in stochastic environments while√simultaneously ensuring
worst-case robustness, that is, O( T ) regret even for adversarial environments. Importantly, this is achieved without
any prior knowledge of the nature of the environment.
In this work, we extend such best-of-both-worlds results to
the combinatorial bandit problem, a generalization of multiarmed bandits, where the learner has to pick a subset of arms
(called a combinatorial action) at each time (see Section 2
for formal deﬁnitions). In particular, we consider the semibandit feedback, meaning that the learner observes the loss
of each arm in the selected subset. Our main contributions
include the following:
1. We propose a simple and general semi-bandit algorithm based on the Follow-the-Regularized-Leader
(F TRL) framework with a novel regularizer (Section 2.1).
2. For any combinatorial action set, we prove that our
algorithm achieves O(Csto log
√ T ) regret for stochastic environments and O(Cadv T ) regret for adversarial environments, where Csto and Cadv are problemdependent factors (that do not depend on T ) and are
optimal in some worst-case sense. This is the ﬁrst bestof-both-worlds result for combinatorial bandit to the
best of our knowledge (Section 3.1).
3. For two common special cases of combinatorial action
sets: the set of all subsets of arms and the set of all
subsets with a ﬁxed size m (so called m-set), we further derive reﬁned bounds for the problem-dependent
constants Csto and Cadv , which are optimal for each
of these special cases. As a side result, our bounds
imply that for the m-set with m > d/2, semi-bandit
feedback is no harder than full-information feedback
in the adversarial case (Sections 3.2 and 3.3).

