Learning to Clear the Market

Weiran Shen 1 Sébastien Lahaie 2 Renato Paes Leme 2

Abstract
The problem of market clearing is to set a price for
an item such that quantity demanded equals quantity supplied. In this work, we cast the problem of
predicting clearing prices into a learning framework and use the resulting models to perform revenue optimization in auctions and markets with
contextual information. The economic intuition
behind market clearing allows us to obtain finegrained control over the aggressiveness of the
resulting pricing policy, grounded in theory. To
evaluate our approach, we fit a model of clearing
prices over a massive dataset of bids in display ad
auctions from a major ad exchange. The learned
prices outperform other modeling techniques in
the literature in terms of revenue and efficiency
trade-offs. Because of the convex nature of the
clearing loss function, the convergence rate of our
method is as fast as linear regression.

1. Introduction
A key difficulty in designing machine learning systems for
revenue optimization in auctions and markets is the discontinuous nature of the problem. Consider the basic problem
of setting a reserve price in a single-item auction (e.g., for
online advertising): revenue steadily increases with price
up to the point where all buyers drop out, at which point
it suddenly drops to zero. The discontinuity may average
away over a large market, but one is typically left with a
highly non-convex objective.
We are interested in obtaining pricing policies for revenue
optimization in a data-rich (i.e., contextual) environment,
where each product is associated with a set of features. For
example, in online display advertising, a product is an ad
impression (an ad placement viewed by the user) which is
annotated with features like geo-information, device type,
1

Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 Google Research, New
York, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Weiran Shen <emersonswr@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

cookies, etc. There are two main approaches to reserve
pricing in this domain: one is to divide the feature space into
well defined clusters and apply a traditional (non-contextual)
revenue optimization algorithm in each cluster (Myerson,
1981; Dhangwatnotai et al., 2015; Roughgarden & Wang,
2016; Paes Leme et al., 2016). This is effectively a semiparametric approach with the drawback that an overly fine
clustering leads to data sparsity and inability to learn across
clusters. An overly coarse clustering, on the other hand,
does not fully take advantage of the rich features available.
To overcome these difficulties, a natural alternative is to fit
a parametric pricing policy by optimizing a loss function.
The first instinct is to use revenue itself as a loss function,
but this loss is notoriously difficult to optimize because it
is discontinuous, non-convex, and has zero gradient over
much of its domain—so one must look to surrogates. Medina & Mohri (2014) propose a continuous surrogate loss
for revenue whose gradient information is rich enough to
optimize for prices. The loss is nevertheless non-convex
so optimizing it relies on techniques from constrained DCprogramming, which have provable convergence but limited
scalability in high-dimensional contexts.
Main contribution. The main innovation in this paper is to
address the revenue optimization problem by instead looking to the closely related problem of market clearing: how
to set prices so that demand equals supply. The loss function
for market clearing exhibits several nice properties from a
learning perspective, notably convexity. The market clearing objective dates back to the economic theory of market
equilibrium (Arrow & Debreu, 1954), and more recently
arises in the literature on iterative auctions (Bikhchandani
& Mamer, 1997; Gul & Stacchetti, 1999; Ausubel, 2006).
To our knowledge, our work is the first to use it as a loss
function in a machine learning context.
The economic insight behind the market-clearing loss function allows us to adapt its shape to control how conservative
or aggressive the resulting prices are in extracting revenue.
To increase price levels, we can artificially increase demand
or limit supply, which connects revenue optimization theorems from computational economics (Bulow & Klemperer,
1996; Roughgarden et al., 2012) to regularization techniques
under our loss function.
We begin by casting the problem of market clearing as a

