Learning to Infer Program Sketches

Maxwell Nye 1 2 Luke Hewitt 1 2 3 Joshua Tenenbaum 1 2 4 Armando Solar-Lezama 2

Abstract
Our goal is to build systems which write code
automatically from the kinds of specifications humans can most easily provide, such as examples
and natural language instruction. The key idea of
this work is that a flexible combination of pattern
recognition and explicit reasoning can be used
to solve these complex programming problems.
We propose a method for dynamically integrating
these types of information. Our novel intermediate representation and training algorithm allow a
program synthesis system to learn, without direct
supervision, when to rely on pattern recognition
and when to perform symbolic search. Our model
matches the memorization and generalization performance of neural synthesis and symbolic search,
respectively, and achieves state-of-the-art performance on a dataset of simple English descriptionto-code programming problems.

1. Introduction
An open challenge in AI is to automatically write code from
the kinds of specifications humans can easily provide, such
as examples or natural language instruction. Such a system
must determine both what the task is and how to write the
correct code. Consider writing a simple function which
maps inputs to outputs:
[2, 3, 4, 5, 6] → [2, 4, 6]
[5, 8, 3, 2, 2, 1, 12] → [8, 2, 2, 12]
A novice programmer would not recognize from experience
any of the program, and would have to reason about the entire program structure from first principles. This reasoning
would be done by considering the definitions and syntax of
the primitives in the programming language, and finding a
1

MIT Brain and Cognitive Sciences 2 MIT CSAIL 3 MIT-IBM
AI Lab 4 Center for Brains, Minds and Machines (CBMM). Correspondence to: Maxwell Nye <mnye@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

way to combine these language constructs to construct an
expression with the desired behavior.
A moderately experienced programmer might immediately
recognize, from learned experience, that because the output
list is always a subset of the input list, a filter function
is appropriate:
filter(input, <HOLE>)
where <HOLE> is a lambda function which filters elements
in the list. The programmer would then have to reason about
the correct code for <HOLE>.
Finally, a programmer very familiar with this domain might
immediately recognize both the need for a filter function, as well as the correct semantics for the lambda function,
allowing the entire program to be written in one shot:
filter(input, lambda x:

x%2==0)

Depending on the familiarity of the domain and the complexity of the problem, humans use a flexible combination
of recognition of learned patterns and explicit reasoning to
solve programming problems (Lake et al., 2017). Familiar
patterns are used, when they exist, and for unfamiliar code
elements, explicit reasoning is employed.
This flexibility is not unique to input-output examples. For
example, a natural language specification could be used to
further specify the desired program, i.e., “Find the even
values in a list.” In this case, the process of writing code
is analogous. For example, a programmer might learn that
“find X in a list” means filter, and “even” corresponds
to the code x%2==0. For a less familiar task, such as “Find
values in the list which are powers of two,” a programmer
might recognize the need for filter, but would need to
reason about how to write a lambda function which classifies
powers of two.
We propose a system which mimics the human ability to
dynamically incorporate pattern recognition and reasoning
to solve programming problems from examples or natural
language specification. We show that without direct supervision, our model learns to find good intermediates between
pattern recognition and symbolic reasoning components,
and outperforms existing models on several programming
tasks.

