Wasserstein Adversarial Examples via Projected Sinkhorn Iterations

Eric Wong 1 Frank R. Schmidt 2 J. Zico Kolter 3 4

Abstract
A rapidly growing area of work has studied the existence of adversarial examples, datapoints which
have been perturbed to fool a classifier, but the
vast majority of these works have focused primarily on threat models defined by `p norm-bounded
perturbations. In this paper, we propose a new
threat model for adversarial attacks based on the
Wasserstein distance in image space. In the image classification setting, such distances measure
the cost of moving pixel mass, which can naturally represent “standard” image manipulations
such as scaling, rotation, translation, and distortion (and can potentially be applied to other settings as well). To generate Wasserstein adversarial examples, we develop a procedure for approximate projection onto the Wasserstein ball, based
upon a modified version of the Sinkhorn iteration.
The resulting algorithm can successfully attack
image classification models, bringing traditional
CIFAR10 models down to 3% accuracy within a
Wasserstein ball with radius 0.1 (i.e., moving 10%
of the image mass 1 pixel), and we demonstrate
that PGD-based adversarial training can improve
this adversarial accuracy to 76%. In total, this
work opens up a new direction of study in adversarial robustness, more formally considering
convex metrics that accurately capture the invariances that we typically believe should exist in
classifiers, and code for all experiments in the
paper is available at https://github.com/
locuslab/projected sinkhorn.

1
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA 2 Bosch Center for Artificial
Intelligence, Renningen, Germany 3 Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA
4
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
USA. Correspondence to: Eric Wong <ericwong@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

+ ∆W =
+ ∆∞ =
Figure 1. A minimal example exemplifying the difference between
Wasserstein perturbations and `∞ perturbations on an image with
six pixels. The top example utilizes a perturbation ∆W to shift
the image one pixel to the right, which is small with respect to
2-Wasserstein distance since each pixel moved a minimal amount
(k∆W kW2 = 3), but large with respect to `∞ distance since each
pixel changed a maximal amount (k∆W k∞ = 1). In contrast,
the bottom example utilizes a perturbation ∆∞ which changes all
pixels to be grayer by 0.3. This is small with respect to `∞ distance,
since each pixel changes by a small amount (k∆∞ k∞ = 0.3), but
large with respect to 2-Wasserstein distance, since the mass on
each pixel on the left had to move 3 pixels over at a cost of 32 per
unit of mass (k∆∞ kW = 8.1).

1. Introduction
A substantial effort in machine learning research has gone towards studying adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2014),
commonly described as datapoints that are indistinguishable
from “normal” examples, but are specifically perturbed to
be misclassified by machine learning systems. This notion
of indistinguishability, later described as the threat model
for attackers, was originally taken to be `∞ bounded perturbations, which model a small amount of noise injected to
each pixel (Goodfellow et al., 2015). Since then, subsequent
work on understanding, attacking, and defending against
adversarial examples has largely focused on this `∞ threat
model and its corresponding `p generalization. While the
`p threat model is convenient, it is by no means a comprehensive description of all possible adversarial perturbations.
Other work (Engstrom et al., 2017) has looked at perturbations such as rotations and translations, but beyond these
specific transforms, there has been little work considering
broad, well-defined classes of attacks beyond the `p ball.
In this paper, we propose a new type of adversarial perturbation that encodes a general class of attacks that is fundamentally different from the `p ball. Specifically, we propose
an attack model where the perturbed examples are bounded
in Wasserstein distance in image space1 from the original
1
This is in contrast to work that considers Wasserstein distances
in the training distribution (Sinha et al., 2018).

