Amortized Monte Carlo Integration

Adam Goliński * 1 2 Frank Wood 3 Tom Rainforth * 1

Abstract
Current approaches to amortizing Bayesian inference focus solely on approximating the posterior distribution. Typically, this approximation is, in turn, used to calculate expectations for
one or more target functions—a computational
pipeline which is inefficient when the target function(s) are known upfront. In this paper, we address this inefficiency by introducing AMCI, a
method for amortizing Monte Carlo integration
directly. AMCI operates similarly to amortized
inference but produces three distinct amortized
proposals, each tailored to a different component
of the overall expectation calculation. At runtime, samples are produced separately from each
amortized proposal, before being combined to an
overall estimate of the expectation. We show that
while existing approaches are fundamentally limited in the level of accuracy they can achieve,
AMCI can theoretically produce arbitrarily small
errors for any integrable target function using
only a single sample from each proposal at runtime. We further show that it is able to empirically outperform the theoretically optimal selfnormalized importance sampler on a number of
example problems. Furthermore, AMCI allows
not only for amortizing over datasets but also
amortizing over target functions.

1. Introduction
At its core, Bayesian modeling is rooted in the calculation of expectations: the eventual aim of modeling is typically to make a decision or to construct predictions for
unseen data, both of which take the form of an expectation under the posterior (Robert, 2007). This aim can
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, University of
Oxford, United Kingdom 2 Department of Engineering Science,
University of Oxford, United Kingdom 3 Department of Computer
Science, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
Correspondence to: Adam Goliński <adamg@robots.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

thus be summarized

 in the form of one or more expectations Ep(x|y) f (x) , where f (x) is a target function and
p(x|y) is the posterior distribution on x for some data y,
which we typically only know up to a normalizing constant
p(y). More generally, expectations with respect to distributions with unknown normalization constant are ubiquitous
throughout the sciences (Robert & Casella, 2013).
Sometimes f (x) is not known up front. Here it is typically
convenient to first approximate p(x|y), e.g. in the form of
Monte Carlo (MC) samples, and then later use this approximation to calculate estimates, rather than addressing the
target expectations directly.
However, it is often the case in practice that a particular
target function, or class of target functions, is known a priori. For example, in decision-based settings f (x) takes the
form of a loss function, while any posterior predictive distribution constitutes a set of expectations with respect to
the posterior, parameterized by the new input. Though often overlooked, it is well established that in such targetaware settings the aforementioned pipeline of first approximating p(x|y)
 and
 then using this as a basis for calculating Ep(x|y) f (x) is suboptimal as it ignores relevant information in f (x) (Hesterberg, 1988; Wolpert, 1991; Oh &
Berger, 1992; Evans & Swartz, 1995; Meng & Wong, 1996;
Chen & Shao, 1997; Gelman & Meng, 1998; LacosteJulien et al., 2011; Owen, 2013; Rainforth et al., 2018b).
As we will later show, the potential gains in such scenarios
can be arbitrarily large.
In this paper, we extend these ideas to amortized inference settings (Stuhlmüller et al., 2013; Kingma & Welling,
2014; Ritchie et al., 2016; Paige & Wood, 2016; Le et al.,
2017; 2018a; Webb et al., 2018), wherein one looks to
amortize the cost of inference across different possible
datasets by learning an artifact that assists the inference
process at runtime for a given dataset. Existing approaches
do not operate in a target-aware fashion, such that even if
the inference network learns proposals that perfectly match
the true posterior for every possible dataset, the resulting
estimator is still sub-optimal.
To address this, we introduce AMCI, a framework for
performing Amortized Monte Carlo Integration. Though
still based on learning amortized proposals distributions,
AMCI varies from standard amortized inference ap-

