Theoretically Principled Trade-off between Robustness and Accuracy
Hongyang Zhang 1 2 Yaodong Yu 3 Jiantao Jiao 4 Eric P. Xing 1 5 Laurent El Ghaoui 4 Michael I. Jordan 4

Abstract
We identify a trade-off between robustness and
accuracy that serves as a guiding principle in the
design of defenses against adversarial examples.
Although this problem has been widely studied
empirically, much remains unknown concerning
the theory underlying this trade-off. In this work,
we decompose the prediction error for adversarial
examples (robust error) as the sum of the natural
(classification) error and boundary error, and provide a differentiable upper bound using the theory
of classification-calibrated loss, which is shown to
be the tightest possible upper bound uniform over
all probability distributions and measurable predictors. Inspired by our theoretical analysis, we
also design a new defense method, TRADES, to
trade adversarial robustness off against accuracy.
Our proposed algorithm performs well experimentally in real-world datasets. The methodology is
the foundation of our entry to the NeurIPS 2018
Adversarial Vision Challenge in which we won
the 1st place out of ~2,000 submissions, surpassing the runner-up approach by 11.41% in terms
of mean `2 perturbation distance.

1. Introduction
In response to the vulnerability of deep neural networks
to small perturbations around input data (Szegedy et al.,
2013), adversarial defenses have been an imperative object
of study in machine learning (Huang et al., 2017), computer
vision (Song et al., 2018; Xie et al., 2017; Meng & Chen,
2017), natural language processing (Jia & Liang, 2017),
and many other domains. In machine learning, study of
adversarial defenses has led to significant advances in understanding and defending against adversarial threat (He et al.,
2017). In computer vision and natural language processing, adversarial defenses serve as indispensable building
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago 3 University of Virginia 4 University of California,
Berkeley 5 Petuum Inc.. Correspondence to: Hongyang Zhang
<hongyanz@cs.cmu.edu>, Yaodong Yu <yy8ms@virginia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

blocks for a range of security-critical systems and applications, such as autonomous cars and speech recognition
authorization. The problem of adversarial defenses can be
stated as that of learning a classifier with high test accuracy
on both natural and adversarial examples. The adversarial
example for a given labeled data (x, y) is a data point x0
that causes a classifier c to output a different label on x0 than
y, but is “imperceptibly similar” to x. Given the difficulty
of providing an operational definition of “imperceptible similarity,” adversarial examples typically come in the form of
restricted attacks such as ✏-bounded perturbations (Szegedy
et al., 2013), or unrestricted attacks such as adversarial rotations, translations, and deformations (Brown et al., 2018;
Engstrom et al., 2017; Gilmer et al., 2018; Xiao et al., 2018;
Alaifari et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2019a). The focus of this
work is the former setting, though our framework can be
generalized to the latter.
Despite a large literature devoted to improving the robustness of deep-learning models, many fundamental questions
remain unresolved. One of the most important questions
is how to trade off adversarial robustness against natural
accuracy. Statistically, robustness can be be at odds with
accuracy when no assumptions are made on the data distribution (Tsipras et al., 2019). This has led to an empirical
line of work on adversarial defense that incorporates various kinds of assumptions (Su et al., 2018; Kurakin et al.,
2017). On the theoretical front, methods such as relaxation
based defenses (Kolter & Wong, 2018; Raghunathan et al.,
2018a) provide provable guarantees for adversarial robustness. They, however, ignore the performance of classifier
on the non-adversarial examples, and thus leave open the
theoretical treatment of the putative robustness/accuracy
trade-off.
The problem of adversarial defense becomes more challenging when computational issues are considered. For example,
the straightforward empirical risk minimization (ERM) formulation of robust classification involves minimizing the
robust 0-1 loss maxx0 :kx0 xk✏ 1{c(x0 ) 6= y}, a loss which
is NP-hard to optimize even if ✏ = 0 in general. Hence, it
is natural to expect that some prior work on adversarial defense replaced the 0-1 loss 1(·) with a surrogate loss (Madry
et al., 2018; Kurakin et al., 2017; Uesato et al., 2018). However, there is little theoretical guarantee on the tightness of
this approximation.

