Static Automatic Batching in TensorFlow

Ashish Agarwal 1

Abstract
Dynamic neural networks are becoming increasingly common, and yet it is hard to implement
them efficiently. On-the-fly operation batching for
such models is sub-optimal and suffers from run
time overheads, while writing manually batched
versions can be hard and error-prone. To address this, we extend TensorFlow with pfor, a
parallel-for loop optimized using static loop vectorization. With pfor, users can express computation using nested loops and conditional constructs,
but get performance resembling that of a manually batched version. Benchmarks demonstrate
speedups of one to two orders of magnitude on
a range of tasks, from Jacobian computation, to
auto-batching Graph Neural Networks.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models are getting increasingly complicated
in structure. New applications, like study of molecular structure, genetic data, relational databases, program synthesis,
(Chen et al., 2018; Liang et al., 2018; Schlichtkrull et al.,
2018) require dealing with inputs that have rich and dynamic structure. Handling such domains requires dynamic
computation graphs, where the model structure is dependent
on each input. This doesn’t work well with frameworks that
require creating a static graph structure a priori (Abadi et al.,
2016; Jia et al., 2014). As a result, define-by-run paradigm
has gained popularity (Tokui et al., 2015; Neubig et al.,
2017a; Paszke et al., 2017), where the programming model
is closer to the host programming language, and constructs
like loops and conditionals can be used freely.
Another interesting trend is that systems for running deep
learning are getting very powerful, with custom accelerator
pods capable of running at petaflops. Leveraging so much
compute can easily make host CPU a bottleneck. Running
dynamic computation in the host language, especially in1
Google Inc.. Correspondence to: Ashish Agarwal <agarwal@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

terpreted languages like python can make this bottleneck
worse.
Given the above two trends, frameworks are increasing turning to trace compilation (Agrawal et al., 2019; Moldovan
et al., 2018), where the computation gets expressed dynamically, but a combination of static and just-in-time analysis
is used to extract static computation graphs which can be
dispatched to these accelerators. This approach promises
good usability via programming abstractions that are close
to the host programming language, as well as the performance advantages of static optimization together with quick
dispatch of large chunks of computation to the accelerators.
However there is a caveat. While trace compilation can
convert loops and conditionals in the host languages to the
corresponding constructs compatible with the accelerators,
the body of these loops are unlikely to get good compute
utilization. This forces the programmers to write manually
batched implementations, which ends up undoing some of
the advantages of define-by-run, and forces them to deal
with complicated padding and masking logic.
Frameworks like DyNet avoid this manual batching by having the runtime perform operator batching on the fly (Neubig et al., 2017b). However this creates runtime overheads,
undoing some of the advantages of trace compilation.
Given this need to leverage fast accelerators in the context of dynamic computation and trace compilation, we
propose using static analysis on trace compiled graphs to
perform automatic batching. This approach gets rid of runtime overheads of dynamic batching. Users express their
computation with nested host control flow constructs. Trace
compilation then converts these to nested loop structure in
some intermediate representation, and then static techniques
auto-vectorize these loops.
We use this insight to implement static automatic batching in TensorFlow. Firstly, we add an SPMD (Single Program, Multiple Data) programming abstraction to TensorFlow Python frontend. With SPMD, multiple instances of
a single program operate on different data. We expose it
as parallel-for loop, which we call pfor (see §3.1). Here
the different iterations of the loop can be viewed as different instances of the program. Secondly we implement an
algorithm that takes SPMD loop definitions and rewrites

