Target Tracking for Contextual Bandits:
Application to Demand Side Management
Margaux Brégère 1 2 3 Pierre Gaillard 3 Yannig Goude 1 2 Gilles Stoltz 2

Abstract
We propose a contextual-bandit approach for demand side management by offering price incentives. More precisely, a target mean consumption
is set at each round and the mean consumption
is modeled as a complex function of the distribution of prices sent and of some contextual variables such as the temperature, weather, and so on.
The performance of our strategies is measured
in quadratic losses through a regret criterion. We
offer T 2/3 upper bounds on this regret (up to polylogarithmic terms)—and even faster rates under
stronger assumptions—for strategies inspired by
standard strategies for contextual bandits (like
LinUCB, see Li et al., 2010). Simulations on a
real data set gathered by UK Power Networks, in
which price incentives were offered, show that our
strategies are effective and may indeed manage
demand response by suitably picking the price
levels.

1. Introduction
Electricity management is classically performed by anticipating demand and adjusting accordingly production. The
development of smart grids, and in particular the installation
of smart meters (see Yan et al., 2013; Mallet et al., 2014),
come with new opportunities: getting new sources of information, offering new services. For example, demand-side
management (also called demand-side response; see Albadi
& El-Saadany, 2007; Siano, 2014 for an overview) consists
of reducing or increasing consumption of electricity users
when needed, typically reducing at peak times and encouraging consumption of off-peak times. This is good to adjust
to intermittency of renewable energies and is made possi1

EDF R&D, Palaiseau, France 2 Laboratoire de mathématiques
d’Orsay, Université Paris-Sud, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay,
Orsay, France 3 INRIA - Département d’Informatique de l’École
Normale Supérieure, PSL Research University, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Margaux Brégère <margaux.bregere@edf.fr>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

ble by the development of energy storage devices such as
batteries or even electric vehicles (see Fischer et al., 2015;
Kikusato et al., 2019); the storages at hand can take place at
a convenient moment for the electricity provider. We will
consider such a demand-side management system, based
on price incentives sent to users via their smart meters. We
propose here to adapt contextual bandit algorithms to that
end, which are already used in online advertising. Other
such systems were based on different heuristics (Shareef
et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2015).
The structure of our contribution is to first provide a modeling of this management system, in Section 2. It relies on
making the mean consumption as close as possible to a moving target by sequentially picking price allocations. The literature discussion of the main ingredient of our algorithms,
contextual bandit theory, is postponed till Section 2.4. Then,
our main results are stated and discussed in Section 3: we
control our cumulative loss through a T 2/3 regret bound
with respect to the best constant price allocation. A refinement as far as convergence rates are concerned is offered
in Section 4. A section with simulations based on a real
data set concludes the paper: Section 5. For the sake of
length, most of the proofs are provided in the supplementary
material.
Notation. Without further indications, kxk denotes the
Euclidean norm of a vector x. For the other norms, there
will be a subscript: e.g., the supremum norm of x is is
denoted by kxk1 .

2. Setting and Model
Our setting consists of a modeling of electricity consumption and of an aim—tracking a target consumption. Both
rely on price levels sent out to the customers.
2.1. Modeling of the Electricity Consumption
We consider a large population of customers of some electricity provider and assume it homogeneous, which is not an
uncommon assumption, see Mei et al. (2017). The consumption of each customer at each instance t depends, among
others, on some exogenous factors (temperature, wind, season, day of the week, etc.), which will form a context vector

