TibGM: A Transferable and Information-Based Graphical Model
Approach for Reinforcement Learning

Tameem Adel 1 Adrian Weller 1 2

Abstract
One of the challenges to reinforcement learning
(RL) is scalable transferability among complex
tasks. Incorporating a graphical model (GM),
along with the rich family of related methods, as
a basis for RL frameworks provides potential to
address issues such as transferability, generalisation and exploration. Here we propose a flexible
GM-based RL framework which leverages efficient inference procedures to enhance generalisation and transfer power. In our proposed transferable and information-based graphical model
framework ‘TibGM’, we show the equivalence
between our mutual information-based objective
in the GM, and an RL consolidated objective
consisting of a standard reward maximisation target and a generalisation/transfer objective. In settings where there is a sparse or deceptive reward
signal, our TibGM framework is flexible enough
to incorporate exploration bonuses depicting intrinsic rewards. We empirically verify improved
performance and exploration power.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a powerful approach yet
standard RL algorithms do not scale well for complex or
large tasks (Bakker & Schmidhuber, 2004b), and often suffer when facing problems with sparse rewards. Exceptions
include a few hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL)
frameworks (Watkins, 1989; Kaelbling et al., 1996; Parr
& Russell, 1998; Sutton et al., 1999; Dietterich, 2000;
Bakker & Schmidhuber, 2004b), which have the potential
to improve over standard RL in terms of scalability, and
to handle non-Markovian environments. Other advantages
of HRL include the potential to solve subtasks indepen1

Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, UK
The Alan Turing Institute, UK. Correspondence to: Tameem
Adel <tah47@cam.ac.uk>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

dently, the reuse of learnt representations among subtasks,
improved efficiency due to the task decoupling and the reduced search space (Bakker & Schmidhuber, 2004a; Cao &
Ray, 2012; Schmidhuber, 2015; Florensa et al., 2017), and
efficient exploration at higher levels of the hierarchy (Levy
et al., 2017).
Problems related to the notion of a hierarchy, such as
how to learn or implement efficient inference queries, pave
the way for paradigms like probabilistic graphical models
(PGMs, Jordan, 1998; Jordan et al., 1999; Wainwright &
Jordan, 2008; Koller & Friedman, 2009). The ability to
cast a problem as a PGM facilitates a path between objectives written specifically to match our targets, and automated learning and inference techniques enabling efficient
solutions to achieve the objectives.
Graphical models grant the possibility of beginning from
precise objectives, expressing them in the interpretable
form of a graph, and achieving the objectives via efficient
inference. Compared to previous RL frameworks that have
cast the problem in a PGM, we aim at taking full advantage of this cycle here. We propose a novel information
theoretic objective that aims at both maximising ‘local’ reward, and facilitating transfer learning (transferability) and
exploration, ultimately leading to improved ‘global’ reward
maximisation. We take advantage of a latent space disentangled into components fit for our purpose, and develop a
recognition model-based variational inference procedure to
achieve our objectives.
Graphical models enable earlier work in approximate inference to be adopted. A seminal example is variational
autoencoders (VAEs, Kingma & Welling, 2014; Kingma
et al., 2014), which effectively merge two types of models,
graphical models and deep learning, into a single comprehensive framework. In VAEs, a generative and a recognition model are integrated for the sake of developing a powerful probabilistic framework utilising the recent advances
in both deep generative models and scalable variational inference (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014).
Here we use similar techniques and propose an information
theoretic objective which expresses our joint goals of local
reward maximisation, and high transferability and generalisation power. We construct a graphical model (GM) that

