Stochastic Blockmodels meet Graph Neural Networks

Nikhil Mehta∗ 1 Lawrence Carin 1 Piyush Rai 2

Abstract
Stochastic blockmodels (SBM) and their variants,
e.g., mixed-membership and overlapping stochastic blockmodels, are latent variable based generative models for graphs. They have proven to be
successful for various tasks, such as discovering
the community structure and link prediction on
graph-structured data. Recently, graph neural networks, e.g., graph convolutional networks, have
also emerged as a promising approach to learn
powerful representations (embeddings) for the
nodes in the graph, by exploiting graph properties
such as locality and invariance. In this work, we
unify these two directions by developing a sparse
variational autoencoder for graphs, that retains the
interpretability of SBMs, while also enjoying the
excellent predictive performance of graph neural
nets. Moreover, our framework is accompanied
by a fast recognition model that enables fast inference of the node embeddings (which are of
independent interest for inference in SBM and
its variants). Although we develop this framework for a particular type of SBM, namely the
overlapping stochastic blockmodel, the proposed
framework can be adapted readily for other types
of SBMs. Experimental results on several benchmarks demonstrate encouraging results on link
prediction while learning an interpretable latent
structure that can be used for community discovery.

1. Introduction
Learning the latent structure in graph-structured data (Fortunato, 2010; Goldenberg et al., 2010; Schmidt & Morup,
2013) is an important problem in a wide range of domains,
∗

The major part of this work was done when Nikhil Mehta
was at IIT Kanpur. 1 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Duke University 2 Department of Computer Science, IIT Kanpur. Correspondence to: Nikhil Mehta <nikhilmehta.dce@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

such as social and biological network analysis and recommender systems. These latent structures help discover the
underlying communities in the network, as well as in predicting potential links between nodes. Latent space models (Hoff et al., 2002) and their structured extensions, such
as the stochastic blockmodel (Nowicki & Snijders, 2001)
and variants like the infinite relational model (IRM) (Kemp
et al., 2006), mixed-membership stochastic blockmodel
(MMSB) (Airoldi et al., 2008), and the overlapping stochastic blockmodel (OSBM) (Miller et al., 2009a; Latouche
et al., 2011a) accomplish this by learning low-dimensional,
interpretable node embeddings defined via structured latent
variables. These embeddings can be used to identify the
community membership(s) of each node in the graph, as
well as for tasks such as link prediction.
The overlapping stochastic blockmodel (OSBM), also
known as the latent feature relational model (LFRM), is
a particularly appealing model for relational data (Miller
et al., 2009a; Latouche et al., 2011a; Zhu et al., 2016). The
OSBM/LFRM models each node in the graph as belonging
to one or more communities using a binary membership
vector, and defines the link probability between any pair of
nodes as a bilinear function of their community membership
vectors. Despite its appealing properties, the OSBM/LFRM
has a number of limitations. In particular, although usually
considered to be more expressive (Miller et al., 2009a) than
models such as IRM and MMSB, a single layer of binary
node embeddings and the bilinear model for the link generation can still limit the expressiveness of OSBM/LFRM.
Moreover, it has a challenging inference procedure, which
primarily relies on MCMC (Miller et al., 2009a; Latouche
et al., 2011a) or mean-field variational inference (Zhu et al.,
2016). Although recent models have tried to improve the expressiveness of OSBM/LFRM, e.g., by assuming a deep hierarchy of binary-vector-based node embeddings (Hu et al.,
2017), inference in such models remains intractable, requiring expensive MCMC-based inference. It is therefore
desirable to have a model that retains the basic spirit to
OSBM/LFRM (e.g., easy interpretability and strong link
prediction performance), but with greater expressiveness,
and a simpler and scalable inference procedure.
Motivated by these desiderata, we develop a deep generative
framework for graph-structured data, that inherits the easy
interpretability of overlapping stochastic blockmodels, but is

