Understanding Priors in Bayesian Neural Networks at the Unit Level

Mariia Vladimirova 1 2 Jakob Verbeek 1 Pablo Mesejo 3 Julyan Arbel 1

Abstract
We investigate deep Bayesian neural networks
with Gaussian weight priors and a class of ReLUlike nonlinearities. Bayesian neural networks with
Gaussian priors are well known to induce an L2 ,
“weight decay”, regularization. Our results characterize a more intricate regularization effect at
the level of the unit activations. Our main result
establishes that the induced prior distribution on
the units before and after activation becomes increasingly heavy-tailed with the depth of the layer.
We show that first layer units are Gaussian, second layer units are sub-exponential, and units in
deeper layers are characterized by sub-Weibull
distributions. Our results provide new theoretical
insight on deep Bayesian neural networks, which
we corroborate with simulation experiments.

1. Introduction
Neural networks (NNs), and their deep counterparts (Goodfellow et al., 2016), have largely been used in many research
areas such as image analysis (Krizhevsky et al., 2012),
signal processing (Graves et al., 2013), or reinforcement
learning (Silver et al., 2016), just to name a few. The impressive performance provided by such machine learning
approaches has greatly motivated research that aims at a
better understanding the driving mechanisms behind their
effectiveness. In particular, the study of the NNs distributional properties through Bayesian analysis has recently
gained much attention.
Bayesian approaches investigate models by assuming a prior
distribution on their parameters. Bayesian machine learning
refers to extending standard machine learning approaches
with posterior inference, a line of research pioneered by
1
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK,
38000 Grenoble, France 2 Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, 141701 Dolgoprudny, Russia 3 Andalusian Research Institute in Data Science and Computational Intelligence (DaSCI),
University of Granada, 18071 Granada, Spain. Correspondence to:
Mariia Vladimirova <mariia.vladimirova@inria.fr>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

works on Bayesian neural networks (Neal, 1992; MacKay,
1992). There is a large variety of applications, e.g. gene
selection (Liang et al., 2018), and the range of models is
now very broad, including e.g. Bayesian generative adversarial networks (Saatci & Wilson, 2017). See Polson &
Sokolov (2017) for a review. The interest of the Bayesian
approach to NNs is at least twofold. First, it offers a principled approach for modeling uncertainty of the training
procedure, which is a limitation of standard NNs which only
provide point estimates. A second main asset of Bayesian
models is that they represent regularized versions of their
classical counterparts. For instance, maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimation of a Bayesian regression model with
double exponential (Laplace) prior is equivalent to Lasso
regression (Tibshirani, 1996), while a Gaussian prior leads
to ridge regression. When it comes to NNs, the regularization mechanism is also well appreciated in the literature,
since they traditionally suffer from overparameterization,
resulting in overfitting.
Central in the field of regularization techniques is the weight
decay penalty (Krogh & Hertz, 1991), which is equivalent
to MAP estimation of a Bayesian neural network with independent Gaussian priors on the weights. Dropout has
recently been suggested as a regularization method in which
neurons are randomly turned off (Srivastava et al., 2014),
and Gal & Ghahramani (2016) proved that a neural network with arbitrary depth and non-linearities, with dropout
applied before every weight layer, is mathematically equivalent to an approximation to the probabilistic deep Gaussian
process (Damianou & Lawrence, 2013), leading to the consideration of such NNs as Bayesian models.
This paper is devoted to the investigation of hidden units
prior distributions in Bayesian neural networks under the
assumption of independent Gaussian weights. We first describe a fully connected neural network architecture as illustrated in Figure 1. Given an input x ∈ RN , the `-th hidden
layer unit activations are defined as
g (`) (x) = W (`) h(`−1) (x),

h(`) (x) = φ(g (`) (x)),
(1)

where W (`) is a weight matrix including the bias vector.
A nonlinear activation function φ : R → R is applied
element-wise, which is called nonlinearity, g (`) = g (`) (x)
is a vector of pre-nonlinearities, and h(`) = h(`) (x) is a

