Separating value functions across time-scales

Joshua Romoff * 1 2 Peter Henderson * 3 Ahmed Touati 4 2 Emma Brunskill 3 Joelle Pineau 1 2 Yann Ollivier 2

Abstract
In many finite horizon episodic reinforcement
learning (RL) settings, it is desirable to optimize
for the undiscounted return – in settings like Atari,
for instance, the goal is to collect the most points
while staying alive in the long run. Yet, it may be
difficult (or even intractable) mathematically to
learn with this target. As such, temporal discounting is often applied to optimize over a shorter effective planning horizon. This comes at the risk of
potentially biasing the optimization target away
from the undiscounted goal. In settings where
this bias is unacceptable – where the system must
optimize for longer horizons at higher discounts
– the target of the value function approximator
may increase in variance leading to difficulties
in learning. We present an extension of temporal
difference (TD) learning, which we call TD(∆),
that breaks down a value function into a series
of components based on the differences between
value functions with smaller discount factors. The
separation of a longer horizon value function into
these components has useful properties in scalability and performance. We discuss these properties
and show theoretic and empirical improvements
over standard TD learning in certain settings.

1. Introduction
The goal of reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms is to
learn a policy that optimizes the cumulative reward (return)
provided by the environment. A discount factor 0 ≤ γ < 1
can be used to optimize an exponentially decreasing function of the future return. Discounting is often used as a
biased proxy for optimizing the cumulative reward to reduce variance and make use of convenient theoretical con*

1
Equal contribution
MILA, McGill University
3
Facebook AI Research
Stanford University 4 MILA,
Université de Montréal. Correspondence to: Joshua Romoff <joshua.romoff@mail.mcgill.ca>, Peter Henderson
<phend@stanford.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

vergence properties, making learning more efficient and
stable (Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 1995; Prokhorov & Wunsch,
1997; Even-Dar & Mansour, 2003). However, in many of
the complex tasks used for evaluating current state-of-the-art
reinforcement learning systems (Mnih et al., 2013; OpenAI, 2018), it is more desirable to optimize for performance
over long horizons. The optimal choice of discount factor,
which balances asymptotic policy performance with learning ability, is often difficult, and solutions have ranged from
scheduled curricula (OpenAI, 2018; Prokhorov & Wunsch,
1997; François-Lavet et al., 2015) to meta-gradient learning
of the discount factor (Xu et al., 2018).
OpenAI (2018), for example, start with a small discount
factor and gradually increase it to bootstrap the learning process. Rather than explicitly tackling the problem of discount
selection, we make the observation that for any arbitrary
discount factor, the discounted value function already encompasses all smaller timescales (discounts). This simple
observation allows us to derive a novel method of generating separable value functions. That is, we can separate the
value function into a number of partial estimators, which
we call delta estimators, which approximate the difference
Wz = Vγz − Vγz−1 between value functions. Importantly,
each delta estimators is learnable by itself, because it satisfies a Bellman-like equation based on the W s of shorter
horizons. Thus, these delta estimators can then be summed
to yield the same discounted value function, and any subset
of estimators from the series of smaller γz values. The use
of difference methods (the delta between two value functions at different time scales) leads us to call our method
TD(∆).
The separable nature of the full TD(∆) estimator allows for
each component to be learned in a way that is optimal for
that part of the overall value function. This means that, for
example, the learning rate (and similarly other parameters)
can be adjusted for each component, yielding overall faster
convergence. Moreover, the components corresponding to
smaller effective horizons can converge faster, bootstrapping
larger horizon components (at the risk of some bias). Our
method provides a simple drop-in way to separate value
functions in any TD-like algorithm to increase performance
in a variety of settings, particularly in MDPs with dense
rewards.

