Gaining Free or Low-Cost Transparency with Interpretable Partial Substitute

Tong Wang 1

Abstract

ing two solutions for facilitating human understandability.

This work addresses the situation where a blackbox model with good predictive performance is
chosen over its interpretable competitors, and we
show interpretability is still achievable in this case.
Our solution is to find an interpretable substitute
on a subset of data where the black-box model is
overkill or nearly overkill while leaving the rest
to the black-box. This transparency is obtained
at minimal cost or no cost of the predictive performance. Under this framework, we develop a
Hybrid Rule Sets (HyRS) model that uses decision rules to capture the subspace of data where
the rules are as accurate or almost as accurate as
the black-box provided. To train a HyRS, we devise an efficient search algorithm that iteratively
finds the optimal model and exploits theoretically
grounded strategies to reduce computation. Our
framework is agnostic to the black-box during
training. Experiments on structured and text data
show that HyRS obtains an effective trade-off between transparency and interpretability.

The first solution is to develop models that are interpretable
by themselves, such as rule-based models, scoring models,
case-based models, etc., of small or reasonable sizes. They
are self-contained and do not rely on other models to explain them. We call them interpretable models in this paper
and call the decision-making process transparent since humans understand wholly and precisely how a decision is
generated. This solution is favorable when interpretable
models perform as well as or better than black-box models
(Choi et al., 2016). However, due to possible constraints on
the model complexity to achieve interpretability, the lose
of predictive performance for choosing interpretable models is often inevitable (Wang et al., 2015), needing another
solution to obtain interpretability in this case.

1. Introduction
The deployment of machine learning in real-world applications has led to a surge of interest in systems optimized not
only for task performance but also model interpretability,
especially when human experts are involved in the decisionmaking process. In many heavily regulated industries such
as judiciaries and health care, understanding the decisionmaking process of an analytical model is not just a preference but often a matter of legal and ethic compliance
(Doshi-Velez & Kim, 2017), as recently promoted by EU’s
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) (Parliament &
of the European Union, 2016).
Thanks to this increasing interest, interpretable machine
learning has achieved unprecedented advancement, provid1
Department of Business Analytics, University of Iowa, Iowa,
USA. Correspondence to: Tong Wang <tong-wang@uiowa.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

To deal with situations when an interpretable model is inadequate, and a black-box has to be chosen for better predictive
performance, the second solution is proposed to develop
models that explain black-boxes. These models generate
post hoc explanations or approximations for a black-box
either locally (Ribeiro et al., 2016) or globally (Adler et al.,
2016; Lakkaraju et al., 2017), providing some insights into
the black-box model by identifying key features or interactions of features (Tsang et al., 2017). However, two concerning issues exist. First, explainers only approximate but
do not characterize exactly the decision-making process
of a black-box model, yielding an imperfect explanation
fidelity. Second, there exists ambiguity and inconsistency
(Ross et al., 2017; Lissack, 2016) in the explanation since
there could be different explanations for the same prediction
generated by different explainers, or by the same explainer
with different parameters. Both issues result from the fact
that the explainers only approximate in a post hoc way but
are not the decision-making process themselves.
In this paper, we create an alternative solution to gain interpretability in the presence of a chosen black-box. We
propose to use interpretable partial substitute to process a
subset of data, where an interpretable model is adequate for
producing predictions that are as good as the black box, i.e.,
where the black-box is overkill, to obtain free interpretability at no cost of the predictive performance; or, if the user is
willing to trade some accuracy for transparency, our model
can find the right subset of data at minimal cost of predic-

