Traditional and Heavy Tailed Self Regularization in Neural Network Models

Charles H. Martin 1 Michael W. Mahoney 2

Abstract
Random Matrix Theory (RMT) is applied to analyze the weight matrices of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), including both production quality,
pre-trained models such as AlexNet and Inception, and smaller models trained from scratch,
such as LeNet5 and a miniature-AlexNet. Empirical and theoretical results clearly indicate that
the empirical spectral density (ESD) of DNN
layer matrices displays signatures of traditionallyregularized statistical models, even in the absence of exogenously specifying traditional forms
of regularization, such as Dropout or Weight
Norm constraints. Building on recent results in
RMT, most notably its extension to Universality
classes of Heavy-Tailed matrices, we develop a
theory to identify 5+1 Phases of Training, corresponding to increasing amounts of Implicit SelfRegularization. For smaller and/or older DNNs,
this Implicit Self-Regularization is like traditional
Tikhonov regularization, in that there is a “size
scale” separating signal from noise. For stateof-the-art DNNs, however, we identify a novel
form of Heavy-Tailed Self-Regularization, similar to the self-organization seen in the statistical
physics of disordered systems. This implicit SelfRegularization can depend strongly on the many
knobs of the training process. We demonstrate
that we can cause a small model to exhibit all 5+1
phases simply by changing the batch size.

1. Introduction
The inability of optimization and learning theory to explain
and predict the properties of NNs is not a new phenomenon.
From the earliest days of DNNs, it was suspected that VC
1

Calculation Consulting, 8 Locksley Ave, 6B, San Francisco,
CA 94122 2 ICSI and Department of Statistics, University of
California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720. Correspondence
to: Charles H. Martin <charles@CalculationConsulting.com>,
Michael W. Mahoney <mmahoney@stat.berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

theory did not apply to these systems (Vapnik et al., 1994). It
was originally assumed that local minima in the energy/loss
surface were responsible for the inability of VC theory to
describe NNs (Vapnik et al., 1994), and that the mechanism
for this was that getting trapped in local minima during
training limited the number of possible functions realizable
by the network. However, it was very soon realized that the
presence of local minima in the energy function was not a
problem in practice (LeCun et al., 1998; Duda et al., 2001).
Thus, another reason for the inapplicability of VC theory
was needed. At the time, there did exist other theories of
generalization based on statistical mechanics (Seung et al.,
1992; Watkin et al., 1993; Haussler et al., 1996; Engel & den
Broeck, 2001), but for various technical and nontechnical
reasons these fell out of favor in the ML/NN communities.
Instead, VC theory and related techniques continued to
remain popular, in spite of their obvious problems.
More recently, theoretical results of Choromanska et
al. (Choromanska et al., 2014) (which are related to (Seung et al., 1992; Watkin et al., 1993; Haussler et al.,
1996; Engel & den Broeck, 2001)) suggested that the Energy/optimization Landscape of modern DNNs resembles
the Energy Landscape of a zero-temperature Gaussian Spin
Glass; and empirical results of Zhang et al. (Zhang et al.,
2016) have again pointed out that VC theory does not describe the properties of DNNs. Martin and Mahoney then
suggested that the Spin Glass analogy may be useful to understand severe overtraining versus the inability to overtrain
in modern DNNs (Martin & Mahoney, 2017).
Motivated by this, we are interested here in two questions.
• Theoretical Question. Why is regularization in deep
learning seemingly quite different than regularization in
other areas on ML; and what is the right theoretical framework with which to investigate regularization for DNNs?
• Practical Question. How can one control and adjust, in
a theoretically-principled way, the many knobs and switches
that exist in modern DNN systems, e.g., to train these models efficiently and effectively, to monitor their effects on the
global Energy Landscape, etc.?
That is, we seek a Practical Theory of Deep Learning,
one that is prescriptive and not just descriptive. This (phenomenological) theory would provide useful tools for practitioners wanting to know How to characterize and control
the Energy Landscape to engineer larger and betters DNNs;

