Incremental Randomized Sketching for Online Kernel Learning

Xiao Zhang 1 Shizhong Liao 1

Abstract
Randomized sketching has been used in offline
kernel learning, but it cannot be applied directly to
online kernel learning due to the lack of incremental maintenances for randomized sketches with
regret guarantees. To address these issues, we
propose a novel incremental randomized sketching approach for online kernel learning, which
has efficient incremental maintenances with theoretical guarantees. We construct two incremental
randomized sketches using the sparse transform
matrix and the sampling matrix for kernel matrix approximation, update the incremental randomized sketches using rank-1 modifications, and
construct a time-varying explicit feature mapping
for online kernel learning. We prove that the proposed incremental randomized sketching is statistically unbiased for the matrix product approximation, obtains a 1 +  relative-error bound for
the kernel matrix approximation, enjoys a sublinear regret bound for online kernel learning, and
has constant time and space complexities at each
round for incremental maintenances. Experimental results demonstrate that the incremental randomized sketching achieves a better learning performance in terms of accuracy and efficiency even
in adversarial environments.

1. Introduction
Online kernel learning must rise to the challenge of incremental maintenance in a low computational complexity with
accuracy and convergence guarantees at each round. Online
gradient descent is a judicious choice for online kernel learning due to its efficiency and effectiveness (Bottou, 2010;
Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2011). However, the kernelization
of the online gradient descent may cause a linear growth
with respect to the model size and increase the hypothesis
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University,
Tianjin 300350, China. Correspondence to: Shizhong Liao
<szliao@tju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

updating time significantly (Wang et al., 2012). To solve the
problem, budgeted online kernel learning has been proposed
to maintain a buffer of support vectors (SVs) with a fixed
budget, which limits the model size to reduce the computational complexities (Crammer et al., 2003). Several budget
maintenance strategies were introduced to bound the buffer
size of SVs. Dekel et al. (2005) maintained the budget by
discarding the oldest support vector. Orabona et al. (2008)
projected the new example onto the linear span of SVs in
the feature space to reduce the buffer size. But the buffer of
SVs cannot be used for kernel matrix approximation directly.
Besides, it is difficult to provide a lower bound of the buffer
size that is key to the theoretical guarantees for budgeted
online kernel learning.
Unlike the budget maintenance strategies of SVs, sketches
of the kernel matrix have been introduced into online kernel
learning to approximate the kernel incrementally. Engel et al.
(2004) used the approximate linear dependency (ALD) rule
to construct the sketches for kernel approximation in kernel
regression. But the kernel matrix approximation error is not
compared with the best rank-k approximation. Sun et al.
(2012) proved that the size of sketches constructed by ALD
rule grows sublinearly with respect to the data size when
the eigenvalues decay fast enough. Recently, randomized
sketches of kernel matrix were used as surrogates to perform
the offline kernel approximation with finite sample bounds
(Sarlós, 2006; Woodruff, 2014; Raskutti & Mahoney, 2015),
but few efforts have been made to formulate suitable randomized sketches for online kernel learning. Existing online
kernel learning approaches using randomized sketches usually adopted a random sampling strategy. Lu et al. (2016)
applied the Nyström approach for kernel function approximation and constructed the explicit feature mapping using
the singular value decomposition, but it fixed the randomized sketches after initialization, which is equivalent to the
offline Nyström approach using uniform sampling that may
suffer from a low approximation accuracy in adversarial environments due to the non-uniformity structure of the data
(Kumar et al., 2009). Calandriello et al. (2017b) assumed
that the kernel function can be expressed as an inner product
in the explicit feature space, and proposed a second order
online kernel learning approach using online sampling strategy, but the construction of the explicit feature mapping
needs to be further explored. Calandriello et al. (2017a)

