Automatic Classifiers as Scientific Instruments:
One Step Further Away from Ground-Truth

Jacob Whitehill 1 Anand Ramakrishnan 1

Abstract
Automatic machine learning-based detectors of
various psychological and social phenomena (e.g.,
emotion, stress, engagement) have great potential to advance basic science. However, when a
detector d is trained to approximate an existing
measurement tool (e.g., a questionnaire, observation protocol), then care must be taken when
interpreting measurements collected using d since
they are one step further removed from the underlying construct. We examine how the accuracy of d, as quantified by the correlation q of
d’s outputs with the ground-truth construct U , impacts the estimated correlation between U (e.g.,
stress) and some other phenomenon V (e.g., academic performance). In particular: (1) We show
that if the true correlation between U and V is
r, then the expected sample correlation, over all
vectors T n whose correlation with U is q, is qr.
(2) We derive a formula for the probability that
the sample correlation (over n subjects) using d is
positive given that the true correlation is negative
(and vice-versa); this probability can be substantial (around 20 − 30%) for values of n and q that
have been used in recent affective computing studies. (3) With the goal to reduce the variance of
correlations estimated by an automatic detector,
we show that training multiple neural networks
d(1) , . . . , d(m) using different training architectures and hyperparameters for the same detection
task provides only limited “coverage” of T n .

1. Introduction
Automatic classifiers have the potential to advance basic
research in psychology, education, medicine, and many
1

Department of Computer Science, Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI), MA, USA. Correspondence to: Jacob Whitehill
<jrwhitehill@wpi.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

other fields by serving as scientific instruments that can
measure behavioral, medical, social, and other phenomena
with higher temporal resolution, lower cost, and greater consistency than is possible with traditional methods such as
human-coded questionnaires or observation protocols. The
affective computing (Picard, 2010) community is starting to
see some first fruits of this potential: Perugia, et al. (Perugia et al., 2017) used the Empatica E4 wristband sensor to
explore the relationship between participants’ (n = 14) electrodermal activity (EDA) and their emotional states when
playing cognitive games. Parra, et al. (Parra et al., 2017)
used the Emotient facial expression recognition software
to identify a positive correlation (r = 0.32, n = 59 participants) between emotions and adult attachment (Collins
& Read, 1990). Chen, et al. (Chen et al., 2014) used Emotient in a study of how facial emotion is associated with job
interview performance among n = 4 participants.
In most empirical studies designed to measure the relationship between two phenomena U and V (e.g., engagement
(Monkaresi et al., 2017), grit (Duckworth et al., 2007), stress,
attachment (Collins & Read, 1990), academic performance,
etc.), the investigator chooses a validated instrument for
each phenomenon and records measurements of each variable for n participants. She/he then computes a statistic,
such as the Pearson product-moment coefficient, that captures the magnitude and sign (as well as statistical significance) of the relationship between the two variables. Machine learning offers the potential to create a new array of
scientific instruments with important advantages compared
to standard measurement tools. However, they also bring
a potential pitfall that – while not fundamentally new, i.e.,
there is always a separation between a construct and its
measurement – is exacerbated compared to using standard
measurements: If one creates a new scientific instrument by
training an automatic detector d to mimic a standard instrument as closely as possible, then d is one degree of separation further removed from the underlying phenomenon U –
i.e., it is an estimator of another estimator.
Motivating example: Suppose a behavioral scientist
wishes to examine the relationship between stress (construct U ) and academic performance (construct V ). Using
a traditional approach, she/he could conduct an experiment

