DAG-GNN: DAG Structure Learning with Graph Neural Networks

Yue Yu * 1 Jie Chen * 2 3 Tian Gao 3 Mo Yu 3

Abstract
Learning a faithful directed acyclic graph (DAG)
from samples of a joint distribution is a challenging combinatorial problem, owing to the intractable search space superexponential in the
number of graph nodes. A recent breakthrough
formulates the problem as a continuous optimization with a structural constraint that ensures
acyclicity (Zheng et al., 2018). The authors apply the approach to the linear structural equation
model (SEM) and the least-squares loss function
that are statistically well justified but nevertheless
limited. Motivated by the widespread success of
deep learning that is capable of capturing complex nonlinear mappings, in this work we propose
a deep generative model and apply a variant of
the structural constraint to learn the DAG. At the
heart of the generative model is a variational autoencoder parameterized by a novel graph neural
network architecture, which we coin DAG-GNN.
In addition to the richer capacity, an advantage
of the proposed model is that it naturally handles discrete variables as well as vector-valued
ones. We demonstrate that on synthetic data
sets, the proposed method learns more accurate
graphs for nonlinearly generated samples; and on
benchmark data sets with discrete variables, the
learned graphs are reasonably close to the global
optima. The code is available at https://
github.com/fishmoon1234/DAG-GNN.

1. Introduction
Bayesian Networks (BN) have been widely used in machine
learning applications (Spirtes et al., 1999; Ott et al., 2004).
The structure of a BN takes the form of a directed acyclic
graph (DAG) and plays a vital part in causal inference (Pearl,
*

Equal contribution 1 Lehigh University 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab 3 IBM Research. Correspondence to: Yue Yu
<yuy214@lehigh.edu>, Jie Chen <chenjie@us.ibm.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

1988) with many applications in medicine, genetics, economics, and epidemics. Its structure learning problem is
however NP-hard (Chickering et al., 2004) and stimulates a
proliferation of literature.
Score-based methods generally formulate the structure learning problem as optimizing a certain score function with respect to the unknown (weighted) adjacency matrix A and
the observed data samples, with a combinatorial constraint
stating that the graph must be acyclic. The intractable search
space (with a complexity superexponential in the number
of graph nodes) poses substantial challenges for optimization. Hence, for practical problems in a scale beyond small,
approximate search often needs to be employed with additional structure assumption (Nie et al., 2014; Chow & Liu,
1968; Scanagatta et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2016).
Recently, Zheng et al. (2018) formulate an equivalent
acyclicity constraint by using a continuous function of the
adjacency matrix (specifically, the matrix exponential of
A ◦ A). This approach drastically changes the combinatorial nature of the problem to a continuous optimization,
which may be efficiently solved by using maturely developed blackbox solvers. The optimization problem is nevertheless nonlinear, thus these solvers generally return only
a stationary-point solution rather than the global optimum.
Nevertheless, the authors show that empirically such local
solutions are highly comparable to the global ones obtained
through expensive combinatorial search.
With the inspiring reformulation of the constraint, we revisit
the objective function. The score-based objective functions
generally make assumptions of the variables and the model
class. For example, Zheng et al. (2018) demonstrate on
the linear structural equation model (SEM) with a leastsquares loss. While convenient, such assumptions are often
restricted and they may not correctly reflect the actual distribution of real-life data.
Hence, motivated by the remarkable success of deep neural
networks, which are arguably universal approximators, in
this work we develop a graph-based deep generative model
aiming at better capturing the sampling distribution faithful
to the DAG. To this end, we employ the machinery of variational inference and parameterize a pair of encoder/decoder
with specially designed graph neural networks (GNN). The
objective function (the score), then, is the evidence lower

