Combining Parametric and Nonparametric Models for Off-Policy Evaluation

Omer Gottesman 1 Yao Liu 2 Scott Sussex 1 Emma Brunskill 2 Finale Doshi-Velez 1

Abstract
We consider a model-based approach to perform batch off-policy evaluation in reinforcement learning. Our method takes a mixture-ofexperts approach to combine parametric and nonparametric models of the environment such that
the final value estimate has the least expected error. We do so by first estimating the local accuracy of each model and then using a planner to
select which model to use at every time step as
to minimize the return error estimate along entire trajectories. Across a variety of domains, our
mixture-based approach outperforms the individual models alone as well as state-of-the-art importance sampling-based estimators.

1. Introduction
In the context of reinforcement learning (RL), off-policy
evaluation (OPE) refers to the task of evaluating how good
a given evaluation policy is, using data collected under a
different behavior policy. This is in contrast with the much
simpler problem of on-policy evaluation, where the behavior and evaluation policies are identical, and the value of
the policy can be estimated simply by taking the average
rewards accumulated over the observed trajectories. The
most common set of approaches to OPE derive from importance sampling (e.g. Precup (2000); Jiang & Li (2016));
while unbiased, they tend to have prohibitively high variance unless a very large amount of data is available.
To reduce variance, another set of approaches first use the
data collected under behavior policy to learn a parametric model to approximate the environment’s dynamics, and
then use that model to simulate trajectories under the evaluation policy (e.g. Chow et al. (2015)). Unfortunately,
poor model specification can lead to poor generalization
and model bias even if the amount of data is infinite. Fonteneau et al. (2013) circumvent this issue by simulating tra1
Harvard University 2 Stanford University. Correspondence to:
Omer Gottesman <gottesman@fas.harvard.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

jectories under the evaluation policy via stitching together
actual transitions observed in the data. This nonparametric approach stays closer to the data, and is thus less likely
to suffer from generalization errors; unlike the parametric
approach, it will be consistent in the limit of infinite data.
However, in a finite batch, the required transitions to use
this method may not be available in the observed data if
there is a large discrepancy between the behavior and evaluation policy.
Our main contribution is to note that the parametric
and nonparametric approaches above have complementary strengths: the nonparametric approach can be very
accurate where data are abundant, while the parametric
approach can often generalize better in situations which
are not frequently observed. We therefore propose a
mixture-of-experts (MoE) approach for generating trajectories which switches between sampling transitions from a
parametric and nonpaprametric model. We treat the OPE
as a planning problem: at every transition, we choose
the model—parametric or nonparametric—to minimize the
overall value estimate error. We derive estimators of local errors for each model, and across a variety of domains, demonstrate that our approach produces more accurate value estimates than a myopic strategy (that does
not optimize for error in the long-term), modeling using either parametric or nonparamtric approaches alone, as well
as state-of-the-art importance sampling methods.

2. Background and Notation
We denote a Markov Decision Process (MDP) by
hX , A, γ, ft , fr , p0 , i, where X , A and γ are the state
space, action space, and reward discount, respectively. For
this work, we assume the state transition and rewards are
deterministic functions of the current state and action such
that xt+1 = ft (xt , at ) and rt = fr (xt , at ). The MoE algorithm we present in this paper can be applied to the stochastic case as well, but the model error estimators we develop
and use only apply to the deterministic case. p0 (x) denotes
the initial states distribution.
(i) (i) (i)
(i)
A history is a sequence H (i) := (x0 , a0 , r0 , ..., xT )
where x0 ∼ p0 and the actions are chosen according to
a policy π such that at ∼ π(at |xt ). Finally, let ∆(x, x0 )
be a distance metric over the space X . Throughout this

