Learning to bid in revenue-maximizing auctions

Thomas Nedelec 1 2 Noureddine El Karoui 3 1 Vianney Perchet 2 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of the optimization
of bidding strategies in prior-dependent revenuemaximizing auctions, when the seller fixes the
reserve prices based on the bid distributions. Our
study is done in the setting where one bidder
is strategic. Using a variational approach, we
study the complexity of the original objective and
we introduce a relaxation of the objective functional in order to use gradient descent methods.
Our approach is simple, general and can be applied to various value distributions and revenuemaximizing mechanisms. The new strategies we
derive yield massive uplifts compared to the traditional truthfully bidding strategy.

1. Introduction
Modern marketplaces like Uber, Amazon or Ebay enable
sellers to fine-tune their selling mechanism by reusing their
large number of past interactions with consumers. In the
online advertising or the electricity markets, billions of auctions are occurring everyday between the same bidders and
sellers. Based on the data gathered, different approaches
learn complex mechanisms maximizing the seller revenue
(Conitzer and Sandholm, 2002; Ostrovsky and Schwarz,
2011; Paes Leme et al., 2016; Golrezaei et al., 2017).
Most of the literature has focused on the auctioneer side
(Milgrom and Tadelis, 2018). Algorithms focused on the
bidder’s standpoint to enable them to be strategic against any
smart data-driven selling mechanisms are lacking. These
algorithms should ideally strengthen the balance of power
driving the relationship between buyers and sellers. Our
main objective is to exhibit simple robust algorithmic procedures that take advantage of various data-dependent revenuemaximizing mechanisms. This represents a big step forward
in understanding possible strategic behaviors in revenue
1

Criteo AI Lab 2 CMLA, ENS Paris Saclay 3 UC, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Thomas Nedelec <nedelec@cmla.enscachan.fr>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

maximizing auctions. This is a new argument supporting the Wilson doctrine (Wilson, 1987) claiming that datadependent revenue maximizing algorithms are not robust to
strategic bidders.
1.1. Framework
In the early stage of the market design literature (see, e.g.,
Myerson (1981)), a typical underlying assumption is that
the bidders’ value distributions were commonly known to
the seller and other bidders. This can be justified if different group of bidders with the same value distribution are
interacting successively with one seller. In the aforementioned modern applications, the same bidders have billions
of interactions everyday with the seller. Even if the latter
does not know the value distribution beforehand, it might
use in many cases the past bid distributions as proxies of
value distribution.
Several mechanisms based on the value distribution of bidders have already been introduced. We will focus on the
lazy second price auction with personalized reserve price
(Paes Leme et al., 2016), the Myerson auction (Myerson,
1981), the eager version of the second price auction and the
boosted second price auction (Golrezaei et al., 2017). When
repeating these auctions (every day, or every milli-second,
depending on the context) and if the bidder is myopic, i.e
optimizing per stage and not long-term revenue, it is optimal
to bid truthfully at each auction. So with myopic bidders,
bids and values have the same distribution and the seller can
design optimally the mechanism based on the former.
Non-myopic bidders optimize their long-term expected utility taking into account that their current strategy will imply
a certain mechanism (for instance a specific reserve price)
in the future. More precisely, we will consider the following
steady state analysis. Assume the valuations of a bidder
vi ∈ R are drawn from a specific distribution Fi ; a bidding
strategy is a mapping βi from R into R that indicates the
actual bid Bi = βi (vi ) when the value is vi . As a consequence, the distribution of bids FBi is the push-forward of
Fi by βi . In the steady state, the seller uses the distributions of bids FBi to choose a specific auction mechanism
M(FBi ) among a given class of mechanisms M. The objective of a long-term strategic bidder is to find her strategy
βi that maximizes her expected utility when vi ∼ Fi , she

