Efficient Training of BERT by Progressively Stacking

Linyuan Gong 1 Di He 1 Zhuohan Li 1 Tao Qin 2 Liwei Wang 1 3 Tie-Yan Liu 2

Abstract
Unsupervised pre-training is commonly used in
natural language processing: a deep neural network trained with proper unsupervised prediction
tasks are shown to be effective in many downstream tasks. Because it is easy to create a large
monolingual dataset by collecting data from the
Web, we can train high-capacity models. Therefore, training efficiency becomes a critical issue
even when using high-performance hardware. In
this paper, we explore an efficient training method
for the state-of-the-art bidirectional Transformer
(BERT) model. By visualizing the self-attention
distributions of different layers at different positions in a well-trained BERT model, we find
that in most layers, the self-attention distribution
will concentrate locally around its position and the
start-of-sentence token. Motivated by this, we propose the stacking algorithm to transfer knowledge
from a shallow model to a deep model; then we
apply stacking progressively to accelerate BERT
training. Experiments showed that the models
trained by our training strategy achieve similar
performance to models trained from scratch, but
our algorithm is much faster.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep neural networks have pushed the limits
of many applications, including speech recognition (Hinton
et al., 2012), image classification (He et al., 2016), and
machine translation (Vaswani et al., 2017). The keys to the
success are the advanced neural network architectures and
massive databases of labeled instances (Deng et al., 2009).
However, human annotations may be very costly to collect,
The work was done while the first and third author were visiting Microsoft Research Asia. 1 Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE, School of EECS, Peking University 2 Microsoft
Research 3 Center for Data Science, Peking University, Beijing
Institute of Big Data Research. Correspondence to: Tao Qin <taoqin@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

especially in domains that require particular expertise.
In natural language processing, using unsupervised pretrained models is one of the most effective ways to help
train tasks in which labeled information is not rich enough.
For example, word embedding learned from Wikipedia corpus (Mikolov et al., 2013; Pennington et al., 2014) can
substantially improve the performance of sentence classification and textual similarity systems (Socher et al., 2011;
Tai et al., 2015; Kalchbrenner et al., 2014). Recently, pretrained contextual representation approaches (Devlin et al.,
2018; Radford et al., 2018; Peters et al., 2018) have been
developed and shown to be more effective than conventional word embedding. Different from word embedding
that only extracts local semantic information of individual
words, pre-trained contextual representations further learn
sentence-level information by sentence-level encoders.
BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) is the current state-of-the-art pretrained contextual representations based on a huge multilayer Transformer encoder architecture (BERT-Base has
110M parameters and BERT-Large has 330M parameters)
and trained by masked language modeling and next-sentence
prediction tasks. Because these tasks require no human supervision, the size of the available training data easily scales
up to billions of tokens. Therefore, the training efficiency
of such a model becomes the most critical issue, and the
requirement of extremely high-performance hardware becomes a barrier to its practical application.
In this paper, we aim to improve the training efficiency of the
BERT model from in an algorithmic sense. Our motivation
is from the observation of self-attention layers, which is the
core component of the BERT model. We visualize a shallow
BERT model and a deep BERT model and then study their
differences and relationships. By carefully investigating
the attention distributions in different layers at different
positions, we find some interesting phenomena: First, the
attention distributions of the shallow model are quite similar
across different position and layers. At any position, the
attention distribution is a mixture of two distributions. One
distribution is local attention that focuses on neighbors. The
other distribution focuses on the start-of-sentence token.
Second, we find the attention distribution in the shallow
model is similar to that of a deep model. This suggests that
such knowledge can be shared from the shallow model to a

