Complementary-Label Learning for Arbitrary Losses and Models

Takashi Ishida 1 2 Gang Niu 2 Aditya Krishna Menon 3 Masashi Sugiyama 2 1

Abstract
In contrast to the standard classification paradigm
where the true class is given to each training
pattern, complementary-label learning only uses
training patterns each equipped with a complementary label, which only specifies one of the
classes that the pattern does not belong to. The
goal of this paper is to derive a novel framework
of complementary-label learning with an unbiased estimator of the classification risk, for arbitrary losses and models—all existing methods
have failed to achieve this goal. Not only is this
beneficial for the learning stage, it also makes
model/hyper-parameter selection (through crossvalidation) possible without the need of any ordinarily labeled validation data, while using any
linear/non-linear models or convex/non-convex
loss functions. We further improve the risk estimator by a non-negative correction and gradient ascent trick, and demonstrate its superiority
through experiments.

1. Introduction
Modern classification methods usually require massive data
with high-quality labels, but preparing such datasets is unrealistic in many domains. To mitigate the problem, previous
works have investigated ways to learn from weak supervision: semi-supervised learning (Chapelle et al., 2006; Miyato et al., 2016; Kipf & Welling, 2017; Sakai et al., 2017;
Tarvainen & Valpola, 2017; Oliver et al., 2018), noisy-label
learning (Natarajan et al., 2013; Menon et al., 2015; Patrini
et al., 2017; Ma et al., 2018; Han et al., 2018; Charoenphakdee et al., 2019), positive-unlabeled learning (Elkan
& Noto, 2008; du Plessis et al., 2014; Kiryo et al., 2017),
positive-confidence learning (Ishida et al., 2018), similarunlabeled learning (Bao et al., 2018), unlabeled-unlabeled
learning (du Plessis et al., 2013; Lu et al., 2019), and others.
1
The University of Tokyo 2 RIKEN 3 Google Research. Correspondence to: Takashi Ishida <ishida@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

In this paper, we consider learning from another natural type
of weak supervision called complementary-label learning
(Ishida et al., 2017; Yu et al., 2018), where the label only
specifies one of the classes that the pattern does not belong
to. For example, a crowdsourced worker can tell us a pattern
does not belong to a certain class, instead of identifying the
correct class. In contrast to the ordinary case where the
true class is given to each pattern (which often needs to be
chosen out of many candidate classes precisely), collecting
these complementary labels is obviously much easier and
less costly.
Another potential application is collecting survey data that
requires extremely private questions (Ishida et al., 2017).
It would be less mentally demanding, if we explain to the
respondent that we will transform their provided true label
to a complementary label, before the data is saved into the
database. This might become common in the future where
privacy concerns are increasing.
A natural question is, however, is it possible to learn from
such complementary labels (without any true labels)?
The problem has previously been tackled by Ishida et al.
(2017), showing that the classification risk can be recovered only from complementarily labeled data. They also
gave theoretical analysis with a statistical consistency guarantee. However, they required strong restrictions on the
loss functions, allowing only one-versus-all and pairwise
comparison multi-class loss functions (Zhang, 2004), with
certain non-convex binary losses. This is a severe limitation
since the softmax cross-entropy loss, which cannot be expressed by the two losses above, is the most popular loss in
deep learning nowadays.
Later, Yu et al. (2018) proposed a different formulation for
complementary labels by employing the forward loss correction technique (Patrini et al., 2017) to adjust the learning
objective, but limiting the loss function to softmax crossentropy loss. Their proposed risk estimator is not necessarily
unbiased but the minimizer is theoretically guaranteed to be
consistent with the minimizer of the risk for ordinary labels
(under an implicit assumption on the model for convergence
analysis). They also extended the problem setting to where
complementary labels are chosen in an uneven (biased) way.
In this paper, we first derive an unbiased risk estimator

