Improving Adversarial Robustness via Promoting Ensemble Diversity

Tianyu Pang 1 Kun Xu 1 Chao Du 1 Ning Chen 1 Jun Zhu 1

Abstract
Though deep neural networks have achieved significant progress on various tasks, often enhanced
by model ensemble, existing high-performance
models can be vulnerable to adversarial attacks.
Many efforts have been devoted to enhancing the
robustness of individual networks and then constructing a straightforward ensemble, e.g., by directly averaging the outputs, which ignores the
interaction among networks. This paper presents
a new method that explores the interaction among
individual networks to improve robustness for ensemble models. Technically, we define a new
notion of ensemble diversity in the adversarial
setting as the diversity among non-maximal predictions of individual members, and present an
adaptive diversity promoting (ADP) regularizer to
encourage the diversity, which leads to globally
better robustness for the ensemble by making adversarial examples difficult to transfer among individual members. Our method is computationally
efficient and compatible with the defense methods
acting on individual networks. Empirical results
on various datasets verify that our method can
improve adversarial robustness while maintaining
state-of-the-art accuracy on normal examples.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have recently achieved significant progress in many tasks, such as image classification (Russakovsky et al., 2015) and speech recognition (Graves & Jaitly, 2014). However, they are not problemless. Recent work has shown that high-performance
classifiers are vulnerable to adversarial attacks (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Papernot et al., 2016b; Carlini & Wagner,
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Institute
for AI, BNRist Center, THBI Lab, Tsinghua-Fuzhou Institute
for Data Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Tianyu Pang <pty17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>,
Ning Chen <ningchen@tsinghua.edu.cn>, Jun Zhu <dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

2017b; Athalye et al., 2018), where images with human
imperceptible perturbations (i.e., adversarial examples) can
be generated to fool the classifiers. To improve the adversarial robustness of classifiers, various kinds of defenses
have been proposed (Kurakin et al., 2017b; 2018a; Kannan et al., 2018), and one practically effective strategy is
to construct ensembles of the enhanced networks to obtain
stronger defenses (Liao et al., 2018; Kurakin et al., 2018b).
However, most of these defense strategies focus on enhancing an individual network, while ignoring the potentially
very informative interactions among multiple models. As
widely observed, adversarial examples can have strong transferability among models (Papernot et al., 2016a; Kurakin
et al., 2018b). When training an ensemble model, the ignorance of interaction among individual members may lead
them to return similar predictions or feature representations (Dauphin et al., 2014; Li et al., 2016). Since it is
easier for adversarial examples to transfer among similar
models, it is probable for the adversarial examples crafted
for one individual member to also fool other members, or
even fool the whole ensemble model (See experiments).
Previous work has shown that for a single network, promoting the diversity among learned features of different classes
can improve adversarial robustness (Pang et al., 2018a;b).
In this paper, we propose to improve adversarial robustness
from a new perspective by promoting the diversity among
the predictions returned by different members of an ensemble, called ensemble diversity. Our approach is orthogonal
to other defenses acting on a single network and thus is
compatible with most of the previous defense methods.
Technically, we first develop a new notion of ensemble diversity in the adversarial setting, which is significantly different
from the previous attempts in the standard setting of ensembling weak classifiers in a non-adversarial environment.
Namely, previous work has defined ensemble diversity by
considering the prediction errors of individual classifiers in
the ensemble (Liu & Yao, 1999a;b; Dietterich, 2000; Islam
et al., 2003). However, this definition is inappropriate for our
case since most DNNs can achieve high accuracy on a training set (Goodfellow et al., 2016) and promoting diversity of
prediction errors will largely sacrifice accuracy. Instead, we
define the diversity on the non-maximal predictions of each
network (detailed in Eq. (3)). Geometrically, the diversity

