Set Transformer: A Framework for Attention-based
Permutation-Invariant Neural Networks
Juho Lee 1 2 Yoonho Lee 3 Jungtaek Kim 4 Adam R. Kosiorek 1 5 Seungjin Choi 4 Yee Whye Teh 1

Abstract
Many machine learning tasks such as multiple
instance learning, 3D shape recognition and fewshot image classification are defined on sets of instances. Since solutions to such problems do not
depend on the order of elements of the set, models used to address them should be permutation
invariant. We present an attention-based neural
network module, the Set Transformer, specifically
designed to model interactions among elements
in the input set. The model consists of an encoder
and a decoder, both of which rely on attention
mechanisms. In an effort to reduce computational
complexity, we introduce an attention scheme inspired by inducing point methods from sparse
Gaussian process literature. It reduces computation time of self-attention from quadratic to linear
in the number of elements in the set. We show
that our model is theoretically attractive and we
evaluate it on a range of tasks, demonstrating increased performance compared to recent methods
for set-structured data.

1. Introduction
Learning representations has proven to be an essential problem for deep learning and its many success stories. The
majority of problems tackled by deep learning are instancebased and take the form of mapping a fixed-dimensional
input tensor to its corresponding target value (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012; Graves et al., 2013).
For some applications, we are required to process setstructured data. Multiple instance learning (Dietterich et al.,
1
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, United Kingdom 2 AITRICS, Republic of Korea 3 Kakao Corporation, Republic of Korea 4 Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
POSTECH, Republic of Korea 5 Oxford Robotics Institute, University of Oxford, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Juho Lee
<juho.lee@stats.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

1997; Maron & Lozano-Pérez, 1998) is an example of such
a set-input problem, where a set of instances is given as an
input and the corresponding target is a label for the entire
set. Other problems such as 3D shape recognition (Wu et al.,
2015; Shi et al., 2015; Su et al., 2015; Charles et al., 2017),
sequence ordering (Vinyals et al., 2016), and various set operations (Muandet et al., 2012; Oliva et al., 2013; Edwards &
Storkey, 2017; Zaheer et al., 2017) can also be viewed as the
set-input problems. Moreover, many meta-learning (Thrun
& Pratt, 1998; Schmidhuber, 1987) problems which learn
using different, but related tasks may also be treated as setinput tasks where an input set corresponds to the training
dataset of a single task. For example, few-shot image classification (Finn et al., 2017; Snell et al., 2017; Lee & Choi,
2018) operates by building a classifier using a support set
of images, which is evaluated with query images.
A model for set-input problems should satisfy two critical
requirements. First, it should be permutation invariant —
the output of the model should not change under any permutation of the elements in the input set. Second, such a model
should be able to process input sets of any size. While these
requirements stem from the definition of a set, they are not
easily satisfied in neural-network-based models: classical
feed-forward neural networks violate both requirements,
and RNNs are sensitive to input order.
Recently, Edwards & Storkey (2017) and Zaheer et al.
(2017) propose neural network architectures which meet
both criteria, which we call set pooling methods. In this
model, each element in a set is first independently fed into
a feed-forward neural network that takes fixed-size inputs.
Resulting feature-space embeddings are then aggregated
using a pooling operation (mean, sum, max or similar).
The final output is obtained by further non-linear processing
of the aggregated embedding. This remarkably simple architecture satisfies both aforementioned requirements, and
more importantly, is proven to be a universal approximator
for any set function (Zaheer et al., 2017). Thanks to this
property, it is possible to learn a complex mapping between
input sets and their target outputs in a black-box fashion,
much like with feed-forward or recurrent neural networks.
Even though this set pooling approach is theoretically attractive, it remains unclear whether we can approximate

