Curiosity-Bottleneck: Exploration by Distilling Task-Specific Novelty

Youngjin Kim 1 2 Wontae Nam∗ 3 Hyunwoo Kim∗ 2 Ji-Hoon Kim 4 Gunhee Kim 2

Abstract
Exploration based on state novelty has brought
great success in challenging reinforcement learning problems with sparse rewards. However, existing novelty-based strategies become inefficient
in real-world problems where observation contains not only task-dependent state novelty of our
interest but also task-irrelevant information that
should be ignored. We introduce an informationtheoretic exploration strategy named CuriosityBottleneck that distills task-relevant information
from observation. Based on the information bottleneck principle, our exploration bonus is quantified as the compressiveness of observation with
respect to the learned representation of a compressive value network. With extensive experiments on static image classification, grid-world
and three hard-exploration Atari games, we show
that Curiosity-Bottleneck learns an effective exploration strategy by robustly measuring the state
novelty in distractive environments where stateof-the-art exploration methods often degenerate.

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL), an agent learns to interact
with an unknown environment by maximizing the cumulative reward. In this process, the agent should determine
whether to take the best sequence of actions based on previous experiences or to explore different actions in the hope
of discovering novel and potentially more rewarding trajectories. This well-known dilemma is often coined as the
exploration-exploitation tradeoff.
Choosing an appropriate exploration strategy becomes more
crucial especially in an environment where observation also
*

Equal contribution 1 NALBI Inc. 2 Seoul National University,
South Korea 3 Machine Learning Lab, KC Co. Ltd., South Korea
4
Clova AI Research, NAVER Corp., South Korea. Correspondence to: Gunhee Kim <gunhee.kim@snu.ac.kr>, Ji-Hoon Kim
<genesis.kim@navercorp.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

contains novel but task-irrelevant information1 . For example, suppose a robot navigating through a crowded street,
where it visits known locations (states) while facing various
strangers (task-irrelevant novelty). The robot should not
classify a state as novel because of strangers; instead, it
should ignore the distractions to effectively reach its destination and obtain rewards precisely. Although such situations
are widespread in real-world problems (e.g. navigating
drones in a crowd), many recent exploration strategies for
policy optimization (Mohamed & Rezende, 2015; Houthooft
et al., 2016; Pathak et al., 2017; Burda et al., 2019a; Bellemare et al., 2016; Tang et al., 2017; Ostrovski et al., 2017;
Choi et al., 2019) are designed to be effective in environments where observation is well-aligned to the target task
such as Atari games (Bellemare et al., 2013). Through a
series of experiments, we observe that those approaches are
often inaccurate to capture the state novelty when observation contains such novel but task-irrelevant information.
In this work, we propose an information-theoretic approach
to measuring state novelty in distractive environments. Our
method is task-specific in that it learns to identify the target task using sparse extrinsic rewards and filters out taskirrelevant or distractive information from observation when
quantifying the state novelty. Motivated by neural network’s
ability to learn a compressive representation (Tishby & Zaslavsky, 2015; Shwartz-Ziv & Tishby, 2017), we propose
to quantify the degree of compression of observation with
respect to the latent representation of a compressive value
network, and use it as a surrogate metric for task-specific
state novelty as intrinsic reward. The proposed exploration
algorithm is referred to as Curiosity-Bottleneck since it introduces the information bottleneck (IB) principle (Tishby
& Zaslavsky, 2015; Shwartz-Ziv & Tishby, 2017; Alemi
et al., 2017; Alemi & Fischer, 2018; Alemi et al., 2018b;a)
to exploration problems to comprise following properties:
(i) encoding an observation of a higher probability to be
more compressive in representation and (ii) omitting taskirrelevant information while learning a compressive representation. The degree of compression of observation is
estimated by the variational upper-bound of mutual information between observations and learned neural network representations, which can be efficiently computed in a closed
1
The task-irrelevant information refers to ones that affect
neither the agent nor the target.

