PAC Learnability of Node Functions in Networked Dynamical Systems

Abhijin Adiga 1 Chris J. Kuhlman 1 Madhav V. Marathe 1 2 S. S. Ravi 1 3 Anil K. Vullikanti 1 2

Abstract

(Bei et al., 2016; Kleinberg et al., 2017; Adiga et al., 2018).

We consider the PAC learnability of the functions
at the nodes of a discrete networked dynamical
system, assuming that the underlying network is
known. We provide tight bounds on the sample
complexity of learning threshold functions. We
establish a computational intractability result for
efficient PAC learning of such functions. We develop efficient consistent learners when the number of negative examples is small. Using synthetic
and real-world networks, we experimentally study
how the network structure and sample complexity
influence the quality of inference.

We consider the problem of learning the node functions of a
SyDS with a known graph and binary node states under the
probably approximately correct (PAC) learning model pioneered by Valiant (1984). The PAC model has been applied
to many different learning contexts such as learning classes
of Boolean functions, half spaces, automata, etc. (Kearns &
Vazirani, 1994). While PAC learnability has been studied for
classes of individual Boolean functions (e.g., (Hellerstein &
Servedio, 2007)), there has been limited work on dynamical
systems, which can be viewed as Boolean functions that are
connected through a network. Only recently, it has been applied in the context of learning influence functions of nodes
in stochastic networked dynamical systems (Narasimhan
et al., 2015; He et al., 2016).

1. Introduction
Many real world phenomena (disease, influence and social
behavior, neuronal activity, magnetic systems) can be formally represented as networked discrete dynamical systems
(Valente, 1996; Schelling, 1978; Amini & Fountoulakis,
2014). Many such systems that include popular models such
as SEIR (Newman, 2002) and Linear Threshold (Kempe
et al., 2003) fall into the generic class of Synchronous dynamical systems (SyDSs). A SyDS consists of a graph
whose nodes represent entities and whose edges represent
interactions among the entities. Nodes have states and a
local function at each node determines the next state of the
node using the current states of the node and its neighbors.
In a SyDS, the propagation of a contagion evolves in discrete
time steps. In practice, some components of a SyDS are
unknown; learning them is an active area of research. Some
of this research is based on observing the system (Adiga
et al., 2017; González-Bailón et al., 2011; Narasimhan et al.,
2015; Kempe et al., 2003; Lokhov, 2016) while others rely
on active interactions with the system in the form of queries
1
Biocomplexity Institute and Initiative, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, VA, USA. 2 Also with the Department of Computer
Science, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA. 3 Also
with the Department of Computer Science, University at Albany
– SUNY, Albany, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Abhijin Adiga
<abhijin@virginia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Threshold functions are a commonly used class of local
functions in dynamical system models (Granovetter, 1978;
Watts, 2002). A t-threshold function is a Boolean function
whose value is 1 iff at least t of its inputs have value 1.
Variants of this model include bithreshold (Kuhlman et al.,
2011) and progressive threshold (Amini & Fountoulakis,
2014). Our focus is on learning this class of functions (i.e.,
the threshold value of each node in the network) under the
PAC model. Let n be the number of nodes in the graph.
A configuration (s1 , s2 , . . . , sn ) specifies the state of each
node at a certain time. Given a configuration C1 at time τ ,
the configuration C2 at time τ + 1 is called the successor
of C1 . Each example given to the learner is a pair of configurations (C1 , C2 ). An example is labeled ‘positive’ if
C2 is the successor of C1 ; otherwise, it is labeled ‘negative’.
Under the PAC model, these examples are drawn from an
unknown distribution.
Summary of results. Our focus is on SyDSs, where the
local function at each node is a threshold function; that
is, the hypothesis space consists of n-tuples of the form
(t1 , t2 , . . . , tn ), where each ti , a non-negative integer, is the
threshold value assigned to node vi , 1 ≤ i ≤ n. Following
Mitchell (1997), we use the phrase “sample complexity”,
represented by M(, δ), to denote the number of examples
needed under the PAC model to learn a hypothesis space for
given pair of error and probability values (, δ). We assume
that , δ ∈ (0, 12 ). Our results are summarized below.
1. Upper bounds: For learning the hypothesis space of

