Does Data Augmentation Lead to Positive Margin?

Shashank Rajput * 1 Zhili Feng * 1 Zachary Charles 2 Po-Ling Loh 3 Dimitris Papailiopoulos 2

Abstract
Data augmentation (DA) is commonly used during model training, as it significantly improves
test error and model robustness. DA artificially
expands the training set by applying random noise,
rotations, crops, or even adversarial perturbations
to the input data. Although DA is widely used,
its capacity to provably improve robustness is not
fully understood. In this work, we analyze the
robustness that DA begets by quantifying the margin that DA enforces on empirical risk minimizers. We first focus on linear separators, and then a
class of nonlinear models whose labeling is constant within small convex hulls of data points.
We present lower bounds on the number of augmented data points required for non-zero margin,
and show that commonly used DA techniques may
only introduce significant margin after adding exponentially many points to the data set.

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning has ushered in a plethora of advances in data science and engineering, which leverage models with millions of tunable parameters and achieve unprecedented accuracy on many vision, speech, and text prediction
tasks. For state-of-the-art performance, model training involves stochastic gradient descent (SGD), combined with
regularization, momentum, data augmentation, and other
heuristics. Several empirical studies (Zhang et al., 2016;
Zantedeschi et al., 2017) observe that among these methods,
data augmentation plays a central role in improving the test
error performance and robustness of these models.
Data augmentation (DA) expands the training set with artificial data points. For example, Krizhevsky et al. (2012)
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Wisconsin-Madison 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison 3 Department
of Statistics, University of Wisconsin-Madison. Correspondence to: Shashank Rajput <rajput3@wisc.edu>, Zhili Feng
<zfeng49@cs.wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

augmented ImageNet using translations, horizontal reflections, and altered intensities of the RGB channels of images in the training set. Others have augmented datasets
by adding labels to sparsely annotated videos (Misra et al.,
2015; Kuznetsova et al., 2015; Prest et al., 2012). Another
important class of data augmentation methods are referred
to broadly as adversarial training. Such methods use adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2013; Madry et al., 2017)
to enlarge the training set. Many works have since shown
that by training models on these adversarial examples, we
can increase the robustness of learned models (Bastani et al.,
2016; Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Szegedy et al., 2013; Goodfellow et al., 2014). Recently, (Ford et al., 2019) studied
the use of additive Gaussian DA in ensuring robustness of
learned classifiers. While they showed the approach can
have some limited success, ensuring robustness to adversarial attacks requires augmenting the data set with Gaussian
noise of particularly high variance.
The high-level motivation of DA is clear: a reliable model
should be trained to predict the same class even if an image
is slightly perturbed. Despite its empirical effectiveness, relatively few works theoretically analyze the performance and
limitations of DA. Bishop (1995) shows that training with
noise is equivalent to Tikhonov regularization in expectation.
Wager et al. (2013) show that training generalized linear
models while randomly dropping features is approximately
equivalent to `2 -regularization normalized by the inverse
diagonal Fisher information matrix. Dao et al. (2018) study
data augmentation as feature-averaging and variance regularization, using a Markov process to augment the dataset.
Wong & Kolter (2018) provide a provable defense against
bounded `∞ -attacks by training on a convex relaxation of
the “adversarial polytope,” which is also a form of DA.
We take a different path by analyzing how DA impacts the
margin of a classifier, i.e., the minimum distance from the
training data to its decision boundary. We focus on margin
since it acts as a proxy for both generalization (ShalevShwartz & Ben-David, 2014) and worst-case robustness.
In particular, we analyze how much data augmentation is
necessary in order to ensure that any empirical risk minimization algorithm achieves positive, or even large, margin.
To the best of our knowledge, no existing work has explicitly
analyzed data augmentation through the lens of margin.

