Nonlinear Distributional Gradient Temporal-Difference Learning

Chao Qu 1 Shie Mannor 2 Huan Xu 3 4

Abstract
We devise a distributional variant of gradient
temporal-difference (TD) learning. Distributional
reinforcement learning has been demonstrated to
outperform the regular one in the recent study
(Bellemare et al., 2017a). In the policy evaluation
setting, we design two new algorithms called distributional GTD2 and distributional TDC using
the Cramér distance on the distributional version
of the Bellman error objective function, which
inherits advantages of both the nonlinear gradient TD algorithms and the distributional RL approach. In the control setting, we propose the
distributional Greedy-GQ using the similar derivation. We prove the asymptotic almost-sure convergence of distributional GTD2 and TDC to a local
optimal solution for general smooth function approximators, which includes neural networks that
have been widely used in recent study to solve the
real-life RL problems. In each step, the computational complexities of above three algorithms are
linear w.r.t. the number of the parameters of the
function approximator, thus can be implemented
efficiently for neural networks.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) considers a problem where an
agent interacts with the environment to maximize the cumulative reward trough time. A standard approach to solve the
RL problem is called value function based reinforcement
learning, which finds a policy that maximizes the value function V (s) (Sutton & Barto, 1998). Thus, the estimation of
the value function of a given stationary policy of a Markov
Decision Process (MDP) is an important subroutine of generalized policy iteration (Sutton & Barto, 1998) and a key
1

Ant Financial Services Group, Hang Zhou, China 2 Faculty
of Electrial Engineering, Technion, Haifa, Israel 3 Alibaba Group,
Seattle, USA 4 H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems
Engineering, Georgia Tech, Atlanta, USA. Correspondence to:
Chao Qu <luoji.qc@antfin.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

intermediate step to generate good control policy (Gelly &
Silver, 2008; Tesauro, 1992). The value function is known
to solve the Bellman equation, which succinctly describes
the recursive relation on state-action value function Q(s, a).
Qπ (s, a) = ER(s, a) + γEs0 ,a0 Qπ (s0 , a0 ),
where the expectation is taken over the next state s0 ∼
P (·|s, a), the reward R(s, a) and the action a0 from policy
π, γ is the discount factor. Hence, many RL algorithms are
based on the idea of solving the above Bellman equation
in a sample driven way, and one popular technique is the
temporal-difference (TD) learning (Sutton & Barto, 1998).
The last several years have witnessed the success of the TD
learning with the value function approximation (Mnih et al.,
2015; Van Hasselt et al., 2016), especially when using a deep
neural network. In their seminal work, Tsitsiklis & Van Roy
(1996) proved that the TD(λ) algorithm converges when
a linear function approximator is implemented and states
are sampled according to the policy evaluated (sometimes
referred as on-policy setting in RL literature). However, if either the function approximator is non-linear, or the on-policy
setting does not hold, there are counterexamples that demonstrate that TD(λ) may diverge. To mitigate this problem,
a family of TD-style algorithms called Gradient Temporal
Difference (GTD) are proposed by (Sutton et al., 2009b;a)
that address the instability of the TD algorithm with the
linear function approximator in the off-policy setting. These
works rely on the objective function called mean-squared
projected Bellman error (MSPBE) whose unique optimum
are the fixed points of the TD(0) algorithm. Bhatnagar et al.
(2009) extend this idea to the non-linear smooth function
approximator (e.g., neural networks) and prove the convergence of the algorithm under mild conditions. In the control
setting, Maei et al. (2010) propose Greedy-GQ which has
similar objective function as MSPBE but w.r.t. the Bellman
optimality operator.
Recently, the distributional perspective on reinforcement
learning has gained much attention. Rather than study on
the expectation of the long term return (i.e., Q(s, a)), it
explicitly takes into consideration the stochastic nature of
the long term return Z(s, a) (whose expectation is Q(s, a)).
The recursion of Z(s, a) is described by the distributional

