Online Algorithms for Rent-or-Buy with Expert Advice

Sreenivas Gollapudi * 1 Debmalya Panigrahi * 2

Abstract
We study the use of predictions by multiple experts (such as machine learning algorithms) to
improve the performance of online algorithms. In
particular, we consider the classical rent-or-buy
problem (also called ski rental), and obtain algorithms that provably improve their performance
over the adversarial scenario by using these predictions. We also prove matching lower bounds
to show that our algorithms are the best possible,
and perform experiments to empirically validate
their performance in practice.

1. Introduction
Uncertainty plays a central role in many scenarios where
an optimizer is faced with the decision between two alternatives with very different costs. The first alternative has
a recurring small cost (“rent”) while the second alternative
presents a large cost upfront (“buy”) but nothing thereafter.
While long term use justifies the large cost to buy, renting
is the preferred option for short term use. The uncertainty
arises in the length of use, which is typically not known
in advance. These decisions arise in our everyday lives,
such as in deciding whether to buy a house or rent. The
same question arises in much larger contexts, such as in a
corporate decision of whether to invest in a new data center
or rent space in an existing one. In optimization, such problems constitute the rent-or-buy question, and are modeled
as the widely-studied ski rental problem (Karlin et al., 1994;
Lotker et al., 2008; Khanafer et al., 2013; Kodialam, 2014).
Two popular paradigms for dealing with uncertainty are
online algorithms (Borodin & El-Yaniv, 1998) that are designed to work without knowing the input to the problem in
advance, and machine learning that makes future predictions
by fitting a model to prior data. Recent work has begun to
incorporate machine learned predictions into the design of
*

Equal contribution 1 Google Research 2 Department of Computer Science, Duke University. Correspondence to: Debmalya
Panigrahi <debmalya@cs.duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

online algorithms (Medina & Vassilvitskii, 2017; Lykouris
& Vassilvitskii, 2018; Kumar et al., 2018; Mitzenmacher,
2018) to improve their performance. The goal is to incorporate the ML predictions in a manner that improves the
performance of the online algorithm if the predictions are
accurate (a design goal called consistency), but not degrade
it significantly if the predictions are inaccurate (a design
goal called robustness). Note that these properties are ensured by the algorithm without any knowledge of the quality
of the predictions.
While the previous studies focused on using prediction inputs from a single ML algorithm or expert, we study the
more general setting where we get predictions from multiple
experts. This is often the case in practice, where different
ML algorithms use a variety of models and techniques to
arrive at different sets of predictions for the future. Indeed,
the problem of combining predictions from multiple experts
to obtain a policy that matches the performance of the best
expert has been extensively studied in the context of online
learning (Jacobs et al., 1991; Chen et al., 1999; Hansen,
1999; Masoudnia & Ebrahimpour, 2014). In this paper, we
study the use of multiple predictions to improve the performance of online algorithms, namely for the classical ski
rental problem. Our goal is to match the performance of
the best expert, while also ensuring that the algorithm does
not degrade significantly compared to the worst-case performance of the best online algorithm if all the experts have
large prediction errors.
The ski rental problem. In the ski rental problem, a skier
needs to decide between buying skis at cost b and renting
them at the cost of 1 per day. It is easy to see that if the
ski season last more than b days, then the skier should buy
skis at the start of the season; else, she should rent skis
throughout the season. But, the skier does not know the
length of the ski season in advance, and only learns it once
the season ends. It is well-known that the best deterministic
strategy for the skier is to rent for b days and buy after that
if the ski season continues longer. This algorithm achieves a
competitive ratio of 2.1 Our goal is to use experts (e.g., ML
algorithms) that provide estimates of the length of the season
to improve the performance of this online algorithm. The
1

The competitive ratio of an online algorithm is the worst case
ratio of the algorithm’s cost to the optimal cost.

