Myopic Posterior Sampling for Adaptive Goal Oriented Design of Experiments

Kirthevasan Kandasamy 1 Willie Neiswanger 1 Reed Zhang 1 Akshay Krishnamurthy 2
Jeff Schneider 1 Barnabás Póczos 1

Abstract
Bayesian methods for adaptive decision-making,
such as Bayesian optimisation, active learning,
and active search have seen great success in relevant applications. However, real world data collection tasks are more broad and complex, as we may
need to achieve a combination of the above goals
and/or application specific goals. In such scenarios, specialised methods have limited applicability. In this work, we design a new myopic strategy for a wide class of adaptive design of experiment (DOE) problems, where we wish to collect
data in order to fulfil a given goal. Our approach,
Myopic Posterior Sampling (MPS), which is inspired by the classical posterior sampling algorithm for multi-armed bandits, enables us to address a broad suite of DOE tasks where a practitioner may incorporate domain expertise about the
system and specify her desired goal via a reward
function. Empirically, this general-purpose strategy is competitive with more specialised methods
in a wide array of synthetic and real world DOE
tasks. More importantly, it enables addressing
complex DOE goals where no existing method
seems applicable. On the theoretical side, we
leverage ideas from adaptive submodularity and
reinforcement learning to derive conditions under which MPS achieves sublinear regret against
natural benchmark policies.

1. Introduction
Many problems in adaptive decision-making under uncertainty fall into the design of experiments (DOE) framework,
where one wishes to design a sequence of experiments and
collect data so as to achieve a desired goal. For example, in
electrolyte design for batteries, a chemist would like to conduct experiments that measure battery conductivity in order
to identify an electrolyte design that maximises conductiv1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: Kirthevasan Kandasamy <kandasamy@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

ity. On a different day, she would like to experiment with
different designs to learn how the viscosity of the electrolyte
changes with the design. These two tasks, black-box optimisation and active learning, fall under the umbrella of DOE
and are pervasive in industrial and scientific applications.
While several methods exist for specific DOE tasks, real
world problems are broad and complex, and specialised
methods have limited applicability. Continuing with the
electrolyte example, the chemist can typically measure both
conductivity and viscosity with a single experiment. Since
such experiments are expensive, it is wasteful to first perform a set of experiments to optimise conductivity and then
a fresh set to learn viscosity. Rather, it is desirable to design
a single set of experiments that simultaneously achieves both
goals. A second example is metallurgy, where one wishes to
identify phase transitions in an alloy by carefully selecting
a sequence of X-ray diffraction experiments (Bunn et al.,
2016). Here and elsewhere, the goal of the experimenter
is application specific and cannot be simply shoehorned
into standard DOE formulations such as black-box optimisation, active learning, etc. In addition, domain knowledge
about the problem may need to be considered in selecting
experiments, as it may significantly reduce the number of
experiments needed to achieve the desired goal.
To address these desiderata, we develop a general and flexible framework for goal oriented DOE, where a practitioner
may specify her desired goal via a reward function λ. λ
can depend on the data collected during the DOE process
and unknown system characteristics, and hence cannot be
directly computed by a decision-maker. We then develop
an adaptive myopic strategy for DOE, inspired by posterior
(Thompson) sampling for multi-armed bandits (Thompson,
1933), which uses results from past experiments to plan
future experiments and achieve the goal, i.e. maximise λ.
Our approach has two key advantages. First, our Bayesian
formulation allows one to straightforwardly specify domain
expertise. Moreover, modern tools for probabilistic programming enable pratitioners to apply a Bayesian algorithm
such as ours in a fairly straightforward manner. Second,
our myopic strategy is simple and computationally attractive in comparison with policies that engage in long-term
planning. Nevertheless, borrowing ideas from submodular
optimisation and reinforcement learning, we derive natural

