Bounding User Contributions:
A Bias-Variance Trade-off in Differential Privacy
Kareem Amin 1 Alex Kulesza 1 Andres Muñoz Medina 1 Sergei Vassilvitskii 1

Abstract
Differentially private learning algorithms protect
individual participants in the training dataset by
guaranteeing that their presence does not significantly change the resulting model. In order to
make this promise, such algorithms need to know
the maximum contribution that can be made by
a single user: the more data an individual can
contribute, the more noise will need to be added
to protect them. While most existing analyses
assume that the maximum contribution is known
and fixed in advance—indeed, it is often assumed
that each user contributes only a single example—
we argue that in practice there is a meaningful
choice to be made. On the one hand, if we allow
users to contribute large amounts of data, we may
end up adding excessive noise to protect a few outliers, even when the majority contribute only modestly. On the other hand, limiting users to small
contributions keeps noise levels low at the cost
of potentially discarding significant amounts of
excess data, thus introducing bias. Here, we characterize this trade-off for an empirical risk minimization setting, showing that in general there is a
“sweet spot” that depends on measurable properties of the dataset, but that there is also a concrete
cost to privacy that cannot be avoided simply by
collecting more data.

1. Introduction
Differential privacy (Dwork & Roth, 2014) has emerged
as the standard framework for quantifying information revealed by an algorithm about the users that supply its underlying data. A differentially private algorithm guarantees
1
Google Research New York, NY, USA. Correspondence
to: Kareem Amin <kamin@google.com>, Alex Kulesza
<kulesza@google.com>, Andres Muñoz Medina <ammedina@google.com>, Sergei Vassilvitskii <sergeiv@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

that the presence of any single user in the dataset cannot
be accurately predicted from the algorithm’s output; this
is achieved by perturbing the result using random noise.
Differential privacy is built around a rigorous theory and
has strong formal properties; for example, the protection it
affords cannot be broken by any kind of post-processing.
While a variety of mechanisms for generating differentially
private algorithms are now known—and, increasingly, used
in practice—significant challenges remain. In applying
differential privacy to location data, Pyrgelis et al. (2018)
lamented that “differentially private mechanisms . . . yield
a significant loss in utility.” Describing their use of differential privacy at the U.S. Census Bureau, Garfinkel et al.
(2018) wrote that their chosen value for the privacy parameter ✏ (for which smaller values indicate stronger privacy
protection) was “far higher than those envisioned by the
creators of differential privacy.” In order to achieve their
desired utility, they were forced to accept a less than ideal
level of protection.
While a variety of factors contribute to these kinds of problems, we focus here on a particular difficulty arising from
the need to add noise sufficient to mask the largest effect of
any individual user. In typical applications, this maximum
effect can be quite large or potentially unbounded: even
when typical users contribute only a modest amount of data,
there can be extreme outliers, and they must be protected too.
(Arguably, the protection of outliers is even more important.) And, making things worse, we must protect not only
the users already in the dataset, but also the hypothetical
users who might have elected not to contribute—otherwise
an attacker could infer their absence.
Formally, the magnitude of the noise usually must be calibrated to match the sensitivity of the analysis with respect to
a single user. Most existing theoretical work assumes that
the sensitivity is fixed and known in advance; for instance,
in differentially private learning it is often assumed that
each user can contribute only a single example (Chaudhuri
et al., 2011; Bassily et al., 2014). In reality, of course, users
often contribute many examples, with different users contributing at vastly different rates; a single user might thus
be responsible for a disproportionately large fraction of the
dataset.

