S EVER: A Robust Meta-Algorithm for Stochastic Optimization1

Ilias Diakonikolas * 1 Gautam Kamath * 2 Daniel M. Kane * 3 Jerry Li * 4 Jacob Steinhardt * 5 Alistair Stewart * 6

Abstract
In high dimensions, most machine learning methods are brittle to even a small fraction of structured outliers. To address this, we introduce a new
meta-algorithm that can take in a base learner
such as least squares or stochastic gradient descent, and harden the learner to be resistant to
outliers. Our method, S EVER, possesses strong
theoretical guarantees yet is also highly scalable—
beyond running the base learner itself, it only
requires computing the top singular vector of a
certain n × d matrix. We apply S EVER on a drug
design dataset and a spam classification dataset,
and find that in both cases it has substantially
greater robustness than several baselines.

1. Introduction
Learning in the presence of outliers is a ubiquitous challenge
in machine learning; nevertheless, most machine learning
methods are very sensitive to outliers in high dimensions.
The focus of this work is on designing algorithms that are
outlier robust while remaining competitive in terms of accuracy and running time.
We highlight two motivating applications. The first is biological data (e.g., gene expression data), where mislabeling
or measurement errors can create systematic outliers (Rosen*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA 2 Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing, Berkeley, California, USA 3 Departments of Mathematics and Computer Science and Engineering, University
of California, San Diego, California, USA 4 Microsoft Research AI, Redmond, Washington, USA 5 Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley, California, USA
6
Web3 Foundation, Zug, Switzerland. Correspondence to:
Ilias Diakonikolas <diakonik@usc.edu>, Gautam Kamath
<g@csail.mit.edu>, Daniel M. Kane <dakane@cs.ucsd.edu>,
Jerry Li <jerrl@microsoft.com>, Jacob Steinhardt <jsteinhardt@berkeley.edu>, Alistair Stewart <stewart.al@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).
Code: https://github.com/hoonose/sever

berg et al., 2002; Li et al., 2008) requiring painstaking manual effort to remove (Paschou et al., 2010). Detecting outliers in such settings is often important either because the
outlier observations are of interest themselves or because
they might contaminate the downstream statistical analysis.
The second motivation is machine learning security, where
outliers can be introduced through data poisoning attacks
(Barreno et al., 2010) where an adversary inserts fake data
into the training set (e.g., by creating a fake user account).
Recent work shows that for high-dimensional datasets, even
a small fraction of outliers can substantially degrade the
learned model (Biggio et al., 2012; Newell et al., 2014; Koh
& Liang, 2017; Steinhardt et al., 2017; Koh et al., 2018).
Crucially, in both the biological and security settings above,
the outliers are not “random” but are instead highly correlated, and could have a complex internal structure that is
difficult to model. This leads us to the following conceptual question underlying the present work: Can we design
training algorithms that are robust to the presence of an εfraction of arbitrary (and potentially adversarial) outliers?
Estimation in the presence of outliers is a prototypical goal
in robust statistics and has been systematically studied since
the pioneering work of Tukey Tukey (1960). Popular methods include RANSAC (Fischler & Bolles, 1981), minimum
covariance determinant (Rousseeuw & Driessen, 1999), removal based on k-nearest neighbors (Breunig et al., 2000),
and Huberizing the loss (Owen, 2007) (see Hodge & Austin
(2004) for a comprehensive survey). However, these classical methods either break down in high dimensions, or only
handle “benign” outliers that are obviously different from
the rest of the data (see Section 1.1 for futher discussion).
Motivated by this, recent work in theoretical computer science has developed efficient robust estimators for classical problems such as linear classification (Klivans et al.,
2009; Awasthi et al., 2014), mean and covariance estimation (Diakonikolas et al., 2016a; Lai et al., 2016), clustering
(Charikar et al., 2017), and regression (Bhatia et al., 2015;
2017; Balakrishnan et al., 2017). Nevertheless, the promise
of practical high-dimensional robust estimation is yet to be
realized; indeed, the aforementioned results generally suffer
from one of two shortcomings–either they use sophisticated
convex optimization algorithms that do not scale to large
datasets, or they are tailored to specific problems of interest

