Poisson Subsampled Renyi Differential Privacy
Yuqing Zhu 1 Yu-Xiang Wang 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of "privacyamplification by subsampling” under the
Renyi Differential Privacy (RDP) framework
(Mironov, 2017). This is the main workhorse
underlying the moments accountant approach
for differentially private deep learning (Abadi
et al., 2016). Complementing a recent result
on this problem that deals with “Sampling
without Replacement” (Wang et al., 2019), we
address the “Poisson subsampling” scheme
which selects each data point independently with
probability γ. The seemingly minor change
allows us to more precisely characterize the RDP
of M ◦ PoissonSample. In particular, we prove
an exact analytical formula for the case when
M is the Gaussian mechanism or the Laplace
mechanism. For general M, we prove an upper
bound that is optimal up to an additive constant
of log(3)/(α − 1) and a multiplicative factor of
1 + O(γ). Our result is the first of its kind that
makes the moments accountant technique (Abadi
et al., 2016) efficient and generally applicable for
all Poisson-subsampled mechanisms. An open
source implementation is available at https:
//github.com/yuxiangw/autodp.

1. Introduction
“Privacy-amplification by Subsampling” and the Renyi Differential Privacy are the two fundamental techniques that
have been driving many exciting recent advances in differentially private learning (Abadi et al., 2016; Park et al.,
2016; Papernot et al., 2018; McMahan et al., 2018).
One prominent use case of both techniques is the
NoisySGD algorithm (Song et al., 2013; Bassily et al.,
2014; Wang et al., 2015; Foulds et al., 2016; Abadi et al.,
1
UC Santa Barbara, Department of Computer Science. Correspondence to: Yuqing Zhu <yuqingzhu@ucsb.edu>, Yu-Xiang
Wang <yuxiangw@cs.ucsb.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

2016) for differentially private deep learning. NoisySGD
iteratively updates the model parameters as follows:
!
#
"
θt+1 ← θt − ηt
∇fi (θt ) + Zt
(1)
i∈I

where θt is the model parameter at tth step, ηt is the learning rate, fi is the loss function of data point i, ∇ is the standard gradient operator, I ⊂ [n] is a randomly subsampled
index set and Zt ∼ N (0, σ 2 I). When ∇fi (θt ) is bounded
(or clipped) in ℓ2 -norm, the Gaussian noise-adding procedure is known to ensure (ϵ, δ)-DP for this iteration. ϵ, δ
are nonnegative numbers that quantifies the privacy loss incurred from running the algorithm (the smaller the better).
But this is clearly not good enough as it takes many iterations to learn the model, and the privacy guarantee deteriorates as the algorithm continues. This is where the “privacyamplification” and RDP become useful.
The principle of “privacy-amplification by subsampling”
works seamlessly with NoisySGD as it allows us to exploit
the randomness in choosing the minibatch I for the interest
of a stronger privacy guarantee. Roughly speaking, if the
minibatch I is obtained by selecting each data point with
probability γ, then we can “amplify” the privacy guarantee
to a stronger (O(γϵ), γδ)-DP.
The RDP framework provides a complementary set of benefits that reduce the overall privacy loss over the multiple iterations we run NoisySGD. Notice that the vanilla
“strong-composition” is stated for any (ϵ, δ)-DP algorithm.
By using the moments accountant techniques (Abadi et al.,
2016) that keep track of the RDP of a specific algorithm
— subsampled-Gaussian mechanism, one can hope to more
efficiently use the privacy budget than what an optimal algorithm would be able to using only (ϵ, δ)-DP (Kairouz et al.,
2015).
In general, however, calculating the RDP for the procedure
that first subsamples the data set then apply a randomized
mechanism M is highly non-trivial. An exact analytical
formula is not known even for the widely-used subsampledGaussian mechanism. Existing asymptotic bounds are typically off by a constant, and only apply to a restricted subset
of the parameter regimes. To get the most mileage out of
the moments accountant, practitioners often resort to numerical integration which calculates and keep track of a

