On the Design of Estimators for Bandit Off-Policy Evaluation

Nikos Vlassis 1 Aurelien Bibaut 2 Maria Dimakopoulou 1 Tony Jebara 1

Abstract
Off-policy evaluation is the problem of estimating the value of a target policy using data collected under a different policy. We describe a
framework for designing estimators for bandit offpolicy evaluation. Given a base estimator and a
parametrized class of control variates, we seek a
control variate in that class that reduces the risk
of the base estimator. We derive the population
risk as a function of the class parameters and we
discuss some approaches for optimizing this function. We present our main results in the context
of multi-armed bandits, and we decribe a simple design for contextual bandits that gives rise
to an estimator that is shown to perform well in
multi-class cost-sensitive classification datasets.

1. Introduction
We address the problem of off-policy evaluation in a bandit
setting. The problem involves estimating the value (expected reward) of a target policy from logged data collected
under an alternative logging policy. This is an important
problem, with roots in causality and estimation of treatment
effects (Robins & Rotnitzky, 1995; Hahn, 1998; Hirano
et al., 2003), and with an active research literature (Dudı́k
et al., 2014; Li et al., 2015; Thomas & Brunskill, 2016;
Swaminathan et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2017; Athey & Wager, 2017; Kallus & Zhou, 2018; Farajtabar et al., 2018;
Joachims et al., 2018). The setting is of particular interest
in recommendation systems (e.g., movie recommendations
at Netflix), in which the logged actions are recommended
items (e.g., movies) and the logged rewards capture a metric
of interest (e.g., watch time). Off-policy evaluation allows
testing a much larger number of candidate policies than
would be possible by online A/B testing.
In the context of bandit problems, the following question is
1

Netflix, Los Gatos CA, USA 2 Department of Biostatistics,
University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, USA. Correspondence
to: Nikos Vlassis <nvlassis@netflix.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

of great interest: Given a bandit model, what is a low-risk
estimator of the counterfactual target value? (Throughout,
by ‘risk’ we will assume mean squared error (MSE).) The
question is primarily relevant in the non-asymptotic (finite
sample) and/or agnostic (inaccurate model) setting, since
asymptotically and under model realizability the Doubly
Robust (DR) estimator is known to be risk-optimal (Hahn,
1998). Even for the simple case of a Bernoulli K-armed
bandit the question of what constitutes a risk-optimal estimator is still open. Li et al. (2015) have derived a minimax
lower bound of risk in the case of K-armed bandits with
Gaussian rewards, and have demonstrated that REG, the
classical regression (aka direct method) estimator for Karmed bandits, matches the minimax lower bound up to a
constant. However, it is not known whether REG is improvable, and whether there exist instance-dependent estimators
that dominate REG. Lattimore & Szepesvári (2019, Chapter
16) discuss the problem of computing instance-dependent
lower bounds for bandit problems.
In this work we address the problem of designing a low-risk
estimator for a given bandit instance. We develop our main
results in the context of the standard Bernoulli K-armed
bandit, but our ideas are generalizable to a wider class of
problems, and we demonstrate an application to contextual
bandits. We approach the problem in the following way: We
assume we possess a base estimator b, for instance, REG.
Given knowledge of b, we design a parametric class of
control variates (CV), and seek a member t from that class
such that MSE(b − t) < MSE(b). The latter involves an
optimization problem over population-dependent quantities.
We derive the population risk difference MSE(b − t) −
MSE(b) and discuss a few ways to optimize this quantity.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows.
First, we show that the population risk is closed-form for
a parametrized class of estimators involving polynomial
functions of sufficient statistics (Section 3.3). Second, we
demonstrate experimentally (Section 4 and Fig.1) that there
do exist instance-dependent estimators that improve REG
for K-armed bandits in the finite-sample regime, and those
estimators can be learned from the data and built off totally different estimator classes (e.g., IPS). Finally, we show
how a simple application of the idea can give rise to an
estimator for contextual bandits that attains state-of-the-art
performance in a benchmark dataset.

