Hessian Aided Policy Gradient

Zebang Shen 1 Hamed Hassani 2 Chao Mi 1 Hui Qian 1 Alejandro Ribeiro 2

Abstract
Reducing the variance of estimators for policy
gradient has long been the focus of reinforcement
learning research. While classic algorithms like
REINFORCE find an -approximate first-order
stationary point in O(1/4 ) random trajectory
simulations, no provable improvement on the
complexity has been made so far. This paper
presents a Hessian aided policy gradient method
with the first improved sample complexity of
O(1/3 ). While our method exploits information
from the policy Hessian, it can be implemented
in linear time with respect to the parameter dimension and is hence applicable to sophisticated
DNN parameterization. Simulations on standard
tasks validate the efficiency of our method.

1. Introduction
A Markov Decision Process (MDP) is determined by timevarying system states, actions to affect the transition probability between states, and instantaneous rewards collected
as a function of the state visited and the action taken (Puterman, 2014). Whenever the system visits a particular state,
the agent chooses an action that is dictated by a (possibly
stochastic) policy. As the agent moves from state to state,
it collects an aggregate reward given by a discounted sum
of the instantaneous rewards. The optimal policy of an
MDP is the one that maximizes such aggregate reward. The
focus of this paper is to find the optimal policy in modelfree reinforcement learning (RL) problems where transition
probabilities and rewards are unknown and can only be estimated by probing the system through the execution of policy
actions (Sutton and Barto, 2018).
Policy gradient methods and its variants constitute the set
of tools that are most widely used for finding good policies
in MDPs (Williams, 1992; Sutton et al., 2000; Baxter and
1

Zhejiang University 2 University of Pennsylvania. Correspondence to: Hui Qian <qianhui@zju.edu.cn>, Alejandro Ribeiro
<aribeiro@seas.upenn.edu >.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Bartlett, 2001). Such methods directly find the optimal policy through the use of stochastic first-order differentials of
the accumulated reward relative to policy variations. Their
popularity notwithstanding, they are known to have low sample efficiency demanding hundreds of thousands of Monte
Carlo simulations of full trajectories even when dealing
with relatively simple MDPs. Large sample complexity is
inherent to MDPs because to evaluate individual stochastic
policy gradients we need to run a full trajectory under the
current policy. Such trajectories are composed of a large
number of individual transitions which not only makes them
costly to simulate but also results in gradient estimates with
large variances as the randomness of individual transitions
is compounded over the trajectory’s time horizon (Williams,
1992; Sutton, 1984; Arulkumaran et al., 2017; Sutton and
Barto, 2018).
Besides the aforementioned MDP-specific challenges, policy gradient inherits the limitations of any stochastic gradient descent method used for optimizing a nonconvex function. This manifests in the need for O(1/4 ) stochastic
first-order queries to find an -approximate first order stationary point (-FOSP) (Nesterov, 2013). In the supervised
learning literature this slow convergence is alleviated with
variance reduction techniques which exploit correlations
between consecutive stochastic gradient estimators (Roux
et al., 2012; Johnson and Zhang, 2013; Defazio et al., 2014;
Nguyen et al., 2017; Fang et al., 2018). Give the dramatic
impact of VR on the SL, we should expect it to be even more
effective in reinforcement learning where policy gradients
are prone to larger variances.
However, direct transplanting the variance reduction techniques tailored for supervised learning does not reduced the
O(1/4 ) sample complexity (Papini et al., 2018). This happens because variance reduction techniques make explicit
use of the fact that the randomness in the objective function
is oblivious to the argument, i.e., the randomness that affects
the choice of a function does not depend the variables. This
is not true for RL problems in which the probabilities of
random trajectories are affected by the policy. Consequently,
when applying variance reduction techniques to these nonoblivious objectives, the improvements in convergence rates
that are obtained in supervised learning do not materialize.
Contributions. This paper develops a Hessian-aided vari-

