Adaptive Regret of Convex and Smooth Functions

Lijun Zhang 1 Tie-Yan Liu 2 Zhi-Hua Zhou 1

Abstract
We investigate online convex optimization in
changing environments, and choose the adaptive
regret as the performance measure. The goal is
to achieve a small regret over every interval so
that the comparator is allowed to change over
time. Different from previous works that only
utilize the convexity condition, this paper further exploits smoothness to improve the adaptive
regret. To this end, we develop novel adaptive
algorithms for convex and smooth functions, and
establish problem-dependent regret bounds over
any interval. Our regret bounds are comparable
to existing results in the worst case, and become
much tighter when the comparator has a small
loss.

1. Introduction
Online convex optimization (OCO) is a powerful learning
framework which has both theoretical and practical appeals
(Zinkevich, 2003). Given a convex decision set W, the
learner is required to select a decision wt ∈ W in each
round t. Then, a convex loss function ft : W 7→ R is
revealed, and the learner suffers loss ft (wt ). The goal is
to minimize the cumulative loss of the online learner, or
equivalently the regret defined as
Regret =

T
X
t=1

ft (wt ) − min

w∈W

T
X

ft (w)

t=1

which is the difference of losses between the learner and the
optimal solution in hindsight. In the past decades, various
algorithms for minimizing the regret have been developed
(Shalev-Shwartz, 2011; Hazan, 2016).
OCO is a natural choice for changing environments in the
sense that the loss arrives dynamically. However, in the
1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 2 Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Lijun Zhang
<zhanglj@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

real-world application, we are also facing another dynamic
challenge—the optimal solution may change continuously.
For example, in online recommendation, w models the interest of users, which could evolve over time. In this scenario,
regret is no longer a suitable measure of performance, since
the online learner is compared against a fixed decision. So,
the traditional regret is also referred to as static regret to
emphasize that the comparator is static.
To cope with changing environments, the notion of adaptive
regret has been proposed and received considerable interests
(Hazan & Seshadhri, 2007; Daniely et al., 2015; Zhang et al.,
2018b). The key idea is to minimize the “local” regret
s
s
X
 X
Regret [r, s] =
ft (wt ) − min
ft (w)
t=r

w∈W

t=r

of every interval [r, s] ⊆ [T ]. Requiring a low regret over
any interval essentially means the online learner is evaluated
against a changing comparator. For convex
p functions, the
state-of-the-art algorithm achieves an O( (s − r) log s) regret over any interval [r, s] (Jun et al., 2017), which is close
to the minimax regret over a fixed interval (Abernethy et al.,
2008). In the studies of static regret, it is well-known that
the regret bound can be improved when additional curvatures, such as smoothness, are present (Srebro et al., 2010).
Thus, it is natural to ask whether smoothness can also be exploited to enhance the adaptive regret. This paper provides
an affirmative answer by developing adaptive algorithms for
convex and smooth functions that enjoy tighter bounds.
We remark that directly combining the regret of convex and
smooth functions with existing adaptive algorithms does
not give a tight adaptive regret, because of the following
technical challenges.
• The regret bound for convex and smooth functions requires to know the loss of the optimal decision (Srebro
et al., 2010), which is generally unavailable.
• Existing adaptive algorithms have some components,
including a meta-algorithm and a set of intervals, that
cannot utilize smoothness.
To address the above challenges, we first introduce the scalefree online gradient descent (SOGD), a special case of the
scale-free mirror descent (Orabona & Pál, 2018), and demonstrate that SOGD is able to exploit smoothness automatically and does not need any prior knowledge. Then,

