Efficient learning of smooth probability functions from Bernoulli tests
with guarantees

Paul Rolland 1 Ali Kavis 1 Alex Immer 1 Adish Singla 2 Volkan Cevher 1

Abstract
We study the fundamental problem of learning an
unknown, smooth probability function via pointwise Bernoulli tests. We provide a scalable algorithm for efficiently solving this problem with rigorous guarantees. In particular, we prove the convergence rate of our posterior update rule to the
true probability function in L2 -norm. Moreover,
we allow the Bernoulli tests to depend on contextual features and provide a modified inference
engine with provable guarantees for this novel
setting. Numerical results show that the empirical
convergence rates match the theory, and illustrate
the superiority of our approach in handling contextual features over the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
One of the central challenges in machine learning relates to
learning a continuous probability function from point-wise
Bernoulli tests (Casella & Berger, 2002; Johnson & Wichern, 2002). Examples include, but are not limited to, clinical
trials (DerSimonian & Laird, 1986), recommendation systems (McNee et al., 2003), sponsored search (Pandey &
Olston, 2007), and binary classification. Due to the curse
of dimensionality, we often require a large number of tests
in order to obtain an accurate approximation of the target
function. It is thus necessary to use a method that scalably
constructs this approximation with the number of tests.
A widely used method for efficiently solving this problem
is the Logistic Gaussian Process (LGP) algorithm (Tokdar
& Ghosh, 2007). While this algorithm has no clear provable
guarantees, it is shown to be very efficient in practice in
approximating the target function. However, the time required for inferring the posterior distribution at some point
1

Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland 2 Max
Planck Institute for Software Systems, Saarbrücken, Germany.
Correspondence to: Paul Rolland <paul.rolland@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

grows cubicly with the number of tests, and can thus be
inapplicable when the amount of data becomes large. There
has been extensive work to resolve this cubic complexity
associated with GP computations (Rasmussen, 2004). However, these methods require additional approximations on
the posterior distribution, which impacts the efficiency and
make the overall algorithm even more complicated, leading
to further difficulties in establishing theoretical convergence
guarantees.
Recently, Goetschalckx et al. (2011) tackled the issues encountered by LGP, and proposed a scalable inference engine
based on Beta Processes called Continuous Correlated Beta
Process (CCBP) for approximating the probability function.
By scalable, we mean the algorithm complexity scales linearly with the number of tests. However, no theoretical analysis is provided, and the approximation error saturates as
the number of tests becomes large (cf., section 5.1). Hence,
it is unclear whether provable convergence and scalability
can be obtained simultaneously.
This paper bridges this gap by designing a simple and scalable method for efficiently approximating the probability
functions with provable convergence. Our algorithm constructs a posterior distribution that allows inference in linear
time (w.r.t. the number of tests) and converges in L2 -norm
to the true probability function (uniformly over the feature
space), see Theorem 1.
In addition, we also allow the Bernoulli tests to depend on
contextual parameters influencing the success probabilities.
To ensure convergence of the approximation, these features
need to be taken into account in the inference engine. We
thus provide the first algorithm that efficiently treats these
contextual features while performing inference, and retain
guarantees. As a motivation for this setting, we demonstrate
how this algorithm can efficiently be used for treating bias
in the data (Agarwal et al., 2018).
1.1. Basic model and the challenge
In its basic form, we seek to learn an unknown, smooth function π : X → [0, 1], X ⊂ Rd from point-wise Bernoulli
tests, where d is the features space dimension. We model
such tests as si ∼ Bernoulli(π(xi )), where ∼ means dis-

