On the Limitations of Representing Functions on Sets

Edward Wagstaff * 1 Fabian B. Fuchs * 1 Martin Engelcke * 1 Ingmar Posner 1 Michael Osborne 1

Abstract
Recent work on the representation of functions
on sets has considered the use of summation in
a latent space to enforce permutation invariance.
In particular, it has been conjectured that the dimension of this latent space may remain fixed
as the cardinality of the sets under consideration
increases. However, we demonstrate that the analysis leading to this conjecture requires mappings
which are highly discontinuous and argue that this
is only of limited practical use. Motivated by this
observation, we prove that an implementation of
this model via continuous mappings (as provided
by e.g. neural networks or Gaussian processes)
actually imposes a constraint on the dimensionality of the latent space. Practical universal function
representation for set inputs can only be achieved
with a latent dimension at least the size of the
maximum number of input elements.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models have had great success in taking
advantage of structure in their input spaces: recurrent neural
networks are popular models for sequential data (Sutskever
et al., 2014) and convolutional neural networks are the stateof-the-art for many image-based problems (He et al., 2016).
Recently, however, models for unstructured inputs in the
form of sets have rapidly gained attention (Ravanbakhsh
et al., 2016; Zaheer et al., 2017; Qi et al., 2017a; Lee et al.,
2018; Murphy et al., 2018; Korshunova et al., 2018).
Importantly, a range of machine learning problems can naturally be formulated in terms of sets; e.g. parsing a scene
composed of a set of objects (Eslami et al., 2016; Kosiorek
et al., 2018), making predictions from a set of points forming a 3D point cloud (Qi et al., 2017a;b), or training a set
of agents in reinforcement learning (Sunehag et al., 2017).
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
<{ed, fabian, martin}@robots.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Input

Output

ϕ
x1

xM

X ∈ ℝM

ρ

+
ϕ(x1)

ϕ(xM )

Z

ℝNxM

ℝN

f(x1, …, xM )

ℝ

Figure 1: Illustration of the model structure proposed in
several works (Zaheer et al., 2017; Qi et al., 2017a) for
representing permutation-invariant functions. The sum operation enforces permutation invariance for the model as a
whole. φ and ρ can be implemented by e.g. neural networks.
Furthermore, attention-based models perform a weighted
summation of a set of features (Vaswani et al., 2017; Lee
et al., 2018). Hence, understanding the mathematical properties of set-based models is valuable both in terms of setstructured applications as well as better understanding the
capabilities and limitations of attention-based models.
Many popular machine learning models, including neural
networks and Gaussian processes, are fundamentally based
on vector inputs1 rather than set inputs. In order to adapt
these models for use with sets, we must enforce the property
of permutation invariance, i.e. the output of the model must
not change if the inputs are reordered. Multiple authors, including Ravanbakhsh et al. (2016), Zaheer et al. (2017) and
Qi et al. (2017a), have considered enforcing this property
using a technique which we term sum-decomposition, illustrated in Figure 1. Mathematically speaking, we say that a
function f defined on sets of size M is sum-decomposable
via Z if there are functions φ : R → Z and ρ : Z → R such
that2

f (X) = ρ Σx∈X φ(x)
(1)
We refer to Z here as the latent space. Since summation is permutation-invariant, a sum-decomposition is also
permutation-invariant. Ravanbakhsh et al. (2016), Zaheer
et al. (2017) and Qi et al. (2017b) have also considered
the idea of enforcing permutation invariance using other
operations, e.g. max(·). In this paper we concentrate on a
detailed analysis of sum-decomposition, but some of the limitations we discuss also apply when max(·) is used instead
of summation.
1

Or inputs of higher rank, i.e. matrices and tensors.
We use R here for brevity – see Definition 2.2 for the fully
general definition.
2

