Approximating Orthogonal Matrices with Effective Givens Factorization

Thomas Frerix 1 Joan Bruna 2

Abstract
We analyze effective approximation of unitary
matrices. In our formulation, a unitary matrix
is represented as a product of rotations in twodimensional subspaces, so-called Givens rotations. Instead of the quadratic dimension dependence when applying a dense matrix, applying
such an approximation scales with the number
factors, each of which can be implemented efficiently. Consequently, in settings where an approximation is once computed and then applied
many times, such a representation becomes advantageous. Although effective Givens factorization is not possible for generic unitary operators,
we show that minimizing a sparsity-inducing objective with a coordinate descent algorithm on
the unitary group yields good factorizations for
structured matrices. Canonical applications of
such a setup are orthogonal basis transforms. We
demonstrate numerical results of approximating
the graph Fourier transform, which is the matrix
obtained when diagonalizing a graph Laplacian.

1. Introduction
Unitary operators are ubiquitous in many areas, from numerical linear algebra to quantum computing and cryptography.
Celebrated applications include the QR-decomposition and
the diagonalization of symmetric matrices (Golub & Van
Der Vorst, 2000). Without any assumptions on the structure of the matrix, applying a unitary transformation in d
dimensions requires O(d2 ) operations for the matrix-vector
product. In scenarios where a given unitary operator needs
to be intensively applied many times, using approximations
that trade-off accuracy with a better scaling behavior in the
dimension is desirable.
In this paper, we develop a method to compute approxima1

Technical University of Munich 2 New York University. Correspondence to: Thomas Frerix <thomas.frerix@tum.de>, Joan
Bruna <bruna@cims.nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

tions of unitary matrices in the form of Givens factorization
(Givens, 1958). Givens rotations are localized in a twodimensional subspace of predefined coordinates. Therefore,
computations with Givens sequences scale with the number
of factors and the computational cost for applying each factor can be kept low since efficient implementations are possible (Golub & Van Loan, 2012). Our main motivation comes
from the success story of the Fast Fourier transform (FFT)
(Cooley & Tukey, 1965), which brought down the computational cost of applying a Fourier transform to O(d log(d))
operations. This reduction led to a revolution in signal processing and was recognized by Sullivan & Dongarra (2000)
as one of the most important algorithms of the 20th century.
However, this speed-up relies on the fact that the classical
Fourier transform is defined over a periodic grid, which provides many symmetries leveraged in the butterfly structure
of the FFT.
These symmetries do not carry over to unstructured domains
such as graphs and general unitary operators. In fact, using
simple covering bounds, we show that generic unitary matrices require O(d2 / log d) Givens factors to be effectively
approximated. However, the question of approximating
with fewer factors in the presence of structure remains open:
given an element U ∈ U (d), how to produce the best possible N -term sequence of Givens rotations G1 . . . GN that
Q
minimizes U − j Gj ?
Due to the combinatorial nature of selecting Givens subspaces, this is an NP-hard optimization problem. In this
paper, we propose a relaxation based on sparsity-inducing
norms over the unitary group. In essence, given a point
U ∈ U (d), we use the gradient flow of a potential function f : U (d) → R to define a path that links U to its
nearest signed permutation matrix, the sparsest elements of
the group and thus the global minimizers of f . Then, our
algorithm tries to approximately follow this path using coordinate descent with the Givens factors acting as generators
of the group.
We validate our algorithm on a family of structured orthogonal operators, constructed with a planted random sequence
of K Givens factors and demonstrate that effective approximation is possible in the regime K = O(d log d). Finally,
we apply our algorithm to approximate a graph Fourier
transform (GFT), the orthogonal matrix obtained when di-

