Gromov-Wasserstein Learning for Graph Matching and Node Embedding
Hongteng Xu 1 2 Dixin Luo 2 Hongyuan Zha 3 Lawrence Carin 2

Abstract

Relational matching between graphs
Cost = |d(A, D) - d(1, 2)|

A novel Gromov-Wasserstein learning framework
is proposed to jointly match (align) graphs and
learn embedding vectors for the associated graph
nodes. Using Gromov-Wasserstein discrepancy,
we measure the dissimilarity between two graphs
and find their correspondence, according to the
learned optimal transport. The node embeddings
associated with the two graphs are learned under
the guidance of the optimal transport, the distance
of which not only reflects the topological structure
of each graph but also yields the correspondence
across the graphs. These two learning steps are
mutually-beneficial, and are unified here by minimizing the Gromov-Wasserstein discrepancy with
structural regularizers. This framework leads to
an optimization problem that is solved by a proximal point method. We apply the proposed method
to matching problems in real-world networks, and
demonstrate its superior performance compared
to alternative approaches.

B

1. Introduction
Real-world entities and their interactions are often represented as graphs. Given two or more graphs created in different domains, graph matching aims to find a correspondence
across different graphs. This task is important for many applications, e.g., matching the protein networks from different species (Sharan & Ideker, 2006; Singh et al., 2008), linking accounts in different social networks (Zhang & Philip,
2015), and feature matching in computer vision (Cordella
et al., 2004). However, because it is NP-hard, graph matching is challenging and often solved heuristically. Further
complicating matters, the observed graphs may be noisy
(e.g., containing unreliable edges), which leads to unsatisfying matching results using traditional methods.
1
Infinia ML, Inc., Durham, NC, USA 2 Department of ECE,
Duke University, Durham, NC, USA 3 College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA. Correspondence
to: Hongteng Xu <hongtengxu313@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

5

4

8

7
2

D

C

E

1

A
3

6

Update optimal
transport based
on embeddings
and graph
topology

E

D

Update embeddings
based on optimal
transport and graph
topology

C

B

A

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Optimal
transport

Absolute matching
between graphs
Cost = K(A, 1)

Embedding space of nodes

Figure 1. An illustration of the proposed method.

A problem related to graph matching is the learning of node
embeddings, which aims to learn a latent vector for each
graph node; the collection of embeddings approximates the
topology of the graph, with similar/related nodes nearby in
embedding space. Learning suitable node embeddings is
beneficial for graph matching, as one may seek to align two
or more graphs according to the metric structure associated
with their node embeddings. Although graph matching and
node embedding are highly related tasks, in practice they
are often treated and solved independently. Existing node
embedding methods (Perozzi et al., 2014; Tang et al., 2015;
Grover & Leskovec, 2016) are designed for a single graph,
and applying such methods separately to multiple graphs
doesn’t share information across the graphs, and, hence, is
less helpful for graph matching. Most graph matching methods rely purely on topological information (i.e., adjacency
matrices of graphs) and ignore the potential functionality of
node embeddings (Kuchaiev et al., 2010; Neyshabur et al.,
2013; Nassar et al., 2018). Although some methods consider first deriving embeddings for each graph and then
learning a transformation between the embeddings, their
results are often unsatisfying because their embeddings are
predefined and the transformations are limited to orthogonal
projections (Grave et al., 2018) or rigid/non-rigid deformations (Myronenko & Song, 2010).
This paper considers the joint goal of graph matching and
learning node embeddings, seeking to achieve improvements in both tasks. As illustrated in Figure 1, to achieve
this goal we propose a novel Gromov-Wasserstein learning
framework. The dissimilarity between two graphs is measured by the Gromov-Wasserstein discrepancy (GW discrepancy) (Peyré et al., 2016), which compares the distance ma-

