The Implicit Fairness Criterion of Unconstrained Learning

Lydia T. Liu * 1 Max Simchowitz * 1 Moritz Hardt 1

Abstract
We clarify what fairness guarantees we can and
cannot expect to follow from unconstrained machine learning. Specifically, we show that in many
settings, unconstrained learning on its own implies group calibration, that is, the outcome variable is conditionally independent of group membership given the score. A lower bound confirms
the optimality of our upper bound. Moreover, we
prove that as the excess risk of the learned score
decreases, the more strongly it violates separation and independence, two other standard fairness criteria. Our results challenge the view that
group calibration necessitates an active intervention, suggesting that often we ought to think of it
as a byproduct of unconstrained machine learning.

1. Introduction
Although many fairness-promoting interventions have been
proposed in the machine learning literature, unconstrained
learning remains the dominant paradigm among practitioners for learning risk scores from data. Given a prespecified class of models, unconstrained learning seeks to find
a predictor which minimizes the average prediction loss
over a labeled dataset, or some surrogate thereof, without
explicitly correcting for disparity with respect to sensitive
attributes, such as race or gender. Many criticize the practice
of unconstrained machine learning for propagating harmful
biases (Crawford, 2013; Barocas and Selbst, 2016; Crawford, 2017). Others see merit in unconstrained learning for
reducing bias in consequential decisions (Kleinberg et al.,
2016; Corbett-Davies et al., 2017a;b).
In this work, we show that defaulting to unconstrained learning does not neglect fairness considerations entirely. Instead,
it prioritizes one notion of “fairness” over others: unconstrained learning achieves calibration with respect to one
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, USA.
Correspondence to: Lydia T. Liu <lydiatliu@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

or more sensitive attributes, as well as a related criterion
called sufficiency (e.g., Barocas et al., 2018), at the cost of
violating other widely used fairness criteria, separation and
independence (see Section 1.2 for references therein).
A risk score is calibrated for a group if the risk score obviates the need to solicit group membership for the purpose of
predicting an outcome variable of interest. The concept of
calibration has a venerable history in statistics and machine
learning (Cox, 1958; Murphy and Winkler, 1977; Dawid,
1982; DeGroot and Fienberg, 1983; Platt, 1999; Zadrozny
and Elkan, 2001; Niculescu-Mizil and Caruana, 2005). The
appearance of calibration as a widely adopted and discussed
“fairness criterion” largely resulted from a recent debate
around fairness in recidivism prediction and pre-trial detention. After journalists at ProPublica pointed out that a
popular recidivism risk score known as COMPAS had a
disparity in false positive rates between white defendants
and black defendants (Angwin et al., 2016), the organization
that produced these scores countered that this disparity was
a consequence of the fact that their scores were calibrated by
race (Dieterich et al., 2016): that is, for both black and white
individuals, the average probability of recidivism among of
given score was nearly identical.
Formal trade-offs dating back the 1970s confirm the observed tension between calibration and other classification
criteria, including the aforementioned criterion of separation, which is related to the disparity in false positive
rates (Darlington, 1971; Chouldechova, 2017; Kleinberg
et al., 2017; Barocas et al., 2018). In the context of COMPAS, for example, separation means that black and white
individuals with similar probabilies of recidivism would
receive similar scores.
Implicit in this debate is the view that calibration is a constraint that needs to be actively enforced as a means of
promoting fairness. Consequently, recent literature has proposed new learning algorithms which ensure approximate
calibration in different settings (Hebert-Johnson et al., 2018;
Kearns et al., 2017).
The goal of this work is to understand when approximate
calibration can in fact be achieved by unconstrained machine learning alone. We define several relaxations of the
exact calibration criterion, and show that approximate group
calibration is often a routine consequence of unconstrained

