Faster Attend-Infer-Repeat with Tractable Probabilistic Models

Karl Stelzner 1 Robert Peharz 2 Kristian Kersting 1 3

Abstract
The recent Attend-Infer-Repeat (AIR) framework
marks a milestone in structured probabilistic modeling, as it tackles the challenging problem of
unsupervised scene understanding via Bayesian
inference. AIR expresses the composition of visual scenes from individual objects, and uses variational autoencoders to model the appearance of
those objects. However, inference in the overall
model is highly intractable, which hampers its
learning speed and makes it prone to suboptimal
solutions. In this paper, we show that the speed
and robustness of learning in AIR can be considerably improved by replacing the intractable
object representations with tractable probabilistic
models. In particular, we opt for sum-product
networks (SPNs), expressive deep probabilistic
models with a rich set of tractable inference routines. The resulting model, called SuPAIR, learns
an order of magnitude faster than AIR, treats object occlusions in a consistent manner, and allows
for the inclusion of a background noise model,
improving the robustness of Bayesian scene understanding.

1. Introduction
Deriving meaningful representations from data with inherent
structure is a key problem in machine learning and artificial
intelligence. A natural approach to this problem is generative modeling, which postulates a latent data generating
process, and reasons about this process conditioned on data.
In the vision domain, for example, the idea of “vision as
inverse graphics” has a particularly long history (Grenander,
1976) due to its natural appeal. Unfortunately, it has suffered from the highly intractable posterior of the graphical
rendering process.
1
CS Dept., TU Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany
Eng. Dept. (CBL), University of Cambridge, UK 3 Centre
for Cognitive Science, TU Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany. Correspondence to: Karl Stelzner <stelzner@cs.tu-darmstadt.de>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Recently, deep neural generative models such as variational
autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2014) and generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.,
2014) have shown remarkable success in generative image
modeling. However, since their basic variants deliver rather
unstructured latent representations, several structured latent
variable models based on VAEs have been proposed. A
particularly notable model is Attend-Infer-Repeat (AIR) (Eslami et al., 2016), which incorporates VAEs as object models
within a scene generation process and learns a recurrent neural network (RNN) to dynamically detect multiple objects
composed in a scene. Other examples of structured models
are (Johnson et al., 2016), which incorporate VAEs into a
latent switching linear dynamical system to infer behavioral
patterns from mice depth videos, and SketchRNN (Ha &
Eck, 2018), which uses an RNN to infer the trajectory of a
pen from given sketches.
None of these models require supervision in the form of
observed latent representations. Instead, the nature of these
representations is specified through the model structure.
To this end, the structure is imbued with available prior
knowledge, such as the rules of object interaction, pen stroke
rendering, or Markovian assumptions of biological behavior.
Other parts such as the appearance of objects or typical
pen trajectories are subject to learning. Exact inference is
almost always intractable, either because the global model
structure is already intractable itself or because intractable
components such as VAEs are used.
Recent advances in variational inference, see e.g. (Zhang
et al., 2017) for an overview, have enabled impressive results in such highly intractable models. Some of the key contributing factors in these advances are inference networks
and amortization (Gershman & Goodman, 2014; Kingma
& Welling, 2014), the reparameterization trick (Kingma &
Welling, 2014; Titsias & Gredilla-Lázaro, 2014; Schulman
et al., 2015), and techniques for reducing the variance in
gradient estimates (Mnih & Gregor, 2014). Despite these
improvements, however, inference in such large-scale structured models is far from solved, leading to slow learning or
suboptimal inference results, expressed in e.g. poor local
optima in the variational objective.
In this paper, we demonstrate that these issues can be effectively mitigated by replacing intractable components in

