SATNet: Bridging deep learning and logical reasoning using a differentiable
satisfiability solver
Po-Wei Wang 1 Priya L. Donti 1 2 Bryan Wilder 3 Zico Kolter 1 4

Abstract
Integrating logical reasoning within deep learning
architectures has been a major goal of modern AI
systems. In this paper, we propose a new direction
toward this goal by introducing a differentiable
(smoothed) maximum satisfiability (MAXSAT)
solver that can be integrated into the loop of larger
deep learning systems. Our (approximate) solver
is based upon a fast coordinate descent approach
to solving the semidefinite program (SDP) associated with the MAXSAT problem. We show how
to analytically differentiate through the solution
to this SDP and efficiently solve the associated
backward pass. We demonstrate that by integrating this solver into end-to-end learning systems,
we can learn the logical structure of challenging
problems in a minimally supervised fashion. In
particular, we show that we can learn the parity
function using single-bit supervision (a traditionally hard task for deep networks) and learn how to
play 9 ⇥ 9 Sudoku solely from examples. We also
solve a “visual Sudoku” problem that maps images of Sudoku puzzles to their associated logical
solutions by combining our MAXSAT solver with
a traditional convolutional architecture. Our approach thus shows promise in integrating logical
structures within deep learning.

1

School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA 2 Department of Engineering &
Public Policy, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA 3 Department of Computer Science, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA 4 Bosch Center
for Artificial Intelligence, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. Correspondence to: Po-Wei Wang <poweiw@cs.cmu.edu>, Priya
Donti <pdonti@cmu.edu>, Bryan Wilder <bwilder@usc.edu>,
Zico Kolter <zkolter@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Although modern deep learning has produced groundbreaking improvements in a variety of domains, state-of-the-art
methods still struggle to capture “hard” and “global” constraints arising from discrete logical relationships. Motivated by this deficiency, there has been a great deal of recent
interest in integrating logical or symbolic reasoning into
neural network architectures (Palm et al., 2017; Yang et al.,
2017; Cingillioglu & Russo, 2018; Evans & Grefenstette,
2018). However, with few exceptions, previous work primarily focuses on integrating preexisting relationships into
a larger differentiable system via tunable continuous parameters, not on discovering the discrete relationships that
produce a set of observations in a truly end-to-end fashion.
As an illustrative example, consider the popular logic-based
puzzle game Sudoku, in which a player must fill in a 9 ⇥ 9
partially-filled grid of numbers to satisfy specific constraints.
If the rules of Sudoku (i.e. the relationships between problem variables) are not given, then it may be desirable to
jointly learn the rules of the game and learn how to solve
Sudoku puzzles in an end-to-end manner.
We consider the problem of learning logical structure specifically as expressed by satisfiability problems – concretely,
problems that are well-modeled as instances of SAT or
MAXSAT (the optimization analogue of SAT). This is a
rich class of domains encompassing much of symbolic AI,
which has traditionally been difficult to incorporate into
neural network architectures since neural networks rely
on continuous and differentiable parameterizations. Our
key contribution is to develop and derive a differentiable
smoothed MAXSAT solver that can be embedded within
more complex deep architectures, and show that this solver
enables effective end-to-end learning of logical relationships
from examples (without hard-coding of these relationships).
More specifically, we build upon recent work in fast block
coordinate descent methods for solving SDPs (Wang et al.,
2017) to build a differentiable solver for the smoothed SDP
relaxation of MAXSAT. We provide an efficient mechanism
to differentiate through the optimal solution of this SDP by
using a similar block coordinate descent solver as used in the
forward pass. Our module is amenable to GPU acceleration,
greatly improving training scalability.

