Non-Parametric Priors For Generative Adversarial Networks
Rajhans Singh 1 Pavan Turaga 1 2 Suren Jayasuriya 1 2 Ravi Garg 3 Martin W. Braun 3

Abstract
The advent of generative adversarial networks
(GAN) has enabled new capabilities in synthesis, interpolation, and data augmentation heretofore considered very challenging. However, one
of the common assumptions in most GAN architectures is the assumption of simple parametric
latent-space distributions. While easy to implement, a simple latent-space distribution can be
problematic for uses such as interpolation. This
is due to distributional mismatches when samples
are interpolated in the latent space. We present
a straightforward formalization of this problem;
using basic results from probability theory and offthe-shelf-optimization tools, we develop ways to
arrive at appropriate non-parametric priors. The
obtained prior exhibits unusual qualitative properties in terms of its shape, and quantitative benefits
in terms of lower divergence with its mid-point
distribution. We demonstrate that our designed
prior helps improve image generation along any
Euclidean straight line during interpolation, both
qualitatively and quantitatively, without any additional training or architectural modifications. The
proposed formulation is quite flexible, paving the
way to impose newer constraints on the latentspace statistics.

1. Introduction
Advances in deep learning have resulted in state-of-theart generative models for a wide variety of data generation tasks. Generative methods map sampled points in a
low-dimensional latent space with known distribution to
1
School of Electrical, Computer, and Energy Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA 2 School of
Arts, Media and Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe,
AZ, USA 3 Intel Corporation, Chandler, AZ, USA. Correspondence to: Rajhans Singh <rsingh70@asu.edu>, Pavan Turaga
<pturaga@asu.edu>, Suren Jayasuriya <sjayasur@asu.edu>,
Ravi Garg <ravi.garg@intel.com>, Martin W. Braun <martin.w.braun@intel.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

points in high-dimensional space with distributions matching real-data. In particular, generative adversarial networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) have shown successful
applications in super-resolution (Ledig et al., 2017), imageto-image translation (Isola et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2017),
text-to-image translation (Reed et al., 2016), image inpainting (Pathak et al., 2016), image manipulation (Zhu et al.,
2016), synthetic data generation (Shrivastava et al., 2017)
and domain adaptation (Tzeng et al., 2017).
A GAN architecture consists of a generator G and a discriminator D. The generator G maps low-dimensional latent
points z ∼ Pz to high-dimensional data distribution Pdata .
The latent-space distribution Pz is typically chosen to be a
normal or uniform distribution. The goal of the generator G
is to produce data such that they are perceptually indistinguishable from real data. However, the discriminator D is
trained to distinguish between ‘fake’ and ‘real’ data. Both
the generator and discriminator are trained in an adversarial
fashion, and at the end of training the generator learns to
generate data with a distribution similar to the real one.
One natural question for generative models is how to model
the latent space effectively to generate diverse and varied
output. Interpolating between samples in the latent space
can lead to semantic interpolation in image space (Radford
et al., 2016). Interpolation can help transfer certain semantic
features of one image to another. Successful interpolation
also shows that GANs do not simply over-fit or reproduce
the training set, but generate novel output. Interpolation has
been shown to disentangle factors of variation in the latent
space with many applications (Liu et al., 2018a; Kumar &
Chellappa, 2018; Liu et al., 2018b; Yin et al., 2017).
Imposing a parametric structure on the latent space can
cause distributional mismatches where the prior distribution
does not match the interpolated point’s distribution. This
mismatch causes the interpolated points to lose fidelity in
quality (White, 2016). Previous research has resulted in
various parametric models to fix this problem (White, 2016;
Kilcher et al., 2018; Agustsson et al., 2019). One of the
findings in prior work (Leśniak et al., 2019) is that the use of
a Cauchy distributed prior solves the distributional mismatch
problem. But, Cauchy is a very peculiar distribution, with
undefined moments and a heavy-tail. This means that during
inference there will always be a number of undesirable
outputs (as acknowledged also in (Leśniak et al., 2019)) due

