Better generalization with less data using robust gradient descent

Matthew J. Holland 1 Kazushi Ikeda 2

Abstract
For learning tasks where the data (or losses) may
be heavy-tailed, algorithms based on empirical
risk minimization may require a substantial number of observations in order to perform well offsample. In pursuit of stronger performance under weaker assumptions, we propose a technique
which uses a cheap and robust iterative estimate
of the risk gradient, which can be easily fed into
any steepest descent procedure. Finite-sample
risk bounds are provided under weak moment assumptions on the loss gradient. The algorithm
is simple to implement, and empirical tests using simulations and real-world data illustrate that
more efficient and reliable learning is possible
without prior knowledge of the loss tails.

1. Introduction
Machine learning requires reliable statistical inference
which can be implemented to be computationally efficient.
To capture this more formally, it is typical to use a risk
R(w) ..= E l(w; z), induced by a loss l, where w is the
parameter to be specified, and expectation is with respect to
the data z. Given a sample z1 , . . . , zn , if a learning algob such that R( b
rithm outputs w
w) is sufficiently small with
large confidence over the sample distribution, one takes this
as theoretical evidence for good generalization, albeit up to
conditions placed on the underlying data distribution. The
inferential side of the task is important since the risk can
never be observed, and the computational side is important
b we study formally
for minimizing the gap between the w
b we actually obtain in practice.
and the w
Pn
The empirical mean of the risk, given by n−1 i=1 l(·; zi ),
offers a natural objective function to be minimized based on
the data, and indeed empirical risk minimization (ERM) is
1
Institute of Scientific and Industrial Research, Osaka University 2 Division of Information Science, Nara Institute of Science and
Technology. Correspondence to: Matthew J. Holland <matthewh@ar.sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

the de facto standard learning strategy for tackling most machine learning problems (Kearns & Schapire, 1994; Bartlett
et al., 1996; Alon et al., 1997; Bartlett & Mendelson, 2003).
While ERM is an established strategy, it has many limitations which have been elucidated in recent years. Since
ERM admits any minimizer of the empirical risk, general
analysis of ERM learners abstracts away the actual implementation of the algorithm. Recent work, however, has
shown how sensitive ERM can be to the actual implementation (Daniely & Shalev-Shwartz, 2014; Feldman, 2016),
where highly sub-optimal performance can be observed in
classification tasks with more than two classes, let alone the
case of unbounded, possibly heavy-tailed losses. A related
problem is highlighted clearly by Lin & Rosasco (2016),
where ERM implemented using gradient descent (GD) only
enjoys strong guarantees when the data is sharply concentrated around the mean. Such results are of conceptual and
practical importance given the ubiquity of gradient-based
methods in modern machine learning. These results also
imply that typical learning algorithms implementing ERM
are liable to become highly inefficient if the data is “inconvenient” in the heavy-tailed sense.
As heavy-tailed data abounds in practice (Finkenstädt &
Rootzén, 2003), it is naturally of interest to study new algorithms which, like GD-based ERM (henceforth, ERM-GD)
are easy to implement, but which are more robust to the underlying data distribution. In this paper, we propose a new
learning algorithm which utilizes robust and inexpensive
estimates of the risk gradient for use in a first-order update
procedure.
Review of related work Seminal work by Lin & Rosasco
(2016) looks at the generalization of ERM-GD for subGaussian observations. Since ERM-GD is a key benchmark
to be compared against, it is of interest to find a technique
that is competitive with ERM-GD when it is optimal, but
which behaves better when sub-Gaussianity cannot be assumed.
Our main interest is with robustness to the underlying distribution, and important work in this direction has appeared in
recent years. One approach is to use all the data to construct
b
robust estimates R(w)
of the risk R(w) for each w to be
b as an alternative obchecked, and subsequently minimize R
jective. A strategy using M-estimates of R was introduced

