Iterative Linearized Control: Stable Algorithms and Complexity Guarantees

Vincent Roulet 1 Siddhartha Srinivasa 2 Dmitriy Drusvyatskiy 3 Zaid Harchaoui 1

Abstract
We examine popular gradient-based algorithms
for nonlinear control in the light of the modern complexity analysis of first-order optimization algorithms. The examination reveals that
the complexity bounds can be clearly stated in
terms of calls to a computational oracle related
to dynamic programming and implementable by
gradient back-propagation using machine learning software libraries such as PyTorch or TensorFlow. Finally, we propose a regularized GaussNewton algorithm enjoying worst-case complexity bounds and improved convergence behavior
in practice. The software library based on PyTorch is publicly available.

Introduction
Finite horizon discrete time nonlinear control has been
studied for decades, with applications ranging from spacecraft dynamics to robot learning (Bellman, 1971; Bertsekas, 2005). Popular nonlinear control algorithms, such
as differential dynamic programming or iterative linear
quadratic Gaussian algorithms, are commonly derived using a linearization argument relating the nonlinear control
problem to a linear control problem (Todorov & Li, 2003;
Li & Todorov, 2007).
We examine nonlinear control algorithms based on iterative linearization techniques through the lens of the modern
complexity analysis of first-order optimization algorithms.
We first reformulate the problem as the minimization of
an objective that is written as a composition of smooth
functions. Owing to this reformulation, we can frame several popular nonlinear control algorithms as first-order optimization algorithms applied to this objective.
1

Department of Statistics, University of Washington, Seattle,
USA 2 Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering,
University of Washington, Seattle, USA 3 Department of Mathematics, University of Washington, Seattle, USA. Correspondence
to: Vincent Roulet <vroulet@uw.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

We highlight the equivalence of dynamic programming and
gradient back-propagation in this framework and underline
the central role of the corresponding automatic differentiation oracle in the complexity analysis in terms of convergence to a stationary point of the objective. We show that
the number of calls to this automatic differentiation oracle is the relevant complexity measure given the outreach
of machine learning software libraries such as PyTorch or
TensorFlow (Paszke et al., 2017; Abadi et al., 2015).
Along the way we propose several improvements to the iterative linear quadratic regulator (ILQR) algorithm, resulting in an accelerated regularized Gauss-Newton algorithm
enjoying a complexity bound in terms of convergence to
a stationary point and displaying stable convergence behavior in practice. Regularized Gauss-Newton algorithms
give a template for the design of algorithms based on
partial linearization with guaranteed convergence (Bjorck,
1996; Burke, 1985; Nesterov, 2007; Lewis & Wright, 2016;
Drusvyatskiy & Paquette, 2018). The proposed accelerated
regularized Gauss-Newton algorithm is based on a GaussNewton linearization step stabilized by a proximal regularization and boosted by a Catalyst extrapolation scheme,
potentially accelerating convergence while preserving the
worst-case guarantee.

Related work. Differential dynamic programming
(DDP) and iterative linearization algorithms are popular
algorithms for finite horizon discrete time nonlinear control (Tassa et al., 2014). DDP is based on approximating
the Bellman equation at the current trajectory in order to
use standard dynamic programming. Up to our knowledge, the complexity analysis of DDP has been limited;
see (Mayne, 1966; Jacobson & Mayne, 1970; Todorov &
Li, 2003) for classical analyses of DDP.
Iterative linearization algorithms such as the iterative linear quadratic regulator (ILQR) or the iterative linearized
Gaussian algorithm (ILQG) linearize the trajectory in order to use standard dynamic programming (Li & Todorov,
2004; 2007). Again, the complexity analysis of ILQG for
instance has been limited. It is worthwhile to mention related approaches in the nonlinear model predictive control
area (Grüne & Pannek, 2017; Richter et al., 2012; Dontchev
et al., 2018).

