Learning Models from Data with Measurement Error:
Tackling Underreporting

Roy Adams 1 Yuelong Ji 2 Xiaobin Wang 2 Suchi Saria 1 3 4

Abstract
Measurement error in observational datasets can
lead to systematic bias in inferences based on
these datasets. As studies based on observational
data are increasingly used to inform decisions
with real-world impact, it is critical that we develop a robust set of techniques for analyzing
and adjusting for these biases. In this paper we
present a method for estimating the distribution
of an outcome given a binary exposure that is
subject to underreporting. Our method is based
on a missing data view of the measurement error problem, where the true exposure is treated
as a latent variable that is marginalized out of
a joint model. We prove three different conditions under which the outcome distribution can
still be identified from data containing only errorprone observations of the exposure. We demonstrate this method on synthetic data and analyze
its sensitivity to near violations of the identifiability conditions. Finally, we use this method
to estimate the effects of maternal smoking and
heroin use during pregnancy on childhood obesity,
two import problems from public health. Using
the proposed method, we estimate these effects using only subject-reported drug use data and refine
the range of estimates generated by a sensitivity
analysis-based approach. Further, the estimates
produced by our method are consistent with existing literature on both the effects of maternal
smoking and the rate at which subjects underreport smoking.

1

Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University
Center on the Life Origins of Disease, Department of Population, Family, and Reporductive Health, Johns Hopkins University
Bloomberg School of Public Health 3 Department of Applied Math
and Statistics, Johns Hopkins University 4 Bayesian Health. Correspondence to: Roy Adams <roy.james.adams@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Measurement error in observational datasets can lead to systematic bias in inferences based these datasets. As studies
using observational data are increasingly used to inform decisions with real-world impact, it is critical that we develop
a robust set of techniques for analyzing and adjusting for
these biases. Bias can mean different things in different
contexts, but here we use it in the statistical sense to refer to
inferences that are wrong in a non-random way (Casella &
Berger, 2002). Basing decisions on biased inferences can
lead to real consequences and degrade trust in the use of
observational data to inform decision making. For example,
decisions about what resources should be allocated to preventing maternal drug use during pregnancy must be based
on studies that rely on subject-reported drug use behaviors
(Wang et al., 2002). Analyzing and accounting for various
potential sources of bias remains an open problem, but one
with important implications.
One reason that accounting for bias in observational data is
a difficult problem is that it requires making further assumptions about what the sources and magnitudes of various biases might be. There is often substantial debate about the validity of these assumptions (e.g. Knape & Korner-Nievergelt
(2015); Sólymos & Lele (2016); Knape & Korner-Nievergelt
(2016)). As a result, it is frequently the case that observational studies relegate potential sources of bias to the discussion of limitations rather than performing quantitative
bias analysis (Rothman et al., 2008). It is our view that,
to the extent possible, quantitative bias analysis should be
presented alongside quantitative measures of uncertainty
when presenting results from observational studies. It is
therefore critical that we develop a robust set of tools for
analyzing and accounting for observational bias.
In this work we focus on bias caused by measurement error,
the degree and direction of which depends heavily on the
type of error (Carroll et al., 2006; Gustafson, 2003). There
are three common approaches to dealing with measurement
error (more details on these approaches are provided in Section 2). The first approach assumes that we have access to
a data source containing error-free measurements (referred
to as validation data). This data can be used to estimate the
distribution of errors in order to adjust appropriately when

