Circuit-GNN: Graph Neural Networks for Distributed Circuit Design

Guo Zhang * 1 Hao He * 1 Dina Katabi 1

Abstract
We present Circuit-GNN, a graph neural network
(GNN) model for designing distributed circuits.
Today, designing distributed circuits is a slow process that can take months from an expert engineer. Our model both automates and speeds up
the process. The model learns to simulate the
electromagnetic (EM) properties of distributed
circuits. Hence, it can be used to replace traditional EM simulators, which typically take tens
of minutes for each design iteration. Further, by
leveraging neural networks’ differentiability, we
can use our model to solve the inverse problem –
i.e., given desirable EM specifications, we propagate the gradient to optimize the circuit parameters and topology to satisfy the specifications. We
exploit the flexibility of GNN to create one model
that works for different circuit topologies. We
compare our model with a commercial simulator
showing that it reduces simulation time by four
orders of magnitude. We also demonstrate the
value of our model by using it to design a Terahertz channelizer, a difficult task that requires
a specialized expert. The results show that our
model produces a channelizer whose performance
is as good as a manually optimized design, and
can save the expert several weeks of topology
and parameter optimization. Most interestingly,
our model comes up with new designs that differ
from the limited templates commonly used by engineers in the field, hence significantly expanding
the design space.

1. Introduction
Distributed circuit design refers to designing circuits at
high frequencies, where the wavelength is comparable to
or smaller than the circuit components. It is increasingly
*

Equal contribution 1 EECS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Hao He
<haohe@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

x3

x1

x4

x3

x1

x2
x4

x2

x2
x1
x5

x5

(a) 6-resonator filter
(b) 4-resonator filter
Figure 1. Examples distributed circuits templates based on square
resonators. Each template has multiple control parameters like xi .

important since new 5G and 6G communication technologies keep moving to higher and higher frequencies. Unlike
lower frequencies, where there are relatively fast tools and
a large literature on design guidelines, designing distributed
circuits is a slow and onerous process. The process goes
as follows. An expert engineer comes up with an initial
design based on desired specifications (e.g., design a bandpass filter at 300 GHz, with a bandwidth of 30 GHz). To do
so, typically the engineer picks an initial template and optimizes its parameters. Fig. 1 shows common templates used
in the literature (Hong, 2011). The engineer then spends
extensive effort optimizing the parameters of the template
(the xi ’s in Fig. 1) so that the circuit satisfies the desired
specifications. The optimization is done iteratively. In every
iteration, the engineer sets the parameters in the template
to some values, simulates the design, and compares the
output of the simulation to the specifications. Each simulation takes tens of minutes during which the simulator runs
mainly a brute-force numerical solution of the Maxwell EM
equations. This iterative effort may turn out to be useless
if the chosen template topology cannot satisfy the desired
specifications, and a new template must be tried and optimized using a new set of iterations. The process can take
days, weeks, or months.
In this paper, we introduce a learning model that speeds
up and automates this process. Our model addresses both
the forward and inverse design problems. The forward task
takes a circuit design and produces the resulting s21 function, which relates the signal on the circuit’s output port
to the signal at its input port. Said differently, the forward
task produces the output of the EM simulator but using a
neural network. The inverse task on the other hand takes

