On the Linear Speedup Analysis of Communication Efficient Momentum SGD
for Distributed Non-Convex Optimization
Hao Yu 1 Rong Jin 1 Sen Yang 1

Abstract

where fi (x) = E⇠i ⇠Di [Fi (x; ⇠i )] are smooth non-convex
functions with possibly different distributions Di . Problem
(1) is particularly important in deep learning since it captures data parallelism for training deep neural networks. In
deep learning with data parallelism, each Fi (·; ·) = F (·; ·)
represents the common deep neural network to be jointly
trained and each Di represents the distribution of the local
data set accessed by worker i. The scenario where each Di
are different also captures the federated learning setting
recently proposed in (McMahan et al., 2017) where mobile
clients with private local training data and slow intermittent network connections cooperatively train a high-quality
centralized model.

Recent developments on large-scale distributed
machine learning applications, e.g., deep neural networks, benefit enormously from the advances in distributed non-convex optimization
techniques, e.g., distributed Stochastic Gradient
Descent (SGD). A series of recent works study
the linear speedup property of distributed SGD
variants with reduced communication. The linear speedup property enables us to scale out the
computing capability by adding more computing
nodes into our system. The reduced communication complexity is desirable since communication
overhead is often the performance bottleneck in
distributed systems. Recently, momentum methods are more and more widely adopted by practitioners to train machine learning models since
they can often converge faster and generalize better. However, it remains unclear whether any distributed momentum SGD possesses the same linear speedup property as distributed SGD and has
reduced communication complexity. This paper
fills the gap by considering a distributed communication efficient momentum SGD method and
proving its linear speedup property.

1. Introduction
Consider distributed non-convex optimization scenarios
where N workers jointly solve the following consensus
optimization problem:
N

minm

x2R

f (x) =

1 X
E⇠ ⇠D [Fi (x; ⇠i )]
N i=1 | i i {z
}

(1)

=fi (x)

1

Machine Intelligence Technology Lab, Alibaba Group
(U.S.) Inc., Bellevue, WA. Correspondence to: Hao Yu
<eeyuhao@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) (and its momentum
variants) have been the dominating methodology for solving machine learning problem. For large-scale distributed
machine learning problems, such as training deep neural
networks, a parallel version of SGD, known as parallel minibatch SGD, is widely adopted (Dean et al., 2012; Dekel
et al., 2012; Li et al., 2014). With N parallel workers,pparallel mini-batch SGD can solve problem (1) with O(1/ N
pT )
convergence, which is N times faster1 than the O(1/ T )
convergence attained by SGD over a single node (Ghadimi
& Lan, 2013; Lian et al., 2015). Obviously, such linear
speedup with respect to (w.r.t.) number of workers is desired in distributed training as it implies perfect computation
scalability by increasing the number of used workers. However, such linear speedup is difficult to harvest in practice
because the classical parallel mini-batch SGD requires all
workers to synchronize local gradients or models at every
iteration such that inter-node communication cost becomes
the performance bottleneck. To eliminate potential communication bottlenecks, such as high latency or low bandwidths,
in computing infrastructures, many distributed SGD variants have been recently proposed. For example, (Lian et al.,
2017; Jiang et al., 2017; Assran et al., 2018) consider decentralized parallel SGD where global gradient aggregations
p
If an algorithm has O(1/ T ) convergence, then it takes 1/✏2
iterations to attain anpO(✏) accurate solution. Similarly, if another
algorithm has O(1/ N T ) convergence, then it takes 1/(N ✏2 )
iterations, which is N times smaller than 1/✏2 , to attain an O(✏)
accurate solution. In this sense, the second algorithm is N times
faster than the first one.
1

