Learning a Prior over Intent
via Meta-Inverse Reinforcement Learning
Kelvin Xu 1 Ellis Ratner 1 Anca Dragan 1 Sergey Levine 1 Chelsea Finn 1

Abstract
A significant challenge for the practical application of reinforcement learning to real world
problems is the need to specify an oracle reward
function that correctly defines a task. Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) seeks to avoid this
challenge by instead inferring a reward function
from expert demonstrations. While appealing, it
can be impractically expensive to collect datasets
of demonstrations that cover the variation common in the real world (e.g. opening any type
of door). Thus in practice, IRL must commonly
be performed with only a limited set of demonstrations where it can be exceedingly difficult to
unambiguously recover a reward function. In this
work, we exploit the insight that demonstrations
from other tasks can be used to constrain the set
of possible reward functions by learning a “prior”
that is specifically optimized for the ability to
infer expressive reward functions from limited
numbers of demonstrations. We demonstrate that
our method can efficiently recover rewards from
images for novel tasks and provide intuition as to
how our approach is analogous to learning a prior.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms have the potential
to automate a wide range of decision-making and control
tasks across a variety of different domains, as demonstrated
by successful recent applications ranging from robotic control (Kober & Peters, 2012; Levine et al., 2016) to game
playing (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016). A key assumption of the RL problem statement is the availability of
a reward function that accurately describes the desired task.
For many real world tasks, reward functions can be chal1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley, USA. Correspondence to:
Kelvin Xu <kelvinxu@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Figure 1. A diagram of our meta-inverse RL approach. Our approach attempts to remedy over-fitting in few-shot IRL by learning
a “prior” that constraints the set of possible reward functions to lie
within a few steps of gradient descent. Standard IRL attempts to
recover the reward function directly from the available demonstrations. The shortcoming of this approach is that there is little reason
to expect generalization as it is analogous to training a density
model with only a few examples.

lenging to manually specify, while being crucial for good
performance (Amodei et al., 2016). Most real world tasks
are multifaceted and require reasoning over multiple factors
in a task (e.g. a robot cleaning in a house with children),
while simultaneously providing appropriate reward shaping
to make the task feasible with tractable exploration (Ng
et al., 1999). These challenges are compounded by the
inherent difficulty of specifying rewards for tasks with highdimensional observation spaces such as images.
Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) is an approach that
aims to address this problem by instead inferring the reward
function from demonstrations of the task (Ng & Russell,
2000). This has the appealing benefit of taking a datadriven approach to reward specification in place of hand
engineering. In practice however, rewards functions are
rarely learned as it can be prohibitively expensive to provide
demonstrations that cover the variability common in real
world tasks (e.g., collecting demonstrations of opening every
type of door knob). In addition, while learning a complex
function from high dimensional observations might make
an expressive function approximator seem like a reasonable
modelling assumption, in the “few-shot” domain it is notoriously difficult to unambiguously recover a good reward

