Band-limited Training and Inference for Convolutional Neural Networks

Adam Dziedzic * 1 John Paparrizos * 1 Sanjay Krishnan 1 Aaron Elmore 1 Michael Franklin 1

Abstract
The convolutional layers are core building blocks
of neural network architectures. In general, a convolutional filter applies to the entire frequency
spectrum of the input data. We explore artificially
constraining the frequency spectra of these filters
and data, called band-limiting, during training.
The frequency domain constraints apply to both
the feed-forward and back-propagation steps. Experimentally, we observe that Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are resilient to this compression scheme and results suggest that CNNs learn
to leverage lower-frequency components. In particular, we found: (1) band-limited training can
effectively control the resource usage (GPU and
memory); (2) models trained with band-limited
layers retain high prediction accuracy; and (3)
requires no modification to existing training algorithms or neural network architectures to use
unlike other compression schemes.

1. Introduction
Convolutional layers are an integral part of neural network
architectures for computer vision, natural language processing, and time-series analysis (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Kamper et al., 2016; Bińkowski et al., 2017). Convolutions
are fundamental signal processing operations that amplify
certain frequencies of the input and attenuate others. Recent results suggest that neural networks exhibit a spectral
bias (Rahaman et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2018); they ultimately
learn filters with a strong bias towards lower frequencies.
Most input data, such as time-series and images, are also
naturally biased towards lower frequencies (Agrawal et al.,
1993; Faloutsos et al., 1994; Torralba & Oliva, 2003). This
begs the question—does a convolutional neural network
(CNN) need to explicitly represent the high-frequency com*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
University of Chicago, Chicago, USA. Correspondence
to: Adam Dziedzic <ady@uchicago.edu>, John Paparrizos
<jopa@uchicago.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

ponents of its convolutional layers? We show that the answer
to the question leads to some surprising new perspectives on:
training time, resource management, model compression,
and robustness to noisy inputs.
Consider a frequency domain implementation of the convolution function that: (1) transforms the filter and the input
into the frequency domain; (2) element-wise multiplies both
frequency spectra; and (3) transforms the outcome product
to the original domain. Let us assume that the final model is
biased towards lower Fourier frequencies (Rahaman et al.,
2018; Xu et al., 2018). Then, it follows that discarding
a significant number of the Fourier coefficients from high
frequencies after step (1) should have a minimal effect. A
smaller intermediate array size after step (1) reduces the
number of multiplications in step (2) as well as the memory
usage. This gives us a knob to tune the resource utilization,
namely, memory and computation, as a function of how
much of the high frequency spectrum we choose to represent. Our primary research question is whether we can train
CNNs using such band-limited convolutional layers, which
only exploit a subset of the frequency spectra of the filter
and input data.
While there are several competing compression techniques,
such as reduced precision arithmetic (Wang et al., 2018;
Aberger et al.; Hubara et al., 2017), weight pruning (Han
et al., 2015), or sparsification (Li et al., 2017), these techniques can be hard to operationalize. CNN optimization
algorithms can be sensitive to the noise introduced during
the training process, and training-time compression can require specialized libraries to avoid instability (Wang et al.,
2018; Aberger et al.). Furthermore, pruning and sparsification techniques only reduce resource utilization during
inference. In our experiments, surprisingly, band-limited
training does not seem to suffer the same problems and
gracefully degrades predictive performance as a function
of compression rate. Band-limited CNNs can be trained
with any gradient-based algorithm, where layer’s gradient is
projected onto the set of allowed frequencies.
We implement an FFT-based convolutional layer that selectively constrains the Fourier spectrum utilized during
both forward and backward passes. In addition, we apply
standard techniques to improve the efficiency of FFT-based
convolution (Mathieu et al., 2013), as well as new insights

