DeepMDP: Learning Continuous Latent Space Models
for Representation Learning

Carles Gelada 1 Saurabh Kumar 1 Jacob Buckman 2 Ofir Nachum 1 Marc G. Bellemare 1

Abstract
Many reinforcement learning (RL) tasks provide
the agent with high-dimensional observations that
can be simplified into low-dimensional continuous states. To formalize this process, we introduce
the concept of a DeepMDP, a parameterized latent
space model that is trained via the minimization
of two tractable latent space losses: prediction
of rewards and prediction of the distribution over
next latent states. We show that the optimization
of these objectives guarantees (1) the quality of
the embedding function as a representation of the
state space and (2) the quality of the DeepMDP as
a model of the environment. Our theoretical findings are substantiated by the experimental result
that a trained DeepMDP recovers the latent structure underlying high-dimensional observations on
a synthetic environment. Finally, we show that
learning a DeepMDP as an auxiliary task in the
Atari 2600 domain leads to large performance
improvements over model-free RL.

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL), it is typical to model the environment as a Markov Decision Process (MDP). However,
for many practical tasks, the state representations of these
MDPs include a large amount of redundant information and
task-irrelevant noise. For example, image observations from
the Arcade Learning Environment (Bellemare et al., 2013a)
consist of 33,600-dimensional pixel arrays, yet it is intuitively clear that there exist lower-dimensional approximate
representations for all games. Consider P ONG; observing
only the positions and velocities of the three objects in the
frame is enough to play. Converting each frame into such
a simplified state before learning a policy facilitates the
1

Google Brain 2 Center for Language and Speech Processing,
Johns Hopkins University. Correspondence to: Carles Gelada
<cgel@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

learning process by reducing the redundant and irrelevant
information presented to the agent. Representation learning techniques for reinforcement learning seek to improve
the learning efficiency of existing RL algorithms by doing
exactly this: learning a mapping from states to simplified
states.
Bisimulation metrics (Ferns et al., 2004; 2011) define two
states to be behaviourally similar if they (1) produce the
close immediate reward and (2) they transition to states
which themselves are behaviourally similar. Bisimulation
metrics have been used reduce the dimensionality of the
state space by aggregating states (a form of representation
learning) but have not received much attention due to their
high computational cost. Furthermore, state aggregation
techniques, whether based on bisimulation or other methods
(Abel et al., 2017; Li et al., 2006; Singh et al., 1995; Givan
et al., 2003; Jiang et al., 2015; Ruan et al., 2015), suffer
from poor compatibility with function approximation methods. Instead, to support stochastic gradient descent-based
training procedures we explore the use of continuous latent representations. Specifically, for any MDP, we propose
utilizing the latent space of its corresponding DeepMDP.
A DeepMDP is a latent space model of an MDP which has
been trained to minimize two tractable losses: predicting
the rewards and predicting the distribution of next latent
states. DeepMDPs can be viewed as a formalization of recent works which use neural networks to learn latent space
models of the environment (Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018; Oh
et al., 2017; Hafner et al., 2018). The state of a DeepMDP
can be interpreted as a representation of the original MDP’s
state, and doing so reveals a profound theoretical connection
to bisimulation. We show that minimization of the DeepMDP losses guarantees that two non-bisimilar states can
never be collapsed into a single representation. Additionally,
this guarantees that value functions in the DeepMDP are
good approximations of value functions in the original task
MDP. These results serve not only provide a theoreticallygrounded approach to representation learning but also represent a promising first step towards principled latent-space
model-based RL algorithms.
In a synthetic environment, we show that a DeepMDP learns
to recover the low-dimensional latent structure underlying

