Provably Efficient Maximum Entropy Exploration

Elad Hazan 1 2 Sham M. Kakade 3 4 2 Karan Singh 1 2 Abby Van Soest 1 2

Abstract
Suppose an agent is in a (possibly unknown)
Markov Decision Process in the absence of a reward signal, what might we hope that an agent
can efficiently learn to do? This work studies a
broad class of objectives that are defined solely as
functions of the state-visitation frequencies that
are induced by how the agent behaves. For example, one natural, intrinsically defined, objective
problem is for the agent to learn a policy which
induces a distribution over state space that is as
uniform as possible, which can be measured in an
entropic sense. We provide an efficient algorithm
to optimize such such intrinsically defined objectives, when given access to a black box planning
oracle (which is robust to function approximation).
Furthermore, when restricted to the tabular setting
where we have sample based access to the MDP,
our proposed algorithm is provably efficient, both
in terms of its sample and computational complexities. Key to our algorithmic methodology is
utilizing the conditional gradient method (a.k.a.
the Frank-Wolfe algorithm) which utilizes an approximate MDP solver.

1. Introduction
A fundamental problem in reinforcement learning is that of
exploring the state space. How do we understand what is
even possible in the context of a given environment in the
absence of a reward signal?
This question has received a lot of attention, with approaches
1
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University 2 Google AI Princeton 3 Allen School of Computer
Science and Engineering, University of Washington
4
Department of Statistics, University of Washington. Correspondence to:
Elad Hazan <ehazan@google.com>,
Sham
Kakade
<sham@cs.washington.edu>,
Karan
Singh
<karans@princeton.edu>,
Abby
Van
Soest
<asoest@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

such as learning with intrinsic reward and curiosity driven
methods, surveyed below. Our work studies a class of objectives1 that is defined solely as function of the state-visitation
frequencies. A natural such objective is finding a policy that
maximizes the entropy of the induced distribution over the
state space. More generally, our approach extends to any
concave function over distributions.
Suppose the MDP is fully and precisely known, in terms of
states, actions, and the entire transition matrix. Then maximizing the entropy can be recast as a convex optimization
problem (see Section 3.2.2 or (De Farias & Van Roy, 2003))
over the space of state-visitation frequencies induced by the
exhaustive set of all policies. However, most RL instances
that are common in practice exhibit at least one of several
complications:
— prohibitively large state space (i.e. Chess or Go)
— unknown transition matrix (as in common Atari games)
These scenarios often require function approximation, ie.
restricting the search to a non-linearly parameterized policy class (eg. neural networks), which makes the entropy
maximization problem non-convex.
As a remedy for the computational difficulty, we propose
considering an approximate planning oracle: an efficient
method that given a well-specified reward signal can find an
optimizing policy. Such sample-based planning oracles have
been empirically observed to work well with non-linearly
parameterized policy classes. Given such an oracle, we give
a provably efficient method for exploration based on the
conditional gradient (or Frank-Wolfe) algorithm (Frank &
Wolfe, 1956).
Formally, we show how to generate a sequence of reward
signals, that when sequentially optimized give rise to a
policy with an entropy on the state distribution close to
optimal. Our main theorem gives a bound on the number of
calls to the planning oracle, which is independent of the size
of the state space of the MDP and that of the policy class.
Next, we outline an efficient construction of such oracles and
state the resultant sample & computational complexity in the
tabular MDP setting. As a proof of concept, we implement
the proposed method and demonstrate experiments over
1
In contrast to scalar rewards, such objectives permit a broader
framework for reward specifiction, and may be useful in other
contexts.

