Fast Incremental von Neumann Graph Entropy Computation:
Theory, Algorithm, and Applications

Pin-Yu Chen 1 Lingfei Wu 1 Sijia Liu 1 Indika Rajapakse 2

Abstract
The von Neumann graph entropy (VNGE) facilitates measurement of information divergence and
distance between graphs in a graph sequence. It
has been successfully applied to various learning tasks driven by network-based data. While
effective, VNGE is computationally demanding
as it requires the full eigenspectrum of the graph
Laplacian matrix. In this paper, we propose a new
computational framework, Fast Incremental von
Neumann Graph EntRopy (FINGER), which approaches VNGE with a performance guarantee.
FINGER reduces the cubic complexity of VNGE
to linear complexity in the number of nodes and
edges, and thus enables online computation based
on incremental graph changes. We also show
asymptotic equivalence of FINGER to the exact VNGE, and derive its approximation error
bounds. Based on FINGER, we propose efficient
algorithms for computing Jensen-Shannon distance between graphs. Our experimental results
on different random graph models demonstrate
the computational efficiency and the asymptotic
equivalence of FINGER. In addition, we apply
FINGER to two real-world applications and one
synthesized anomaly detection dataset, and corroborate its superior performance over seven baseline graph similarity methods.

1. Introduction
In recent years, graph-based learning has become an active research field (Shuman et al., 2013; Kalofolias, 2016;
Luo et al., 2012; Shivanna & Bhattacharyya, 2014; Wang
et al., 2016; Kipf & Welling, 2017; Wu et al., 2018a;b; Xu
et al., 2018). Its success is rooted in the advanced capability of summarizing and representing phenomenal structural
1
IBM Research 2 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA.
Correspondence to: Pin-Yu Chen <pin-yu.chen@ibm.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

features embedded in graphs. In particular, evaluating similarity between graphs is crucial to network analysis and
graph-based anomaly detection (Papadimitriou et al., 2010;
Akoglu et al., 2015; Ranshous et al., 2015). For example, Yanardag and Vishwanathan used graph similarity for learning
novel graph kernels (Yanardag & Vishwanathan, 2015), and
Sharpnack et al. proposed the Lovasz extended scan statistic
for anomaly detection in connected graphs (Sharpnack et al.,
2013). Koutra et al. proposed DeltaCon, a state-of-the-art
similarity algorithm in terms of its scalability and capability
of handling weighted graphs using fast belief propagation
(Koutra et al., 2016). However, these methods are sensitive
to heuristic metrics and presumed models, and thus provide
limited understanding on the general notion of variations
between graphs. On the other hand, model-agnostic approaches such as graph entropy have been used to quantify
the structural complexity of a single graph, which relates
to the Shannon entropy of a probability distribution over
a function of enumerated subgraphs in a graph (Simonyi,
1995; Shetty & Adibi, 2005; Li & Pan, 2016). However,
graph entropy can be computationally demanding due to its
use of exhaustive subgraph search.
Different from the aforementioned approaches and inspired
by quantum information theory, the von Neumann graph entropy (VNGE) (Braunstein et al., 2006; Passerini & Severini,
2008; 2009) facilitates the measure of (quantum) JensenShannon divergence and distance (Endres & Schindelin,
2003; Briët & Harremoës, 2009) between graphs. It associates with a model-agnostic information measure for
quantifying variation between two quantum density matrices. In addition, the VNGE has been shown to be linearly
correlated with classical graph entropy measures (Anand &
Bianconi, 2009; Anand et al., 2011). The VNGE and the
Jensen-Shannon distance have been successfully applied to
structural reduction in multiplex networks (De Domenico
et al., 2015), depth analysis in image processing (Han et al.,
2012; Bai & Hancock, 2014), structure-function analysis in
genetic networks (Seaman et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2018b),
and network-ensemble comparison (Li et al., 2018). However, despite its effectiveness, the computation of VNGE
requires (at most) cubic complexity in the number of nodes,
thereby impeding its applicability to machine learning and
data mining tasks involving a sequence of large graphs.

