Variational Laplace Autoencoders

Yookoon Park 1 Chris Dongjoo Kim 1 Gunhee Kim 1

Abstract
Variational autoencoders (Kingma & Welling,
2014) employ an amortized inference model to approximate the posterior of latent variables. However, such amortized variational inference faces
two challenges: (1) the limited posterior expressiveness of fully-factorized Gaussian assumption
and (2) the amortization error of the inference
model. We present a novel approach that addresses both challenges. First, we focus on ReLU
networks with Gaussian output and illustrate their
connection to probabilistic PCA. Building on this
observation, we derive an iterative algorithm that
finds the mode of the posterior and apply fullcovariance Gaussian posterior approximation centered on the mode. Subsequently, we present a
general framework named Variational Laplace
Autoencoders (VLAEs) for training deep generative models. Based on the Laplace approximation
of the latent variable posterior, VLAEs enhance
the expressiveness of the posterior while reducing the amortization error. Empirical results on
MNIST, Omniglot, Fashion-MNIST, SVHN and
CIFAR10 show that the proposed approach significantly outperforms other recent amortized or
iterative methods on the ReLU networks.

1. Introduction
Variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2014)
are deep latent generative models which have been popularly
used in various domains of data such as images, natural language and sound (Gulrajani et al., 2017; Gregor et al., 2015;
Bowman et al., 2016; Chung et al., 2015; Roberts et al.,
2018). VAEs introduce an amortized inference network
(i.e. an encoder) to approximate the posterior distribution
of latent variable z and maximize the evidence lower-bound
(ELBO) of the data. However, the two major limitations of
1

Neural Processing Research Center, Seoul National University,
Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: Gunhee Kim <gunhee@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

VAEs are: (1) the constrained expressiveness of the fullyfactorized Gaussian posterior assumption and (2) the amortization error (Cremer et al., 2018) of the inference model
due to the dynamic posterior prediction.
There have been various attempts to address these problems.
A representative line of works belongs to the category of
normalizing flows (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015; Kingma
et al., 2016; Tomczak & Welling, 2016), which apply a chain
of invertible transformation with tractable densities in order
to represent a more flexible posterior distribution. However,
not only do they incur additional parameter overhead for the
inference model but are yet prone to the amortization error
as they entirely depend on the dynamic inference.
Recently, iterative approaches based on gradient-based refinement of the posterior parameters have been proposed
(Krishnan et al., 2018; Kim et al., 2018; Marino et al., 2018).
These methods aim to reduce the amortization error by augmenting the dynamic inference with an additional inner-loop
optimization of the posterior. Nonetheless, they still rely on
the fully-factorized Gaussian assumption, and accordingly
fail to enhance the expressiveness of the posterior.
We develop a novel approach that tackles both challenges
by (1) iteratively updating the mode of the approximate posterior and (2) defining a full-covariance Gaussian posterior
centered on the mode, whose covariance is determined by
the local behavior of the generative network. By deducing
the approximate posterior directly from the generative network, not only are we able to minimize the amortization
error but also model the rich correlations between the latent
variable dimensions.
We start from the class of neural networks of rectified linear
activations (e.g. ReLU) (Montufar et al., 2014; Pascanu
et al., 2014) and Gaussian output, which is universally popular for modeling continuous data such images (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012; Gregor et al., 2015) and also as a building
block of deep latent models (Rezende et al., 2014; Sønderby
et al., 2016). Subsequently, we present a generalized framework named Variational Laplace Autoencoders (VLAEs),
which encompasses the general class of differentiable neural
networks. We show that the ReLU networks are in fact a
special case of VLAEs that admits efficient computation.
In addition, we illustrate an example for Bernoulli output
networks.

