Adaptive Neural Trees

Ryutaro Tanno 1 Kai Arulkumaran 2 Daniel C. Alexander 1 Antonio Criminisi 3 Aditya Nori 3

Abstract
Deep neural networks and decision trees operate on largely separate paradigms; typically, the
former performs representation learning with prespecified architectures, while the latter is characterised by learning hierarchies over pre-specified
features with data-driven architectures. We unite
the two via adaptive neural trees (ANTs) that
incorporates representation learning into edges,
routing functions and leaf nodes of a decision
tree, along with a backpropagation-based training
algorithm that adaptively grows the architecture
from primitive modules (e.g., convolutional layers). We demonstrate that, whilst achieving competitive performance on classification and regression datasets, ANTs benefit from (i) lightweight
inference via conditional computation, (ii) hierarchical separation of features useful to the task
e.g. learning meaningful class associations, such
as separating natural vs. man-made objects, and
(iii) a mechanism to adapt the architecture to the
size and complexity of the training dataset.

1. Introduction
Neural networks (NNs) and decision trees (DTs) are both
powerful classes of machine learning models with proven
successes in academic and commercial applications. The
two approaches, however, typically come with mutually
exclusive benefits and limitations.
NNs are characterised by learning hierarchical representations of data through the composition of nonlinear transformations (Zeiler & Fergus, 2014; Bengio, 2013), which
has alleviated the need for feature engineering, in contrast
with many other machine learning models. In addition, NNs
are trained with stochastic optimisers, such as stochastic
gradient descent (SGD), allowing training to scale to large
datasets. Consequently, with modern hardware, we can train
Work done while Ryutaro and Kai were Research Interns
at Microsoft Research Cambridge. 1 University College London, UK 2 Imperial College London, UK 3 Microsoft Research,
Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to: Ryutaro Tanno <ryutaro.tanno.15@ucl.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

NNs of many layers on large datasets, solving numerous
problems ranging from object detection to speech recognition with unprecedented accuracy (LeCun et al., 2015).
However, their architectures typically need to be designed
by hand and fixed per task or dataset, requiring domain
expertise (Zoph & Le, 2017). Inference can also be heavyweight for large models, as each sample engages every part
of the network, i.e., increasing capacity causes a proportional increase in computation (Bengio et al., 2013).
Alternatively, DTs are characterised by learning hierarchical
clusters of data (Criminisi & Shotton, 2013). A DT learns
how to split the input space, so that in each subset, linear
models suffice to explain the data. In contrast to standard
NNs, the architectures of DTs are optimised based on training data, and are particularly advantageous in data-scarce
scenarios. DTs also enjoy lightweight inference as only a
single root-to-leaf path on the tree is used for each input
sample. However, successful applications of DTs often require hand-engineered features of data. We can ascribe the
limited expressivity of single DTs to the common use of simplistic routing functions, such as splitting on axis-aligned
features. The loss function for optimising hard partitioning is non-differentiable, which hinders the use of gradient
descent-based optimization and thus complex splitting functions. Current techniques for increasing capacity include
ensemble methods such as random forests (RFs) (Breiman,
2001) and gradient-boosted trees (GBTs) (Friedman, 2001),
which are known to achieve state-of-the-art performance in
various tasks, including medical applications and financial
forecasting (Sandulescu & Chiru, 2016; Kaggle.com, 2017;
Le Folgoc et al., 2016; Volkovs et al., 2017).
The goal of this work is to combine NNs and DTs to gain
the complementary benefits of both approaches. To this
end, we propose adaptive neural trees (ANTs), which generalise previous work that attempted the same unification
(Suárez & Lutsko, 1999; İrsoy et al., 2012; Laptev & Buhmann, 2014; Rota Bulo & Kontschieder, 2014; Kontschieder
et al., 2015; Frosst & Hinton, 2017; Xiao, 2017) and address
their limitations (see Tab. 1). ANTs represent routing decisions and root-to-leaf computational paths within the tree
structures as NNs, which lets them benefit from hierarchical representation learning, rather than being restricted to
partitioning the raw data space. On the other hand, unlike
the fully distributed representaion of standard NN models,

