Towards Understanding the Importance of Noise in Training Neural Networks

Mo Zhou * 1 Tianyi Liu * 2 Yan Li 2 Dachao Lin 1 Enlu Zhou 2 Tuo Zhao 2

Abstract
Numerous empirical evidence has corroborated
that noise plays a crucial rule in effective and efficient training of neural networks. The theory
behind, however, is still largely unknown. This
paper studies this fundamental problem through
training a simple two-layer convolutional neural
network model. Although training such a network
requires solving a non-convex optimization problem with a spurious local optimum and a global
optimum, we prove that perturbed gradient descent and perturbed mini-batch stochastic gradient
algorithms in conjunction with noise annealing
is guaranteed to converge to a global optimum in
polynomial time with arbitrary initialization. This
implies that the noise enables the algorithm to efficiently escape from the spurious local optimum.
Numerical experiments are provided to support
our theory.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved great successes in a wide variety of domains such as speech and
image recognition (Hinton et al., 2012; Krizhevsky et al.,
2012), nature language processing (Rumelhart et al., 1986)
and recommendation systems (Salakhutdinov et al., 2007).
Training DNNs requires solving non-convex optimization problems. Specifically, given n samples denoted by
{(xi , yi )}ni=1 , where xi is the i-th input feature and yi is the
response, we solve the following optimization problem,
n

min F(θ) =
θ

1X
`(yi , f (xi , θ)),
n i=1

where ` is a loss function, f denotes the decision function
based on the neural network, and θ denotes the parameters
associated with f .
*

Equal contribution 1 Peking University 2 Georgia Institute
of Technology. Correspondence to: Tianyi Liu and Tuo Zhao
<{tianyiliu,tourzhao}@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Simple first order algorithms such as Stochastic Gradient
Descent (SGD) and its variants have been very successful for
training deep neural networks, despite the highly complex
non-convex landscape. For instance, recent results show
that there are a combinatorially large number of saddle
points and local optima in training DNNs (Choromanska
et al., 2015). Though it has been shown that SGD and its
variants can escape saddle points efficiently and converge to
local optima (Dauphin et al., 2014; Kawaguchi, 2016; Hardt
& Ma, 2016; Jin et al., 2017), the reason why the neural
network learnt by SGD generalizes well cannot yet be well
explained, since local optima do not necessarily guarantee
generalization. For example, Zhang et al. (2016) empirically
show the proliferation of global optima (when minimizing
the empirical risk), most of which cannot generalize; Keskar
et al. (2016) also provide empirical evidence of the existence
of sharp local optima, which do not generalize. They further
observe that gradient descent (GD) can often converge to the
sharp optima, while SGD tends to converge to the flat ones.
This phenomenon implies that the noise in SGD is very
crucial and enables SGD to select good optima. Besides,
Bottou (1991); Neelakantan et al. (2015) also show that
adding noise to gradient can potentially improve training
of deep neural networks. These empirical observations
motivate us to theoretically investigate the role of the noise
in training DNNs.
This paper aims to provide more theoretical insights on the
following fundamental question:
How does noise help train neural networks in the
presence of bad local optima?
Specifically, we study a two-layer non-overlapping convolutional neural network (CNN) with one hidden layer, which
takes the following form:
f (Z, w, a) = aT σ(Z T w),
where w ∈ Rp , a ∈ Rk and Z ∈ Rp×k are the convolutional
weights, the output weights and the input, respectively, and
σ(·) is the element-wise ReLU activation operator. Since
the ReLU activation is positive homogeneous, the weights
a and w can arbitrarily scale with each other. Thus, we
impose an additional constraint kwk2 = 1 to make the
neural network identifiable. We consider the realizable case,
where the training data is generated from a teacher network

