Passed & Spurious:
Descent Algorithms and Local Minima in Spiked Matrix-Tensor Models

Stefano Sarao Mannelli 1 Florent Krzakala 2 Pierfrancesco Urbani 1 Lenka Zdeborová 1

Abstract
In this work we analyse quantitatively the interplay between the loss landscape and performance
of descent algorithms in a prototypical inference
problem, the spiked matrix-tensor model. We
study a loss function that is the negative loglikelihood of the model. We analyse the number
of local minima at a fixed distance from the signal/spike with the Kac-Rice formula, and locate
trivialization of the landscape at large signal-tonoise ratios. We evaluate in a closed form the
performance of a gradient flow algorithm using
integro-differential PDEs as developed in physics
of disordered systems for the Langevin dynamics. We analyze the performance of an approximate message passing algorithm estimating the
maximum likelihood configuration via its state
evolution. We conclude by comparing the above
results: while we observe a drastic slow down
of the gradient flow dynamics even in the region
where the landscape is trivial, both the analyzed
algorithms are shown to perform well even in the
part of the region of parameters where spurious
local minima are present.

1. Introduction
A central question in computational sciences is the algorithmic feasibility of optimization in high-dimensional nonconvex landscapes. This question is particularly important
in learning and inference problems where the value of the
optimized function is not the ultimate criterium for quality
of the result, instead the generalization error or the closeness
to a ground-truth signal is more relevant.
1
Institut de physique théorique, Université Paris Saclay, CNRS,
CEA, 91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France 2 Laboratoire de Physique de
l’École Normale Supérieure, CNRS & Université Pierre & Marie
Curie & PSL Université, 75005 Paris, France. Correspondence
to: Stefano Sarao Mannelli <stefano.sarao@ipht.fr>, Lenka Zdeborová <lenka.zdeborova@ipht.fr>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Recent years brought a popular line of research into this
question where various works show for a variety of systems
that spurious local minima are not present in certain regimes
of parameters and conclude that consequently optimization
algorithms shall succeed, without the aim of being exhaustive these include (Kawaguchi, 2016; Soudry & Carmon,
2016; Ge et al., 2016; Freeman & Bruna, 2016; Bhojanapalli
et al., 2016; Park et al., 2017; Du et al., 2017; Ge et al., 2017;
Du et al., 2017; Lu & Kawaguchi, 2017). The spuriosity of
a minima is in some works defined by their distance from
the global minimum, in other works as local minimizers that
lead to bad generalization or bad accuracy in reconstruction
of the ground truth signal. These two notions are not always
equivalent, and certainly the later is more relevant and will
be used in the present work.
Many of the existing works stop at the statement that absence of spurious local minimizers leads to algorithmic feasibility and the presence of such spurious local minima leads
to algorithmic difficulty, at least as far as gradient-descentbased algorithms are concerned. At the same time, even
gradient-descent-based algorithms may be able to perform
well even when spurious local minima are present. This
is because the basins of attraction of the spurious minimas
may be small and the dynamics might be able to avoid them.
In the other direction, even if spurious local minima are
absent, algorithms might take long time to find a minimizer
for entropic reasons that in high-dimensional problems may
play a crucial role.
Main Results: We study the spiked matrix-tensor model,
introduced and motivated in (Sarao Mannelli et al., 2018a).
We view this model as a prototypical solvable example of
a high-dimensional non-convex optimization problem, and
anticipate that the results observed here will have a broader
relevance. Our main contributions are:
• Using the Kac-Rice formula (Fyodorov, 2004;
Ben Arous et al., 2017) we rigorously derive the expected number of local minimizers of the associated
likelihood at a given correlation with the ground truth
signal.
• We extend the recently introduced Langevin-stateevolution (Sarao Mannelli et al., 2018a) to the gradient

