Overparameterized Nonlinear Learning:
Gradient Descent Takes the Shortest Path?
Samet Oymak 1 Mahdi Soltanolkotabi 2

Abstract
Many modern learning tasks involve fitting nonlinear models which are trained in an overparameterized regime where the parameters of the model
exceed the size of the training dataset. Due to
this overparameterization, the training loss may
have infinitely many global minima and it is critical to understand the properties of the solutions
found by first-order optimization schemes such as
(stochastic) gradient descent starting from different initializations. In this paper we demonstrate
that when the loss has certain properties over a
minimally small neighborhood of the initial point,
first order methods such as (stochastic) gradient
descent have a few intriguing properties: (1) the
iterates converge at a geometric rate to a global optima even when the loss is nonconvex, (2) among
all global optima of the loss the iterates converge
to one with a near minimal distance to the initial
point, (3) the iterates take a near direct route from
the initial point to this global optimum. As part of
our proof technique, we introduce a new potential
function which captures the tradeoff between the
loss function and the distance to the initial point as
the iterations progress. The utility of our general
theory is demonstrated for a variety of problem
domains spanning low-rank matrix recovery to
shallow neural network training.

1. Introduction
1.1. Motivation
In a typical statistical estimation or supervised learning problem, we are interested in fitting a function f (⋅; θ) ∶ Rd ↦ R
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Riverside 2 Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, University of Southern California. Correspondence to: Samet Oymak <sametoymak@gmail.com>, Mahdi
Soltanolkotabi <soltanol@usc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

parameterized by θ ∈ Rp to a training data set of n inputoutput pairs xi ∈ Rd and yi ∈ R for i = 1, 2, . . . , n. The
training problem then consists of finding a parameter θ
that minimizes the empirical risk n1 ∑ni=1 `(f (xi ; θ), yi ).
The loss `(ỹ, y) measures the discrepancy between the
output(or label) y and the model prediction ỹ = f (xi ; θ).
For regression tasks one typically uses a least-squares loss
`(ỹ, y) = 12 (ỹ − y)2 so that the training problem reduces to
a nonlinear least-squares problem of the form
minp L(θ) ∶=

θ∈R

1 n
2
∑ (f (xi ; θ) − yi ) .
2 i=1

(1.1)

In this paper we mostly focus on nonlinear least-squares
problems however Section 5 of the supplementary material
extends our results to a broader class of loss functions L(θ).

Classical statistical estimation/learning theory postulates
that to find a reliable model that avoids overfitting, the size
of the training data must exceed the intrinsic dimension1 of
the model class f (⋅; θ) used for empirical risk minimization
(1.1). For many models such notions of intrinsic dimension
are at least as large as the number of parameters in the model
p, so that this literature requires the size of the training data
to exceed the number of parameters in the model i.e. n > p.
Contrary to this classical literature, modern machine learning models such as deep neural networks are often trained
via first-order methods in an over-parameterized regime
where the number of parameters in the model exceed the
size of the training data (i.e. n < p). Statistical learning
in this over-parameterized regime poses new challenges:
Given the nonconvex nature of the training loss (1.1) can
first-order methods converge to a globally optimal model
that perfectly interpolate the training data? If so, which of
the global optima do they converge to? What are the statistical properties of this model and how does this model vary as
a function of the initial parameter used to start the iterative
updates? What is the trajectory that iterative methods such
as (stochastic) gradient descent take to reach this point?
Why does a model trained using this approach generalize to
1

Some common notions of intrinsic dimension include Vapnik–Chervonenkis (VC) Dimension (Vapnik & Chervonenkis,
2015), Rademacher/Gaussian complexity (Bartlett & Mendelson,
2002; Mohri et al., 2018; Talagrand, 2006), as well as naive parameter counting.

