P OLITEX: Regret Bounds for Policy Iteration Using Expert Prediction

Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori 1 Peter L. Bartlett 2 Kush Bhatia 2 Nevena Lazić 3 Csaba Szepesvári 4 Gellért Weisz 4

Abstract
We present P OLITEX (POLicy ITeration with EXpert advice), a variant of policy iteration where
each policy is a Boltzmann distribution over the
sum of action-value function estimates of the previous policies, and analyze its regret in continuing
RL problems. We assume that the value function error after running a p
policy for τ time steps
scales as ε(τ ) = ε0 + Õ( d/τ ), where ε0 is the
worst-case approximation error and d is the number of features in a compressed representation of
the state-action space. We establish that this condition is satisfied by the LSPE algorithm under
certain assumptions on the MDP and policies. Under the error assumption, we show that the regret
of P OLITEX in uniformly mixing MDPs scales
as Õ(d1/2 T 3/4 + ε0 T ), where Õ(·) hides logarithmic terms and problem-dependent constants.
Thus, we provide the first regret bound for a fully
practical model-free method which only scales in
the number of features, and not in the size of the
underlying MDP. Experiments on a queuing problem confirm that P OLITEX is competitive with
some of its alternatives, while preliminary results
on Ms Pacman (one of the standard Atari benchmark problems) confirm the viability of P OLITEX
beyond linear function approximation.

1. Introduction
We study online no-regret model-free algorithms for infinite horizon reinforcement learning (RL) problems, which
capture long-horizon tasks such as routing problems and
game playing. Model-based reinforcement learning (RL)
algorithms estimate a model of the transition dynamics and
plan according to the model, while model-free algorithms
(e.g., Mnih et al. 2015) directly optimize the objective of interest. Model-free algorithms can often be competitive with
1
Adobe Research 2 UC Berkeley 3 Google Brain 4 DeepMind.
Correspondence to: Nevena Lazic <nevena@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

model-based algorithms, and theoretical evidence suggests
that this is not completely accidental (Strehl et al., 2006;
Azar et al., 2017; Jin et al., 2018; Abbasi-Yadkori et al.,
2019). However, existing theory either applies to settings
with no function approximation (Strehl et al., 2006; Azar
et al., 2017; Jin et al., 2018), or to systems with particular
structure where action-value functions are known to belong
to a known linear function space (Abbasi-Yadkori et al.,
2019). In this paper we ask the following question: Can
we design computationally-efficient, provable model-free
algorithms for infinite horizon RL problems with value function generalization? To this end, we propose P OLITEX, a
variant of policy iteration (PI), and analyze its performance
for infinite-horizon average-cost problems in terms of highprobability regret with respect to a fixed reference policy.
PI algorithms alternate between estimating the value of a
policy and generating a new policy, typically based on the
most recent value estimate (Bertsekas, 2011). In P OLITEX,
the policy in each phase is a Boltzmann distribution over
the sum of value function estimates of all previous policies.
P OLITEX is simple and efficient to implement whenever
an effective value function estimation method is available.
Importantly, no confidence sets or posterior distributions
for transition dynamics or value functions are needed. We
discuss and empirically evaluate versions of P OLITEX that
rely on (1) linear value functions estimated using the leastsquares policy evaluation (LSPE) method of Bertsekas &
Ioffe (1996) and (2) deep neural networks and the nonlinear
TD(0) algorithm. Preliminary experimental results demonstrate the benefits of P OLITEX over several baselines, both
with linear and neural function approximation.
The algorithm and analysis are based on a reduction of
the control of MDPs to expert prediction problems (EvenDar et al., 2009), where we have an expert algorithm in
each state, and the losses fed to the algorithm are value
functions. The Boltzmann policy arises as a result of using
the exponential weights algorithm in each state. The regret
of P OLITEX depends on the value function error. In the case
of linear function approximation, we show that the LSPE
error is controlled for uniformly mixing MDPs whenever a
certain “feature excitation” condition is met. Interestingly,
our results do not depend on the size of the MDP.

