Deep Gaussian Processes with Importance-Weighted Variational Inference

Hugh Salimbeni 1 2 Vincent Dutordoir 2 James Hensman 2 Marc Peter Deisenroth 1 2

Abstract
Deep Gaussian processes (DGPs) can model complex marginal densities as well as complex mappings. Non-Gaussian marginals are essential for
modelling real-world data, and can be generated
from the DGP by incorporating uncorrelated variables to the model. Previous work on DGP models has introduced noise additively and used variational inference with a combination of sparse
Gaussian processes and mean-field Gaussians for
the approximate posterior. Additive noise attenuates the signal, and the Gaussian form of
variational distribution may lead to an inaccurate posterior. We instead incorporate noisy variables as latent covariates, and propose a novel
importance-weighted objective, which leverages
analytic results and provides a mechanism to trade
off computation for improved accuracy. Our results demonstrate that the importance-weighted
objective works well in practice and consistently
outperforms classical variational inference, especially for deeper models.

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes are powerful and popular models with
widespread use, but the joint Gaussian assumption of the
latent function values can be limiting in many situations.
This can be for at least two reasons: firstly, not all prior
knowledge is possible to express solely in terms of mean
and covariance, and secondly Gaussian marginals are not
sufficient for many applications. The deep Gaussian process
(DGP) (Damianou and Lawrence, 2013) can potentially
overcome both these limitations.
We consider the very general problem of conditional density estimation. A Gaussian process model with a Gaussian
likelihood is a poor model unless the true data marginals
are Gaussian. Even if the marginals are Gaussian, a Gaus1
Imperial College London 2 PROWLER.io. Correspondence to:
Hugh Salimbeni <hrs13@ic.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Figure 1: Posterior density from a two-layer model, illustrating non-Gaussian marginals and non-smooth input dependence.

sian process can still be a poor model if the mapping is not
well-captured by a known mean and covariance. For example, changes of lengthscale at unknown locations cannot be
captured with a fixed covariance function (Neil, 1998).
As an example, consider a 1D density estimation task
formed from the letters ‘DGP’, where the inputs are the
horizontal coordinates and the outputs are the vertical coordinates of points uniformly in the glyphs. The marginals
are multimodal and piece-wise constant, and also change
non-smoothly in some regions of the space (for example
changing discontinuously from a bi- to tri-modal density
mid-way through the ‘G’). Figure 1 shows the posterior of a
two-layer DGP with this data.
In this work, we develop the DGP model by revisiting the
original construction of Damianou and Lawrence (2013),
which includes variables that are a priori independent for
each data point. Independent variables are important for
modelling non-Gaussian marginals, as otherwise function
values with the same input will be perfectly correlated. Differently from Damianou and Lawrence (2013), we introduce
the independent variables to the model as latent covariates
(that is, as additional inputs to the GP) (Wang and Neal,
2012) rather than additively as process noise. As we have a
clean separation between variables that are correlated and

