Tighter Problem-Dependent Regret Bounds in Reinforcement Learning
without Domain Knowledge using Value Function Bounds
Andrea Zanette 1 Emma Brunskill 2

Abstract
Strong worst-case performance bounds for
episodic reinforcement learning exist but fortunately in practice RL algorithms perform much
better than such bounds would predict. Algorithms and theory that provide strong problemdependent bounds could help illuminate the key
features of what makes a RL problem hard and
reduce the barrier to using RL algorithms in practice. As a step towards this we derive an algorithm
and analysis for finite horizon discrete MDPs with
state-of-the-art worst-case regret bounds and substantially tighter bounds if the RL environment
has special features but without apriori knowledge of the environment from the algorithm. As
a result of our analysis, we also help address an
open learning theory question (Jiang & Agarwal,
2018) about episodic MDPs with a constant upperbound on the sum of rewards, providing a regret
bound function of the number of episodes with no
dependence on the horizon.

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL) an agent must learn how to
make good decision without having access to an exact model
of the world. Most of the literature for provably efficient
exploration in Markov decision processes (MDPs) (Jaksch
et al., 2010; Osband et al., 2013; Lattimore & Hutter, 2014;
Dann & Brunskill, 2015; Dann et al., 2017; Osband & Roy,
2017; Azar et al., 2017; Kakade et al., 2018) has focused
on providing near-optimal worst-case performance bounds.
Such bounds are highly desirable as they do not depend on
the structure of the particular environment considered and
therefore hold for even extremely hard-to-learn MDPs.
1

Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering, Stanford University, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, USA. Correspondence to:
Andrea Zanette <zanette@stanford.edu>, Emma Brunskill
<ebrun@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Fortunately in practice reinforcement learning algorithms often perform far better than what these problem-independent
bounds would suggest. While we may observe better or
worse performance empirically on different MDPs, we
would like to derive a more systematic understanding of
what types of decision processes are inherently easier or
more challenging for RL. This motivates our interest in
deriving algorithms and theoretical analyses that provide
problem-dependent bounds. Ideally, such algorithms will
do as well as RL solutions designed for the worst case if
the problem is pathologically difficult and otherwise match
the performance bounds of algorithms specifically designed
for a particular problem subclass. This exciting scenario
might bring considerable saving in the time spent designing domain-specific RL solutions and in training a human
expert to judge and recognize the complexity of different
problems. An added benefit would include the robustness
of the RL solution in case the actual model does not belong
to the identified subclass, yielding increased confidence to
deploying RL to high-stakes applications.
Towards this goal, in this paper we contribute with a new
algorithm for episodic tabular reinforcement learning which
automatically provides provably stronger regret bounds in
many domains which have a small variance of the optimal
value function (in the infinite horizon setting, this variance
has been called the environmental norm (Maillard et al.,
2014)). Indeed, there is good reason to believe that some
features of the range or variability of the optimal value
function should be a critical aspect of the hardness of reinforcement learning in a MDP. Many worst-case bounds for
finite-state MDPs scale with a worst case bound on the range
/ magnitude of the value function, such as the diameter D for
an infinite-horizon setting and the horizon H in an episodic
problem. Note that here both D and H arise in the analyses
as upper bounds on the (range of the) optimistic value function across the entire MDP1 . As more samples are collected,
one would hope that the agent’s optimistic value function
converges to the true optimal value function. Unfortunately
this is not the case, see for example (Jaksch et al., 2010;
Bartlett & Tewari, 2009; Zanette & Brunskill, 2018) for a
1
Many RL algorithms with strong performance bounds rely
on the principle of optimism under uncertainty and compute an
optimistic value function.

