The Evolved Transformer
David R. So 1 Chen Liang 1 Quoc V. Le 1

Abstract
Recent works have highlighted the strength of
the Transformer architecture on sequence tasks
while, at the same time, neural architecture search
(NAS) has begun to outperform human-designed
models. Our goal is to apply NAS to search for
a better alternative to the Transformer. We first
construct a large search space inspired by the recent advances in feed-forward sequence models
and then run evolutionary architecture search with
warm starting by seeding our initial population
with the Transformer. To directly search on the
computationally expensive WMT 2014 EnglishGerman translation task, we develop the Progressive Dynamic Hurdles method, which allows us
to dynamically allocate more resources to more
promising candidate models. The architecture
found in our experiments – the Evolved Transformer – demonstrates consistent improvement
over the Transformer on four well-established
language tasks: WMT 2014 English-German,
WMT 2014 English-French, WMT 2014 EnglishCzech and LM1B. At a big model size, the
Evolved Transformer establishes a new state-ofthe-art BLEU score of 29.8 on WMT’14 EnglishGerman; at smaller sizes, it achieves the same
quality as the original ”big” Transformer with
37.6% less parameters and outperforms the Transformer by 0.7 BLEU at a mobile-friendly model
size of ∼7M parameters.

models, although some effort has also been invested in
searching for sequence models (Zoph & Le, 2017; Pham
et al., 2018). In these cases, it has always been to find
improved recurrent neural networks (RNNs), which were
long established as the de facto neural model for sequence
problems (Sutskever et al., 2014; Bahdanau et al., 2015).
However, recent works have shown that there are better alternatives to RNNs for solving sequence problems. Due to
the success of convolution-based networks, such as Convolution Seq2Seq (Gehring et al., 2017), and full attention
networks, such as the Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017),
feed-forward networks are now a viable option for solving
sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) tasks. The main strength
of feed-forward networks is that they are faster, and easier
to train than RNNs.

Over the past few years, impressive advances have been
made in the field of neural architecture search. Reinforcement learning and evolution have both proven their capacity
to produce models that exceed the performance of those
designed by humans (Real et al., 2019; Zoph et al., 2018).
These advances have mostly focused on improving vision

The goal of this work is to examine the use of neural architecture search methods to design better feed-forward
architectures for seq2seq tasks. Specifically, we apply
tournament selection architecture search and warm start
it with the Transformer, considered to be the state-of-art
and widely-used, to evolve a better and more efficient architecture. To achieve this, we construct a search space
that reflects the recent advances in feed-forward seq2seq
models and develop a method called Progressive Dynamic
Hurdles (PDH) that allows us to perform our search directly
on the computationally demanding WMT 2014 EnglishGerman (En-De) translation task. Our search produces a
new architecture – called the Evolved Transformer (ET) –
which demonstrates consistent improvement over the original Transformer on four well-established language tasks:
WMT 2014 English-German, WMT 2014 English-French
(En-Fr), WMT 2014 English-Czech (En-Cs) and the 1 Billion Word Language Model Benchmark (LM1B). At a big
model size, the Evolved Transformer establishes a new stateof-the-art BLEU score of 29.8 on WMT’14 En-De. It is
also effective at smaller sizes, achieving the same quality
as the original ”big” Transformer with 37.6% less parameters and outperforming the Transformer by 0.7 BLEU at a
mobile-friendly model size of ∼7M parameters.

1
Google Research, Brain Team, Mountain View, California,
USA. Correspondence to: David R. So <davidso@google.com>.

2. Related Work

1. Introduction

th

Proceedings of the 36 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

RNNs have long been used as the default option for applying neural networks to sequence modeling (Sutskever

