Discovering Context Effects from Raw Choice Data

Arjun Seshadri 1 Alexander Peysakhovich 2 Johan Ugander 1

Abstract
Many applications in preference learning assume
that decisions come from the maximization of a
stable utility function. Yet a large experimental
literature shows that individual choices and judgements can be affected by “irrelevant” aspects of
the context in which they are made. An important
class of such contexts is the composition of the
choice set. In this work, our goal is to discover
such choice set effects from raw choice data. We
introduce an extension of the Multinomial Logit
(MNL) model, called the context dependent random utility model (CDM), which allows for a
particular class of choice set effects. We show
that the CDM can be thought of as a second-order
approximation to a general choice system, can
be inferred optimally using maximum likelihood
and, importantly, is easily interpretable. We apply
the CDM to both real and simulated choice data
to perform principled exploratory analyses for the
presence of choice set effects.

1. Introduction
Modeling individual choice is an important component of
recommender systems (Resnick and Varian, 1997), search
engine ranking (Schapire et al., 1998), analysis of auctions
(Athey and Levin, 2001), marketing (Allenby and Rossi,
1998), and demand modeling in diverse domains (Berry
et al., 1995; Bruch et al., 2016). The workhorse models
used either implicitly or explicitly in these disparate literatures are random utility models (RUMs) (Manski, 1977),
which assume that individuals have a numeric utility for
each item and that they make choices that maximize noisy
observations of these utilities (Luce, 1959; McFadden, 1980;
Kreps, 1988).
1
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 2 Facebook Artificial Intelligence Research, New York, NY. Correspondence to: Arjun Seshadri <aseshadr@stanford.edu>, Alexander Peysakhovich <alexpeys@fb.com>, Johan Ugander <jugander@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

The most well known and widely used RUM is the conditional multinomial logit (MNL), also called the Luce model,
which is the unique RUM that satisfies the axiom known
as the independence of irrelevant alternatives (IIA) (Luce,
1959). Informally, this axiom states that adding an item to
a choice set does not change the relative probabilities of
choosing the other items. This assumption is very strong,
but it allows analysts to build powerful and interpretable
models. However, if one assumes IIA but it is not actually
true, predictions for out-of-sample choices could be very
wrong. Thus, it is important for analysts to discover whether
IIA is approximately true in a given dataset.
At the same time, there is a large amount of experimental evidence showing significant deviations from rational choice
across many domains. In particular, the value assigned to
an item can strongly depend on the “irrelevant” elements
of the context of the choice (Tversky, 1972; Tversky and
Simonson, 1993). Attempts to model these context effects
in a domain-free manner fall short of being practically valuable, either due to large parameter requirements, inferential
intractability, or both (Park and Choi, 2013).
Our contribution addresses both issues. We consider the
IIA-satisfying MNL model and make small modifications to
subsume a class of IIA violations that we believe are important in practice, while retaining parametric and inferential
efficiency. We refer to this model as the context dependent
random utility model (CDM). The CDM can be thought
of as a “second order” approximation of a general choice
system (the MNL model, meanwhile, corresponds to a “first
order” approximation). Because the CDM nests MNL, it
can fit data that does satisfy IIA just as well, and, importantly, can be used to construct a nested-model hypothesis
test for whether a particular dataset is consistent with IIA.
The key assumption of the CDM is that IIA violations come
from pairwise interactions between items in the choice set
and that larger choice set effects can be approximated additively using all pairwise effects. This assumption means that
the CDM has many fewer parameters than a general choice
system. We can further reduce the CDM’s data dependence
by assuming that these underlying effects can be well modeled by latent vectors of a smaller dimensionality than the
number of items, resulting in what we call the low-rank
CDM. The low-rank CDM can be useful in applications

