Active Learning for Decision-Making from Imbalanced Observational Data

Iiris Sundin 1 Peter Schulam * 2 Eero Siivola * 1 Aki Vehtari 1 Suchi Saria 2 Samuel Kaski 1

Abstract
Machine learning can help personalized decision
support by learning models to predict individual
treatment effects (ITE). This work studies the reliability of prediction-based decision-making in
a task of deciding which action a to take for a
target unit after observing its covariates x̃ and
predicted outcomes p̂(ỹ | x̃, a). An example
case is personalized medicine and the decision
of which treatment to give to a patient. A common problem when learning these models from
observational data is imbalance, that is, difference
in treated/control covariate distributions, which
is known to increase the upper bound of the expected ITE estimation error. We propose to assess
the decision-making reliability by estimating the
ITE model’s Type S error rate, which is the probability of the model inferring the sign of the treatment effect wrong. Furthermore, we use the estimated reliability as a criterion for active learning,
in order to collect new (possibly expensive) observations, instead of making a forced choice based
on unreliable predictions. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this decision-making aware active
learning in two decision-making tasks: in simulated data with binary outcomes and in a medical
dataset with synthetic and continuous treatment
outcomes.

1. Introduction
A promising application domain of machine learning is
to augment human intelligence in decision-making tasks
by providing predictions of outcomes under alternative actions (Schulam & Saria, 2017). To fit a model to this task,
we need data recording previous actions a, observed outcomes y, and any features relevant to the context of the
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Aalto
University, Espoo, Finland 2 Department of Computer Science,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA. Correspondence to: Iiris Sundin <iiris.sundin@aalto.fi>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

decision, x. Then, the goal is to estimate p(Y | X =
x, A = a) and, further, individual treatment effect (ITE),
τ (x) = E[Y [1] − Y [0] | X = x], where Y [a] denotes the
potential outcome of treatment A = a (Rubin, 1978). ITE
provides sufficient information to choose between two actions. The estimation of ITE is susceptible to many error
sources (Pearl, 2009; Schulam & Saria, 2017; Mitchell et al.,
2018), of which we concentrate on imbalance (Gelman &
Hill, 2007).
Imbalance is defined as the difference in covariate distributions in the treated and control groups. Imbalance
makes correct model specification essential for avoiding
bias in treatment effect estimates (Gelman & Hill, 2007).
Mis-specification of the model could be avoided by using
non-parametric models, but their variance increases quickly
when extrapolating. Recently, imbalance has been shown
to increase the upper bound of the model error in estimation of ITE (Shalit et al., 2017). Furthermore, imbalance
becomes the more prevalent issue the higher-dimensional
the covariate space is (D’Amour et al., 2018).
There are many existing ways to deal with imbalance when
learning the average treatment effect (ATE). In causal inference, the most common methods are propensity score
matching or weighting (Rosenbaum & Rubin, 1984; Hirano
et al., 2003; Lunceford & Davidian, 2004), and modeling
the potential outcomes (Imbens & Rubin, 2015; Hernán &
Robins, 2018), as well as doubly robust methods which
implement both (Bang & Robins, 2005; Funk et al., 2011).
Even though these methods can decrease bias in treatment
effect estimates, they will increase variance, and therefore
may make the decision-making less reliable. This is especially the case with ITE; For example, in the areas of
covariate space where there are more control units than
treated, intuition is that the model for the treated outcome either has to generalize from less-representative observations
(increasing bias) or extrapolate (increasing variance). Either
way, there is higher uncertainty about the treated outcome,
which makes reliable decision-making difficult. An extreme
case of this is illustrated in Fig. 1. A natural question then
is, could other data sources be exploited instead of making
a forced choice based on insufficient observational data.
This work has three main contributions, which are complementary to each other and can be used independently. First,

