Efficient Amortised Bayesian Inference
for Hierarchical and Nonlinear Dynamical Systems
Geoffrey Roeder 1 2 Paul K Grant 1 Andrew Phillips 1 Neil Dalchau 1 Edward Meeds 1

Abstract
We introduce a flexible, scalable Bayesian inference framework for nonlinear dynamical systems
characterised by distinct and hierarchical variability at the individual, group, and population levels.
Our model class is a generalisation of nonlinear
mixed-effects (NLME) dynamical systems, the
statistical workhorse for many experimental sciences. We cast parameter inference as stochastic optimisation of an end-to-end differentiable,
block-conditional variational autoencoder. We
specify the dynamics of the data-generating process as an ordinary differential equation (ODE)
such that both the ODE and its solver are fully
differentiable. This model class is highly flexible:
the ODE right-hand sides can be a mixture of userprescribed or “white-box” sub-components and
neural network or “black-box” sub-components.
Using stochastic optimisation, our amortised inference algorithm could seamlessly scale up to
massive data collection pipelines (common in labs
with robotic automation). Finally, our framework
supports interpretability with respect to the underlying dynamics, as well as predictive generalization to unseen combinations of group components
(also called “zero-shot” learning). We empirically
validate our method by predicting the dynamic
behaviour of bacteria that were genetically engineered to function as biosensors.

1. Introduction
Dynamical systems have been the central focus in many
areas of statistical machine learning, whether as state-space
1

Microsoft Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom 2 Princeton
University, Princeton, United States of America.
Correspondence to: Geoffrey Roeder <roeder@princeton.edu>,
Ted Meeds <edmeeds@microsoft.com>, Neil Dalchau
<ndalchau@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

models (Archer et al., 2015; Karl et al., 2016), (non)linear
dynamical systems and their extensions (Becker-Ehmck
et al., 2018; Johnson et al., 2016; Linderman et al., 2016),
or neuroscience applications (Wu et al., 2017; Gao et al.,
2016). Recent work has even reinterpreted general recursive
deep neural networks as discretisations of continuous-time
dynamical systems (Chen et al., 2018).
Dynamical systems learned from experimental data are
widespread in the physical sciences, including fluid dynamics, thermodynamics, and electromagnetism. They also play
a particularly important role in advancing our understanding of biology, typically studied as Ordinary Differential
Equations (ODEs). Seminal contributions of ODE models
in biology include the mechanisms of the cell cycle (Tyson
et al., 2001; Ferrell et al., 2011), circadian rhythms (Leloup
& Goldbeter, 2003), and nerve action potentials (Hodgkin
& Huxley, 1952).
More recently, ODE models have been playing an increasingly important role in engineering biological systems by
capturing mechanistic processes in the underlying chemical
reaction dynamics that identify potential targets for molecular intervention and by predicting the possible outcomes
of these interventions (Elowitz & Leibler, 2000; PotvinTrottier et al., 2016; Gardner et al., 2000). The ability to
precisely engineer biology could enable substantial breakthroughs in medicine and crop yields, and provide sustainable alternatives to environmentally unsustainable processes
and products (Khalil & Collins, 2010; Ruder et al., 2011;
Cumbers & Schmieder, 2017). However, identifying the parameters of ODE models is still limited by the efficiency and
scalability of inference methods (Calderhead & Girolami,
2011). Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) is considered
state-of-the-art for learning ODE parameters from experimental data (Woods et al., 2016; Moore et al., 2018), but
requires expensive numerical integration at each time step.
This problem is exacerbated by model selection, where competing explanatory mechanisms must be evaluated for predictive accuracy and generalisation (Calderhead & Girolami,
2009). In the era of increasingly automated laboratories,
scientists require new statistical models and computational
methods that can scale adequately with the increasing availability of experimental data.

