Memory-Optimal Direct Convolutions for Maximizing
Classification Accuracy in Embedded Applications

Albert Gural 1 Boris Murmann 1

Abstract
In the age of Internet of Things (IoT), embedded devices ranging from ARM Cortex M0s with
hundreds of KB of RAM to Arduinos with 2KB
RAM are expected to perform increasingly sophisticated classification tasks, such as voice and
gesture recognition, activity tracking, and biometric security. While convolutional neural networks
(CNNs), together with spectrogram preprocessing,
are a natural solution to many of these classification tasks, storage of the network’s activations
often exceeds the hard memory constraints of embedded platforms. This paper presents memoryoptimal direct convolutions as a way to push classification accuracy as high as possible given strict
hardware memory constraints at the expense of
extra compute. We therefore explore the opposite end of the compute-memory trade-off curve
from standard approaches that minimize latency.
We validate the memory-optimal CNN technique
with an Arduino implementation of the 10-class
MNIST classification task, fitting the network
specification, weights, and activations entirely
within 2KB SRAM and achieving a state-of-theart classification accuracy for small-scale embedded systems of 99.15%.

1. Introduction
Moving machine learning inference from the cloud to
energy-efficient edge devices is a research topic of growing interest. Running machine learning models locally may
help mitigate privacy concerns associated with a user’s raw
sensor data and can enable truly autonomous operation by
eliminating the need for a data connection. In this application paradigm, often assimilated with the Internet of Things
1

Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, USA. Correspondence to: Albert Gural <agural@stanford.edu>, Boris Murmann <murmann@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

(IoT), the machine learning model is trained on a server
and subsequently deployed across a large number of edge
devices. Consequently, these platforms must have sufficient
local memory to store the weights, biases, activations and
configuration parameters associated with typical machine
learning algorithms. However, low-cost IoT hardware is
severely resource constrained (often just 2-16KB of memory), which stands at odds with the memory-hungry nature
of top-performing algorithms, such as deep CNNs.
To address this issue, recent work has looked at memoryefficient alternatives to CNNs and has asked the question:
Given a (small) fixed memory budget, what is the maximum
classification accuracy that one can achieve? In this quest,
Gupta et al. (2017) advocated k-Nearest Neighbor (KNN)
models to utilize a memory size as low as 2KB (Arduino
UNO platform). Similarly, Kumar et al. (2017) proposed
a sparse tree-based algorithm, building on the assumption
that a CNN can not run on a device with KB-size memory.
However, with the departure from CNNs, which are known
to achieve state-of-the-performance, there is an inherent
sacrifice in classification accuracy that is difficult to recoup
by engineering a new algorithm. For example, the 2KB treebased approach of Kumar et al. (2017) is limited to 94.38%
accuracy on a two-class MNIST-2 dataset (Jose et al., 2013).
This paper presents strategies for implementing CNNs under
strict memory resource constraints. While the described
techniques are generally applicable, we illustrate their utility
through the implementation of a 2KB, four-layer CNN for
image classification, thus imposing similar constraints as
in Kumar et al. (2017). We show that despite this extreme
resource scarcity, a test accuracy of 99.15% is achievable
for the original MNIST-10 dataset from LeCun et al. (1998).
The main contributions of this work are: (1) identification of
a method for memory-optimal direct convolution along with
a proof of its optimality and (2) an example implementation
of MNIST-10 classification on a 2KB Arduino platform.
The latter should be viewed as an illustrative case study
on the asymptotic limits of memory size reduction. As
such, it is not necessarily practical or optimized for other
performance aspects such as throughput and compute energy.
Figure 1 gives a taste of the results of our approach. Code
and supplemental material are available here.

