Improved Zeroth-Order Variance Reduced Algorithms and Analysis for
Nonconvex Optimization

Kaiyi Ji 1 Zhe Wang 1 Yi Zhou 2 Yingbin Liang 1

Abstract

Two types of zeroth-order stochastic algorithms
have recently been designed for nonconvex optimization respectively based on the first-order
techniques SVRG and SARAH/SPIDER. This paper addresses several important issues that are still
open in these methods. First, all existing SVRGtype zeroth-order algorithms suffer from worse
function query complexities than either zerothorder gradient descent (ZO-GD) or stochastic gradient descent (ZO-SGD). In this paper, we propose a new algorithm ZO-SVRG-Coord-Rand and
develop a new analysis for an existing ZO-SVRGCoord algorithm proposed in Liu et al. 2018b, and
show that both ZO-SVRG-Coord-Rand and ZOSVRG-Coord (under our new analysis) outperform other exiting SVRG-type zeroth-order methods as well as ZO-GD and ZO-SGD. Second, the
existing SPIDER-type algorithm SPIDER-SZO
(Fang et al., 2018) has superior theoretical performance, but suffers from the generation of a large
number
of Gaussian random variables as well as a
√
-level stepsize in practice. In this paper, we develop a new algorithm ZO-SPIDER-Coord, which
is free from Gaussian variable generation and allows a large constant stepsize while maintaining
the same convergence rate and query complexity,
and we further show that ZO-SPIDER-Coord automatically achieves a linear convergence rate as
the iterate enters into a local PL region without
restart and algorithmic modification.

1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The
Ohio State University 2 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Duke University. Correspondence to: Kaiyi Ji
<ji.367@osu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Zeroth-order optimization has recently gained increasing
attention due to its wide usage in many applications where
the explicit expressions of gradients of the objective function are expensive or infeasible to obtain and only function
evaluations are accessible. Such a class of applications include black-box adversarial attacks on deep neural networks
(DNNs) (Papernot et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2017; Kurakin
et al., 2016), structured prediction (Taskar et al., 2005) and
reinforcement learning (Choromanski et al., 2018).
Various zeroth-order algorithms have been developed to
solve the following general finite-sum optimization problem
n

min f (x) :=

x∈Rd

1X
fi (x)
n i=1

(1)

where d denotes the input dimension and {fi (·)}ni=1 denote
smooth and nonconvex individual loss functions. Nesterov
& Spokoiny 2011 introduced a zeroth-order gradient descent (ZO-GD) algorithm using a two-point Gaussian random gradient estimator, which yields a convergence rate of
O(d/K) (where K is the number of iterations) and a function query complexity (i.e., the number of queried function
values) of O(dn/), to attain a stationary point xζ such that
Ek∇f (xζ )k2 ≤ . Ghadimi & Lan 2013 proposed a zerothorder stochastic gradient descent (ZO-SGD) algorithm using
the same gradient estimation technique as in Nesterov
p &
Spokoiny 2011, which has a convergence rate of O( d/K)
and a function query complexity of O(d/2 ).
Furthermore, two types of zeroth-order stochastic variance
reduced algorithms have been developed to further improve
the convergence rate of ZO-SGD. The first type refers to
the SVRG-based algorithm, which replaces the gradient in
SVRG (Johnson & Zhang, 2013) by zeroth-order gradient
estimators. In particular, Liu et al. 2018b proposed three
zeroth-order SVRG-based algorithms, namely, ZO-SVRG
based on a two-point random gradient estimator, ZO-SVRGAve based on an average random gradient estimator, and ZOSVRG-Coord based on a coordinate-wise gradient estimator.
The performances of the aforementioned algorithms are
summarized in Table 1. Though existing studies appear
comprehensive, two important questions are still left open

