On The Power of Curriculum Learning in Training Deep Networks

Guy Hacohen 1 2 Daphna Weinshall 1

Abstract
Training neural networks is traditionally done
by providing a sequence of random mini-batches
sampled uniformly from the entire training data.
In this work, we analyze the effect of curriculum
learning, which involves the non-uniform sampling of mini-batches, on the training of deep networks, and specifically CNNs trained for image
recognition. To employ curriculum learning, the
training algorithm must resolve 2 problems: (i)
sort the training examples by difficulty; (ii) compute a series of mini-batches that exhibit an increasing level of difficulty. We address challenge
(i) using two methods: transfer learning from
some competitive “teacher” network, and bootstrapping. In our empirical evaluation, both methods show similar benefits in terms of increased
learning speed and improved final performance
on test data. We address challenge (ii) by investigating different pacing functions to guide the
sampling. The empirical investigation includes
a variety of network architectures, using images
from CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and subsets of ImageNet. We conclude with a novel theoretical analysis of curriculum learning, where we show how
it effectively modifies the optimization landscape.
We then define the concept of an ideal curriculum,
and show that under mild conditions it does not
change the corresponding global minimum of the
optimization function.

1. Introduction
In order to teach complex tasks, teachers are often required
to create a curriculum. A curriculum imposes some order
on the concepts that constitute the final task, an order which
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel 2 Edmond and
Lily Safra Center for Brain Sciences, The Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel. Correspondence to: Guy
Hacohen <guy.hacohen@mail.huji.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

typically reflects their complexity. The student is then gradually introduced to these concepts by increasing complexity,
in order to allow her to exploit previously learned concepts
and thus ease the abstraction of new ones. But the use of a
curriculum is not limited to complex tasks. When teaching
a binary classification task, for example, teachers tend to
present typical examples first, followed by the more ambiguous examples (Avrahami et al., 1997).
In many traditional machine learning paradigms, a target
function is estimated by a learner (the “student”) using a
set of training labeled examples (provided by the “teacher”).
The field of curriculum learning (CL), which is motivated
by the idea of a curriculum in human learning, attempts at
imposing some structure on the training set. Such structure
essentially relies on a notion of “easy” and “hard” examples, and utilizes this distinction in order to teach the learner
how to generalize easier examples before harder ones. Empirically, the use of CL has been shown to accelerate and
improve the learning process (e.g. Selfridge et al., 1985;
Bengio et al., 2009) in many machine learning paradigms.
When establishing a curriculum for human students, teachers need to address two challenges: (i) Arrange the material
in a way that reflects difficulty or complexity, a knowledge
which goes beyond what is available in the training set in
most machine learning paradigms. (ii) Attend to the pace
by which the material is presented – going over the simple ideas too fast may lead to more confusion than benefit,
while moving along too slowly may lead to boredom and
unproductive learning (Hunkins & Ornstein, 2016). In this
paper, we study how these principles can be beneficial when
the learner is a neural network.
In order to address the first challenge, Weinshall et al. (2018)
introduced the idea of curriculum learning by transfer. The
idea is to sort the training examples based on the performance of a pre-trained network on a larger dataset, finetuned to the dataset at hand. This approach was shown to
improve both the speed of convergence and final accuracy
for convolutional neural networks, while not requiring the
manual labeling of training data by difficulty.
In our work, we address both challenges. We begin by decomposing CL into two separate - but closely related - subtasks and their corresponding functions. The first, termed
scoring function, determines the “difficulty” or “complexity”

