A Dynamical Systems Perspective on Nesterov Acceleration

Michael Muehlebach 1 Michael I. Jordan 1

Abstract
We present a dynamical system framework for
understanding Nesterov’s accelerated gradient
method. In contrast to earlier work, our derivation
does not rely on a vanishing step size argument.
We show that Nesterov acceleration arises from
discretizing an ordinary differential equation with
a semi-implicit Euler integration scheme. We analyze both the underlying differential equation as
well as the discretization to obtain insights into the
phenomenon of acceleration. The analysis suggests that a curvature-dependent damping term
lies at the heart of the phenomenon. We further
establish connections between the discretized and
the continuous-time dynamics.

1. Introduction
Many tasks in machine learning and statistics can be formulated as optimization problems. In its basic form, an
optimization problem consists of finding a value x∗ that
minimizes the function f , that is f (x∗ ) ≤ f (x) for all x,
provided such a value exists. In the following, we consider
the subclass of problems where the function f is real-valued,
convex, and has a Lipschitz-continuous gradient. These assumptions are often met, at least locally, in practical problem
instances.
One of the most popular algorithms for computing x∗ up to
a desired accuracy is the gradient method, due to its simplicity and due to the fact that it scales well to large problem
sizes. It is also possible to obtain faster convergence rates
within the family of gradient-based methods by considering accelerated gradient methods, which make use of two
successive gradients (Nesterov, 1983).
Given the important role that acceleration has played not
only in generating useful new algorithms but also in understanding natural limits on convergence rate, there have
1

Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department, UC
Berkeley, Berkeley, California, USA. Correspondence to: Michael
Muehlebach <michaelm@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

been many attempts to understand and characterize the phenomenon. Bubeck et al. (2015) suggest a modification of
the accelerated gradient method that achieves the same convergence rate, but has a geometric interpretation. Allen-Zhu
& Orecchia (2014) present an algorithm that couples gradient and mirror descent, while achieving an accelerated
convergence rate and Lessard et al. (2016) propose a general
analysis framework, inspired by control theory, for comparing different first-order optimization algorithms including
the accelerated gradient method. Other work includes Diakonikolas & Orecchia (2018), who unify the analysis of
first-order methods by imposing certain decay conditions, or
Scieur et al. (2017), where the accelerated gradient method
is interpreted as a multi-step discretization of the gradient
flow.
An important step was taken by Su et al. (2016) and Krichene et al. (2015), who showed that for a vanishing step size
the trajectories of the accelerated gradient scheme approach
the solutions of a certain second-order ordinary differential
equation (ODE). The resulting ODE was analyzed in further detail by Attouch et al. (2018). It was placed within a
variational framework by Wibisono et al. (2016), which led
to the discovery of higher-order schemes that achieve even
faster convergence rates.
In the current paper, we provide a different interpretation
of the accelerated gradient method, one that is not based on
beginning with the difference equation and deriving an underlying ODE via a vanishing step size argument. We go in
the other direction, starting with a certain second-order ODE
that has a clear interpretation as a mass-spring-damper system, and showing that Nesterov acceleration can be derived
by discretizing the ODE with a semi-implicit Euler method.
In contrast to the continuous-time limit of the heavy-ball
method (Polyak, 1964), our model includes a damping term
that locally averages the curvature. This additional damping
seems instrumental to the acceleration phenomenon. In addition to providing intuition, we believe that the model can be
used to translate properties of the continuous-time system,
which are, as we show, often easier to derive, to the resulting
discrete-time algorithm. In particular, we show that under
some regularity conditions fundamental geometric properties (phase-space area contraction and time-reversibility) are
preserved by the discretization.

