Sublinear Space Private Algorithms Under the Sliding Window Model
Jalaj Upadhyay 1

Abstract
The Differential privacy overview of Apple states,
“Apple retains the collected data for a maximum of
three months.” Analysis on recent data is formalized by the sliding window model. This begs the
question: what is the price of privacy in the sliding window model. In this paper, we study heavy
hitters in the sliding window model with window
size w. Previous works of Chan et al. (2012) estimates heavy hitters incur an error of order ✓w
for a constant ✓ > 0. In this paper, we give an efficient differentially private algorithm to estimate
heavy hitters in the sliding window p
model with
e
O(w3/4 ) additive error and using e
O( w) space.

1. Introduction

Many real-world applications involve processing timeevolving data. For example, consider a health agency tracking the spread of flu, or a network service provider monitoring the traffic to be able to allocate resources and preempt congestion, or a recommendation system following the
trending events to be able to better serve the users. Given the
temporal, streaming nature of data, a primary requirement
from a computational perspective is to enable analysis in
real time using small space. Furthermore, these systems
often rely on highly sensitive, private data and therefore,
privacy is of utmost concern in such applications. The focus, therefore, in this paper, is to study sublinear space
algorithms for private analysis of temporal data.
Several computing models have been studied for processing
temporal data. Perhaps, the most popular and the simplest of
all is the streaming model, wherein, at every time epoch new
data is received and processed but the output is produced
only at the end of the stream. This model has been studied
extensively in many privacy-preserving data analysis applications (Mir et al., 2011; Blocki et al., 2012; Upadhyay,
1

Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD - 21218. Correspondence to: Jalaj Upadhyay
<jalaj@jhu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

2014a;b; Joseph et al., 2018). A related model that has been
studied with privacy considerations is that of continual release model, where the output is produced continually at
every time epoch as the data streams, in Chan et al. (2011);
Dwork et al. (2010a). Both these models consider the entire
stream of data useful (and hence, also referred to as the unbounded stream models). This is in contrast with the sliding
window model where the goal is to maintain a fixed length
window over the stream and process queries based on the
most recent data (Datar et al., 2002).
In this paper, we are primarily interested in the sliding window model since many real-world applications (including
the ones listed above) value recent data more than the historical data. For example, Apple retains the data collected
from a user for a maximum of three months, anything older
than that is perhaps considered stale from the perspective
of making recommendations (Apple, 2017; Thakurta et al.,
2017a;b). A secondary motivation stems from privacy concerns – naturally, if Apple retains only recent data for any
user, it limits the exposure to private data. From an algorithmic perspective, this poses an interesting question regarding
the privacy-vs-utility tradeoff since working with a sliding
window allows one to reclaim the privacy budget at every
epoch. Therefore, given a fixed privacy budget, one can give
a stronger privacy guarantee for a shorter sliding window
but at the expense of less accurate analysis.
Unlike privacy in the unbounded streaming model, privacy
in the sliding window model has largely been unexplored.
The only private algorithm in the sliding window model,
that we are aware of, is due to Chan et al. (2012) for finding
heavy hitters, i.e., returning a list of elements in a stream that
occur more than a certain number of times. The algorithm
of Chan et al. (2012) incurs an additive error of ✓w (for
a constant ✓ > 0) over a sliding window of size w, and
requires O(w) space. We, on the other hand, are interested
in sublinear space algorithm with o(w) additive error.
The requirement of sublinear space is very natural. For
example, consider network monitoring with a high-speed
router working at 100 Gbps line speed. At every epoch, one
of the objectives is to identify the IP address that injects the
highest traffic to the network. A trivial solution to this problem requires 1011 bits of space. However, in the scenario
of high-speed routers, where on-chip memory is expensive

