Collaborative Evolutionary Reinforcement Learning

Shauharda Khadka 1 2 Somdeb Majumdar 1 Tarek Nassar 1 Zach Dwiel 1 Evren Tumer 1 Santiago Miret 1
Yinyin Liu 1 Kagan Tumer 2

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning algorithms have
been successfully applied to a range of challenging control tasks. However, these methods typically struggle with achieving effective exploration
and are extremely sensitive to the choice of hyperparameters. One reason is that most approaches
use a noisy version of their operating policy to
explore - thereby limiting the range of exploration.
In this paper, we introduce Collaborative Evolutionary Reinforcement Learning (CERL), a scalable framework that comprises a portfolio of policies that simultaneously explore and exploit diverse regions of the solution space. A collection
of learners - typically proven algorithms like TD3
- optimize over varying time-horizons leading to
this diverse portfolio. All learners contribute to
and use a shared replay buffer to achieve greater
sample efficiency. Computational resources are
dynamically distributed to favor the best learners
as a form of online algorithm selection. Neuroevolution binds this entire process to generate a single
emergent learner that exceeds the capabilities of
any individual learner. Experiments in a range of
continuous control benchmarks demonstrate that
the emergent learner significantly outperforms its
composite learners while remaining overall more
sample-efficient - notably solving the Mujoco Humanoid benchmark where all of its composite
learners (TD3) fail entirely in isolation.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has been successfully applied
to a number of challenging tasks, ranging from arcade games
(Mnih et al., 2015; 2016), board games (Silver et al., 2016)
1
Intel AI Lab 2 Collaborative Robotics and Intelligent Systems
Institute, Oregon State University. Correspondence to: Shauharda
Khadka <shauharda.khadka@intel.com>, Somdeb Majumdar
<somdeb.majumdar@intel.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

to robotic control (Andrychowicz et al., 2017; Lillicrap et al.,
2015). A driving force behind the explosion of RL applications is its integration with powerful non-linear function
approximators like deep neural networks. This partnership,
often referred to as Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL),
has enabled RL to successfully extend to tasks with highdimensional input and action spaces. However, widespread
adoption of these techniques to real-world problems is still
limited by two major challenges: the difficulty in achieving
effective exploration and brittle convergence properties that
require careful tuning of the hyperparameters by a designer.
First, exploration is a key component for successful reinforcement learning. It enables an agent to learn good policies and avoid converging prematurely to local optima. Designing exploration strategies that lead to a diverse set of
experiences remains a key challenge for DRL operating on
high dimensional action and state spaces (Plappert et al.,
2017). Many methods have been formulated to address this
issue, ranging from intrinsic motivation (Bellemare et al.,
2016), count-based exploration (Ostrovski et al., 2017; Tang
et al., 2017), curiosity (Pathak et al., 2017) and variational
information maximization (Houthooft et al., 2016). Further, a parallel class of techniques emphasize exploration
by adding noise directly to the parameters of the agent (Fortunato et al., 2017; Plappert et al., 2017; Khadka & Tumer,
2018). However, each of these techniques either relies on
supplementary structures or introduces task-specific parameters that need to be tuned rigorously. A general exploration
strategy that is universally applicable across tasks and learning algorithms remains an active area of research.
Second, DRL approaches are often notoriously sensitive
to their hyperparamaters (Henderson et al., 2017; Islam
et al., 2017) and demonstrate brittle convergence properties
(Haarnoja et al., 2018). This is particularly true for offpolicy approaches that use a replay buffer to leverage past
experiences (Bhatnagar et al., 2009; Duan et al., 2016). In
part, this sensitivity is coupled with the difficulty of effective
exploration. A standard reinforcement learner employs a
noisy version of its operating policy as its behavioral policy
for exploration. This puts the burden of both exploitation
and exploration onto the same set of hyperparameters.
In this paper, we introduce Collaborative Evolutionary Re-

