New Results on Information Theoretic Clustering

Ferdinando Cicalese 1 Eduardo Laber 2 Lucas Murtinho 2

Abstract
We study the problem of optimizing the clustering of a set of vectors when the quality of the
clustering is measured by the Entropy or the Gini
impurity measure. Our results contribute to the
state of the art both in terms of best known approximation guarantees and inapproximability bounds:
(i) we give the first polynomial time algorithm
for Entropy impurity based clustering with approximation guarantee independent of the number
of vectors and (ii) we show that the problem of
clustering based on entropy impurity does not
admit a PTAS. This also implies an inapproximability result in information theoretic clustering for
probability distributions closing a problem left
open in [Chaudhury and McGregor, COLT08]
and [Ackermann et al., ECCC11]. We also report experiments with a new clustering method
that was designed on top of the theoretical tools
leading to the above results. These experiments
suggest a practical applicability for our method,
in particular, when the number of clusters is large.

1. Introduction
Data clustering is a fundamental tool in machine learning that is commonly used to reduce the computational
resources required to analyse large datasets. For comprehensive descriptions of different clustering methods and their
applications refer to (Hennig et al., 2015; Jain et al., 1999).
In general, clustering is the problem of partitioning a set
of items so that, in the output partition, similar items are
grouped together and dissimilar items are separated. When
the items are represented as vectors that correspond to frequency counts or probability distributions many clustering
algorithms rely on so called impurity measures (e.g., en-

tropy) that estimate the dissimilarity of a group of items
(see, e.g., (Dhillon et al., 2003) and references therein) In
a simple example of this setting a company may want to
group users according to their taste for different genres of
movies. Each user u is represented by a vector, where the
value of the ith component counts the number of times u
watched movies from genre i. To evaluate the dissimilarity
of a group of users we calculate the impurity of the sum of
their associated vectors and then we select the partition for
which the sum of the dissimilarities of its groups is minimum. The design of clustering methods based on impurity
measures is the central theme of this paper.
Problem Description. An impurity measure I : v ∈ Rg 7→
I(v) ∈ R+ is a function that assigns to a vector v a nonnegative value I(v) so that the more homogeneous v, with
respect to the values of its coordinates, the larger its impurity.
Well-known examples of impurity measures are the Entropy
impurity (aka Information Gain in the context of random
forests) and the Gini impurity (Breiman et al., 1984):

IEnt (v) = kvk1

IGini (v) = kvk1

g
X

vi
kvk1
log
,
kvk1
vi
i=1



g
X
vi
vi
1−
kvk1
kvk1
i=1

We are given a collection of n many g-dimensional vectors
V with non-negative values and we are also given an impurity measure I. The goal is to find a partition P of V into k
disjoint groups of vectors V1 , . . . , Vk so as to minimize the
sum of the impurities of the groups in P, i.e.,
I(P) =

k
X
m=1

I

 X


v .

(1)

v∈Vm

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Verona, Verona, Italy 2 Departamento de Informática,
PUC-RIO, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Correspondence to: Ferdinando
Cicalese <ferdinando.cicalese@univr.it>, Eduardo Laber <eduardo.laber1@gmail.com>.

We refer to this problem as the PARTITION WITH M INIMUM
W EIGHTED I MPURITY P ROBLEM (PMWIP). While we
present results for IGini our main focus is on the Entropy
impurity IEnt . We use PMWIPEnt (PMWIPGini ) to refer
to PMWIP with impurity measure IEnt (IGini ).

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Motivations. Clustering based on impurity measures is
used in a number of relevant application as: (i) partition
the values of attributes during the branching phase in the

*

