Stochastic Optimization for DC Functions and Non-smooth Non-convex
Regularizers with Non-asymptotic Convergence

Yi Xu 1 Qi Qi 1 Qihang Lin 2 Rong Jin 3 Tianbao Yang 1

Abstract

where g(·) and h(·) are real-valued lower-semicontinuous
convex functions, r(·) is a proper lower-semicontinuous
function. We include the component r in order to capture
non-differentiable functions that usually play the role of
regularization, e.g., the indicator function of a convex set
X where r(x) = δX (x) is zero if x ∈ X and infinity
otherwise, and a non-differential regularizer such as the
convex `1 norm kxk1 or the non-convex `0 norm and `p
norm kxkpp with p ∈ (0, 1). We do not necessarily impose
smoothness condition on g(x) or h(x) and the convexity
condition on r(x).

Difference of convex (DC) functions cover a
broad family of non-convex and possibly nonsmooth and non-differentiable functions, and have
wide applications in machine learning and statistics. Although deterministic algorithms for DC
functions have been extensively studied, stochastic optimization that is more suitable for learning
with big data remains under-explored. In this
paper, we propose new stochastic optimization
algorithms and study their first-order convergence
theories for solving a broad family of DC functions. We improve the existing algorithms and theories of stochastic optimization for DC functions
from both practical and theoretical perspectives.
Moreover, we extend the proposed stochastic algorithms for DC functions to solve problems with a
general non-convex non-differentiable regularizer,
which does not necessarily have a DC decomposition but enjoys an efficient proximal mapping. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first work
that gives the first non-asymptotic convergence
for solving non-convex optimization whose objective has a general non-convex non-differentiable
regularizer.

A special class of the problem (1) is the one with r(x) being
a convex function - also known as difference of convex (DC)
functions. We would like to mention that even the family of
DC functions is broader enough to cover many interesting
non-convex problems that are well-studied, including an
additive composition of a smooth non-convex function and
a non-smooth convex function, weakly convex functions, etc.
We postpone this discussion to Section 2 after we formally
introduce the definitions of smooth functions and weakly
convex functions.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider a family of non-convex nonsmooth optimization problems that can be written in the
following form:
min g(x) + r(x) − h(x),

x∈Rd

(1)

1
Department of Computer Science, University of Iowa, Iowa
City, IA 52242, USA 2 Department of Management Sciences, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA 3 Machine Intelligence Technology, Alibaba Group, Bellevue, WA 98004, USA.
Correspondence to: Yi Xu <yi-xu@uiowa.edu>, Tianbao Yang
<tianbao-yang@uiowa.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

In the literature, deterministic algorithms for DC problems
have been studied extensively since its introduction by Pham
Dinh Tao in 1985 and are continuously receiving attention
from the community (Khamaru & Wainwright, 2018; Wen
et al., 2018). Please refer to (Thi & Dinh, 2018) for a survey on this subject. Although stochastic optimization (SO)
algorithms for the special cases of DC functions mentioned
above (smooth non-convex functions, weakly convex functions) have been studied recently (Davis & Grimmer, 2017;
Davis & Drusvyatskiy, 2018b;a; Drusvyatskiy & Paquette,
2018; Chen et al., 2018b; Lan & Yang, 2018; Allen-Zhu,
2017; Chen & Yang, 2018; Allen-Zhu & Hazan, 2016; Reddi
et al., 2016b;a; Zhang & He, 2018), a comprehensive study
of SO algorithms with a broader applicability to the DC functions and the problem (1) with a non-smooth non-convex
regularizer r(x) still remain rare.
The papers by (Mairal, 2013), (Nitanda & Suzuki, 2017)
and (Thi et al., 2017) are the most related works dedicated to
the stochastic optimization of special DC functions. Mairal
(2013) studied a special case of problem (1) with h is smooth
and proposed a stochastic majorization-minimization algo-

