Counterfactual Visual Explanations

Yash Goyal 1 Ziyan Wu 2 Jan Ernst 2 Dhruv Batra 1 Devi Parikh 1 Stefan Lee 1

Abstract
In this work, we develop a technique to produce counterfactual visual explanations. Given
a ‘query’ image I for which a vision system predicts class c, a counterfactual visual explanation
identifies how I could change such that the system would output a different specified class c0 . To
do this, we select a ‘distractor’ image I 0 that the
system predicts as class c0 and identify spatial regions in I and I 0 such that replacing the identified
region in I with the identified region in I 0 would
push the system towards classifying I as c0 . We
apply our approach to multiple image classification datasets generating qualitative results showcasing the interpretability and discriminativeness
of our counterfactual explanations. To explore the
effectiveness of our explanations in teaching humans, we present machine teaching experiments
for the task of fine-grained bird classification. We
find that users trained to distinguish bird species
fare better when given access to counterfactual
explanations in addition to training examples.

1. Introduction
When we ask for an explanation of a decision, either implicitly or explicitly we do so expecting the answer to be
given with respect to likely alternatives or specific unselected outcomes – “For situation X, why was the outcome Y
and not Z?” A common and useful technique for providing
such discriminative explanations is through counterfactuals
– i.e. describing what changes to the situation would have
resulted in arriving at the alternative decision – “If X was
X*, then the outcome would have been Z rather than Y.” As
computer vision systems achieve increasingly widespread
and consequential applications, the need to explain their
decisions in arbitrary circumstances is growing as well –
for example, questions of safety “Why did the self-driving
car misidentify the fire hydrant as a stop sign?” or fairness
1
Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Siemens Corporation. Correspondence to: Yash Goyal <ygoyal@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Our approach generates counterfactual visual explanations for a query image I (left) – explaining why the example
image was classified as class c (Crested Auklet) rather than class c0
(Red Faced Cormorant) by finding a region in a distractor image
I 0 (right) and a region in the query I (highlighted in red boxes)
such that if the highlighted region in the left image looked like
the highlighted region in the right image, the resulting image I ∗
would be classified more confidently as c0 .

“Why did the traveler surveillance system select John Doe for
additional screening?” will need answers.
While deep learning models have shown unprecedented (and
occasionally super-human) capabilities in a range of computer vision tasks (Deng et al., 2009; Huang et al., 2007),
they achieve this level of performance at the cost of becoming increasingly inscrutable compared to simpler models.
However, understanding the decisions of these deep models
is important to guide practitioners to design better models,
evaluate fairness, establish appropriate trust in end-users,
and to enable machine-teaching for tasks where these models have eclipsed human performance.
As these systems are increasingly been deployed in real
world applications, interpretability of machine learning systems (particularly deep learning models) has become an
active area of research (Simonyan et al., 2013; Springenberg et al., 2015; Ribeiro et al., 2016; Adebayo et al., 2018;
Doshi-Velez & Kim, 2017). Many of these works have focused on identifying regions in an input image that most
contributed to the final model decision (Springenberg et al.,
2015; Ribeiro et al., 2016; Simonyan et al., 2013; Selvaraju
et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2016) – i.e. producing explanations
via feature attribution. However, these approaches do not
consider alternative decisions or identify hypothetical adjustments to the input which could result in different outcomes
– i.e. they are neither discriminative nor counterfactual.
In this work, we study how such counterfactual visual
explanations can be generated to explain the decisions of

