Complexity of Linear Regions in Deep Networks

Boris Hanin * 1 David Rolnick * 2

Abstract
It is well-known that the expressivity of a neural
network depends on its architecture, with deeper
networks expressing more complex functions. In
the case of networks that compute piecewise linear functions, such as those with ReLU activation,
the number of distinct linear regions is a natural
measure of expressivity. It is possible to construct
networks with merely a single region, or for which
the number of linear regions grows exponentially
with depth; it is not clear where within this range
most networks fall in practice, either before or
after training. In this paper, we provide a mathematical framework to count the number of linear
regions of a piecewise linear network and measure the volume of the boundaries between these
regions. In particular, we prove that for networks
at initialization, the average number of regions
along any one-dimensional subspace grows linearly in the total number of neurons, far below the
exponential upper bound. We also find that the
average distance to the nearest region boundary at
initialization scales like the inverse of the number
of neurons. Our theory suggests that, even after
training, the number of linear regions is far below
exponential, an intuition that matches our empirical observations. We conclude that the practical
expressivity of neural networks is likely far below
that of the theoretical maximum, and that this gap
can be quantified.

1. Introduction
A growing field of theory has sought to explain the broad
success of deep neural networks via a mathematical characterization of the ability of these networks to approximate dif*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, Texas
A&M University and Facebook AI Research, New York
2
University of Pennsylvania. Correspondence to: Boris Hanin
<bhanin@tamu.edu>, David Rolnick <drolnick@seas.upenn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

Figure 1. How many linear regions? This figure shows a twodimensional slice through the 784-dimensional input space of
vectorized MNIST, as represented by a fully-connected ReLU
network with three hidden layers of width 64 each. Colors denote
different linear regions of the piecewise linear network.

ferent functions of input data. Many such works consider the
expressivity of neural networks, showing that certain functions are more efficiently expressible by deep architectures
than by shallow ones (e.g. Bianchini & Scarselli (2014);
Montufar et al. (2014); Telgarsky (2015); Lin et al. (2017);
Rolnick & Tegmark (2018)). It has, however, also been
noted that many expressible functions are not efficiently
learnable, at least by gradient descent (Shalev-Shwartz et al.,
2018). More generally, the typical behavior of a network
used in practice, the practical expressivity, may be very different from what is theoretically attainable. To adequately
explain the power of deep learning, it is necessary to consider networks with parameters as they will naturally occur
before, during, and after training.
Networks with a piecewise linear activation (e.g. ReLU,
hard tanh) compute piecewise linear functions for which input space is divided into pieces, with the network computing
a single linear function on each piece (see Figures 1-4). Figure 2 shows how the complexity of these pieces, which we
refer to as linear regions, changes in a deep ReLU net with
two-dimensional inputs. Each neuron in the first layer splits
the input space into two pieces along a hyperplane, fitting a
different linear function to each of the pieces. Subsequent
layers split the regions of the preceding layers. The local
density of linear regions serves as a convenient proxy for
the local complexity or smoothness of the network, with the
ability to interpolate a complex data distribution seeming to
require fitting many relatively small regions. The topic of

