Learning Discrete Structures for Graph Neural Networks

Luca Franceschi 1 2 Mathias Niepert 3 Massimiliano Pontil 1 2 Xiao He 3

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) are a popular
class of machine learning models whose major
advantage is their ability to incorporate a sparse
and discrete dependency structure between data
points. Unfortunately, GNNs can only be used
when such a graph-structure is available. In practice, however, real-world graphs are often noisy
and incomplete or might not be available at all.
With this work, we propose to jointly learn the
graph structure and the parameters of graph convolutional networks (GCNs) by approximately
solving a bilevel program that learns a discrete
probability distribution on the edges of the graph.
This allows one to apply GCNs not only in scenarios where the given graph is incomplete or
corrupted but also in those where a graph is not
available. We conduct a series of experiments that
analyze the behavior of the proposed method and
demonstrate that it outperforms related methods
by a significant margin.

1. Introduction
Relational learning is concerned with methods that cannot
only leverage the attributes of data points but also their relationships. Diagnosing a patient, for example, not only
depends on the patient’s vitals and demographic information but also on the same information about their relatives,
the information about the hospitals they have visited, and
so on. Relational learning, therefore, does not make the assumption of independence between data points but models
their dependency explicitly. Graphs are a natural way to
represent relational information and there is a large number
of learning algorithms leveraging graph structure. Graph
neural networks (GNNs) (Scarselli et al., 2009) are one such
1

CSML, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genoa, Italy.
University College London, London, UK. 3 NEC Labs EU, Heidelberg, Germany. Work done in part as Luca Franceschi was
visiting researcher at NEC. Correspondence to: Luca Franceschi
<luca.franceschi@iit.it>, Xiao He <xiao.he@neclab.eu>.
2

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

class of algorithms that are able to incorporate sparse and
discrete dependency structures between data points.
While a graph structure is available in some domains, in others it has to be inferred or constructed. A possible approach
is to first create a k-nearest neighbor (kNN) graph based on
some measure of similarity between data points. This is a
common strategy used by several learning methods such as
LLE (Roweis & Saul, 2000) and Isomap (Tenenbaum et al.,
2000). A major shortcoming of this approach, however, is
that the efficacy of the resulting models hinges on the choice
of k and, more importantly, on the choice of a suitable similarity measure over the input features. In any case, the
graph creation and parameter learning steps are independent
and require heuristics and trial and error. Alternatively, one
could simply use a kernel matrix to model the similarity
of examples implicitly at the cost of introducing a dense
dependency structure.
With this paper, we follow a different route with the aim
of learning discrete and sparse dependencies between data
points while simultaneously training the parameters of graph
convolutional networks (GCN), a class of GNNs. Intuitively,
GCNs learn node representations by passing and aggregating messages between neighboring nodes (Kipf & Welling,
2017; Monti et al., 2017; Gilmer et al., 2017; Hamilton et al.,
2017; Duran & Niepert, 2017; Velickovic et al., 2018). We
propose to learn a generative probabilistic model for graphs,
samples from which are used both during training and at
prediction time. Edges are modelled with random variables
whose parameters are treated as hyperparameters in a bilevel
learning framework (Franceschi et al., 2018). We iteratively
sample the structure while minimizing an inner objective (a
training error) and optimize the edge distribution parameters
by minimizing an outer objective (a validation error).
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first method that
simultaneously learns the graph and the parameters of a
GNN for semi-supervised classification. Moreover, and
this might be of independent interest, we adapt gradientbased hyperparameter optimization to work for a class of
discrete hyperparameters (edges, in this work). We conduct
a series of experiments and show that the proposed method is
competitive with and often outperforms existing approaches.
We also verify that the resulting graph generative models
have meaningful edge probabilities.

