Deep Counterfactual Regret Minimization

Noam Brown * 1 2 Adam Lerer * 1 Sam Gross 1 Tuomas Sandholm 2 3

Abstract
Counterfactual Regret Minimization (CFR) is the
leading framework for solving large imperfectinformation games. It converges to an equilibrium
by iteratively traversing the game tree. In order
to deal with extremely large games, abstraction
is typically applied before running CFR. The abstracted game is solved with tabular CFR, and its
solution is mapped back to the full game. This
process can be problematic because aspects of
abstraction are often manual and domain specific,
abstraction algorithms may miss important strategic nuances of the game, and there is a chickenand-egg problem because determining a good abstraction requires knowledge of the equilibrium
of the game. This paper introduces Deep Counterfactual Regret Minimization, a form of CFR that
obviates the need for abstraction by instead using
deep neural networks to approximate the behavior
of CFR in the full game. We show that Deep CFR
is principled and achieves strong performance in
large poker games. This is the first non-tabular
variant of CFR to be successful in large games.

1. Introduction
Imperfect-information games model strategic interactions
between multiple agents with only partial information. They
are widely applicable to real-world domains such as negotiations, auctions, and cybersecurity interactions. Typically
in such games, one wishes to find an approximate equilibrium in which no player can improve by deviating from the
equilibrium.
The most successful family of algorithms for imperfectinformation games have been variants of Counterfactual
Regret Minimization (CFR) (Zinkevich et al., 2007). CFR is
an iterative algorithm that converges to a Nash equilibrium
*
Equal contribution 1 Facebook AI Research 2 Computer Science
Department, Carnegie Mellon University 3 Strategic Machine Inc.,
Strategy Robot Inc., and Optimized Markets Inc. Correspondence
to: Noam Brown <noamb@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

in two-player zero-sum games. Forms of tabular CFR have
been used in all recent milestones in the benchmark domain
of poker (Bowling et al., 2015; Moravčı́k et al., 2017; Brown
& Sandholm, 2017) and have been used in all competitive
agents in the Annual Computer Poker Competition going
back at least six years.1 In order to deal with extremely
large imperfect-information games, abstraction is typically
used to simplify a game by bucketing similar states together
and treating them identically. The simplified (abstracted)
game is approximately solved via tabular CFR. However,
constructing an effective abstraction requires extensive domain knowledge and the abstract solution may only be a
coarse approximation of a true equilibrium.
In constrast, reinforcement learning has been successfully
extended to large state spaces by using function approximation with deep neural networks rather than a tabular
representation of the policy (deep RL). This approach has
led to a number of recent breakthroughs in constructing
strategies in large MDPs (Mnih et al., 2015) as well as in
zero-sum perfect-information games such as Go (Silver
et al., 2017; 2018).2 Importantly, deep RL can learn good
strategies with relatively little domain knowledge for the
specific game (Silver et al., 2017). However, most popular
RL algorithms do not converge to good policies (equilibria)
in imperfect-information games in theory or in practice.
Rather than use tabular CFR with abstraction, this paper
introduces a form of CFR, which we refer to as Deep Counterfactual Regret Minimization, that uses function approximation with deep neural networks to approximate the behavior of tabular CFR on the full, unabstracted game. We
prove that Deep CFR converges to an -Nash equilibrium
in two-player zero-sum games and empirically evaluate performance in poker variants, including heads-up limit Texas
hold’em. We show Deep CFR outperforms Neural Fictitious Self Play (NFSP) (Heinrich & Silver, 2016), which
was the prior leading function approximation algorithm for
imperfect-information games, and that Deep CFR is competitive with domain-specific tabular abstraction techniques.
1

www.computerpokercompetition.org
Deep RL has also been applied successfully to some partially
observed games such as Doom (Lample & Chaplot, 2017), as long
as the hidden information is not too strategically important.
2

