Hierarchical Importance Weighted Autoencoders
Chin-Wei Huang 1 2 Kris Sankaran 1 Eeshan Dhekane 1 Alexandre Lacoste 2 Aaron Courville 1 3

Abstract
Importance weighted variational inference (Burda
et al., 2015) uses multiple i.i.d. samples to have a
tighter variational lower bound. We believe a joint
proposal has the potential of reducing the number
of redundant samples, and introduce a hierarchical
structure to induce correlation. The hope is that
the proposals would coordinate to make up for the
error made by one another to reduce the variance
of the importance estimator. Theoretically, we
analyze the condition under which convergence
of the estimator variance can be connected to convergence of the lower bound. Empirically, we confirm that maximization of the lower bound does
implicitly minimize variance. Further analysis
shows that this is a result of negative correlation
induced by the proposed hierarchical meta sampling scheme, and performance of inference also
improves when the number of samples increases.

1. Introduction
Recent advance in variational inference (Kingma & Welling,
2014; Rezende et al., 2014) makes it efficient to model
complex distribution using latent variable
R model with an
intractable marginal likelihood p(x) = z p(x|z)p(z)dz,
where z is an unobserved vector distributed by a prior distribution, e.g. p(z) = N (0, I). The use of an inference
network, or encoder, allows for amortization of inference
by directly conditioning on the data q(z|x), to approximate
the true posterior p(z|x). This is known as the Variational
Autoencoder (VAE).
Normally, learning is achieved by maximizing a lower
bound on the marginal likelihood, since the latter is not
tractable in general. Naturally, one would be interested in
reducing the gap between the bound and the desired objective. Burda et al. (2015) devises a new family of lower
1

2

3

Mila, University of Montreal Element AI CIFAR
member.
Correspondence to: Chin-Wei Huang <chinwei.huang@umontreal.ca>.
th

Proceedings of the 36 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

bounds with progressively smaller gap using multiple i.i.d.
samples from the variational distribution q(z|x), which
they call the Importance Weighted Autoencoder (IWAE).
Cremer et al. (2017); Bachman & Precup (2015) notice
that IWAE can be interpretted as using a corrected variational distribution in the normal variational lower bound.
The proposal is corrected towards the true posterior by the
importance weighting, and approaches the latter with an
increasing number of samples.
Intuitively, when only one sample is drawn to estimate the
variational lower bound, the loss function highly penalizes
the drawn sample, and thus the encoder. The decoder will
be adjusted accordingly to maximize the likelihood in a
biased manner, as it treats the sample as the real, observed
data. In the IWAE setup, the inference model is allowed to
make mistakes, as a sample corresponding to a high loss is
penalized less owing to the importance weight.
Drawing multiple samples also allows us to represent the
distribution at a higher resolution. This motivates us to
construct a joint sampler such that the empirical distribution drawn from the joint sampler can better represent the
posterior distribution. More specifically, we consider a
hierarchical sampler, whose latent variable z0 acts at a metalevel to decide the salient points of the true posterior, which
we call the Hierarchical Importance Weighted Autoencoder (H-IWAE). Doing so allows for (1) summarizing the
distribution using the latent variable (Edwards & Storkey,
2017), and (2) counteracting bias induced by each proposal.
To analyze the latter effect, we look at the variance of the
Monte Carlo estimate of the lower bound, and show that
maximizing the lower bound implicitly reduces the variance.
Our main contributions are as follows:
• We propose a hierarchical model to induce dependency
among the samples for approximate inference, and derive a hierarchical importance weighted lower bound.
• We analyze the convergence of the variance of the
Monte Carlo estimate of the lower bound, and draw a
connection to the convergence of the bound itself.
• Empirically, we explore different weighting heuristics,
validate the hypothesis that the joint samples tend to
be negatively correlated, and perform experiments on
a suite of standard density estimation tasks.

