Learning Neurosymbolic Generative Models via Program Synthesis
Halley Young 1 Osbert Bastani 1 Mayur Naik 1

Abstract
Generative models have become significantly
more powerful in recent years. However, these
models continue to have difficulty capturing
global structure in data. For example, images of
buildings typically contain spatial patterns such as
windows repeating at regular intervals, but stateof-the-art models have difficulty generating these
patterns. We propose to address this problem by
incorporating programs representing global structure into generative models—e.g., a 2D for-loop
may represent a repeating pattern of windows—
along with a framework for learning these models
by leveraging program synthesis to obtain training
data. On both synthetic and real-world data, we
demonstrate that our approach substantially outperforms state-of-the-art at both generating and
completing images with global structure.

1. Introduction
There has been much interest recently in generative models,
following the introduction of both variational autoencoders
(VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2014) and generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014). These
models have successfully been applied to a range of tasks,
including image generation (Radford et al., 2015), image
completion (IIzuka et al., 2017), texture synthesis (Jetchev
et al., 2017; Xian et al., 2018), sketch generation (Ha & Eck,
2017), and music generation (Dieleman et al., 2018).
Despite their successes, generative models still have difficulty capturing global structure. For example, consider the
image completion task in Figure 1. The original image (left)
is of a building, for which the global structure is a 2D repeating pattern of windows. Given a partial image (middle left),
the goal is to predict the completion of the image. As can be
seen, a state-of-the-art image completion algorithm has trou1
University of Pennsylvania, USA. Correspondence to: Halley
Young <halleyy@seas.upenn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

ble reconstructing the original image (right) (IIzuka et al.,
2017). Real-world data often contains such global structure,
including repetitions, reflectional or rotational symmetry, or
even more complex patterns.
In recent years, program synthesis (Solar-Lezama et al.,
2006) has emerged as a promising approach to capturing
patterns in data (Ellis et al., 2015; 2018; Valkov et al., 2018).
The idea is that simple programs can capture global structure that evades state-of-the-art deep neural networks. A key
benefit of using program synthesis is that we can design the
space of programs to capture different kinds of structure—
e.g., repeating patterns (Ellis et al., 2018), symmetries, or
spatial structure (Deng et al., 2018)—depending on the application domain. The challenge is that for the most part,
existing approaches have synthesized programs that operate directly over raw data. Since programs have difficulty
operating over perceptual data, existing approaches have
largely been limited to very simple data—e.g., detecting 2D
repeating patterns of simple shapes (Ellis et al., 2018).
We propose to address these shortcomings by synthesizing
programs that represent the underlying structure of highdimensional data. In particular, we decompose programs
into two parts: (i) a sketch s 2 S that represents the skeletal
structure of the program (Solar-Lezama et al., 2006), with
holes that are left unimplemented, and (ii) components c 2
C that can be used to fill these holes. We consider perceptual
components—i.e., holes in the sketch are filled with raw
perceptual data. For example, the program

represents part of the structure in the original image x⇤ in
Figure 1 (left). The code is the sketch, and the component
is a sub-image from the given partial image. Together, we
call such a program a neurosymbolic program.
Building on these ideas, we propose an approach called
Synthesis-guided Generative Models (SGM) that combines
neurosymbolic programs representing global structure with
state-of-the-art deep generative models. By incorporating
programmatic structure, SGM substantially improves the
quality of these models. As can be seen, the completion
produced using SGM (middle right of Figure 1) substantially
outperforms state-of-the-art.

