A Statistical Investigation of Long Memory in Language and Music

Alexander Greaves-Tunnell 1 Zaid Harchaoui 1

Abstract
Representation and learning of long-range dependencies is a central challenge confronted in modern applications of machine learning to sequence
data. Yet despite the prominence of this issue,
the basic problem of measuring long-range dependence, either in a given data source or as represented in a trained deep model, remains largely
limited to heuristic tools. We contribute a statistical framework for investigating long-range dependence in current applications of deep sequence
modeling, drawing on the well-developed theory
of long memory stochastic processes. This framework yields testable implications concerning the
relationship between long memory in real-world
data and its learned representation in a deep learning architecture, which are explored through a
semiparametric framework adapted to the highdimensional setting.

1. Introduction
Advances in the design and optimization of deep recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have lead to significant breakthroughs in the modeling of complex sequence data, including natural language and music. An omnipresent challenge
in these sequence modeling tasks is to capture long-range
dependencies between observations, and a great variety of
model architectures have been developed with this objective
explicitly in mind. However, it can be difficult to assess
whether and to what extent a given RNN has learned to
represent such dependencies, that is, whether it has long
memory.
Currently, if a model’s capacity to represent long-range dependence is measured at all, it is typically evaluated heuristically against some task or tasks in which success is taken
an indicator of “memory” in a colloquial sense. Though
1

Department of Statistics, University of Washington, Seattle, USA. Correspondence to: Alexander Greaves-Tunnell
<alecgt@uw.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

undoubtedly helpful, such heuristics are rarely defined with
respect to an underlying mathematical or statistical property
of interest, nor do they necessarily have any correspondence
to the data on which the models are subsequently trained. In
this paper, we pursue a complementary approach in which
long-range dependence is assessed as a quantitative and
statistically accessible feature of a given data source. Consequently, the problem of evaluating long memory in RNNs
can be re-framed as a comparison between a learned representation and an estimated property of the data.
The main contribution is the development and illustration
of a methodology for the estimation, visualization, and hypothesis testing of long memory in RNNs, based on an
approach that mathematically defines and directly estimates
long-range dependence as a property of a multivariate time
series. We offer extensive validation of the proposed approach and explore strategies to overcome problems with
hypothesis testing for long memory in the high-dimensional
regime. We report experimental results obtained on a wideranging collection of music and language data, confirming
the (often strong) long-range dependencies that are observed
by practitioners. However, we show evidence that this property is not adequately captured by a variety of RNNs trained
to benchmark performance on a language dataset.1
Related work. Though a formal connection to long memory processes has been lacking thus far, machine learning applications to sequence modeling have long been concerned
with the capture of long-range dependencies. The development of RNN models has been strongly influenced by
the identification of the “vanishing gradient problem” in
(Bengio et al., 1994). More complex recurrent architectures,
such as long short-term memory (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997a), gated recurrent units (Cho et al., 2014), and
structurally constrained recurrent networks (Mikolov et al.,
2015) were designed specifically to alleviate this problem.
Alternative approaches have pursued a more formal understanding of RNN computation, for example through kernel
methods (Lei et al., 2017), by means of ablative strategies
clarifying the computation of the RNN hidden state (Levy
et al., 2018), or through a dynamical systems approach
1

Code corresponding to these experiments, including an illustrative Jupyter notebook, is available for download at https:
//github.com/alecgt/RNN_long_memory.

