Model Comparison for Semantic Grouping

Francisco Vargas 1 Kamen Brestnichki 1 Nils Hammerla 1

Abstract
We introduce a probabilistic framework for quantifying the semantic similarity between two groups
of embeddings. We formulate the task of semantic
similarity as a model comparison task in which
we contrast a generative model which jointly models two sentences versus one that does not. We
illustrate how this framework can be used for the
Semantic Textual Similarity tasks using clear assumptions about how the embeddings of words
are generated. We apply model comparison that
utilises information criteria to address some of
the shortcomings of Bayesian model comparison, whilst still penalising model complexity. We
achieve competitive results by applying the proposed framework with an appropriate choice of
likelihood on the STS datasets.

1. Introduction
The problem of Semantic Textual Similarity (STS), measuring how closely the meaning of one piece of text corresponds
to that of another, has been studied in the hope of improving
performance across various problems in Natural Language
Processing (NLP), including information retrieval (Zheng
& Callan, 2015). Recent progress in the learning of word
embeddings (Mikolov et al., 2013b) has allowed the encoding of words using distributed vector representations, which
capture semantic information through their location in the
learned embedding space. Despite the extent to which semantic relations between words are captured in this space, it
remains a challenge for researchers to adapt these individual
word embeddings to express semantic similarity between
word groups, like documents, sentences, and other textual
formats.
Recent methods for STS rely on additive composition of
word vectors (Arora et al., 2016; Blacoe & Lapata, 2012;
Mitchell & Lapata, 2008; 2010; Wieting et al., 2015) or
1
Babylon Health. Correspondence to: Francisco Vargas <francisco.vargas@babylonhealth.com>.

Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).

deep learning architectures (Kiros et al., 2015), both of
which summarise a sentence through a single embedding.
The resulting sentence vectors are then compared using
cosine similarity — a choice stemming only from the fact
that cosine similarity gives good empirical results. It is
difficult for a practitioner to utilize word vectors efficiently,
as the underlying assumptions in the similarity measure are
not well understood and the assumptions made at the word
vector level are not clearly defined. For example, embedding
magnitude in (Arora et al., 2016) seems to matter at the word
level, but not at the sentence level. That is, normalizing
word embeddings before the SIF estimate decreases results
considerably, while normalising sentence embeddings has
no effect on results.
The main contribution of our work is the proposal of a
framework that addresses these issues by explicitly deriving
the similarity measure through a chosen generative model
of embeddings. Via this design process, a practitioner can
encode suitable assumptions and constraints that may be
favourable to the application of interest. Furthermore, this
framework puts forward a new research direction that could
help improve the understanding of semantic similarity by
allowing practitioners to study suitable embedding distributions and assess how these perform.
The second contribution of our work is the derivation of a
similarity measure that performs well in an online setting.
Online settings are both practical and key to use-cases that
involve information retrieval in dialogue systems. For example, in a chat-bot application new queries will arrive one
at a time and methods such as the one proposed in (Arora
et al., 2016) will not perform as strongly as they do on
the benchmark datasets. This is because one cannot perform the required data pre-processing on the entire query
dataset, which will not be available a priori in online settings.
Whilst our framework produces an online similarity metric,
it remains competitive to offline methods such as (Arora
et al., 2016). We achieve results comparable to (Arora et al.,
2016) on the STS dataset in O(nd) time — compared to
the O(nd2 ) average complexity of their method (where n is
the number of words in a sentence, and d is the embedding
size).

