Revisiting Fundamentals of Experience Replay

William Fedus * 1 2 Prajit Ramachandran * 1 Rishabh Agarwal 1 Yoshua Bengio 2 3 Hugo Larochelle 1 4
Mark Rowland 5 Will Dabney 5

Abstract
Experience replay is central to off-policy algorithms in deep reinforcement learning (RL), but
there remain significant gaps in our understanding.
We therefore present a systematic and extensive
analysis of experience replay in Q-learning methods, focusing on two fundamental properties: the
replay capacity and the ratio of learning updates to
experience collected (replay ratio). Our additive
and ablative studies upend conventional wisdom
around experience replay — greater capacity is
found to substantially increase the performance
of certain algorithms, while leaving others unaffected. Counterintuitively we show that theoretically ungrounded, uncorrected n-step returns are
uniquely beneficial while other techniques confer
limited benefit for sifting through larger memory.
Separately, by directly controlling the replay ratio we contextualize previous observations in the
literature and empirically measure its importance
across a variety of deep RL algorithms. Finally,
we conclude by testing a set of hypotheses on the
nature of these performance benefits.

1. Introduction
Experience replay is the fundamental data-generating mechanism in off-policy deep reinforcement learning (Lin, 1992).
It has been shown to improve sample efficiency and stability
by storing a fixed number of the most recently collected
transitions for training. However, the interactions of experience replay with modern algorithmic components of
deep RL agents are still poorly understood. This lack of
understanding impedes progress, as researchers are unable
to measure the full impact of algorithmic changes without
extensive tuning. We therefore present a large-scale study
*

Equal contribution 1 Google Brain 2 MILA, Université de
Montréal 3 CIFAR Director 4 CIFAR Fellow 5 DeepMind. Correspondence to: William Fedus <liamfedus@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

to understand the interplay of learning algorithms and datagenerating mechanisms in order to inform the design of
better algorithms.
Earlier works investigating replay buffers have often focused on individual hyperparameters, such as the capacity
of the replay buffer (Zhang & Sutton, 2017), which has
typically been preserved since the seminal work in this field
of Mnih et al. (2013; 2015). We begin by identifying that
several such hyperparameters, such as buffer capacity and
rate of data throughput, are interlinked in the manner that
they affect experience replay, modifying both the amount
of data available to an agent and the typical age of that
data. This motivates a comprehensive set of experiments to
understand the relative effects of modifying each property
independently. We then make the surprising discovery that
these effects depend critically on the presence of a particular algorithmic component, n-step returns, which has not
previously been linked to experience replay. We conclude
by examining several hypotheses to uncover why this link
exists.

2. Background
We consider a Markov decision process (S, A, P, R, γ), and
denote the sequence of states, actions, and rewards experienced by an agent by (St )t≥0 , (At )t≥0 , and (Rt )t≥0 , respectively. The central task of reinforcement learning is to
find a policy π : S → ∆A that maximizes the expected
return


X
Qπ (s, a) = Eπ 
γ t Rt S0 = s, A0 = a ,
t≥0

for each initial state-action pair (s, a) ∈ S × A. This problem is well studied, and a wide range of methods based
on value iteration, policy iteration, and policy gradients
have been built up over the course of decades (Bellman,
1957; Puterman, 1994; Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 1996; Kaelbling et al., 1996; Szepesvári, 2010; Sutton & Barto, 2018;
Franois-Lavet et al., 2018). A prototypical method based on
value iteration is Q-learning (Watkins & Dayan, 1992); in its
most basic form, it maintains an estimate Q : S × A → R
of the optimal value function, and given a sequence of transition tuples (st , at , rt , st+1 )t≥0 , updates Q(st , at ) towards

