Educating Text Autoencoders: Latent Representation Guidance via Denoising

Tianxiao Shen 1 Jonas Mueller 2 Regina Barzilay 1 Tommi Jaakkola 1

Abstract
Generative autoencoders offer a promising approach for controllable text generation by leveraging their latent sentence representations. However,
current models struggle to maintain coherent latent spaces required to perform meaningful text
manipulations via latent vector operations. Specifically, we demonstrate by example that neural encoders do not necessarily map similar sentences
to nearby latent vectors. A theoretical explanation for this phenomenon establishes that highcapacity autoencoders can learn an arbitrary mapping between sequences and associated latent representations. To remedy this issue, we augment
adversarial autoencoders with a denoising objective where original sentences are reconstructed
from perturbed versions (referred to as DAAE).
We prove that this simple modification guides the
latent space geometry of the resulting model by
encouraging the encoder to map similar texts to
similar latent representations. In empirical comparisons with various types of autoencoders, our
model provides the best trade-off between generation quality and reconstruction capacity. Moreover, the improved geometry of the DAAE latent
space enables zero-shot text style transfer via simple latent vector arithmetic.1

1. Introduction
Autoencoder-based generative models have become popular
tools for advancing controllable text generation such as
style or sentiment transfer (Bowman et al., 2016; Hu et al.,
2017; Shen et al., 2017; Zhao et al., 2018). By representing
sentences as vectors in a latent space, these models offer
an attractive continuous approach to manipulating text by
means of simple latent vector arithmetic. However, the
1

2

MIT CSAIL Amazon Web Services. Correspondence to:
Tianxiao Shen <tianxiao@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).
1
Our code and data are available at https://github.
com/shentianxiao/text-autoencoders

Figure 1. Latent representations learned by AAE and DAAE when
mapping clustered sequences in X = {0, 1}50 to Z = R2 . The
training data stem from 5 underlying clusters, with 100 sequences
sampled from each (colored accordingly by cluster identity).

success of such manipulations rests heavily on the geometry
of the latent space representations and its ability to capture
underlying sentence semantics. We discover that without
additional guidance, fortuitous geometric alignments are
unlikely to arise, shedding light on challenges faced by
existing methods.
In this work, we focus on the latent space geometry of adversarial autoencoders (Makhzani et al., 2015, AAEs). In contrast to variational autoencoders (Kingma & Welling, 2014,
VAEs), AAEs maintain a strong coupling between their encoder and decoder, ensuring that the decoder does not ignore
sentence representations produced by the encoder (Bowman
et al., 2016). The training objective for AAEs consists of
two parts: the ability to reconstruct sentences and an additional constraint that the sentence encodings follow a given
prior distribution (typically Gaussian). We find that these
objectives alone do not suffice to enforce proper latent space
geometry: in a toy example with clustered data sequences, a
perfectly-trained AAE undesirably mixes different clusters
in its latent space (Figure 1, Left).
We provide a theoretical explanation for this phenomenon
by analyzing high-capacity encoder/decoder networks in
modern sequence models. For discrete objects such as sentences where continuity assumptions no longer hold, powerful AAEs can learn to map training sentences to latent prior
samples arbitrarily, while retaining perfect reconstruction.
In such cases, even minimal latent space manipulations can
yield random, unpredictable changes in the resulting text.

