Invariant Rationalization
Shiyu Chang * 1 Yang Zhang * 1 Mo Yu * 2 Tommi S. Jaakkola 3

Abstract
Selective rationalization improves neural network
interpretability by identifying a small subset
of input features — the rationale — that best
explains or supports the prediction. A typical
rationalization criterion, i.e. maximum mutual
information (MMI), finds the rationale that
maximizes the prediction performance based
only on the rationale. However, MMI can be
problematic because it picks up spurious correlations between the input features and the output.
Instead, we introduce a game-theoretic invariant
rationalization criterion where the rationales
are constrained to enable the same predictor to
be optimal across different environments. We
show both theoretically and empirically that
the proposed rationales can rule out spurious
correlations and generalize better to different
test scenarios.
The resulting explanations
also align better with human judgments. Our
implementations are publicly available at
https://github.com/code-terminator/
invariant_rationalization.

imum mutual information (MMI) criterion. In the context
of natural language processing (NLP), it defines rationale
as the subset of input text that maximizes the mutual information between the subset and the model output, subject
to the constraint that the selected subset remains within a
prescribed length. Specifically, if we denote the random
variables corresponding to input as X , rationales as Z and
the model output as Y , then the MMI criterion finds the
explanation Z = Z(X) that yields the highest prediction
accuracy of Y .
MMI criterion can nevertheless lead to undesirable results
in practice. It is prone to highlighting spurious correlations
between the input features and the output as valid explanations. While such correlations represent statistical relations
present in the training data, and thus incorporated into the
neural model, the impact of such features on the true outcome (as opposed to model’s predictions) can change at test
time. In other words, MMI may select features that do not
explain the underlying relationship between the inputs and
outputs even though they may still be faithfully reporting
the model’s behavior. We seek to modify the rationalization
criterion to better tailor it to find causal features.

2

As an example, consider figure 1 that shows a beverage review which covers four aspects of beer: appearance, smell,
palate, and overall. The reviewers also assigned a score
to each of these aspects. Suppose we want to find an explanation supporting a positive score to smell. The correct
explanation should be the portion of the review that actually
discusses smell, as highlighted in green. However, reviews
for other aspects such as palate (highlighted in red) may
co-vary with smell score since, as senses, smell and palate
are related. The overall statement as highlighted in blue
would typically also clearly correlate with any individual
aspect score, including smell. Taken together, sentences
highlighted in green, red and blue would all be highly correlated with the positive score for smell. As a result, MMI
may select any one of them (or some combination) as the
rationale, depending on precise statistics in the training data.
Only the green sentence constitutes an adequate explanation.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Our goal is to design a rationalization criterion that approximates finding causal features. While assessing causality
is challenging, we can approximate the task by searching
instead features that are in some sense invariant. This notion was recently introduced in the context of invariant risk

1. Introduction
A number of selective rationalization techniques (Lei et al.,
2016; Li et al., 2016b; Chen et al., 2018a;b; Yu et al., 2018;
Carton et al., 2018; Bastings et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2019;
Chang et al., 2019) have been proposed to explain the predictions of complex neural models. The key idea driving
these methods is to find a small subset of the input features – rationale – that suffices on its own to yield the same
outcome. In practice, rationales that remove much of the
spurious content from the input, e.g., text, could be used and
examined as justifications for model’s predictions.
The most commonly-used criterion for rationales is the max*
1
Equal contribution
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
IBM Research 3 CSAIL MIT. Correspondence to:
Shiyu Chang <shiyu.chang@ibm.com>, Yang Zhang
<yang.zhang2@ibm.com>, Mo Yu <yum@us.ibm.com>.

