All in the Exponential Family:
Bregman Duality in Thermodynamic Variational Inference
Rob Brekelmans 1 * Vaden Masrani 2 * Frank Wood 2 Greg Ver Steeg 1 Aram Galstyan 1

Abstract
The recently proposed Thermodynamic Variational Objective (TVO) leverages thermodynamic
integration to provide a family of variational inference objectives, which both tighten and generalize the ubiquitous Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO).
However, the tightness of TVO bounds was not
previously known, an expensive grid search was
used to choose a “schedule” of intermediate distributions, and model learning suffered with ostensibly tighter bounds. In this work, we propose an
exponential family interpretation of the geometric mixture curve underlying the TVO and various
path sampling methods, which allows us to characterize the gap in TVO likelihood bounds as a sum
of KL divergences. We propose to choose intermediate distributions using equal spacing in the moment parameters of our exponential family, which
matches grid search performance and allows the
schedule to adaptively update over the course of
training. Finally, we derive a doubly reparameterized gradient estimator which improves model
learning and allows the TVO to benefit from more
refined bounds. To further contextualize our contributions, we provide a unified framework for
understanding thermodynamic integration and the
TVO using Taylor series remainders.

1. Introduction
Modern variational inference (VI) techniques are able to
jointly perform maximum likelihood parameter estimation
and approximate posterior inference using stochastic gradient ascent (Kingma & Welling, 2013; Rezende et al., 2014).
Commonly, this is done by optimizing a tractable bound to
*
Equal contribution 1 Information Sciences Institute, University
of Southern California, Marina del Rey, CA 2 University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, CA. Correspondence to: Rob Brekelmans
<brekelma@usc.edu>, Vaden Masrani <vadmas@cs.ubc.ca>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. The original TVO paper recommended using two partition
points, with a single intermediate 1 in addition to the ELBO at
0 = 0. We report test log p✓ (x) values from training a separate
VAE at each 1 , but this grid search is prohibitively expensive in
practice. Our moment-spacing schedule is an adaptive method
for choosing points, which yields near-optimal performance on
Omniglot and provides notable improvement over the ELBO.

R
the marginal log likelihood log p✓ (x) = log p✓ (x, z) dz,
obtained by introducing a divergence D[q (z | x)||p✓ (z | x)]
between the variational distribution q (z | x) and true posterior p✓ (z | x) (Blei et al., 2017; Li & Turner, 2016; Dieng
et al., 2017; Domke & Sheldon, 2018; Wang et al., 2018).
The recent Thermodynamic Variational Objective (TVO)
(Masrani et al., 2019) reframes likelihood estimation in
terms of numerical integration along a geometric mixture
path connecting q (z | x) and p✓ (z | x). This perspective
yields a natural family of lower and upper bounds via Riemann sum approximations, with the ELBO appearing as
a single-term lower bound and wake-sleep (WS) update
corresponding to the simplest upper bound. The TVO generalizes these objectives by using a K-term Riemann sum to
obtain tighter bounds on marginal likelihood. We refer to the
discrete partition { k }K
k=0 used to construct this estimator
as an ‘integration schedule.’
However, the gaps associated with these intermediate
bounds was not previously known, an important roadblock
to understanding the objective. Further, the TVO was limited by a grid search procedure for choosing the integration
schedule. While TVO bounds should become tighter with
more refined partitions, Masrani et al. (2019) actually observe deteriorating performance in practice with high K.

