Time Series Deconfounder: Estimating Treatment Effects over Time in the
Presence of Hidden Confounders
Ioana Bica 1 2 Ahmed M. Alaa 3 Mihaela van der Schaar 2 3 4

Abstract
The estimation of treatment effects is a pervasive problem in medicine. Existing methods for
estimating treatment effects from longitudinal observational data assume that there are no hidden
confounders, an assumption that is not testable in
practice and, if it does not hold, leads to biased
estimates. In this paper, we develop the Time Series Deconfounder, a method that leverages the
assignment of multiple treatments over time to
enable the estimation of treatment effects in the
presence of multi-cause hidden confounders. The
Time Series Deconfounder uses a novel recurrent
neural network architecture with multitask output
to build a factor model over time and infer latent
variables that render the assigned treatments conditionally independent; then, it performs causal
inference using these latent variables that act as
substitutes for the multi-cause unobserved confounders. We provide a theoretical analysis for
obtaining unbiased causal effects of time-varying
exposures using the Time Series Deconfounder.
Using both simulated and real data we show the
effectiveness of our method in deconfounding the
estimation of treatment responses over time.

1. Introduction
Forecasting the patient’s response to treatments assigned
over time represents a crucial problem in the medical domain. The increasing availability of observational data
makes it possible to learn individualized treatment responses
from longitudinal disease trajectories containing information about patient covariates and treatment assignments
(Robins et al., 2000a; Robins & Hernán, 2008; Schulam
1
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom 2 The Alan
Turing Institute, London, United Kingdom 3 UCLA, Los Angeles,
USA 4 University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Correspondence to: Ioana Bica <ioana.bica@eng.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

& Saria, 2017; Lim et al., 2018; Bica et al., 2020a). Existing methods for estimating individualized treatment effects
over time assume that all confounders—variables affecting
the treatment assignments and the potential outcomes—are
observed, an assumption which is not testable in practice1
and probably not true in many situations.
To understand why the presence of hidden confounders introduces bias, consider the problem of estimating treatment
effects for patients with cancer. They are often prescribed
multiple treatments at the same time, including chemotherapy, radiotherapy and/or immunotherapy based on their tumor characteristics. These treatments are adjusted if the tumor size changes. The treatment strategy is also changed as
the patient starts to develop drug resistance (Vlachostergios
& Faltas, 2018) or the toxicity levels of the drugs increase
(Kroschinsky et al., 2017). Drug resistance and toxicity
levels are multi-cause confounders since they affect not only
the multiple causes (treatments)2 , but also the patient outcome (e.g. mortality, risk factors). However, drug resistance
and toxicity may not be observed and, even if observed,
may not be recorded in the electronic health records. Estimating, for instance, the effect of chemotherapy on the
cancer progression in the patient without accounting for the
dependence on drug resistance and toxicity levels (hidden
confounders) will produce biased results.
Wang & Blei (2019) developed theory for deconfounding—
adjusting for the bias introduced by the existence of hidden
confounders in observational data—in the static causal inference setting and noted that the existence of multiple causes
makes this task easier. Wang & Blei (2019) observed that
the dependencies in the assignment of multiple causes can
be used to infer latent variables that render the causes independent and act as substitutes for the hidden confounders.
In this paper, we propose the Time Series Deconfounder, a
method that enables the unbiased estimation of treatment
responses over time in the presence of hidden confounders,
by taking advantage of the dependencies in the sequential
assignment of multiple treatments. We draw from the main
1
Since counterfactuals are never observed, it is not possible to
test for the existence of hidden confounders that could affect them.
2
Causes and treatments are used interchangeably throughout
the paper.

