Training Deep Energy-Based Models with f -Divergence Minimization

Lantao Yu 1 Yang Song 1 Jiaming Song 1 Stefano Ermon 1

Abstract
Deep energy-based models (EBMs) are very flexible in distribution parametrization but computationally challenging because of the intractable
partition function. They are typically trained
via maximum likelihood, using contrastive divergence to approximate the gradient of the KL
divergence between data and model distribution.
While KL divergence has many desirable properties, other f -divergences have shown advantages in training implicit density generative models such as generative adversarial networks. In
this paper, we propose a general variational framework termed f -EBM to train EBMs using any
desired f -divergence. We introduce a corresponding optimization algorithm and prove its local
convergence property with non-linear dynamical
systems theory. Experimental results demonstrate
the superiority of f -EBM over contrastive divergence, as well as the benefits of training EBMs
using f -divergences other than KL.

1. Introduction
Learning deep generative models that can approximate complex distributions over high-dimensional data is an important problem in machine learning, with many applications
such as image, speech, natural language generation (Radford et al., 2015; Oord et al., 2016a; Yu et al., 2017) and
imitation learning (Ho & Ermon, 2016). To this end, two
major branches of generative models have been widely studied: tractable density and implicit density generative models.
To enable the use of maximum likelihood training, tractable
density models have to use specialized architectures to build
a normalized probability model. These include autoregressive models (Larochelle & Murray, 2011; Germain et al.,
2015; Oord et al., 2016b; Van den Oord et al., 2016), flow1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA. Correspondence to: Lantao Yu <lantaoyu@cs.stanford.edu>, Stefano Ermon <ermon@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

based models (Dinh et al., 2014; 2016; Kingma & Dhariwal,
2018) and sum-product networks (Poon & Domingos, 2011).
However, such a normalization requirement can hinder the
flexibility and expressiveness. For example, flow-based
models rely on invertible transformations with tractable Jacobian determinant, while sum-product networks rely on
special graph structures (with sums and products as internal
nodes) to obtain tractable density. To overcome the limitations caused by the constraint of specifying a normalized
explicit density, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
(Goodfellow et al., 2014) proposed to learn implicit density
generative models within a minimax framework, where the
generative model is a direct differentiable mapping from
noise space to sample space. So far many variants of GANs
have been proposed in order to minimize various discrepancy measures (Nowozin et al., 2016; Arjovsky et al., 2017).
In particular, f -GANs (Nowozin et al., 2016) minimize a
variational representation of f -divergence between data and
model distribution, which is a general family of divergences
for measuring the discrepancies between two distributions.
Although appealing, a main drawback of GANs is the lack
of explicit density, which is the central goal of density estimation and plays an indispensable role in applications such
as anomaly detection, image denoising and inpainting.
Deep energy-based models (EBMs) are promising to combine the best of both worlds, in the sense that EBMs allow
both extremely flexible distribution parametrization and the
access to an (unnormalized) explicit density. However, because of the intractable partition function (an integral over
the sample space), so far within the family of f -divergences,
only KL divergence proved to be tractable to optimize with
methods such as contrastive divergence (Hinton, 2002), doubly dual embedding (Dai et al., 2018) and adversarial dynamics embedding (Dai et al., 2019). Since the progress
of generative modeling research was mainly driven by the
study on the properties and tractable optimization of various
discrepancy measures, there is an urgent need to investigate
the possibility of training EBMs with other f -divergences.
Specifically, the choice of discrepancy measures embodies
our preferences and has a significant influence on the learned
model distribution (see Figure 1 for illustration of the effect
of some popular f -divergences on training EBMs in a model
misspecification scenario). For example, it has been found
that minimizing KL (Maximum Likelihood Estimation) is

