Learning Autoencoders with Relational Regularization

Hongteng Xu * 1 2 Dixin Luo * 2 Ricardo Henao 2 Svati Shah 2 Lawrence Carin 2

Abstract
A new algorithmic framework is proposed for
learning autoencoders of data distributions. We
minimize the discrepancy between the model and
target distributions, with a relational regularization on the learnable latent prior. This regularization penalizes the fused Gromov-Wasserstein
(FGW) distance between the latent prior and its
corresponding posterior, allowing one to flexibly learn a structured prior distribution associated with the generative model. Moreover, it
helps co-training of multiple autoencoders even
if they have heterogeneous architectures and incomparable latent spaces. We implement the
framework with two scalable algorithms, making it applicable for both probabilistic and deterministic autoencoders. Our relational regularized autoencoder (RAE) outperforms existing methods, e.g., the variational autoencoder,
Wasserstein autoencoder, and their variants, on
generating images. Additionally, our relational
co-training strategy for autoencoders achieves
encouraging results in both synthesis and realworld multi-view learning tasks. The code is
at https://github.com/HongtengXu/
Relational-AutoEncoders.

1. Introduction
Autoencoders have been used widely in many challenging
machine learning tasks for generative modeling, e.g., image (Kingma & Welling, 2013; Tolstikhin et al., 2018) and
sentence (Bowman et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2019) generation. Typically, an autoencoder assumes that the data in
the sample space X may be mapped to a low-dimensional
manifold, which can be represented in a latent space Z.
The autoencoder fits the unknown data distribution px via
*
1
Equal contribution
Infinia ML Inc., Durham, NC,
USA 2 Duke University, Durham, NC, USA. Correspondence
to: Hongteng Xu <hongtengxu313@gmail.com>, Dixin Luo
<dixin.luo@duke.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

a latent-variable model denoted pG , specified by a prior
distribution pz on latent code z ∈ Z and a generative model
G : Z 7→ X mapping the latent code to the data x ∈ X .
Learning seeks to minimize the discrepancy between px
and pG . According to the choice of the discrepancy, we
can derive different autoencoders. For example, the variational autoencoder (Kingma & Welling, 2013) applies the
KL-divergence as the discrepancy and learns a probabilistic autoencoder via maximizing the evidence lower bound
(ELBO). The Wasserstein autoencoder (WAE) (Tolstikhin
et al., 2018) minimizes a relaxed form of the Wasserstein
distance between px and pG , and learns a deterministic autoencoder. In general, the objective function approximating
the discrepancy consists of a reconstruction loss of observed
data and a regularizer penalizing the difference between
the prior distribution pz and the posterior derived by encoded data, i.e., qz|x . Although existing autoencoders have
achieved success in many generative tasks, they often suffer
from the following two problems.
Regularizer misspecification Typical autoencoders, like
the VAE and WAE, fix the pz as a normal distribution, which
often leads to the problem of over-regularization. Moreover,
applying such an unstructured prior increases the difficulties
in conditional generation tasks. To avoid oversimplified priors, the Gaussian mixture VAE (GMVAE) (Dilokthanakul
et al., 2016) and the VAE with VampPrior (Tomczak &
Welling, 2018) characterize their priors as learnable mixture
models. However, without side information (Wang et al.,
2019), jointly learning the autoencoder and the prior suffers
from a high risk of under-regularization, which is sensitive to the setting of hyperparameters (e.g., the number of
mixture components and the initialization of the prior).
Co-training of heterogeneous autoencoders Solving a
single task often relies on the data in different domains
(i.e., multi-view data). For example, predicting the mortality of a patient may require both her clinical record and
genetic information. In such a situation, we may need to
learn multiple autoencoders to extract latent variables as
features from different views. Traditional multi-view learning strategies either assume that the co-trained autoencoders
share the same latent distributions (Wang et al., 2015; Ye
et al., 2016), or assume that there exists an explicit transform
between different latent spaces (Wang et al., 2016). These
assumptions are questionable in practice, as the correspond-

