Clinician-in-the-Loop Decision Making:
Reinforcement Learning with Near-Optimal Set-Valued Policies

Shengpu Tang 1 Aditya Modi 1 Michael W. Sjoding 2 3 Jenna Wiens 1

Abstract
Standard reinforcement learning (RL) aims to ﬁnd
an optimal policy that identiﬁes the best action
for each state. However, in healthcare settings,
many actions may be near-equivalent with respect
to the reward (e.g., survival). We consider an
alternative objective – learning set-valued policies to capture near-equivalent actions that lead to
similar cumulative rewards. We propose a modelfree algorithm based on temporal difference learning and a near-greedy heuristic for action selection. We analyze the theoretical properties of the
proposed algorithm, providing optimality guarantees and demonstrate our approach on simulated environments and a real clinical task. Empirically, the proposed algorithm exhibits good
convergence properties and discovers meaningful near-equivalent actions. Our work provides
theoretical, as well as practical, foundations for
clinician/human-in-the-loop decision making, in
which humans (e.g., clinicians, patients) can incorporate additional knowledge (e.g., side effects,
patient preference) when selecting among nearequivalent actions.

1. Introduction
In the standard RL setup, one aims to ﬁnd an optimal policy,
which identiﬁes the action for each state that maximizes
some discounted expected cumulative reward. However,
in healthcare, the reward can be difﬁcult to deﬁne; e.g.,
one might want to optimize for long-term quality of life vs.
short-term stabilization of the symptoms (without treating
the underlying disease process). Past work has augmented
1
Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, US 2 Department of Internal
Medicine, Michigan Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
US 3 Institute for Healthcare Policy & Innovation, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, US. Correspondence to: Shengpu Tang
<tangsp@umich.edu>, Jenna Wiens <wiensj@umich.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

reward signals via reward shaping (Lizotte et al., 2012;
Raghu et al., 2017a; Nemati et al., 2016). Still, designing a
single reward function that captures the goals and objectives
across different individuals remains challenging. As a result,
when applying RL in healthcare, survival is often used as the
reward, since it represents a clear goal and is straightforward
to measure (Raghu et al., 2017b; Komorowski et al., 2018;
Li et al., 2018).
While using survival as the reward signal can simplify
the RL setup, we hypothesize that it induces many nearequivalent actions that could otherwise differ. For example,
different doses of a drug might perform similarly in terms of
keeping the patient alive, yet doses that are too large might
cause severe side effects. In other cases, patients may opt
for less invasive treatments, if they are likely to yield similar
outcomes to more invasive ones. In such cases, learning a
single best action and ignoring near-equivalent actions may
be undesirable, as important considerations not captured
through the reward signal can impact decision making.
Thus, we consider the task of learning a “set-valued policy”
(SVP), which returns a set of near-equivalent actions rather
than a single optimal action. This allows for interaction
between the clinician (or patient) and the decision support
system (i.e., clinician/patient-in-the-loop). Such a setup provides clinicians/patients with an opportunity to incorporate
additional information (e.g., patient preferences, adverse
drug reactions, costs/availability of equipment) when choosing among near-equivalent actions.
We study a particular formalization of SVPs introduced by
Fard & Pineau (2011) where they consider the problem of
computing SVPs (planning). In contrast to their exhaustive search based approach, which requires a model of the
underlying environment, we propose a model-free learning algorithm. The sequential nature of decisions makes
learning such policies non-trivial, as near-equivalent actions
should be not only similar in the short term (immediate
reward), but also similar for all possible future trajectories
(expected cumulative rewards). Our contributions are:
• we propose a new algorithm based on temporal difference methods and a near-greedy heuristic for learning
near-optimal set-valued policies,

