Robust Bayesian Classification Using an Optimistic Score Ratio

Viet Anh Nguyen 1 Nian Si 1 Jose Blanchet 1

Abstract
We build a Bayesian contextual classification
model using an optimistic score ratio for robust
binary classification when there is limited information on the class-conditional, or contextual,
distribution. The optimistic score searches for the
distribution that is most plausible to explain the
observed outcomes in the testing sample among
all distributions belonging to the contextual ambiguity set which is prescribed using a limited
structural constraint on the mean vector and the
covariance matrix of the underlying contextual
distribution. We show that the Bayesian classifier
using the optimistic score ratio is conceptually
attractive, delivers solid statistical guarantees and
is computationally tractable. We showcase the
power of the proposed optimistic score ratio classifier on both synthetic and empirical data.

1. Introduction
We consider a binary classification setting in which we
are provided with training samples from two classes but
there is little structure within the classes, e.g., data with
heterogeneous distributions except for means and covariance. The ultimate goal is to correctly classify an unlabeled
test sample of a given feature. This supervised learning
task is the cornerstone of modern machine learning, and its
diverse applications are flourishing in promoting healthcare
(Naraei et al., 2016; Tomar & Agarwal, 2013), speeding
up technological progresses (Rippl et al., 2016; Zhu et al.,
2014), and improving societal values (Bhagat et al., 2011;
Bodendorf & Kaiser, 2009). Confronting the unstructured
nature of the problem, it is natural to exercise a Bayesian
approach which employs subjective belief and available
information, and then determine an optimal classifying decision that minimizes a certain loss function integrated under
the posterior distribution. In this modelling framework, a
1
Stanford University. Correspondence to: Viet Anh Nguyen
<viet-anh.nguyen@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

consensus on the selection of the loss function can be easily
reached. Unfortunately, the choice of a class prior and a
class-conditional distribution (i.e., the likelihood given the
class), two compulsory inputs to the Bayesian machinery to
devise the posterior, is more difficult to be agreed upon due
to conflicting beliefs among involving parties and limited
available data.
Robust Bayesian statistics, which explicitly aims to assemble a posterior inference model with multiple priors
and/or multiple class-conditional distributions, emerges as
a promising remedy to this longstanding problem. Existing research in this field mainly focuses on robust divergences in the general Bayesian inference framework. Walker
(2013) identifies the behaviour of Bayesian updating in the
context of model misspecification to show that standard
Bayesian updating method learns a model that minimizes
the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence to the true data generating model. To achieve robustness in Bayesian inference,
existing works often target robust divergences, including
maximum mean discrepancy, Rényi’s alpha-divergences,
Hellinger-based divergences, and density power divergence
(Chérief-Abdellatif & Alquier, 2019; Knoblauch et al., 2019;
Bissiri et al., 2016; Jewson et al., 2018; Ghosh & Basu,
2016). Learning the learning rate in the general Bayesian inference framework is also gaining more recent attention
(Holmes & Walker, 2017; Knoblauch, 2019). Besides,
Miller & Dunson (2019) use approximate Bayesian computation to obtain a ’coarsened’ posterior to achieve robustness
and Grünwald (2012) proposes a safe Bayesian method.
Despite being an active research field, alleviating the impact
of the model uncertainty in the class-conditional distribution (i.e., the likelihood conditional on the class) using ideas
from distributional robustness is left largely unexplored even
though this uncertainty arises naturally for numerous reasons. Even if we assume a proper parametric family, the
plug-in estimator still carries statistical error from finite
sampling and rarely matches the true distribution. The uncertainty is amplified when one relaxes to the nonparametric
setting where no hardwired likelihood specification remains
valid, and we are not aware of any guidance on a reasonable
choice of a likelihood in this case. The situation deteriorates
further when the training data violates the independent or
identically distributed assumptions, or when the test distribution differs from the training distribution as in the setting

