A Mean-field Analysis of Deep ResNet and Beyond:
Towards Provable Optimization Via Overparameterization From Depth

Yiping Lu 1 Chao Ma 2 Yulong Lu 3 Jianfeng Lu 3 Lexing Ying 4

Abstract
Training deep neural networks with stochastic gradient descent (SGD) can often achieve zero training loss on real-world tasks although the optimization landscape is known to be highly non-convex.
To understand the success of SGD for training
deep neural networks, this work presents a meanfield analysis of deep residual networks, based on
a line of works that interpret the continuum limit
of the deep residual network as an ordinary differential equation when the network capacity tends
to infinity. Specifically, we propose a new continuum limit of deep residual networks, which
enjoys a good landscape in the sense that every
local minimizer is global. This characterization
enables us to derive the first global convergence
result for multilayer neural networks in the meanfield regime. Furthermore, without assuming the
convexity of the loss landscape, our proof relies
on a zero-loss assumption at the global minimizer
that can be achieved when the model shares a universal approximation property. Key to our result
is the observation that a deep residual network resembles a shallow network ensemble (Veit et al.,
2016), i.e. a two-layer network. We bound the
difference between the shallow network and our
ResNet model via the adjoint sensitivity method,
which enables us to apply existing mean-field
analyses of two-layer networks to deep networks.
Furthermore, we propose several novel training
schemes based on the new continuous model, including one training procedure that switches the
order of the residual blocks and results in strong
empirical performance on the benchmark datasets.
Equal contribution 1 Institute for Computational & Mathematical Engineering, Stanford University 2 PACM, Princeton University 3 Mathematics Department, Duke University 4 Department of
Mathematics, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Yiping Lu
<yplu@stanford.edu>.

1. Introduction
Neural networks have become state-of-the-art models in
numerous machine learning tasks and strong empirical performance is often achieved by deeper networks. One landmark example is the residual network (ResNet) (He et al.,
2016a;b), which can be efficiently optimized even at extremely large depth such as 1000 layers. However, there
exists a gap between this empirical success and the theoretical understanding: ResNets can be trained to almost zero
loss with standard stochastic gradient descent(Zhang et al.,
2016; Ishida et al., 2020), yet it is known that larger depth
leads to increasingly non-convex landscape even the the
presence of residual connections (Yun et al., 2019). While
global convergence can be obtained in the so-called “lazy”
regime e.g. (Jacot et al., 2018; Du et al., 2018), such kernel models cannot capture fully-trained neural networks
(Suzuki, 2018; Chizat et al., 2019; Ghorbani et al., 2019).
In this work, we aim to demonstrate the provable optimization of ResNet beyond the restrictive “lazy” regime. To
do so, we build upon recent works that connect ordinary
differential equation (ODE) models to infinite-depth neural networks (E, 2017; Lu et al., 2017; Sonoda & Murata,
2017; Haber & Ruthotto, 2017; Chen et al., 2018; Dupont
et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2019c; Thorpe & van Gennip,
2018; Sonoda & Murata, 2019; Lu et al., 2019). Specifically, each residual block of a ResNet can be written as
xn+1 = xn + ∆tf (xn , θn ), which can be seen as the Euler
discretization of the ODE ẋt = f (x, t). This turns training
the neural network into solving an optimal control problem (Li et al., 2017; E et al., 2019a; Liu & Theodorou,
2019), under which backpropagation can be understood as
simulating the adjoint equation (Chen et al., 2018; Li et al.,
2017; Li & Hao, 2018; Zhang et al., 2019a; Li et al., 2020).
However, this analogy does not directly provide guarantees
of global convergence even in the continuum limit.

*

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

To address the problem of global convergence, we propose a
new limiting ODE model of ResNets. Formally, we model
deep ResNets via a mean-field ODE model
Z
Ẋρ (x, t) = f (Xρ (x, t), θ)ρ(θ, t)dθ
θ

This model considers every residual block f (·, θi ) as a parti-

