Automatic Reparameterisation of Probabilistic Programs

Maria I. Gorinova * 1 Dave Moore 2 Matthew D. Hoffman 2

Abstract
Probabilistic programming has emerged as a powerful paradigm in statistics, applied science, and
machine learning: by decoupling modelling from
inference, it promises to allow modellers to directly reason about the processes generating data.
However, the performance of inference algorithms can be dramatically affected by the parameterisation used to express a model, requiring users
to transform their programs in non-intuitive ways.
We argue for automating these transformations,
and demonstrate that mechanisms available in recent modelling frameworks can implement noncentring and related reparameterisations. This
enables new inference algorithms, and we propose two: a simple approach using interleaved
sampling and a novel variational formulation that
searches over a continuous space of parameterisations. We show that these approaches enable
robust inference across a range of models, and
can yield more efficient samplers than the best
fixed parameterisation.

1. Introduction
Reparameterising a probabilistic model means expressing
it in terms of new variables defined by a bijective transformation of the original variables of interest. The reparameterised model expresses the same statistical assumptions
as the original, but can have drastically different posterior
geometry, with significant implications for both variational
and sampling-based inference algorithms.
Non-centring is a particularly common form of reparameterisation in Bayesian hierarchical models. Consider a
random variable z ∼ N (µ, σ); we say this is in centred
*

Work done while interning at Google. 1 University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK 2 Google, San Francisco, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Maria I. Gorinova <m.gorinova@ed.ac.uk>, Dave
Moore <davmre@google.com>, Matthew D. Hoffman <mhoffman@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

parameterisation (CP). If we instead work with an auxiliary, standard normal variable z̃ ∼ N (0, 1), and obtain z
by applying the transformation z = µ + σz̃, we say the
variable z̃ is in its non-centred parameterisation (NCP). Although the centred parameterisation is often more intuitive,
non-centring can dramatically improve the performance of
inference (Betancourt & Girolami, 2015). Neal’s funnel
(Figure 1a) provides a simple example: most Markov chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms have trouble sampling
from the funnel due to the strong non-linear dependence between latent variables. Non-centring the model removes this
dependence, converting the funnel into a spherical Gaussian
distribution.
Bayesian practitioners are often advised to manually noncentre their models (Stan Development Team et al., 2016);
however, this breaks the separation between modelling and
inference and requires expressing the model in a potentially
less intuitive form. Moreover, it requires the user to understand the concept of non-centring and to know a priori
where in the model it might be appropriate. Because the best
parameterisation for a given model may vary across datasets,
even experts may need to find the optimal parameterisation
by trial and error, burdening modellers and slowing down
the model development loop (Blei, 2014).
We propose that non-centring and similar reparameterisations be handled automatically by probabilistic programming systems. We demonstrate how such program transformations may be implemented using the effect handling
mechanisms present in several modern deep probabilistic
programming frameworks, and consider two inference algorithms enabled by automatic reparameterisation: interleaved
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (iHMC), which alternates HMC
steps between centred and non-centred parameterisations,
and a novel algorithm we call Variationally Inferred Parameterisation (VIP), which searches over a continuous space of
reparameterisations that includes non-centring as a special
case.1 We compare these strategies to a fixed centred and
non-centred parameterisation across a range of well-known
hierarchical models. Our results suggest that both VIP and
iHMC can enable for more automated robust inference, often performing at least as well as the best fixed parame1
Code for these algorithms and experiments is available at
https://github.com/mgorinova/autoreparam.

