Training Neural Networks for and by Interpolation

Leonard Berrada 1 Andrew Zisserman 2 M. Pawan Kumar 2

Abstract
In modern supervised learning, many deep neural networks
are able to interpolate the data: the empirical loss can be
driven to near zero on all samples simultaneously. In this
work, we explicitly exploit this interpolation property for the
design of a new optimization algorithm for deep learning,
which we term Adaptive Learning-rates for Interpolation
with Gradients (ALI-G). ALI-G retains the two main advantages of Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), which are (i) a
low computational cost per iteration and (ii) good generalization performance in practice. At each iteration, ALI-G
exploits the interpolation property to compute an adaptive
learning-rate in closed form. In addition, ALI-G clips the
learning-rate to a maximal value, which we prove to be helpful for non-convex problems. Crucially, in contrast to the
learning-rate of SGD, the maximal learning-rate of ALI-G
does not require a decay schedule, which makes it considerably easier to tune. We provide convergence guarantees of
ALI-G in various stochastic settings. Notably, we tackle the
realistic case where the interpolation property is satisfied
up to some tolerance. We provide experiments on a variety
of architectures and tasks: (i) learning a differentiable neural computer; (ii) training a wide residual network on the
SVHN data set; (iii) training a Bi-LSTM on the SNLI data
set; and (iv) training wide residual networks and densely
connected networks on the CIFAR data sets. ALI-G produces state-of-the-art results among adaptive methods, and
even yields comparable performance with SGD, which requires manually tuned learning-rate schedules. Furthermore,
ALI-G is simple to implement in any standard deep learning
framework and can be used as a drop-in replacement in
existing code.

1. Introduction
Training a deep neural network is a challenging optimization
problem: it involves minimizing the average of many high1
DeepMind, London, United Kingdom. Work performed while
at University of Oxford. 2 Department of Engineering Science,
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. Correspondence
to: Leonard Berrada <lberrada@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

dimensional non-convex functions. In practice, the main
algorithms of choice are Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD)
(Robbins & Monro, 1951) and adaptive gradient methods
such as AdaGrad (Duchi et al., 2011) or Adam (Kingma &
Ba, 2015). It has been observed that SGD tends to provide
better generalization performance than adaptive gradient
methods (Wilson et al., 2017). However, the downside of
SGD is that it requires the manual design of a learning-rate
schedule, which is widely regarded as an onerous and time
consuming task. In this work, we alleviate this issue with
the design of an adaptive learning-rate algorithm that needs
minimal tuning for good performance. Indeed, we postulate
that by using the same descent direction as SGD while automatically adapting its learning-rate, the resulting algorithm
can offer similar generalization performance while requiring
considerably less tuning.
In this work, we build on the following two ideas. First,
an adaptive learning-rate can be computed for the nonstochastic gradient direction when the minimum value of
the objective function is known (Polyak, 1969; Shor, 1985;
Brännlund, 1995; Nedić & Bertsekas, 2001a;b). And second,
one such minimum value is usually approximately known
for interpolating models: for instance, it is close to zero for a
model trained with the cross-entropy loss. By carefully combining these two ideas, we create a stochastic algorithm that
(i) provably converges fast in convex or Restricted Secant
Inequality (RSI) settings, and (ii) obtains state-of-the-art
empirical results with neural networks. We refer to this
algorithm as Adaptive Learning-rates for Interpolation with
Gradients (ALI-G).
Procedurally, ALI-G is close to many existing algorithms,
such as Deep Frank-Wolfe (Berrada et al., 2019), A P ROX
(Asi & Duchi, 2019) and L4 (Rolinek & Martius, 2018).
And yet uniquely, thanks to its careful design and analysis, the learning-rate of ALI-G effectively requires a single
hyper-parameter that does not need to be decayed. Since
ALI-G is easy to implement in any deep learning framework,
we believe that it can prove to be a practical and reliable
optimization tool for deep learning.
Contributions. We summarize the contributions of this
work as follows:
- We design an adaptive learning-rate algorithm that uses a
single hyper-parameter and does need any decaying sched-

