SGD Learns One-Layer Networks in WGANs

Qi Lei 1 Jason D. Lee 2 Alexandros G. Dimakis 1 Constantinos Daskalakis 3

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are a
widely used framework for learning generative
models. Wasserstein GANs (WGANs), one of
the most successful variants of GANs, require
solving a minmax optimization problem to global
optimality, but are in practice successfully trained
using stochastic gradient descent-ascent. In this
paper, we show that, when the generator is a onelayer network, stochastic gradient descent-ascent
converges to a global solution with polynomial
time and sample complexity.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al., 2014) are a prominent framework for learning generative models of complex, real-world distributions given
samples from these distributions. GANs and their variants
have been successfully applied to numerous datasets and
tasks, including image-to-image translation (Isola et al.,
2017), image super-resolution (Ledig et al., 2017), domain
adaptation (Tzeng et al., 2017), probabilistic inference (Dumoulin et al., 2016), compressed sensing (Bora et al., 2017)
and many more. These advances owe in part to the success of Wasserstein GANs (WGANs) (Arjovsky et al., 2017;
Gulrajani et al., 2017), leveraging the neural net induced
integral probability metric to better measure the difference
between a target and a generated distribution.
Along with the aforementioned empirical successes, there
have been theoretical studies of the statistical properties of
GANs—see e.g. (Zhang et al., 2018; Arora et al., 2017;
2018; Bai et al., 2018; Dumoulin et al., 2016) and their
references. These works have shown that, with an appropriate design of the generator and discriminator, the global
optimum of the WGAN objective identifies the target distri1
University of Texas at Austin, TX 2 Princeton University,
NJ 3 Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MA. Correspondence to: Qi Lei <leiqi@ices.utexas.edu>, Jason D. Lee <jasonlee@princeton.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

bution with low sample complexity. However, these results
cannot be algorithmically attained via practical GAN training algorithms.
On the algorithmic front, prior work has focused on the
stability and convergence properties of gradient descentascent (GDA) and its variants in GAN training and more
general min-max optimization problems; see e.g. (Nagarajan & Kolter, 2017; Heusel et al., 2017; Mescheder et al.,
2017; 2018; Daskalakis et al., 2017; Daskalakis & Panageas,
2018a;b; Gidel et al., 2019; Liang & Stokes, 2019; Mokhtari
et al., 2019; Jin et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2019; Lei et al., 2020;
2019; 2017) and their references. These works have studied
conditions under which GDA converges to a globally optimal solution in the convex-concave objective, or local stability in the non-convex non-concave setting. These results
do not ensure convergence to a globally optimal generator,
or in fact even convergence to a locally optimal generator.
Thus a natural question is whether:
Are GANs able to learn high-dimensional distributions in
polynomial time and polynomial/parametric sample
complexity, and thus bypass the curse of dimensionality?
The aforementioned prior works stop short of this goal due
to a) the intractability of min-max optimization in the nonconvex setting, and b) the curse of dimensionality in learning
with Wasserstein distance in high dimensions (Bai et al.,
2018).
A notable exception is Feizi et al. (2017) which shows that
for WGANs with a linear generator and quadratic discriminator GDA succeeds in learning a Gaussian using polynomially many samples in the dimension.
In the same vein, we are the first to our knowledge to study
the global convergence properties of stochastic GDA in
the GAN setting, and establishing such guarantees for nonlinear generators. In particular, we study the WGAN formulation for learning a single-layer generative model with
some reasonable choices of activations including tanh, sigmoid and leaky ReLU.
Our contributions. For WGAN with a one-layer generator network using an activation from a large family of functions and a quadratic discriminator, we show that stochastic
gradient descent-ascent learns a target distribution using

