History-Gradient Aided Batch Size Adaptation for Variance Reduced
Algorithms

Kaiyi Ji 1 Zhe Wang 1 Bowen Weng 1 Yi Zhou 2 Wei Zhang 3 Yingbin Liang 1

Abstract
Variance-reduced algorithms, although achieve
great theoretical performance, can run slowly in
practice due to the periodic gradient estimation
with a large batch of data. Batch-size adaptation
thus arises as a promising approach to accelerate such algorithms. However, existing schemes
either apply prescribed batch-size adaption rule
or exploit the information along optimization
path via additional backtracking and condition
verification steps. In this paper, we propose a
novel scheme, which eliminates backtracking line
search but still exploits the information along optimization path by adapting the batch size via history stochastic gradients. We further theoretically
show that such a scheme substantially reduces the
overall complexity for popular variance-reduced
algorithms SVRG and SARAH/SPIDER for both
conventional nonconvex optimization and reinforcement learning problems. To this end, we
develop a new convergence analysis framework
to handle the dependence of the batch size on history stochastic gradients. Extensive experiments
validate the effectiveness of the proposed batchsize adaptation scheme.

1. Introduction
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Ghadimi & Lan, 2013)
algorithms have been extensively used to efficiently solve
large-scale optimization problems recently. Furthermore,
various variance reduced algorithms such as SAGA (Defazio et al., 2014), SVRG (Johnson & Zhang, 2013; Reddi
et al., 2016a), SARAH (Nguyen et al., 2017a;b), and SPIDER (Fang et al., 2018)/SpiderBoost (Wang et al., 2019),
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The Ohio
State University 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Utah 3 Department of Mechanical Engineering,
Southern University of Science and Technology. Correspondence
to: Kaiyi Ji <ji.367@osu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

have been proposed to reduce the variance of SGD. Such
variance reduction techniques have also been applied to policy gradient algorithms to develop SVRPG (Papini et al.,
2018), SRVR-PG (Xu et al., 2019b) and SARAPO (Yuan
et al., 2018) in reinforcement learning (RL). Though variance reduced algorithms have been shown to have orderlevel lower computational complexity than SGD (and than
vanilla policy gradient in RL), they often do not perform as
well as SGD in practice, largely due to the periodic largebatch gradient estimation. In fact, variance-reduced gradient
estimation plays an important role only towards the later
stage of the algorithm execution, and hence a promising way
to accelerate variance reduced algorithms is to adaptively
increase the batch size.
Two types of batch-size adaptation schemes have been proposed so far to accelerate stochastic algorithms (Smith et al.,
2018; Friedlander & Schmidt, 2012; Devarakonda et al.,
2017). The first approach follows a prescribed rule to adapt
the batch size, which can be exponential and polynomial increase of batch size as in hybrid SGD (HSGD) (Friedlander
& Schmidt, 2012; Zhou et al., 2018b) and linear increase of
batch size (Zhou et al., 2018b). Moreover, Harikandeh et al.
2015 proposed to use exponential increase of batch size at
each outer-loop iteration for SVRG.
The second approach adapts the batch size based on the
information along the optimization path. For example, De
et al. 2016; 2017 proposed Big Batch SGD, which adapts
the batch size so that the resulting gradient and variance
satisfy certain optimization properties. Since the batch size
needs to be chosen even before its resulting gradient is
calculated, the algorithm adopts the backtracking line search
to iteratively check that the chosen batch size ensures the
resulting gradient to satisfy a variance bound. Clearly, the
backtracking step adds undesired complexity, but seems to
be unavoidable, because the convergence analysis exploits
the instantaneous variance bound.
Our contribution lies in designing an easy-to-implement
scheme to adapt the batch size, which incorporates the information along the optimization path, but does not involve
backtracking and condition verification. We further show
by both theory and experiments that such a scheme achieves
much better performance than vanilla variance reduced algo-

