Eliminating the Invariance on the Loss Landscape of Linear Autoencoders

Reza Oftadeh 1 Jiayi Shen 1 Zhangyang Wang 1 Dylan Shell 1

Abstract
This paper proposes a new loss function for linear autoencoders (LAEs) and analytically identifies the structure of the associated loss surface.
Optimizing the conventional Mean Square Error
(MSE) loss results in a decoder matrix that spans
the principal subspace of the sample covariance of
the data, but, owing to an invariance that cancels
out in the global map, it will fail to identify the
exact eigenvectors. We show here that our proposed loss function eliminates this issue, so the
decoder converges to the exact ordered unnormalized eigenvectors of the sample covariance matrix.
We characterize the full structure of the new loss
landscape by establishing an analytical expression
for the set of all critical points, showing that it is a
subset of critical points of MSE, and that all local
minima are still global. Specifically, the invariant
global minima under MSE are shown to become
saddle points under the new loss. Additionally,
the computational complexity of the loss and its
gradients are the same as MSE and, thus, the new
loss is not only of theoretical importance but is of
practical value, e.g., for low-rank approximation.

1. Introduction
Promising performance in deep learning has spurred active
research to establish a formal understanding of the method’s
empirical results. Two important and complimentary lines
of research have been brought to bear to analyze the behavior of various architectures of linear/non-linear neural
networks: (i) global function approximation theorems describe structural aspects of networks (Leshno et al., 1993;
Lu et al., 2017); while the dynamics of learning (under SGD)
have been examined via (ii) approaches for analyzing properties of the loss landscape. Within the latter, a direction
centered on the question of local vs. global minima, or more
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas
A&M University, Texas, USA. Correspondence to: Reza Oftadeh
<reza.oftadeh@tamu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

generally the categorization of extreme points, has flourished. Much work extends the results of Baldi & Hornik
(1989) for LAEs to more complex networks (Kunin et al.,
2019; Pretorius et al., 2018; Frye et al., 2019). Most notably,
Zhou & Liang (2018) generalize the LAE results to deep
linear networks and shallow RELU networks, and Laurent &
Brecht (2018) prove global optimality for arbitrary convex
differentiable loss under slightly different conditions.
Related Works Though the aforementioned works have
been very successful in addressing the problem of local vs.
global minima, not all global minima “are created equal”.
While for an LAE with MSE loss all local minima are global
minima, Baldi & Hornik (1989) further show that at these
minima the decoder’s columns and the principal components
of the covariance matrix of the data are not the necessarily
the same but only span the same subspace. In other words,
the LAE fails (almost surely) to identify the exact principal
directions. This is due to the loss possessing a symmetry
under the action of a group of invertible matrices, so that
directions (and orderings/permutations thereto) will not be
discriminated. (For a further elaboration and a more detailed
algebraic characterization of the invariance, see Remark 1.
Fig 1 also provides a visual demonstration.)
Several methods for neural networks compute the exact
eigenvectors (Rubner & Tavan, 1989; Xu, 1993; Kung &
Diamantaras, 1990; Oja et al., 1992), but they depend on
either particular network structures or special optimization
methods. More recent related works, mainly concerned
with regularization, form two separate line of studies: one
explores the effects of implicit regularization and the other
investigates the consequence of adding a weight regularizer.
For implicit regularization, Gidel et al. (2019) extended the
results of Saxe et al. (2019), and show that under some assumptions discrete Gradient Descent (GD) dynamics solves
“a reduced-rank regression with a gradually increasing rank”.
In this approach, with vanishing initialization and time
rescaling of the gradient dynamics, the GD optimizer learns
the eigenvectors sequentially. However, not only this approach only works for GD optimization, it is approximate
as the exact solution is achieved only when the initialization
converges to zero.
In the case of weight regularization, it was observed by
Plaut (2018), and further explored by Kunin et al. (2019)

