Cost-Effective Interactive Attention Learning with Neural Attention Processes

Jay Heo 1 Junhyeon Park 1 Hyewon Jeong 1 Kwang joon Kim 2 Juho Lee 3 Eunho Yang 1 3 Sung Ju Hwang 1 3

Abstract
We propose a novel interactive learning framework which we refer to as Interactive Attention
Learning (IAL), in which the human supervisors
interactively manipulate the allocated attentions,
to correct the model’s behaviour by updating the
attention-generating network. However, such a
model is prone to overfitting due to scarcity of
human annotations, and requires costly retraining.
Moreover, it is almost infeasible for the human
annotators to examine attentions on tons of instances and features. We tackle these challenges
by proposing a sample-efficient attention mechanism and a cost-effective reranking algorithm
for instances and features. First, we propose Neural Attention Processes (NAP), which is an attention generator that can update its behaviour
by incorporating new attention-level supervisions
without any retraining. Secondly, we propose an
algorithm which prioritizes the instances and the
features by their negative impacts, such that the
model can yield large improvements with minimal human feedback. We validate IAL on various time-series datasets from multiple domains
(healthcare, real-estate, and computer vision) on
which it significantly outperforms baselines with
conventional attention mechanisms, or without
cost-effective reranking, with substantially less
retraining and human-model interaction cost.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are arguably the most prevalent tools
for predictive modeling tasks nowadays, thanks to their
ability to learn complex functions with multiple layers of
non-linear transformations. However, the complex nature
1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST),
Daejeon, South Korea 2 Yonsei University College of Medicine,
Seoul, South Korea 3 AITRICS, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: Jay Heo <jayheo@kaist.ac.kr>, Sung Ju Hwang <sjhwang82@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

of the model, at the same time, makes it difficult to interpret
what they have learned, which has led to the recent surge of
interest in interpretable models that are capable of providing
interpretations of the model and the prediction in humanunderstandable forms (Gilpin et al., 2018).
Although recent works propose diverse solutions to interpretability (Choi et al., 2016a; Ahmad et al., 2018; Lage
et al., 2018), including attention mechanisms, activation
visualization, and optimization for human-interpretability
under human-in-the-loop, we face yet another challenge:
not all machine-generated interpretations are correct or human understandable. This is mainly due to two reasons:
1) correctness and reliability of a learning model heavily
depends on the quantity and quality of the training data. 2)
neural networks tend to learn non-robust features that help
with predictions but are not human-perceptible (Ilyas et al.,
2019). Such unreliability of the interpretations is highly
problematic for safety-critical applications such as clinical
risk predictions (Ahmad et al., 2018; Sankar et al., 2019) or
autonomous driving (Chi & Mu, 2017).
The main limitation of the existing models is that they
mostly only consider passive roles for human supervisors,
where they simply take the provided interpretations as is.
Yet, a more effective way to use the interpretations is to
use them as channels for human-model communications,
such that the models learn by continuously interacting with
the human supervisors, where they iteratively correct the
model-generated interpretations. From a cognitive science
perspective, human learning is done by internal reflection
(back-propagation) and external explanation (human feedback) during social interactions (Clark et al., 2015).
Based on this motivation, we propose an interactive learning
framework, where the model learns by iteratively interacting
with the human supervisors who manipulate the model by
adjusting the provided interpretations, which is depicted in
Figure 1. The specific interpretation mechanism we consider
in this work is the attention mechanism (Bahdanau et al.,
2014). While active learning asks for supervision at the
instance level, in our interactive learning model, it asks for
supervision at the attention level. However, this leads to
multiple challenges regarding efficiency, which hinders their
applications to practical scenarios:

