Kernel Interpolation With Continuous Volume Sampling

Ayoub Belhadji 1 Rémi Bardenet 1 Pierre Chainais 1

Abstract
A fundamental task in kernel methods is to pick
nodes and weights, so as to approximate a given
function from an RKHS by the weighted sum of
kernel translates located at the nodes. This is the
crux of kernel quadrature or kernel interpolation
from discrete samples. Furthermore, RKHSs offer a convenient mathematical and computational
framework, connecting the discrete and continuous worlds. We introduce and analyse continuous
volume sampling (VS), the continuous counterpart – for choosing node locations – of a discrete
distribution introduced in (Deshpande & Vempala, 2006). Our contribution is theoretical: we
prove almost optimal bounds for interpolation and
quadrature under VS. While similar bounds already exist for some specific RKHSs using ad-hoc
node constructions, VS offers bounds that apply
to any Mercer kernel and depend only on the spectrum of the associated integration operator. We
emphasize that, unlike previous randomized approaches that rely on regularized leverage scores
or determinantal point processes, evaluating the
pdf of VS only requires pointwise evaluations
of the kernel. VS is thus naturally amenable to
MCMC samplers.

1. Introduction
Kernel approximation is a recurrent task in machine learning
(Hastie, Tibshirani, and Friedman, 2009)[Chapter 5], signal
processing (Unser, 2000) or numerical quadrature (Larkin,
1972). Expressed in its general form, we are given a reproducing kernel Hilbert space F (RKHS; Berlinet & ThomasAgnan, 2011) of functions over X , with a symmetric kernel
k : X × X → R+ , and an element µ : X → R of F. We
ask for conditions on a design x = (x1 , . . . , xN ) ∈ X N ,
1

Univ. Lille, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 - CRIStAL,
Villeneuve d’Ascq, France. Correspondence to: Ayoub Belhadji
<ayoub.belhadji@centralelille.fr>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

and on the corresponding weights w1 , . . . , wN , such that
the RKHS norm
µ−

N
X
i=1

wi k(xi , .)

(1)
F

is small. In other words, µ should be well reconstructed in
F by the weighted sum.
Measuring the error in RKHS norm has a computational advantage. Indeed, minimizing (1) boils down to minimizing a
quadratic form; and given a design x such that Det K(x) =
Det(k(xi , xj )) > 0, Equation (1) has a unique set of minimizing weights. The minimizer corresponds to the weights
ŵ = K(x)−1 µ(x), where µ(x) ∈ RN contains the evaluation of µ at the N design nodes xi . Whenever the weights
are chosen to be ŵ, the sum in (1) takes the same values as
µ at the nodes xi , and the optimal value of (1) is thus called
interpolation error; otherwise we speak of approximation
error. Note that when the kernel k is bounded, guarantees in
RKHS norm translate to guarantees in the supremum norm.
In this work, we propose and analyze the interpolation based
on a random design drawn from a distribution called continuous volume sampling, which favors designs x with a large
value of Det K(x). After introducing this new distribution,
we prove non-asymptotic guarantees on the interpolation error which depend on the spectrum of the kernel k. Previous
kernel-based randomized designs, both i.i.d. (Bach, 2017)
and repulsive (Belhadji et al., 2019), can be hard to compute
in practice since they require access to the Mercer decomposition of k. We show here that continuous volume sampling
enjoys similar error bounds as well as some additional interpretable geometric properties, while having a joint density
that can be evaluated as soon as one can evaluate the RKHS
kernel k. In particular, this opens the possibility of Markov
chain Monte Carlo samplers (Rezaei & Gharan, 2019).
Volume sampling was originally introduced on a finite domain (Deshpande et al., 2006), where it has been used in
matrix subsampling for linear regression and low-rank approximations (Derezinski & Warmuth, 2017; Belhadji et al.,
2018). Like (Belhadji et al., 2019), our work connects the
discrete problem of subsampling columns from a matrix
and the continuous problem of interpolating functions in an
RKHS.
The rest of the article is organized as follows. Section 2

