DeltaGrad: Rapid retraining of machine learning models

Yinjun Wu 1 Edgar Dobriban 2 Susan B. Davidson 1

Abstract
Machine learning models are not static and may
need to be retrained on slightly changed datasets,
for instance, with the addition or deletion of a set
of datapoints. This has many applications, including privacy, robustness, bias reduction, and uncertainty quantifcation. However, it is expensive
to retrain models from scratch. To address this
problem, we propose the DeltaGrad algorithm for
rapid retraining machine learning models based
on information cached during the training phase.
We provide both theoretical and empirical support
for the effectiveness of DeltaGrad, and show that
it compares favorably to the state of the art.

Figure 1. Running time of our DeltaGrad algorithm for retraining
a logistic regression model on RCV1 as a function of the fraction
of data deleted and added. Our algorithm is faster than training
from scratch (Running time BaseL). Also shown is the distance
of DeltaGrad and the model trained on full data from the correct
values (Distance BaseL and Distance DeltaGrad, resp.), illustrating
that our algorithm is accurate. See Section 18 for details.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models are used increasingly often, and
are rarely static. Models may need to be retrained on slightly
changed datasets, for instance when datapoints have been
added or deleted. This has many applications, including
privacy, robustness, bias reduction, and uncertainty quantifcation. For instance, it may be necessary to remove certain
datapoints from the training data for privacy and robustness reasons. Constructing models with some datapoints
removed can also be used for constructing bias-corrected
models, such as in jackknife resampling (Quenouille, 1956)
which requires retraining the model on all leave-one-out
datasets. In addition, retraining models on subsets of data
can be used for uncertainty quantifcation, such as constructing statistically valid prediction intervals via conformal prediction e.g., Shafer & Vovk (2008).
Unfortunately, it is expensive to retrain models from scratch.
The most common training mechanisms for large-scale models are based on (stochastic) gradient descent (SGD) and
1
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylvania, PA, United States 2 Department of Statistics, University of Pennsylvania, PA, United States. Correspondence to: Yinjun Wu <wuyinjun@seas.upenn.edu>, Edgar Dobriban <dobriban@wharton.upenn.edu>, Susan B. Davidson <susan@cis.upenn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

its variants. Retraining the models on a slightly different
dataset would involve re-computing the entire optimization
path. When adding or removing a small number of data
points, this can be of the same complexity as the original
training process.
However, we expect models on two similar datasets to be
similar. If we retrain the models on many different new
datasets, it may be more effcient to cache some information
about the training process on the original data, and compute
the “updates”. Such ideas have been used recently e.g.,
Ginart et al. (2019); Guo et al. (2019); Wu et al. (2020).
However, the existing approaches have various limitations:
They only apply to specialized problems such as k-means
(Ginart et al., 2019) or logistic regression (Wu et al., 2020),
or they require additional randomization leading to nonstandard training algorithms (Guo et al., 2019).
To address this problem, we propose the DeltaGrad algorithm for rapid retraining of machine learning models when
slight changes happen in the training dataset, e.g. deletion
or addition of samples, based on information cached during
training. DeltaGrad addresses several limitations of prior
work: it is applicable to general machine learning models defned by empirical risk minimization trained using SGD, and
does not require additional randomization. It is based on the
idea of “differentiating the optimization path” with respect
to the data, and is inspired by ideas from Quasi-Newton

