On Unbalanced Optimal Transport: An Analysis of Sinkhorn Algorithm

Khiem Pham * 1 Khang Le * 1 Nhat Ho 2 Tung Pham 1 3 Hung Bui 1

Abstract
We provide a computational complexity analysis
for the Sinkhorn algorithm that solves the entropic
regularized Unbalanced Optimal Transport (UOT)
problem between two measures of possibly different masses with at most n components. We show
that the complexity of the Sinkhorn algorithm
for finding an ε-approximate solution to the UOT
e 2 /ε). To the best of our
problem is of order O(n
knowledge, this complexity is better than the best
known complexity upper bound of the Sinkhorn
algorithm for solving the Optimal Transport (OT)
e 2 /ε2 ). Our proof
problem, which is of order O(n
technique is based on the geometric convergence
rate of the Sinkhorn updates to the optimal dual
solution of the entropic regularized UOT problem
and scaling properties of the primal solution. It
is also different from the proof technique used
to establish the complexity of the Sinkhorn algorithm for approximating the OT problem since the
UOT solution does not need to meet the marginal
constraints of the measures.

1. Introduction
The Optimal Transport (OT) problem has a long history
in mathematics and operation research, originally used to
find the optimal cost to transport masses from one distribution to the other distribution (Villani, 2003). Over the
last decade, OT has emerged as one of the most important
tools to solve interesting practical problems in statistics and
machine learning (Ho et al., 2017; Arjovsky et al., 2017;
Courty et al., 2017; Srivastava et al., 2018; Peyré & Cuturi,
2019). Recently, the Unbalanced Optimal Transport (UOT)
problem between two measures of possibly different masses
has been used in several applications in computational biol*

Equal contribution 1 VinAI Research 2 Department of EECS,
University of California, Berkeley 3 Faculty of Mathematics, Mechanics and Informatics, Hanoi University of Science, Vietnam
National University. Correspondence to: Nhat Ho <minhnhat@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

ogy (Schiebinger et al., 2019), computational imaging (Lee
et al., 2019), deep learning (Yang & Uhler, 2019) and machine learning and statistics (Frogner et al., 2015; Janati
et al., 2019a).
The UOT problem is a regularized version of Kantorovich
formulation which places penalty functions on the marginal
distributions based on some given divergences (Liero et al.,
2018). When the two measures are the probability distributions, the standard OT is a limiting case of the UOT. Under
the discrete setting of the OT problem where each probability distribution has at most n components, the OT problem
can be recast as a linear programming problem. The benchmark methods for solving the OT problem are interior-point
methods of which the most practical complexity is e
O(n3 )
developed by (Pele & Werman, 2009). Recently, (Lee & Sidford, 2014) used Laplacian linear system algorithms to ime 5/2 ).
prove the complexity of interior-point methods to O(n
However, the interior-point methods are not scalable when
n is large.
In order to deal with the scalability of computing the
OT, (Cuturi, 2013) proposed to regularize its objective function by the entropy of the transportation plan, which results
in the entropic regularized OT. One of the most popular
algorithms for solving the entropic regularized OT is the
Sinkhorn algorithm (Sinkhorn, 1974), which was shown by
e 2 /ε3 )
(Altschuler et al., 2017) to have a complexity of O(n
when used to approximate the OT within an ε-accuracy.
In the same article, (Altschuler et al., 2017) developed
a greedy version of the Sinkhorn algorithm, named the
Greenkhorn algorithm, that has a better practical performance than the Sinkhorn algorithm. Later, the complexity of
the Greenkhorn algorithm was improved to e
O(n2 /ε2 ) by a
deeper analysis in (Lin et al., 2019b). In order to accelerate
the Sinkhorn and Greenkhorn algorithms, (Lin et al., 2019a)
introduced Randkhorn and Gandkhorn algorithms that have
complexity upper bounds of O(n7/3 /ε4/3 ). These complexities are better than those of Sinkhorn and Greenkhorn
algorithms in terms of the desired accuracy ε. A different
line of algorithms for solving the OT problem is based on
primal-dual algorithms. These algorithms include accelerated primal-dual gradient descent algorithm (Dvurechensky
et al., 2018), accelerated primal-dual mirror descent algorithm (Lin et al., 2019b), and accelerated primal-dual coordinate descent algorithm (Guo et al., 2019). These primal-dual

