Bayesian Learning from Sequential Data using
Gaussian Processes with Signature Covariances

Csaba Toth 1 Harald Oberhauser 1

Abstract
We develop a Bayesian approach to learning from
sequential data by using Gaussian processes (GPs)
with so-called signature kernels as covariance
functions. This allows to make sequences of different length comparable and to rely on strong
theoretical results from stochastic analysis. Signatures capture sequential structure with tensors
that can scale unfavourably in sequence length
and state space dimension. To deal with this, we
introduce a sparse variational approach with inducing tensors. We then combine the resulting GP
with LSTMs and GRUs to build larger models that
leverage the strengths of each of these approaches
and benchmark the resulting GPs on multivariate
time series (TS) classification datasets.

1. Introduction
The evolution of some state variable, parameter or object
gives naturally gives rise to sequential data, which is defined
by having a notion of order on the incoming information.
The ordering relation, or index set does not have to represent
physical time, but for simplicity we will call it as such. For
example, besides time series, sources of sequential data
are text (Pennington et al., 2014), DNA (Heather & Chain,
2016), or even topological data analysis (Chevyrev et al.,
2018). This ubiquity of sequential data has received special
attention by the machine learning community in recent years.
This paper is motivated by the following three approaches:
Deep learning approaches. Deep learning approaches,
such as the celebrated LSTM network (Hochreiter &
Schmidhuber, 1997), other forms of RNNs (Cho et al., 2014)
and convolutional networks have successfully been applied
1
Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Csaba Toth
<csaba.toth@maths.ox.ac.uk>,
Harald Oberhauser <harald.oberhauser@maths.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

to a variety of tasks involving sequential data (Sutskever
et al., 2014; Oord et al., 2016). Deep learning models can
approximate any continuous function, but the cost is a large
number of parameters, high variance and poor interpretability. This leaves the door open for alternative approaches not
only as competitors, but as complementary building blocks
in a larger model.

Bayesian approaches. Often not only point predictions,
but estimates of the associated uncertainties are required
(Ghahramani, 2013). GPs (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006)
provide flexible priors over functions of the data in nonparametric Bayesian models. In the context of sequential data,
two prominent ways to use GPs are: (1) using as covariance
functions kernels specifically designed for sequences (Lodhi
et al., 2002; Cuturi, 2011; Cuturi & Doucet, 2011; Al-Shedivat et al., 2017), (2) modelling the evolution in a latent
space, that emits the observations, as a discrete dynamical
system with a GP prior on the transition function, a model
called the Gaussian Process State Space Model (GPSSM)
(Frigola et al., 2013; 2014; Mattos et al., 2016; Eleftheriadis
et al., 2017; Doerr et al., 2018; Ialongo et al., 2019). These
two approaches are not mutually exclusive; if one models
the latent system as a higher order Markov process, then
sequence kernels can incorporate the effect of past states.

Signature approaches. The signature feature map is a
well-developed tool from stochastic analysis that represents
a sequence as an element in a linear space of tensors, (Chen,
1958; Lyons et al., 2007). While not a mainstream machine learning approach, it is gaining attention since it can
represent non-linear functions of sequences as linear functions of signature features, and can be made invariant to
parametrization similar to dynamic time warping (DTW).
For example, (Kidger et al., 2019) use them as layer in a
deep learning architecture; (Kiraly & Oberhauser, 2019)
introduce kernels for sequences by taking inner products
of signature features; (Chevyrev & Oberhauser, 2018) use
them for maximum mean discrepancies between laws of
stochastic processes. In particular, if κ : Rd × Rd → R is a
kernel for vector-valued data, then (Kiraly & Oberhauser,

