Frequentist Uncertainty in Recurrent Neural Networks via
Blockwise Influence Functions
Ahmed M. Alaa 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1 2

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are instrumental in modelling sequential and time-series data.
Yet, when using RNNs to inform decision-making,
predictions by themselves are not sufficient — we
also need estimates of predictive uncertainty. Existing approaches for uncertainty quantification in
RNNs are based predominantly on Bayesian methods; these are computationally prohibitive, and
require major alterations to the RNN architecture
and training. Capitalizing on ideas from classical
jackknife resampling, we develop a frequentist alternative that: (a) does not interfere with model
training or compromise its accuracy, (b) applies
to any RNN architecture, and (c) provides theoretical coverage guarantees on the estimated uncertainty intervals. Our method derives predictive
uncertainty from the variability of the (jackknife)
sampling distribution of the RNN outputs, which
is estimated by repeatedly deleting “blocks” of
(temporally-correlated) training data, and collecting the predictions of the RNN re-trained on the
remaining data. To avoid exhaustive re-training,
we utilize influence functions to estimate the effect
of removing training data blocks on the learned
RNN parameters. Using data from a critical care
setting, we demonstrate the utility of uncertainty
quantification in sequential decision-making.

1. Introduction
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are sequence-based models of key importance in a wide range of application domains
(Sundermeyer et al., 2012; Kalchbrenner & Blunsom, 2013).
Because of their ability to handle temporal sequences, RNNs
have been used in applications that involve sequential decision making over time — examples of such applications
1
University of California, Los Angeles 2 Cambridge University.
Correspondence to: Ahmed M. Alaa <ahmedmalaa@ucla.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

(a) Blockwise resampling

(b) Sequential confidence intervals
RNN Predictions

Perturbed
RNN models

Confidence Interval

Abstract

0

1

2

3

4

Time

Figure 1. Pictorial depiction of our approach. (a) Blockwise resampling is applied to the RNN in a post-hoc fashion to create N
perturbed versions of the model {RNN1 , . . . , RNNN } (illustrated
through the shaded diagrams) by repeatedly deleting N “blocks” of
training data, and using influence functions to estimate the parameters of the perturbed models. Here, ht is the RNN’s hidden state,
xt is its input and yt is its output, (b) Confidence intervals are constructed on the basis of the variability of the N perturbed RNNs’
outputs (highlighted in light red color). Here, we set N = 3.

include: stock market predictions (Bao et al., 2017; Selvin
et al., 2017), service demand forecasting (Wen et al., 2017;
Zhu & Laptev, 2017), medical prognoses (Shickel et al.,
2017; Lim et al., 2018; Alaa & van der Schaar, 2019) and reinforcement learning (Bakker, 2002; Wang et al., 2018).
In high-stakes applications where RNNs would inform critical decisions, reliable estimates of predictive uncertainty are
indispensable for accurate risk assessment (Gollier, 2018).
For instance, optimal decisions on when to administer an
aggressive treatment to a hospitalized patient (based on their
temporal lab measurements) requires estimating the uncertainty in their predicted outcomes in order to properly weigh
risks against benefits (Dusenberry et al., 2019). Whereas
various methods for uncertainty estimation in feed-forward
networks have been recently proposed (Lakshminarayanan
et al., 2017; Malinin & Gales, 2018; Maddox et al., 2019),
equivalent methods for RNN models are still lacking.
In this paper, we develop a principled frequentist approach
for estimating uncertainty in the predictions of RNN models.
(A high-level depiction of our approach is given in Figure 1.)
Our method builds on classical jackknife resampling (Miller,

