Online mirror descent and dual averaging:
keeping pace in the dynamic case

Huang Fang 1 Nicholas J. A. Harvey 1 Victor S. Portella 1 Michael P. Friedlander 1

Abstract
Online mirror descent (OMD) and dual averaging (DA)—two fundamental algorithms for online
convex optimization—are known to have very
similar (and sometimes identical) performance
guarantees when used with a fixed learning rate.
Under dynamic learning rates, however, OMD is
provably inferior to DA and suffers a linear regret,
even in common settings such as prediction with
expert advice. We modify the OMD algorithm
through a simple technique that we call stabilization. We give essentially the same abstract regret
bound for OMD with stabilization and for DA by
modifying the classical OMD convergence analysis in a careful and modular way that allows
for straightforward and flexible proofs. Simple
corollaries of these bounds show that OMD with
stabilization and DA enjoy the same performance
guarantees in many applications—even under dynamic learning rates. We also shed light on the
similarities between OMD and DA and show simple conditions under which stabilized-OMD and
DA generate the same iterates.

1. Introduction
Online convex optimization (OCO) lies at the intersection
of machine learning, convex optimization, and game theory.
In OCO, a player is required to make a sequence of online
decisions over discrete time steps. Each decision incurs
a cost given by a convex function that is only revealed to
the player after they make that decision. The goal of the
player is to minimize what is known as regret: the difference
between the total cost and the cost of a competitor with
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia, Canada. Correspondence to:
Huang Fang <hgfang@cs.ubc.ca>, Nicholas J. A. Harvey
<nickhar@cs.ubc.ca>, Victor S. Portella <victorsp@cs.ubc.ca>,
Michael P. Friedlander <mpf@cs.ubc.ca>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

the benefit of hindsight. Letting T denote the number of
decisions, the goal is for the player’s algorithm to ensure its
regret is sublinear in T .
Online mirror descent (OMD) and dual averaging (DA) are
two important algorithm templates for OCO from which
many classical online learning algorithms can be derived
as special cases; see Shalev-Shwartz (2012) and McMahan
(2017) for examples. When the number T of decisions to
be made is known in advance, the performance of OMD
and DA (with properly chosen constant learning rates) can
be shown to be very similar (Hazan, 2016). That is, they
achieve essentially the same regret bound when using the
same learning rate. However, when the number of decisions
is not known a priori, there is a fundamental difference in
the regret guarantees for OMD and DA with a similar dynamic (time-varying) learning
√ rate: while DA can guarantee
sublinear regret bound O( T ) for any T > 0 (Nesterov,
2009), there are instances for which OMD suffers asymptotically linear Ω(T ) regret (Orabona & Pál, 2018). We
summarize this discussion as follows.
Previously known fact. With a dynamic learning rate,
OMD does not match the performance of DA.
The purpose of this paper is to introduce a stabilization
technique that bridges the gap between OMD and DA with
dynamic learning rates.
Main result (informal). With a dynamic learning rate,
stabilized-OMD matches the performance of DA.
For a formal statement, see the abstract regret bounds in
Theorems 4.1, 4.3, and 4.6. In Section 5 we give some
applications: regret bounds with strongly convex mirror
maps; for prediction with expert advice, anytime regret
bounds with the best known constant, and a first-order regret bound. Also, in Section 6 we formally compare the
iterates of DA and stabilized-OMD. This sheds light on the
drawbacks of OMD with dynamic learning rate and why stabilization helps. To conclude, we derive simple conditions
under which stabilized-OMD and DA generate exactly the
same iterates. This is analogous to the relationship between
OMD and DA with a fixed learning rate, and is evidence
that stabilization may be a natural way to extend OMD to
dynamic learning rates. Additionally, in Appendix I we

