Sample Factory: Egocentric 3D Control from Pixels at 100000 FPS with
Asynchronous Reinforcement Learning

Aleksei Petrenko 1 2 Zhehui Huang 2 Tushar Kumar 2 Gaurav Sukhatme 2 Vladlen Koltun 1

Abstract
Increasing the scale of reinforcement learning
experiments has allowed researchers to achieve
unprecedented results in both training sophisticated agents for video games, and in sim-to-real
transfer for robotics. Typically such experiments
rely on large distributed systems and require expensive hardware setups, limiting wider access
to this exciting area of research. In this work
we aim to solve this problem by optimizing the
efficiency and resource utilization of reinforcement learning algorithms instead of relying on
distributed computation. We present the “Sample Factory”, a high-throughput training system
optimized for a single-machine setting. Our architecture combines a highly efficient, asynchronous,
GPU-based sampler with off-policy correction
techniques, allowing us to achieve throughput
higher than 105 environment frames/second on
non-trivial control problems in 3D without sacrificing sample efficiency. We extend Sample Factory to support self-play and population-based
training and apply these techniques to train highly
capable agents for a multiplayer first-person
shooter game. Github: https://github.com/
alex-petrenko/sample-factory

1. Introduction
Training agents in simulated environments is a cornerstone
of contemporary reinforcement learning research. Substantial progress has been made in recent years by applying
reinforcement learning methods to train agents in these fast
and efficient environments, whether it is to solve complex
computer games (Dosovitskiy & Koltun, 2017; Jaderberg
et al., 2019; Vinyals et al., 2019) or sophisticated robotic
control problems via sim-to-real transfer (Müller et al., 2018;
1
Intel Labs 2 University of Southern California. Correspondence
to: Aleksei Petrenko <petrenko@usc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Hwangbo et al., 2019; Molchanov et al., 2019; Andrychowicz et al., 2020).
Despite major improvements in the sample efficiency of
modern learning methods, most of them remain notoriously
data-hungry. For the most part, the level of results in recent years has risen due to the increased scale of experiments, rather than the efficiency of learning. Billion-scale
experiments with complex environments are now relatively
commonplace (Horgan et al., 2018; Espeholt et al., 2018;
Kapturowski et al., 2019), and the most advanced efforts
consume trillions of environment transitions in a single training session (Berner et al., 2019).
To minimize the turnaround time of these large-scale experiments, the common approach is to use distributed supercomputing systems consisting of hundreds of individual machines (Berner et al., 2019). Here, we show that by optimizing the architecture and improving the resource utilization
of reinforcement learning algorithms, we can train agents on
billions of environment transitions even on a single compute
node. We present the “Sample Factory”, a high-throughput
training system optimized for a single-machine scenario.
Sample Factory, built around an Asynchronous Proximal
Policy Optimization (APPO) algorithm, is a reinforcement
learning architecture that allows us to aggressively parallelize the experience collection and achieve throughput as
high as 130000 FPS (environment frames per second) on a
single multi-core compute node with only one GPU. We describe theoretical and practical optimizations that allow us to
achieve extreme frame rates on widely available commodity
hardware.
We evaluate our algorithm on a set of challenging 3D environments and demonstrate how to leverage vast amounts of
simulated experience to train agents that reach high levels
of skill. We then extend Sample Factory to support self-play
and population-based training and apply these techniques to
train highly capable agents for a full multiplayer game of
Doom (Kempka et al., 2016).

2. Prior Work
The quest for performance and scalability has been ongoing since before the advent of deep RL (Li & Schuurmans,

