Do RNN and LSTM have Long Memory?

Jingyu Zhao 1 Feiqing Huang 1 Jia Lv 2 Yanjie Duan 2 Zhen Qin 2 Guodong Li 1 Guangjian Tian 2

Abstract
The LSTM network was proposed to overcome
the difficulty in learning long-term dependence,
and has made significant advancements in applications. With its success and drawbacks in mind,
this paper raises the question - do RNN and LSTM
have long memory? We answer it partially by
proving that RNN and LSTM do not have long
memory from a statistical perspective. A new
definition for long memory networks is further
introduced, and it requires the model weights to
decay at a polynomial rate. To verify our theory,
we convert RNN and LSTM into long memory
networks by making a minimal modification, and
their superiority is illustrated in modeling longterm dependence of various datasets.

1. Introduction
Sequential data modeling is an important topic in machine
learning, and it has been well addressed by a variety of
recurrent networks. In the meanwhile, modeling long-range
dependence remains a key challenge. Bengio et al. (1994)
concluded that learning long-term dependencies by a system
yt = M (yt−1 ) + εt with gradient descent is difficult. Later,
much effort was spent on proposing new networks to fight
against vanishing gradients, such as LSTM (Hochreiter &
Schmidhuber, 1997) and GRU networks (Cho et al., 2014).
LSTMs have shown their success on both synthetic classification tasks, such as the “parity” problem and the “latching”
problem (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), and countless applications, including speech recognition and machine
translation. Despite its success, questions concerning the
ability of LSTM in handling long-term dependence arise.
For example, Cheng et al. (2016) pointed out that the update equation of LSTM is Markovian, which is consistent
with the system assumed in Bengio et al. (1994). Greaves1

Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science, The University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Hong
Kong, China. Correspondence to: Guodong Li <gdli@hku.hk>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Tunnell & Harchaoui (2019) utilized statistical tests and
concluded that LSTM cannot fully represent the long memory effect in the input, nor can it generate long memory
sequences from white noise inputs.
Does LSTM have long memory? It is difficult to judge if
long memory is assessed heuristically by the performance of
LSTM on certain tasks. However, long memory happens to
be a well-defined and long-existing terminology in statistics.
From a statistical perspective, our investigation yields an
affirmative reply. Our first contribution is to prove that a
recurrent network process with Markovian update dynamics
does not have long memory under mild conditions.
Nevertheless, the statistical definition of long memory is
neither applicable nor easily transferable to general neural
networks. The main obstacle is the existence of non i.i.d.
exogenous input to the network, violating a key assumption
in the study of stochastic processes. The long or short memory effect in the input confounds the memory property of
the output sequence. Thus, we propose a new definition for
the long memory network process, which aims to characterize the ability of a network process to extract long-term
dependence from the input.
We further explore the possible implications of our theory
in practice. Our analysis implies that we cannot assume that
information can be stably stored in the hidden states of a
recurrent network with Markovian updates. Subsequently,
providing the hidden states with more past information is a
natural strategy to avoid the vanishing gradient problem.
In terms of network design, we propose a new memory filter
component, which is controlled by a learnable memory parameter d. The filter uses d to deduce dynamic weightings
on historical observations of arbitrary lengths and feeds past
information to the hidden units. We incorporate this memory
filter structure into RNN and LSTM and introduce Memoryaugmented RNN (MRNN) and Memory-augmented LSTM
(MLSTM). By adding this memory filter, the modified models achieve the ability to approximate the fractional differencing effect, which is a type of long memory effect, and
retain the flexibility and expressiveness of neural networks.
The main contributions of this work are below:
• We provide theoretical conditions for recurrent net-

