Piecewise Linear Regression via a Difference of Convex Functions

Ali Siahkamari * 1 Aditya Gangrade * 2 Brian Kulis 1 Venkatesh Saligrama 1

Abstract
We present a new piecewise linear regression
methodology that utilizes fitting a difference of
convex functions (DC functions) to the data.
These are functions f that may be represented
as the difference φ1 − φ2 for a choice of convex functions φ1 , φ2 . The method proceeds by
estimating piecewise-liner convex functions, in a
manner similar to max-affine regression, whose
difference approximates the data. The choice
of the function is regularised by a new seminorm over the class of DC functions that controls the `∞ Lipschitz constant of the estimate.
The resulting methodology can be efficiently implemented via Quadratic programming even in
high dimensions, and is shown to have close to
minimax statistical risk. We empirically validate
the method, showing it to be practically implementable, and to have comparable performance
to existing regression/classification methods on
real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
The multivariate nonparametric regression problem is a fundamental statistical primitive, with a vast history and many
approaches. We adopt the following setup: given a dataset,
{(xi , yi )}i∈[n] , where xi ∈ Rd are predictors, assumed
drawn i.i.d. from a law PX , and yi are responses such that
yi = f (xi ) + εi , for a bounded, centered, independent
random noise εi , and bounded f , the goal is to recover an
estimate fˆ of f such that on new data, the squared error
E[(y − fˆ(x))2 ] is small.
The statistical challenge of the problem lies in the fact that
f is only weakly constrained - for instance, f may only be
known to be differentiable, or Lipschitz. In addition, the
*

1

Equal contribution Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Boston University 2 Division of Systems Engineering, Boston University. Correspondence to: Ali Siahkamari
<siaa@bu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

problem is algorithmically challenging in high-dimensions,
and many approaches to the univariate problem do not scale
well with the dimension d. For instance, piecewise linear
regression methods typically involve a prespecified grid,
and thus the number of grid points, or knots, grows exponentially with dimension. Similarly, methods like splines
typically require both stronger smoothness guarantees and
exponentially more parameters to fit with dimension in order
to avoid singularities in the estimate.
This paper is concerned with regression over the class of
functions that are differences of convex functions, i.e., DC
functions. These are functions f that can be represented
as f = φ1 − φ2 for a choice of two convex functions. DC
functions constitute a very rich class - for instance, they
are known to contain all C 2 functions. Such functions have
been applied in a variety of contexts including non-convex
optimization (Yuille & Rangarajan, 2002; Horst & Thoai,
1999), sparse signal recovery (Gasso et al., 2009), feature
selection (Le Thi et al., 2008), and reinforcement learning
(Piot et al., 2014).
The principal contribution of this paper is a method for
piecewise linear regression over the class of DC functions.
At the heart of the method is a representation of piecewise
linear DC functions via a set of linear constraints, in a
manner that generalises the representations used for maxaffine regression. The choice of the function is regularised
for smoothness by a new seminorm that controls the `∞ Lipschitz constant of the resulting function. The resulting
estimate is thus a piecewise linear function, represented as
the difference of two piecewise linear convex functions, that
are smooth in the sense of having bounded gradients.
The method enjoys two main advantages:
1. It is agnostic to any knowledge about the function, and
requires minimal parameter tuning.
2. It can be implemented efficiently, via quadratic programming, even in high dimensions. For n data points in Rd ,
the problems has 2n(2d + 1) + 1 decision variables, and
n2 linear constraints, and can be solved in the worst case in
O(d2 n5 ) time by interior-point methods. Furthermore the
algorithm does not need to specify partitions for piece-wise
linear parts and avoids ad-hoc generalizations of splines or
piece-wise linear methods to multi-dimensions.

