A Simpler Approach to Accelerated Stochastic Optimization: Iterative
Averaging Meets Optimism

Pooria Joulani * 1 Anant Raj * 2 András György 1 Csaba Szepesvári 1 3

Abstract

bly non-smooth) convex function. When φ = 0, and given
access to (noise-free) gradients of f , Nesterov’s accelerated gradient algorithms (Nesterov, 2018) achieve optimal
rates of convergence for Problem (1). Several recent papers,
summarized in Table 1, have attempted to obtain similarly
accelerated rates that improve upon the sub-optimal rates of
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) when the gradients of f
are corrupted by noise and/or when φ 6= 0.

Recently there have been several attempts to extend Nesterov’s accelerated algorithm to smooth
stochastic and variance-reduced optimization. In
this paper, we show that there is a simpler approach to acceleration: applying optimistic online
learning algorithms and querying the gradient oracle at the online average of the intermediate optimization iterates. In particular, we tighten a recent
result of Cutkosky (2019) to demonstrate theoretically that online iterate averaging results in a
reduced optimization gap, independently of the algorithm involved. We show that carefully combining this technique with existing generic optimistic
online learning algorithms yields the optimal accelerated rates for optimizing strongly-convex
and non-strongly-convex, possibly composite objectives, with deterministic as well as stochastic
first-order oracles. We further extend this idea to
variance-reduced optimization. Finally, we also
provide “universal” algorithms that achieve the
optimal rate for smooth and non-smooth composite objectives simultaneously without further tuning, generalizing the results of Kavis et al. (2019)
and solving a number of their open problems.

Despite the major effort to obtain these extensions, existing
results suffer from several limitations such as: (a) inhibiting
noise in the gradient (Allen-Zhu and Orecchia, 2017; Wang
and Abernethy, 2018); (b) potentially querying the gradient
oracle outside the constraint set (Levy et al., 2018; Cutkosky,
2019) (c) not providing optimal rates for strongly-convex
objectives (Cutkosky, 2019); (d) extra logarithmic terms
appearing in the error bounds (Levy et al., 2018; Cutkosky,
2019); (e) not handling proximal updates when φ 6= 0 (Levy
et al., 2018; Kavis et al., 2019; Cutkosky, 2019) or (f) relying
on prior knowledge of problem parameters (Tseng, 2008;
Beck and Teboulle, 2009; Hu et al., 2009; Xiao, 2010; Lan,
2012; Chen et al., 2012).

1. Introduction
Our goal in this paper is to obtain algorithms with optimal
convergence rates for the following problem:
find x? = argmin `(x) = f (x) + φ(x) ,

(1)

x∈X

where X is a convex constraint set in the d-dimensional
Euclidean space, f is convex and smooth, and φ is a (possi*

Equal contribution 1 DeepMind, London, UK 2 Max-Planck
Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany; work
done during an internship at Deepmind 3 University of Alberta,
Edmonton, AB, Canada. Correspondence to: Pooria Joulani
<pjoulani@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

In this paper, we demonstrate a simple direct approach to
deriving accelerated rates: following Cutkosky (2019), we
propose running an online learning algorithm and feeding
it with (possibly noisy) first-order information obtained at
the weighted average of its iterates. Then, building on the
recent simple, tight modular analysis techniques of generic
optimistic online learning algorithms (Joulani et al., 2017;
2020), we are able to alleviate all the aforementioned limitations, design new accelerated algorithms with straightforward convergence analyses, and solve a number of problems
left open in previous work.
1.1. Contributions and Related Work
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We provide a direct, simple template for deriving and
analyzing accelerated algorithms for stochastic and
deterministic convex optimization with composite objectives. We further extend the above framework to
variance-reduced stochastic non-strongly-convex optimization.

