Stochastic Frank-Wolfe for Constrained Finite-Sum Minimization
Geoffrey Négiar 1 Gideon Dresdner 2 Alicia Yi-Ting Tsai 1
Laurent El Ghaoui 1 3 Francesco Locatello 2 4 Robert M. Freund 5 Fabian Pedregosa 6

Abstract
We propose a novel Stochastic Frank-Wolfe (a.k.a.
conditional gradient) algorithm for constrained
smooth finite-sum minimization with a generalized linear prediction/structure. This class of problems includes empirical risk minimization with
sparse, low-rank, or other structured constraints.
The proposed method is simple to implement,
does not require step-size tuning, and has a constant per-iteration cost that is independent of the
dataset size. Furthermore, as a byproduct of the
method we obtain a stochastic estimator of the
Frank-Wolfe gap that can be used as a stopping
criterion. Depending on the setting, the proposed
method matches or improves on the best computational guarantees for Stochastic Frank-Wolfe algorithms. Benchmarks on several datasets highlight
different regimes in which the proposed method
exhibits a faster empirical convergence than related methods. Finally, we provide an implementation of all considered methods in an open-source
package.

1

Introduction

We consider constrained finite-sum optimization problems
of the form

minimize
w∈C

n

1X
fi x >
i w ,
n i=1

(OPT)

where C is a compact and convex set and X =
(x1 , · · · , xn )> ∈ Rn×d is a data matrix, with n sam1
Berkeley AI Research, University of California, Berkeley, CA,
USA 2 Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland 3 SumUp Analytics 4 Max-Planck Institute for Intelligent
Systems, Tübingen, Germany 5 MIT Sloan School of Management 6 Google Research. Correspondence to: Geoffrey Négiar
<geoffrey negiar@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Table 1. Worst-case convergence rates for the function suboptimality after t iterations, for a dataset with n samples. κ ≤ n and can
be much smaller than n for datasets of interest. κ is introduced in
Section 5.
R ELATED W ORK

C ONVEX

F RANK & W OLFE (1956)
M OKHTARI ET AL . (2018)
L U & F REUND (2018)
T HIS WORK

O (n/t)
√
O 1/ 3 t
O (n/t)
O (κ/t)

N ON -C ONVEX
√
O n/ t

7
7

→0

ples and d features. This template includes several problems of interest, such as constrained empirical risk minimization. The LASSO (Tibshirani, 1996) may be writ1 >
2
ten in this form, where fi (x>
i w) = 2 (xi w − yi ) and
C = {w : kwk1 ≤ λ} for some parameter λ. We focus on
the case where the fi s are differentiable with L-Lipschitz
derivative, and study the convex and non-convex cases.
The classical Frank-Wolfe (FW) or Conditional Gradient
algorithm (Frank & Wolfe, 1956; Levitin & Polyak, 1966;
Demyanov & Rubinov, 1967) is an algorithm for constrained optimization. Contrary to other projection-based
constrained optimization algorithms, such as Projected
Gradient Descent, it relies on a Linear Minimization Oracle
(LMO) over the constraint set C, rather than a Quadratic
Minimization Oracle (the projection subroutine). For
certain constraint sets such as the trace norm or most `p
balls, the LMO can be computed more efficiently than the
projection subroutine. Recently, the Frank-Wolfe algorithm
has garnered much attention in the machine learning
community where polytope constraints and sparsity are
of large interest, e.g. Jaggi (2013); Lacoste-Julien & Jaggi
(2015); Locatello et al. (2017).
In the unconstrained setting, stochastic variance-reduced
methods (Shalev-Shwartz & Zhang, 2013; Schmidt et al.,
2013; Hofmann et al., 2015) exhibit the same iteration complexity as full gradient (non-stochastic) methods, while
reaching much smaller per-iteration complexity, usually at
some (small) additional memory cost. This work takes a step
in the direction of designing such a method for Frank-Wolfe
type algorithms, which remains an important open problem.

