Batch Reinforcement Learning with Hyperparameter Gradients

Byung-Jun Lee * 1 Jongmin Lee * 1 Peter Vrancx 2 Dongho Kim 2 Kee-Eung Kim 2 3

Abstract
We consider the batch reinforcement learning
problem where the agent needs to learn only from
a fixed batch of data, without further interaction
with the environment. In such a scenario, we want
to prevent the optimized policy from deviating too
much from the data collection policy since the estimation becomes highly unstable otherwise due
to the off-policy nature of the problem. However,
imposing this requirement too strongly will result
in a policy that merely follows the data collection
policy. Unlike prior work where this trade-off
is controlled by hand-tuned hyperparameters, we
propose a novel batch reinforcement learning approach, batch optimization of policy and hyperparameter (BOPAH), that uses a gradient-based
optimization of the hyperparameter using held-out
data. We show that BOPAH outperforms other
batch reinforcement learning algorithms in tabular
and continuous control tasks, by finding a good
balance to the trade-off between adhering to the
data collection policy and pursuing the possible
policy improvement.

1. Introduction
In many real-world applications of reinforcement learning (RL), exploratory behavior can be very costly when
the agent interacts with the environment. For example, it
would be unreasonable to deploy an -greedy policy for
autonomous vehicles, industrial plants, and clinical treatments, let alone many others. One of the common and
straightforward practices in these scenarios is to build a simulator from collected data, train the agent with the simulated
environment by allowing to make as much exploration as
needed, and then deploy a fully optimized policy into the
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computing, KAIST, Daejeon,
South Korea 2 PROWLER.io 3 Graduate School of AI, KAIST,
Daejeon, South Korea. Correspondence to: Byung-Jun Lee
<bjlee@ai.kaist.ac.kr>, Jongmin Lee <jmlee@ai.kaist.ac.kr>,
Kee-Eung Kim <kekim@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

real environment. However, this approach requires a lot
of human effort including domain expertise in building a
faithful simulator that warrants a successful performance
in the real environment. This paper concerns with such a
scenario, often referred to as batch RL: optimize policy only
from a fixed batch of data, without further interaction with
the environment or a high-fidelity simulator.
Since the policy being optimized would be different from
the policy used for data collection, batch RL algorithms
are mostly founded on techniques in off-policy RL algorithms. They are designed to learn when the behavior policy
(policy used to collect experience) differs from the estimation policy (policy we aim to learn). Recent off-policy
policy optimization algorithms, e.g. (Lillicrap et al., 2016;
Munos et al., 2016; Haarnoja et al., 2018), have shown to
achieve remarkable sample efficiency in standard benchmark tasks. However, they still assume continuous interaction with the environment with the behavior policy being
improved closely together with the estimation policy. On the
other hand, the batch RL setting assumes the behavior policy
being fixed throughout the policy optimization. This difference is considered a fundamental challenge for batch RL: as
we optimize the estimation policy, it would differ more from
the behavior policy, leading to severe covariate shift in the
batch data. As the policy optimization frequently relies on
function approximators trained on the data distributed by the
behavior policy, the optimization could actually get worse
due to the inevitable generalization error of the function
approximators. Thus the challenge is about estimating how
much we can trust the policy evaluation and safely optimize
the policy, rather than about improving the sample efficiency
as in standard off-policy RL scenarios, as exemplified by
recent work on batch RL (Laroche et al., 2019; Fujimoto
et al., 2019).
In this paper, we introduce a novel batch RL framework that
uses the validation data to estimate the reliability of policy
updates. Model selection and hyperparameter tuning with a
held-out dataset is a standard practice in supervised learning,
but has not been adapted to RL, to the best of our knowledge.
The contribution of this paper is two-fold: first, we present
a generalized KL-regularized RL framework that effectively
constrains the distance of the estimation policy from the behavior policy differently per state and stabilizes the training
process. Second, we present BOPAH (batch optimization of

