Safe Reinforcement Learning in Constrained Markov Decision Processes

Akifumi Wachi 1 Yanan Sui 2

Abstract
Safe reinforcement learning has been a promising
approach for optimizing the policy of an agent
that operates in safety-critical applications. In
this paper, we propose an algorithm, SNO-MDP,
that explores and optimizes Markov decision processes under unknown safety constraints. Specifically, we take a stepwise approach for optimizing
safety and cumulative reward. In our method, the
agent first learns safety constraints by expanding
the safe region, and then optimizes the cumulative
reward in the certified safe region. We provide theoretical guarantees on both the satisfaction of the
safety constraint and the near-optimality of the cumulative reward under proper regularity assumptions. In our experiments, we demonstrate the
effectiveness of SNO-MDP through two experiments: one uses a synthetic data in a new, openlyavailable environment named GP-S AFETY-G YM,
and the other simulates Mars surface exploration
by using real observation data.

1. Introduction
In many real applications, environmental hazards are first
detected in situ. For example, a planetary rover exploring
Mars does not obtain high-resolution images at the time of
its launch. In usual cases, after landing on Mars, the rover
takes close-up images or observes terrain data. Leveraging the acquired data, ground operators identify whether
each position is safe. Hence, for fully automated operation,
an agent must autonomously explore the environment and
guarantee safety.
In most cases, however, guaranteeing safety (i.e., surviving) is not the primary objective. The optimal policy for
ensuring safety is often extremely conservative (e.g., stay at
the current position). Even though avoiding hazards is an
1

IBM Research AI, Tokyo, Japan 2 Tsinghua University,
Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Akifumi Wachi <akifumi.wachi@ibm.com>, Yanan Sui <ysui@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

essential requirement, the primary objective is nonetheless
to obtain rewards (e.g., scientific gain).
As a framework to solve this problem, safe reinforcement
learning (safe RL, Garcıa & Fernández (2015)) has recently
been noticed by the research community. The objective of
safe RL is to maximize the cumulative reward while guaranteeing or encouraging safety. Especially in problem settings
in which the reward and safety functions are unknown a
priori, however, a great deal of previous work (e.g., Wachi
et al. (2018)) theoretically guarantees the satisfaction of
the safety constraint, but the acquired policy is not necessarily near-optimal in terms of the cumulative reward. In
this paper, we propose a safe RL algorithm that guarantees
a near-optimal cumulative reward while guaranteeing the
satisfaction of the safety constraint as well.

Related work. Conventional reinforcement learning literature has been agnostic with respect to safety, while pursuing efficiency and optimality of the cumulative reward.
Representatives of such work are probably approximately
correct Markov decision process (PAC-MDP) algorithms
(Brafman & Tennenholtz, 2002; Kearns & Singh, 2002;
Strehl et al., 2006). Algorithms with the PAC-MDP property enable an agent to learn a near-optimal behavior with
a polynomial number of samples. In addition, Kolter &
Ng (2009) and Araya et al. (2012) proposed algorithms to
obtain an -close solution to the Bayesian optimal policy.
As the research community tries to apply RL algorithms
to real-world systems, however, safety issues have been
highlighted. RL algorithms inherently require an agent to
explore unknown state-action pairs, and algorithms that are
agnostic with respect to safety may execute unsafe actions
without deliberateness. Hence, it is important to develop
algorithms that guarantee safety even during training, at
least with high probability.
A notable approach is safe model-based RL (Berkenkamp
et al., 2017; Fisac et al., 2018). In this domain, safety is associated with a state constraint; thus, the resulting algorithm
is well suited for such contexts as a drone learning how to
hover. The parameters of a drone are not perfectly known
a priori, but we have prior knowledge on what states are
unsafe (e.g., a pitch angle of more than 50 degrees is unsafe).
In the field of control theory, constrained model predictive

