Supervised Quantile Normalization for Low-rank Matrix Approximation

Marco Cuturi 1 Olivier Teboul 1 Jonathan Niles-Weed 2 Jean-Philippe Vert 1

Abstract
Low rank matrix factorization is a fundamental
building block in machine learning, used for instance to summarize gene expression profile data
or word-document counts. To be robust to outliers
and differences in scale across features, a matrix
factorization step is usually preceded by ad-hoc
feature normalization steps, such as tf-idf scaling or data whitening. We propose in this work to
learn these normalization operators jointly with
the factorization itself. More precisely, given a
d ˆ n matrix X of d features measured on n individuals, we propose to learn the parameters of
quantile normalization operators that can operate
row-wise on the values of X and/or of its factorization U V to improve the quality of the low-rank
representation of X itself. This optimization is
facilitated by the introduction of a new differentiable quantile normalization operator built using
optimal transport, providing new results on top
of existing work by (Cuturi et al. 2019). We
demonstrate the applicability of these techniques
on synthetic and genomics datasets.

1. Introduction
The vast majority of machine learning problems start with
a matrix X P Rdˆn of measurements that keeps track of
d features measured on n individuals. An important way
to summarize the information contained in X is to find a
low-rank matrix factorization, namely two matrices U and
V of sizes d ˆ k and k ˆ n such that U V « X, as quantified
in a relevant matrix norm. While this problem is known to
boil down to the truncated singular value decomposition of
X when the norm is Euclidean, the two most recent decades
have succeeded in producing extremely useful variations
on that problem, handling for instance the cases in which
the entries of X are non-negative (Lee & Seung, 1999; Hof1
Google Research, Brain Team 2 New York University. Correspondence to: Marco Cuturi <cuturi@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

mann, 2001; Févotte & Idier, 2011), binary (Slawski et al.,
2013) or even describe rank values (Le Van et al., 2015);
considering various forms of sparse priors on the factors
themselves (d’Aspremont et al., 2005; Mairal et al., 2010; Jenatton et al., 2011; Witten et al., 2009); and extending these
problems to cases where the matrices are incomplete (Koren
et al., 2009; Candès & Recht, 2009).
Low Rank Approximations. Let Rdˆn
be the set of d ˆ n
k
matrices of rank k. Choosing a divergence ∆ : X ˆ X Ñ R
defined on a subset of matrices X Ă Rdˆn , and Zk Ă
X X Rdˆn
, one can introduce the operator
k
Πk pXq :“ argmin ∆pX, Zq.
ZPZk

While a very large literature has focused on considering various divergences ∆, such as Frobenius, KL (Lee & Seung,
1999), Beta-divergences (Févotte & Idier, 2011) or Wasserstein (Rolet et al., 2016); and sets Zk (sparse, non-negative),
an important practical limitation of these approaches is that
they perform well if the values described in X have a distribution that is somewhat shared across features: Because
the discrepancy ∆ is usually additive, the loss ∆ can be impacted by differences in ranges. This problem is addressed
by “massaging” the entries of X first, notably through adhoc normalization schemes carried out feature-by-feature,
such as taking logarithms for gene expression data (Risso
et al., 2018) or using tf-idf schemes for text data, before
feeding this modified matrix X̃ to the projector Πk .
Increasing Feature Rescaling. We propose in this paper to
automatically learn such a renormalization, rather than leave
to the user the arduous choice of selecting a suboptimal
method. We also claim that we can gain interpretability
by then finding out which features seem to be inflated /
deflated to improve factorization. Our approach allows for
an increasing map, defined for each of the d features, to be
applied to all n values of the row of a matrix, either prior to
and/or after the factorization step. The benefit of increasing
maps is that they preserve the relative order of samples,
which is an important point for interpretation. Denoting by
T the set of increasing maps from R to R, we consider a
family of d such maps T “ pT1 , . . . , Td q P T d , to which
we associate (using the same symbol) an operator applying
each map Ti to the corresponding row of a d ˆ n matrix W :
TpW q “ rTi pWij qsij P Rdˆn .

