Estimating Model Uncertainty of Neural Networks
in Sparse Information Form

Jongseok Lee 1 Matthias Humt 1 Jianxiang Feng 1 2 Rudolph Triebel 1 2

Abstract
We present a sparse representation of model uncertainty for Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) where
the parameter posterior is approximated with an
inverse formulation of the Multivariate Normal
Distribution (MND), also known as the information form. The key insight of our work is that
the information matrix, i.e. the inverse of the covariance matrix tends to be sparse in its spectrum.
Therefore, dimensionality reduction techniques
such as low rank approximations (LRA) can be
effectively exploited. To achieve this, we develop
a novel sparsification algorithm and derive a costeffective analytical sampler. As a result, we show
that the information form can be scalably applied
to represent model uncertainty in DNNs. Our
exhaustive theoretical analysis and empirical evaluations on various benchmarks show the competitiveness of our approach over the current methods.

1. Introduction
Whenever machine learning methods are used for safetycritical applications such as autonomous driving, it is crucial
to provide a precise estimation of the failure probability
of the learned predictor. Therefore, most of the current
learning approaches return distributions rather than single,
most-likely predictions. However, in case of DNNs, this
true failure probability tends to be severely underestimated,
leading to overconfident predictions (Guo et al., 2017). The
main reason for this is that DNNs are typically trained with a
principle of maximum likelihood, neglecting their epistemic
or model uncertainty with the point estimates of parameters.
Imposing Gaussians on model uncertainty is arguably the
most popular choice as Gaussians are for approximate in1 Institute of Robotics and Mechatronics, German Aerospace
Center (DLR), Wessling, Germany 2 Computer Vision Group, Tech-

nical University of Munich (TU Munich), Garching, Germany.
Correspondence to: Jongseok Lee <jongseok.lee@dlr.de>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

ference what linear maps are for algebra. For example,
once the posterior distribution is inferred, the majority of
computations can be performed using the well known tools
of linear algebra. For DNNs however, the space complexity of using MNDs is intractable as the covariance matrix
scales quadratic to the number of parameters. Consequently,
approximate inference on DNNs posterior often neglects
the parameter correlations (Wu et al., 2019; Kingma et al.,
2015; Graves, 2011; Herandez-Lobato & Adams, 2015) or
simplifies the covariance matrix into Kronecker products of
two smaller matrices (Sun et al., 2017; Louizos & Welling,
2016; Zhang et al., 2018; Park et al., 2019) regardless of the
inference principles such as variational inference.
Instead, inspired by Thrun et al. (2004), we advocate to
explore the dual and inverse formulation of MNDs:
(
)
1
T −1
x̄ ∝ exp − ( x̄ − µ) Σ ( x̄ − µ)
2
(
)
1 T −1
T −1
= exp − x̄ Σ x̄ + µ Σ x̄
2
(
)
1 T
IV
= exp − x̄ I x̄ + µ x̄ or x̄ ∼ N −1 (µIV , I)
2
where the Gaussian random variable x̄ is fully parameterized
by the information vector µIV and matrix I as opposed to
mean µ and covariance matrix Σ. Our major findings are that
this so-called information form has important ramifications
on developing scalable Bayesian Neural Networks. Firstly,
we point out that the approximate inference for this formulation can be simplified to scalable Laplace Approximation
(LA) (MacKay, 1992b; Ritter et al., 2018a), in which we
improve the state-of-the-art Kronecker factored approximations of the information matrix (George et al., 2018) by
correcting the diagonal variance in parameter space.
More importantly, DNNs offer a natural spectral sparsity
in the information matrix (Sagun et al., 2018) as oppose to
the covariance matrix. Intuitively, the information content
of each parameters become weaker with increasing number of parameters and thus, sparse representations can be
effectively exploited. To do so, we propose a novel lowrank representation of the given Kronecker factorization
and devise a spectral sparsification algorithm that can pre-

