On the Global Optimality of Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning:
Reinforcement Learning and Supervised Learning

Lingxiao Wang 1 Qi Cai 1 Zhuoyan Yang 2 Zhaoran Wang 1

Abstract
Model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) formulates meta-learning as a bilevel optimization problem, where the inner level solves each subtask
based on a shared prior, while the outer level
searches for the optimal shared prior by optimizing its aggregated performance over all the
subtasks. Despite its empirical success, MAML
remains less understood in theory, especially in
terms of its global optimality, due to the nonconvexity of the meta-objective (the outer-level objective). To bridge such a gap between theory and
practice, we characterize the optimality gap of
the stationary points attained by MAML for both
reinforcement learning and supervised learning,
where the inner-level and outer-level problems
are solved via first-order optimization methods.
In particular, our characterization connects the
optimality gap of such stationary points with (i)
the functional geometry of inner-level objectives
and (ii) the representation power of function approximators, including linear models and neural
networks. To the best of our knowledge, our analysis establishes the global optimality of MAML
with nonconvex meta-objectives for the first time.
1

1. Introduction
Meta-learning aims to find a prior that efficiently adapts to
a new subtask based on past subtasks. One of the most popular meta-learning methods, namely model-agnostic metalearning (MAML) (Finn et al., 2017a), is based on bilevel op1

Department of Industrial Engineering and Management
Sciences, Northwestern University, USA 2 Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton University, USA. Correspondence to: Lingxiao Wang <lingxiaowang2022@u.northwestern.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
1
See https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.13182 for the
full version.

timization, where the inner level solves each subtask based
on a shared prior, while the outer level optimizes the aggregated performance of the shared prior over all the subtasks.
In particular, MAML associates the solution to each subtask
with the shared prior through one step of gradient descent
based on the subtask data. Due to its model-agnostic property, MAML is widely adopted in reinforcement learning
(Finn et al., 2017a;b; Xu et al., 2018; Nagabandi et al., 2018;
Gupta et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2018; Mendonca et al., 2019)
and supervised learning (Finn et al., 2017a; Li et al., 2017;
Finn et al., 2018; Rakelly et al., 2018; Yoon et al., 2018).
Despite its popularity in empirical studies, MAML is
scarcely explored theoretically. In terms of the global optimality of MAML, (Finn et al., 2019) show that the metaobjective is strongly convex assuming that the inner-level
objective is strongly convex (in its finite-dimensional parameter). However, such an assumption fails to hold for neural
function approximators, which leads to a gap between theory
and practice. For nonconvex meta-objectives, (Fallah et al.,
2019) characterize the convergence of MAML to a stationary point under certain regularity conditions. Meanwhile,
(Rajeswaran et al., 2019) propose a variant of MAML that
utilizes implicit gradients, which is also guaranteed to converge to a stationary point. However, the global optimality
of such stationary points remains unclear. On the other hand,
(Pentina & Lampert, 2014; Amit & Meir, 2017) establish
PAC-Bayes bounds for the generalization error of two variants of MAML. However, such generalization guarantees
only apply to the global optima of the two meta-objectives
rather than their stationary points.
In this work, we characterize the global optimality of the stationary points attained by MAML for both reinforcement
learning (RL) and supervised learning (SL). For meta-RL,
we study a variant of MAML, which associates the solution
to each subtask with the shared prior, namely πθ , through
one step of proximal policy optimization (PPO) (Schulman
et al., 2015; 2017) in the inner level of optimization. In
the outer level of optimization, we maximize the expected
total reward associated with the shared prior aggregated
over all the subtasks. We prove that the -stationary point
attained by such an algorithm is (approximately) globally
optimal given that the function approximator has sufficient

