Semismooth Newton Algorithm for Efficient Projections onto `1,∞ -norm Ball

Dejun Chu 1 Changshui Zhang 1 Shiliang Sun 2 Qing Tao 3

Abstract
The structured sparsity-inducing `1,∞ -norm, as
a generalization of the classical `1 -norm, plays
an important role in jointly sparse models which
select or remove simultaneously all the variables
forming a group. However, its resulting problem is more difficult to solve than the conventional `1 -norm constrained problem. In this paper,
we propose an efficient algorithm for Euclidean
projection onto `1,∞ -norm ball. We tackle the
projection problem via semismooth Newton algorithm to solve the system of semismooth equations. Meanwhile, exploiting the structure of the
Jacobian matrix via LU decomposition yields an
equivalent algorithm which is proved to terminate after a finite number of iterations. Empirical
studies demonstrate that our proposed algorithm
outperforms the existing state-of-the-art solver
and is promising for the optimization of learning
problems with the `1,∞ -norm ball constraint.

1. Introduction
Sparse statistical model (Tibshirani et al., 2015) seeks only
a small amount of non-zero parameters to describe data,
which not only makes the prediction more interpretable, but
also leads to significant computational advantages. It has
emerged as a powerful tool in machine learning, signal processing and statistics. Typically sparse learning model can
be cast as the following regularized loss function minimiza1

Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Tsinghua University
(THUAI), State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist), Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, P. R. China 2 School of Computer
Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, P. R. China 3 Army Academy of Artillery and Air Defense,
Hefei, P. R. China. Correspondence to: Changshui Zhang
<zcs@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

tion problem
min L(W ) + λR(W )
W

(1)

where L(W ) is known as the surrogate convex loss function,
λ > 0 is an appropriate regularization parameter and R(W )
represents the sparsity-inducing regularization (Bach et al.,
2012). By Lagrangian duality theory (Bertsekas et al., 2003),
problem (1) is equivalent under mild conditions to the following constrained optimization problem
min L(W ),
W

s.t. R(W ) ≤ C

(2)

where C is a user-specified parameter. It is well known
that the regularization parameter λ in the problem (1) is
usually estimated via an external procedure such as crossvalidation. In contrast, it is easier to find the parameter C in
the constrained problem (2) from the fact that C has a much
more intuitive meaning than λ in many situations. One
straightforward solution to the problem (2) is the projected
gradient algorithm (PGA). Therefore an efficient projection
step will play a crucial role in the whole procedure since
every iteration of PGA will call for a projection. However,
in many cases developing an efficient projection algorithm
comparable with the computational cost of each gradient
update in the PGA is still a challenge. In this paper, we
propose an efficient projection algorithm that converges in
a finite number of iterations for the problem (2) when the
constraint is the `1,∞ -norm ball.
As a general extension of `1 -norm, `1,q -norms with q ∈
(1, ∞] promote group sparsity, i.e., the solution is not only
sparse as that to the classical `1 -norm, but also the prespecified group variables can be selected or removed simultaneously. It has been shown (Turlach et al., 2005; Yuan &
Lin, 2006; Roth & Fischer, 2008; Huang et al., 2010) that
`1,q -norms using group structure can yield more reliable
estimation than the standard `1 -norm when the data have
underlying group structure, rather than just sparsity. In practice, the settings of q = 2 and q = ∞ are the most popular
choices. While `1,2 -norm has been studied in detail (Yuan
& Lin, 2006; Roth & Fischer, 2008), which will induce
the group Lasso model if combined with the least-squares
loss function, we focus on its counterpart `1,∞ -norm in this
paper.

