Performative Prediction
Juan C. Perdomo * 1 Tijana Zrnic * 1 Celestine Mendler-D ¨unner 1 Moritz Hardt 1 2

Abstract
When predictions support decisions they may inﬂuence the outcome they aim to predict. We
call such predictions performative; the prediction
inﬂuences the target. Performativity is a wellstudied phenomenon in policy-making that has so
far been neglected in supervised learning. When
ignored, performativity surfaces as undesirable
distribution shift, routinely addressed with retraining. We develop a risk minimization framework
for performative prediction bringing together concepts from statistics, game theory, and causality.
A conceptual novelty is an equilibrium notion
we call performative stability. Performative stability implies that the predictions are calibrated
not against past outcomes, but against the future
outcomes that manifest from acting on the prediction. Our main results are necessary and sufﬁcient
conditions for the convergence of retraining to
a performatively stable point of nearly minimal
loss. In full generality, performative prediction
strictly subsumes the setting known as strategic
classiﬁcation. We thus also give the ﬁrst sufﬁcient
conditions for retraining to overcome strategic
feedback effects.

1. Introduction
Supervised learning excels at pattern recognition. When
used to support consequential decisions, however, predictive
models can trigger actions that inﬂuence the outcome they
aim to predict. We call such predictions performative; the
prediction causes a change in the distribution of the target.
Consider a simpliﬁed example of predicting credit default
risk. A bank might estimate that a loan applicant has an
elevated risk of default, and will act on it by assigning a
*
Equal contribution 1 University of California, Berkeley 2 MH
is a paid consultant for Twitter. Correspondence to: Juan
C. Perdomo <jcperdomo@berkeley.edu>, Tijana Zrnic <tijana.zrnic@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

high interest rate. In a self-fulﬁlling prophecy, the high
interest rate further increases the customer’s default risk.
Put differently, the bank’s predictive model is not calibrated
to the outcomes that manifest from acting on the model.
Once recognized, performativity turns out to be ubiquitous.
Trafﬁc predictions inﬂuence trafﬁc patterns, crime location
prediction inﬂuences police allocations that may deter crime,
recommendations shape preferences and thus consumption,
stock price prediction determines trading activity and hence
prices. When ignored, performativity can surface as a form
of distribution shift. As the decision-maker acts according to a predictive model, the distribution over data points
appears to change over time. In practice, the response to
such distribution shifts is to frequently retrain the predictive
model as more data becomes available. Retraining is often
considered an undesired—yet necessary—cat and mouse
game of chasing a moving target.
What would be desirable from the perspective of the decision maker is a certain equilibrium where the model is
optimal for the distribution it induces. Such equilibria coincide with the stable points of retraining, that is, models
invariant under retraining. Performativity therefore suggests
a different perspective on retraining, exposing it as a natural
equilibrating dynamic rather than a nuisance.
This raises fundamental questions. When do such stable
points exist? How can we efﬁciently ﬁnd them? Under what
conditions does retraining converge? When do stable points
also have good predictive performance? In this work, we
formalize performative prediction, tying together conceptual
elements from statistical decision theory, causal reasoning,
and game theory. We then resolve some of the fundamental
questions that performativity raises.
1.1. Our Contributions
We put performativity at the center of a decision-theoretic
framework that extends the classical statistical theory underlying risk minimization. The goal of risk minimization is to
ﬁnd a decision rule, speciﬁed by model parameters θ, that
performs well on a ﬁxed joint distribution D over covariates X and an outcome variable Y . Whenever predictions
are performative, the choice of predictive model affects the
observed distribution over instances Z = (X, Y ). We formalize this intuitive notion by introducing a map D(·) from

