Interpolation between Residual and Non-Residual Networks

Zonghan Yang 1 Yang Liu 1 Chenglong Bao 2 Zuoqiang Shi 3

Abstract
Although ordinary differential equations (ODEs)
provide insights for designing network architectures, its relationship with the non-residual convolutional neural networks (CNNs) is still unclear.
In this paper, we present a novel ODE model by
adding a damping term. It can be shown that the
proposed model can recover both a ResNet and
a CNN by adjusting an interpolation coefficient.
Therefore, the damped ODE model provides a
unified framework for the interpretation of residual and non-residual networks. The Lyapunov
analysis reveals better stability of the proposed
model, and thus yields robustness improvement of
the learned networks. Experiments on a number
of image classification benchmarks show that the
proposed model substantially improves the accuracy of ResNet and ResNeXt over the perturbed
inputs from both stochastic noise and adversarial attack methods. Moreover, the loss landscape
analysis demonstrates the improved robustness of
our method along the attack direction.

1. Introduction
Although deep learning has achieved remarkable success
in many machine learning tasks, the theory behind it has
still remained elusive. In recent years, developing new theories for deep learning has attracted increasing research
interests. One important direction is to connect deep neural networks (DNNs) with differential equations (E, 2017)
which have been largely explored in mathematics. This line
of research mainly contains three perspectives: solving high
dimensional differential equations with the help of DNNs
due to its high expressive power (Han et al., 2018), discov1
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Beijing National Research
Center for Information Science and Technology, Department of
Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University. 2 Yau
Mathematical Sciences Center, Tsinghua University. 3 Department
of Mathematical Sciences, Tsinghua University. Correspondence
to: Chenglong Bao <clbao@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

ering a differential equation that identifies the rule of the
observed data based on the standard block of existing DNNs
(Chen et al., 2018), and designing new architectures based
on the numerical schemes of differential equations (Haber
& Ruthotto, 2017; Lu et al., 2018; Zhu et al., 2018; Chang
et al., 2018; Tao et al., 2018; Lu et al., 2019).
While each attempt in the above directions has strengthened
the theoretical understanding of deep learning, there still
remain many open questions. Among them, one important question is what is the relationship between differential
equations and non-residual convolutional neural networks.
Most prior studies have focused on associating residual
networks (ResNets) (He et al., 2016) with differential equations (Lu et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2018), not only because
ResNets are relatively easy to optimize and achieve better
classification accuracy than CNNs, but also because the
skipping connections among layers can be easily induced by
the discretization of difference operators in differential equations. However, residual neural networks only account for a
small fraction of the entire neural network family and have
their own limitations. For example, Su et al. (2018) indicate
that ResNets are more sensitive to the perturbation of the
inputs and the shallow CNNs. As a result, it is important to
move a further step to investigate the relationship between
differential equations and non-residual convolutional neural
networks.
In this paper, we present a new ordinary differential equation
(ODE) that interpolates non-residual and residual CNNs.
The ODE is controlled by an interpolation parameter λ ranging from 0 to ∞. It is equivalent to a residual network
when λ is 0. On the contrary, the ODE amounts to a nonresidual network when λ approaches to ∞. Hence, our work
provides a unified framework for understanding both nonresidual and residual neural networks from the perspective
of ODE. The interpolation is able to improve over both nonresidual and residual networks. Compared with non-residual
networks, our ODE is much easier to optimize, especially
for deep architectures. Compared with residual networks,
we use the Lyapunov analysis to show that the interpolation
results in improved robustness. To achieve the interpolation,
a key difference of our work from existing methods is to discretize integral operators instead of difference operators to
obtain neural networks. Experiments on image classification
benchmarks show that our approach substantially improves

