The Complexity of Finding Stationary Points
with Stochastic Gradient Descent
Yoel Drori * 1 Ohad Shamir * 1 2

Abstract
We study the iteration complexity of stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) for minimizing the gradient norm of smooth, possibly nonconvex functions. We provide several results, implying that
the classical O(−4 ) upper bound (for making
the average gradient norm less than ) cannot be
improved upon, unless a combination of additional assumptions is made. Notably, this holds
even if we limit ourselves to convex quadratic
functions. We also show that for nonconvex
functions, the feasibility of minimizing gradients
with SGD is surprisingly sensitive to the choice
of optimality criteria.

1. Introduction
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is today one of the main
workhorses for solving large-scale supervised learning and
optimization problems. Much of its popularity is due to
its extreme simplicity: Given a function f and an initialization point x, we perform iterations of the form xt+1 =
xt − ηt gt , where ηt > 0 is a step-size parameter and gt is
a stochastic vector which satisfies E[gt |xt ] = ∇f (xt ). For
example, in the context of machine learning, f (x) might
be the expected loss of some predictor parameterized by x
(over some underlying data distribution) and gt is the gradient of the loss w.r.t. a single data sample. For convex problems, the convergence rate of SGD to a global minimum
of f has been very well studied (for example, (Kushner
& Yin, 2003; Nemirovski et al., 2009; Moulines & Bach,
2011; Bertsekas, 2011; Rakhlin et al., 2012; Bottou et al.,
2018)), however, for nonconvex problems, convergence to
a global minimum cannot in general be guaranteed. A reasonable substitute is to study the convergence to local minima, or at the very least, to stationary points. This can also
be quantified as an optimization problem where the goal
1

Google Research 2 Weizmann Institute of Science. Correspondence to: Yoel Drori <dyoel@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

is not to minimize f (x) over x, but rather k∇f (x)k. This
question of finding stationary points has gained more attention in recent years, with the rise of deep learning and other
large-scale nonconvex optimization methods.
Compared to optimizing function values, the convergence
of SGD in terms of minimizing the gradient norm is relatively less well-understood. A folklore result (see e.g.,
(Ghadimi & Lan, 2013), which we repeat in Appendix B
for completeness, as well as (Allen-Zhu, 2018)) states that
for smooth (Lipschitz gradient) functions, O(−4 ) iterationsP
are sufficient to make the average expected gradient
T
E[ T1 t=1 k∇f (xt )k] less than , and it was widely conjectured that this is the best complexity achievable with
SGD. However, this bound was recently improved in Fang
et al. (Fang et al., 2019), which showed a complexity bound
of O(−3.5 ) for SGD, under the following additional assumptions/algorithmic modifications:
1. (Complex) aggregation. Rather than considering the
average or minimal gradient norm of the iterates, the
algorithm considers the norm of a certain adaptive average of a suffix of the iterates (those which do not
deviate too much from the final iterate).
2. Lipschitz Hessian. The function is twice differentiable, with a Lipschitz Hessian as well as a Lipschitz
gradient.
3. “Dispersive” noise. The stochastic noise satisfies a
“dispersive” property, which intuitively implies that it
is well-spread (it is satisfied, for example, for Gaussian or uniform noise in some ball).
4. Bounded dimension. The dimension is bounded, in
the sense that there is an explicit logarithmic dependence on it in the iteration complexity bound (in contrast, the folklore O(−4 ) result is dimension-free).
The result of Fang et al. is even stronger, as it shows convergence to a second-order stationary point (where the Hessian is nearly positive definite), however, this will not be
our focus here. Note that in this setting it is known that
some dimension dependence is difficult to avoid (see (Simchowitz et al., 2017))

