Class-Weighted Classification: Trade-offs and Robust Approaches

Ziyu Xu 1 Chen Dan 2 Justin Khim 1 Pradeep Ravikumar 1

Abstract
We address imbalanced classification, the problem in which a label may have low marginal
probability relative to other labels, by weighting
losses according to the correct class. First, we
examine the convergence rates of the expected
excess weighted risk of plug-in classifiers where
the weighting for the plug-in classifier and the
risk may be different. This leads to irreducible
errors that do not converge to the weighted Bayes
risk, which motivates our consideration of robust
risks. We define a robust risk that minimizes risk
over a set of weightings, show excess risk bounds
for this problem, and demonstrate that particular
choices of the weighting set leads to a special instance of conditional value at risk (CVaR) from
stochastic programming, which we call label conditional value at risk (LCVaR). Additionally, we
generalize this weighting to derive a new robust
risk problem that we call label heterogeneous conditional value at risk (LHCVaR). Finally, we empirically demonstrate the efficacy of LCVaR and
LHCVaR on improving class conditional risks.

1. Introduction
Classification is a fundamental problem in statistics and
machine learning, including scientific problems such as
cancer diagnosis and satellite image processing as well as
engineering applications such as credit card fraud detection,
handwritten digit recognition, and text processing (Khan
et al., 2001; Lee et al., 2004), but modern applications have
brought new challenges. In online retailing, websites such as
Amazon have hundreds of thousands or millions of products
to taxonomize (Lin et al., 2018). In text data, the distribution of words in documents has been observed to follow a
power law in that there are many labels with few instances
1
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pennsylvania, United States 2 Computer Science Department,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pennsylvania, United States. Correspondence to: Ziyu Xu <ziyux@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

(Zipf, 1936; Feldman, 2019). Similarly, image data also a
long tail of many classes with few examples (Salakhutdinov
et al., 2011; Zhu et al., 2014). In such settings, the classes
with smaller probabilities are generally classified incorrectly
more often, and this is undesirable when the smaller classes
are important, such as rare forms of cancer, fraudulent credit
card transactions, and expensive online purchases. Thus, we
need modern classification methods that work well when
there are a large number of classes and when the class-wise
probabilities are imbalanced.
When faced with such class imbalance a popular approach
in practice is to choose a metric other than zero-one accuracy, such as precision, recall, Fβ -measure (Van Rijsbergen,
1974, 1979), which explicitly take class conditional risks
into account, and train classifiers to optimize this metric.
A difficulty with this approach however is that the right
metric for imbalanced classification is often not clear. A related class of approaches keep the zero-one accuracy metric
but modifies the samples instead. The popular algorithm
SMOTE (Chawla et al., 2002) performs a type of data augmentation for a minority class, i.e., a class with lower probability, and sub-samples the large classes. This has led to
variants with different forms of data augmentation (Zhou
& Liu, 2006; Mariani et al., 2018), but from a theoretical
perspective, these methods remain poorly understood.
A much simpler approach, which is also related to the approaches above, is class-weighting, in which different costs
are incurred for mis-classifying samples of different labels.
Practically, this is a natural approach because it is often
possible to assign different costs to different classes. For
example, the average fraudulent credit card transaction may
cost hundreds of dollars, or in online retailing, failing to
show a customer the correct item causes the company to lose
out on the profit of selling that item. Thus, a good classifier
should be fairly sensitive to possibly fraudulent transactions,
and online retailers should prioritize displaying high-profit
products. As a result, class-weighting has been studied in
a variety of settings, including modifying black-box classifiers, SVMs, and neural networks (Domingos, 1999; Lin
et al., 2002; Scott, 2012; Zhou & Liu, 2006). Additionally,
class-weighting has been observed to be useful for estimating class probabilities, since class-weighting amounts to
adjusting decision thresholds (Wang et al., 2008; Wu et al.,
2010; Wang et al., 2019).

