Constant Curvature Graph Convolutional Networks

Gregor Bachmann * 1 Gary Bécigneul * 1 Octavian-Eugen Ganea 2

Abstract
Interest has been rising lately towards methods
representing data in non-Euclidean spaces, e.g.
hyperbolic or spherical, that provide specific inductive biases useful for certain real-world data
properties, e.g. scale-free, hierarchical or cyclical. However, the popular graph neural networks
are currently limited in modeling data only via
Euclidean geometry and associated vector space
operations. Here, we bridge this gap by proposing mathematically grounded generalizations of
graph convolutional networks (GCN) to (products of) constant curvature spaces. We do this
by i) introducing a unified formalism permitting
a differentiable interpolation between all geometries of constant curvature, ii) leveraging gyrobarycentric coordinates that generalize the classic
Euclidean concept of the center of mass. Our
class of models smoothly recover their Euclidean
counterparts when the curvature goes to zero from
either side. Empirically, we outperform Euclidean
GCNs in the tasks of node classification and distortion minimization for symbolic data exhibiting
non-Euclidean behavior, according to their discrete curvature.

1. Introduction
Graph Convolutional Networks. The success of convolutional networks and deep learning for image data has
inspired generalizations for graphs for which sharing parameters is consistent with the graph geometry. Bruna et al.
(2014); Henaff et al. (2015) are the pioneers of spectral
graph convolutional neural networks in the graph Fourier
space using localized spectral filters on graphs. However,
in order to reduce the graph-dependency on the Laplacian
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, ETH
Zürich 2 Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Gregor Bachmann <gregor.bachmann@inf.ethz.ch>, Gary Bécigneul
<garyb@mit.edu>, Octavian-Eugen Ganea <oct@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

eigenmodes, Defferrard et al. (2016) approximate the convolutional filters using Chebyshev polynomials leveraging
a result of Hammond et al. (2011). The resulting method
(discussed in Appendix A) is computationally efficient and
superior in terms of accuracy and complexity. Further, Kipf
& Welling (2017) simplify this approach by considering
first-order approximations obtaining high scalability. The
proposed graph convolutional networks (GCN) is interpolating node embeddings via a symmetrically normalized adjacency matrix, while this weight sharing can be understood as
an efficient diffusion-like regularizer. Recent works extend
GCNs to achieve state of the art results for link prediction
(Zhang & Chen, 2018), graph classification (Hamilton et al.,
2017; Xu et al., 2018) and node classification (Klicpera
et al., 2019; Veličković et al., 2018).
Euclidean geometry in ML. In machine learning (ML),
data is most often represented in a Euclidean space for various reasons. First, some data is intrinsically Euclidean,
such as positions in 3D space in classical mechanics. Second, intuition is easier in such spaces, as they possess an
appealing vectorial structure allowing basic arithmetic and
a rich theory of linear algebra. Finally, a lot of quantities of
interest such as distances and inner-products are known in
closed-form formulae and can be computed very efficiently
on the existing hardware. These operations are the basic
building blocks for most of today’s popular machine learning models. Thus, the powerful simplicity and efficiency of
Euclidean geometry has led to numerous methods achieving
state-of-the-art on tasks as diverse as machine translation
(Bahdanau et al., 2015; Vaswani et al., 2017), speech recognition (Graves et al., 2013), image classification (He et al.,
2016) or recommender systems (He et al., 2017).
Riemannian ML. In spite of this success, certain types
of data (e.g. hierarchical, scale-free or spherical data) have
been shown to be better represented by non-Euclidean geometries (Defferrard et al., 2019; Bronstein et al., 2017;
Nickel & Kiela, 2017; Gu et al., 2019), leading in particular
to the rich theories of manifold learning (Roweis & Saul,
2000; Tenenbaum et al., 2000) and information geometry
(Amari & Nagaoka, 2007). The mathematical framework in
vigor to manipulate non-Euclidean geometries is known as
Riemannian geometry (Spivak, 1979). Although its theory
leads to many strong and elegant results, some of its basic

