Learning the piece-wise constant graph structure of a varying Ising model

Batiste Le Bars 1 Pierre Humbert 1 Argyris Kalogeratos 1 Nicolas Vayatis 1

Abstract
This work focuses on the estimation of multiple change-points in a time-varying Ising model
that evolves piece-wise constantly. The aim is
to identify both the moments at which significant changes occur in the Ising model, as well
as the underlying graph structures. For this purpose, we propose to estimate the neighborhood
of each node by maximizing a penalized version
of its conditional log-likelihood. The objective
of the penalization is twofold: it imposes sparsity
in the learned graphs and, thanks to a fused-type
penalty, it also enforces them to evolve piece-wise
constantly. Using few assumptions, we provide
two change-points consistency theorems. Those
are the first in the context of unknown number
of change-points detection in time-varying Ising
model. Finally, experimental results on several
synthetic datasets and a real-world dataset demonstrate the performance of our method.

1. Introduction
Graphs are fundamental tools to model and study static or
varying relationships between variables of potentially highdimensional vector data. They have many applications in
physics, computer vision and statistics (Choi et al., 2010;
Marbach et al., 2012). In the static scenario, learning relationships between variables is referred to as graph inference
and emerges in many fields such as in graph signal processing (Dong et al., 2016; Le Bars et al., 2019), in probabilistic
modeling, or in physics and biology (Rodriguez et al., 2011;
Du et al., 2012). In this work, we consider a probabilistic framework where the observed data are drawn from an
Ising model, a discrete Markov Random Field (MRF) with
{−1, 1}-outputs. MRF are undirected probabilistic graphical models (Koller et al., 2009) where a set of random
variables is represented as different nodes of a graph. An
1

Université Paris-Saclay, ENS Paris-Saclay, CNRS, Centre
Borelli, F-91190 Gif-sur-Yvette, France. Correspondence to:
Batiste Le Bars <batiste.lebars@cmla.ens-cachan.fr>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

edge between two nodes in this graph indicates the conditional dependency between the two corresponding random
variables, given the other variables.
Learning the structure of an MRF using a set of observations has been widely investigated (Banerjee et al., 2008;
Meinshausen et al., 2006). In particular for Gaussian graphical models (Yuan & Lin, 2007; Ren et al., 2015) with the
well-known graphical lasso (Friedman et al., 2008). The
Ising model inference task has also been addressed in the
past (Höfling & Tibshirani, 2009; Ravikumar et al., 2010;
Xue et al., 2012; Vuffray et al., 2016; Goel et al., 2019).
However, previous methods do not consider the case where
the underlying structure is evolving through time.
Over the past years, there has been a burst of interest in
learning the structure of time-varying MRF (Hallac et al.,
2017; Yang & Peng, 2019). This task combined with the
change-point detection, which is the detection of the moments in time at which significant changes in the graph
structure occur, is of particular interest. Those have been
widely investigated for piece-wise constant Gaussian graphical models (Gibberd & Nelson, 2017; Wang et al., 2018;
Londschien et al., 2019), in all types of the change-point detection objectives: single change-point (Bybee & Atchadé,
2018), multiple change-points (Gibberd & Roy, 2017), offline detection (Kolar & Xing, 2012; Gibberd & Nelson,
2017), online detection (Keshavarz et al., 2018), etc.
The advancements related to the time-varying Ising model
are though limited. Especially, the combination of multiple
change-points detection and structure inference has not been
studied properly in the past. In (Ahmed & Xing, 2009;
Kolar et al., 2010), the authors learn the parameters of a
time-varying Ising model without looking for change-points
since the network is allowed to change at each timestamp.
In (Fazayeli & Banerjee, 2016), the authors assume that
the change-point location is known and only focus on the
inference of the structural changes between Ising models.
More recently, the problem of detecting a single changepoint has been studied in (Roy et al., 2017).
Contribution. This work focuses on the estimation of
multiple change-points in a time-varying Ising model that
evolves piece-wise constantly. The aim is to identify both
the moments at which significant changes occur in the Ising

