Identifying Statistical Bias in Dataset Replication

Logan Engstrom * 1 Andrew Ilyas * 1 Shibani Santurkar 1 Dimitris Tsipras 1 Jacob Steinhardt 2
Aleksander M ˛
adry 1

Abstract
Dataset replication is a useful tool for assessing whether improvements in test accuracy on a
specific benchmark correspond to improvements
in models’ ability to generalize reliably. In this
work, we present unintuitive yet significant ways
in which standard approaches to dataset replication introduce statistical bias, skewing the resulting observations. We study ImageNet-v2, a replication of the ImageNet dataset on which models
exhibit a significant (11-14%) drop in accuracy,
even after controlling for selection frequency, a
human-in-the-loop measure of data quality. We
show that after remeasuring selection frequencies
and correcting for statistical bias, only an estimated 3.6%±1.5% of the original 11.7%±1.0%
accuracy drop remains unaccounted for. We conclude with concrete recommendations for recognizing and avoiding bias in dataset replication.
Code for our study is publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
The primary objective of supervised learning is to develop
models that generalize robustly to unseen data. Benchmark
test sets provide a proxy for out-of-sample performance,
but can outlive their usefulness. For example, evaluating on
benchmarks alone may steer us towards models that adaptively overfit (Reunanen, 2003; Rao et al., 2008; Dwork
et al., 2015) to the test set and do not generalize. Alternatively, we might select for models that are sensitive to insignificant aspects of the dataset creation process and thus
do not generalize robustly (e.g., models that are sensitive to
the exact humans who annotated the test set).
To diagnose these issues, recent work has generated new,
previously “unseen” testbeds for standard datasets through
*

Equal contribution 1 MIT 2 UC Berkeley. Correspondence to:
Logan Engstrom <engstrom@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).
1
https://git.io/data-rep-analysis

a process known as dataset replication. Though not yet
widespread in machine learning, dataset replication is a
natural analogue to experimental replication studies in the
natural sciences (cf. (Bell, 1973)). These studies play an
important role in verifying empirical findings, and ensure
that results are neither affected by adaptive data analysis,
nor overly sensitive to experimental artifacts.
Recent dataset replication studies (Recht et al., 2019b;a;
Yadav & Bottou, 2019) have generally found little evidence
of adaptive overfitting: progress on the original benchmark
translates to roughly the same amount (or more) of progress
on newly constructed test sets. On the other hand, model
performance on the replicated test set tends to drop significantly from the original one.
One of the most striking instances of this accuracy drop is
observed by Recht et al. (2019b), who performed a careful
replication of the ImageNet dataset and observe an 11-14%
gap between model accuracies on ImageNet and their new
test set, ImageNet-v2. The magnitude of this gap presents
an empirical mystery, and motivates us to understand what
factors cause such a large drop in accuracy.
In this paper, we identify a mechanism through which the
dataset replication process itself might lead to such a drop:
noisy readings during data collection can introduce statistical bias. We show that re-calibrating the ImageNet-v2
dataset while correcting for this bias results in an accuracy
gap of 3.6%±1.5%, compared to the original 11.7%±1.0%
drop between ImageNet and ImageNet-v2.
Our explanation revolves around what we refer to as the
“statistic matching” step of dataset replication. Statistic
matching ensures that model performance on the original
test set and its replication are comparable by controlling
for variables that are known to (or hypothesized to) impact
model performance.2 Drawing a parallel to medicine, suppose we wanted to replicate a study about the effect of a
certain drug on an age-linked disease. After gathering subjects, we have to reweight or filter them so that the age
distribution matches that of the original study—otherwise,
the results of the studies are incomparable. This filter2

In causal inference terms, statistic matching is an instance of
covariate balancing (Stuart, 2010; Imai & Ratkovic, 2013).

