Multi-Precision Policy Enforced Training (MuPPET):
A precision-switching strategy for quantised fixed-point training of CNNs

Aditya Rajagopal * 1 Diederik Adriaan Vink * 1 Stylianos I. Venieris 2 Christos-Savvas Bouganis 1

Abstract
Large-scale convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) suffer from very long training times,
spanning from hours to weeks, limiting the productivity and experimentation of deep learning
practitioners. As networks grow in size and
complexity, training time can be reduced through
low-precision data representations and computations, however, in doing so the final accuracy
suffers due to the problem of vanishing gradients.
Existing state-of-the-art methods combat this
issue by means of a mixed-precision approach
utilising two different precision levels, FP32
(32-bit floating-point) and FP16/FP8 (16-/8-bit
floating-point), leveraging the hardware support
of recent GPU architectures for FP16 operations
to obtain performance gains. This work pushes
the boundary of quantised training by employing
a multilevel optimisation approach that utilises
multiple precisions including low-precision
fixed-point representations resulting in a novel
training strategy MuPPET; it combines the use of
multiple number representation regimes together
with a precision-switching mechanism that
decides at run time the transition point between
precision regimes. Overall, the proposed strategy
tailors the training process to the hardware-level
capabilities of the target hardware architecture
and yields improvements in training time and
energy efficiency compared to state-of-the-art
approaches. Applying MuPPET on the training of
AlexNet, ResNet18 and GoogLeNet on ImageNet
(ILSVRC12) and targeting an NVIDIA Turing
GPU, MuPPET achieves the same accuracy as
standard full-precision training with training-time
speedup of up to 1.84× and an average speedup
of 1.58× across the networks.
*
Equal contribution 1 Intelligent Digital Systems Lab, Department of Electrical Engineering, Imperial College London
2
Samsung AI Center, Cambridge. Correspondence to: Aditya
Rajagopal <ar4414@ic.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have demonstrated
unprecedented accuracy in various machine learning tasks,
from video understanding (Gan et al., 2015; He et al., 2018)
to drone navigation (Loquercio et al., 2018; Kouris & Bouganis, 2018). To achieve such high levels of accuracy in inherently complex applications, current methodologies employ
the design of large and complex CNN models (Szegedy
et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2017) trained over large datasets
(Deng et al., 2009; Lin et al., 2014). Despite the associated
accuracy gains, the combination of large models with massive datasets also results in excessively long training times.
This in turn leads to long turn-around times which set a limit
to the productivity of deep learning practitioners and prohibit wider experimentation. For instance, automatic tuning
and search of neural architectures (Cai et al., 2018; Zhong
et al., 2018) is a rapidly advancing area where accelerated
training enables the improvement of the produced networks.
To counteract these long turn-around times, substantial research effort has been invested in hyperparameter tuning
for the acceleration of training, with a particular focus on
batch size and content. One line of work aims to maximise
memory and hardware utilisation by changing the batch
size, in order to perform CNN training-specific prefetching,
scheduling and dependency improvement (Chen et al., 2019;
Rhu et al., 2016). Other works focus on altering batch size or
reconstructing minibatches to improve the convergence rate
while sustaining high hardware utilisation (Devarakonda
et al., 2017; Johnson & Guestrin, 2018; Peng et al., 2019),
demonstrating up to 6.25× training speedup.
In a different direction, a number of studies have focused
on the use of reduced-precision training schemes. Reducedprecision arithmetic involves the utilisation of data formats
that have smaller wordlengths than the conventional 32-bit
floating-point (FP32) representation and is an approach for
co-optimising processing speed, memory footprint and communication overhead. Existing literature can be categorised
into i) works that use reduced precision to only accelerate
the training stage while eventually yielding an FP32 model,
and ii) those that produce networks with quantised weights.
Regarding the former, Courbariaux et al. (2015) and Gupta
et al. (2015) utilise dynamic quantisation and stochastic
rounding respectively as a means to combat the accuracy

