Streaming Coresets for Symmetric Tensor Factorization

Rachit Chhaya 1 Jayesh Choudhari 1 Anirban Dasgupta 1 Supratim Shit 1

Abstract
Factorizing tensors has recently become an important optimization module in a number of machine
learning pipelines, especially in latent variable
models. We show how to do this efficiently in
the streaming setting. Given a set of n vectors,
each in Rd , we present algorithms to select a sublinear number of these vectors as coreset, while
guaranteeing that the CP decomposition of the
p-moment tensor of the coreset approximates the
corresponding decomposition of the p-moment
tensor computed from the full data. We introduce
two novel algorithmic techniques: online filtering
and kernelization. Using these two, we present
four algorithms that achieve different tradeoffs of
coreset size, update time and working space, beating or matching various state of the art algorithms.
In the case of matrices (2-ordered tensor), our online row sampling algorithm guarantees (1 ± )
relative error spectral approximation. We show
applications of our algorithms in learning single
topic modeling.

1. Introduction
Much of the data that is consumed in data mining and machine learning applications arrives in a streaming manner.
The data is conventionally treated as a matrix, with a row
representing a single data point and the columns its corresponding features. Since the matrix is typically large, it is
advantageous to be able to store only a small number of
rows and still preserve some of its “useful” properties. One
such abstract property that has proven useful in a number of
different settings, such as solving regression, finding various factorizations, is subspace preservation. Given a matrix
A ∈ Rn×d , an m × d matrix C is its subspace preserving
1

Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar, India. Correspondence to: Supratim Shit
<supratim.shit@iitgn.ac.in>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

matrix for the `2 norm if, ∀x ∈ Rd ,
X
X
X
(ãTj x)2 −
(aTi x)2 ≤  ·
(aTi x)2
ãj ∈C

ai ∈A

ai ∈A

We typically desire m  n and ãj ’s represent the subsampled and rescaled rows from A. Such a sample C is
often referred to as a coreset. This property has been used
to obtain approximate solutions to many problems such as
regression, low-rank approximation, etc (Woodruff et al.,
2014) while having m to be at most O(d2 ). Such property
has been defined for other `p norms too (Dasgupta et al.,
2009; Cohen & Peng, 2015; Clarkson et al., 2016).
Matrices are ubiquitous, and depending on the application,
one can assume that the data is coming from a generative
model, i.e., there is some distribution from which every
incoming data point (or row) is sampled and given to user.
Many a time, the goal is to know the hidden variables of this
generative model. An obvious way to learn these variables
is by representing data (matrix) by its low-rank representation. However, we know that a low-rank representation of a
matrix is not unique as there are various ways (such as SVD,
QR, LU) to decompose a matrix. So it difficult to realize
the hidden variables just by the low-rank decomposition
of the data matrix. This is one of the reasons to look at
higher order moments of the data i.e. tensors. Tensors are
formed by outer product of data vectors, i.e. for a dataset
A∈P
Rn×d one can use a p order tensor T ∈ Rd×...×d as
n
T = i=1 ai ⊗p , where p is set by user depending on the
number of latent variables one is expecting in the generative model (Ma et al., 2016). The decomposition of such a
tensor is unique under a mild assumption (Kruskal, 1977).
Factorization of tensors into its constituent elements has
found uses in many machine learning applications such as
topic modeling (Anandkumar et al., 2014), various latent
variable models (Anandkumar et al., 2012; Hsu et al., 2012;
Jenatton et al., 2012), training neural networks (Janzamin
et al., 2015) etc.
P
For a p-order moment tensor T = i ai ⊗p created using
the set of vectors {ai } and for x ∈ Rd one of thePimportant
property one needs to preserve is T (x,··· , x) = i (aTi x)p .
This operation is also called tensor contraction (Song et al.,
2016). Now if we wish to “approximate” it using only a
subset of the rows in A, the above property for `2 norm
subspace preservation does not suffice.

