Can Increasing Input Dimensionality Improve Deep Reinforcement Learning?

Kei Ota 1 Tomoaki Oiki 1 Devesh K. Jha 2 Toshisada Mariyama 1 Daniel Nikovski 2

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms
have recently achieved remarkable successes in
various sequential decision making tasks, leveraging advances in methods for training large deep
networks. However, these methods usually require large amounts of training data, which is
often a big problem for real-world applications.
One natural question to ask is whether learning
good representations for states and using larger
networks helps in learning better policies. In this
paper, we try to study if increasing input dimensionality helps improve performance and sample
efficiency of model-free deep RL algorithms. To
do so, we propose an online feature extractor
network (OFENet) that uses neural nets to produce good representations to be used as inputs
to deep RL algorithms. Even though the high
dimensionality of input is usually supposed to
make learning of RL agents more difficult, we
show that the RL agents in fact learn more efficiently with the high-dimensional representation
than with the lower-dimensional state observations. We believe that stronger feature propagation together with larger networks (and thus larger
search space) allows RL agents to learn more
complex functions of states and thus improves
the sample efficiency. Through numerical experiments, we show that the proposed method outperforms several other state-of-the-art algorithms in
terms of both sample efficiency and performance.
Codes for the proposed method are available at
http://www.merl.com/research/license/OFENet.
1

Mitsubishi Electric Corporation, Kanagawa, Japan 2 Mitsubishi
Electric Research Laboratory, Cambridge, USA. Correspondence to: Kei Ota <Ota.Kei@ds.MitsubishiElectric.co.jp>,
Oiki Tomoaki <Oiki.Tomoaki@dh.MitsubishiElectric.co.jp>,
Devesh K. Jha <jha@merl.com>, Toshisada Mariyama
<Mariyama.Toshisada@ab.MitsubishiElectric.co.jp>, Daniel
Nikovski <nikovski@merl.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms have achieved
impressive success in various difficult tasks such as computer games (Mnih et al., 2013) and robotic control (Gu
et al., 2017). Significant research effort in the field has
led to the development of several successful RL algorithms
(Schulman et al., 2017; Fujimoto et al., 2018; Haarnoja
et al., 2018; Schulman et al., 2015). Their success is partly
based on the expressive power of deep neural networks
that enable the algorithms to learn complex tasks from raw
sensory data. Whereas neural networks have the ability
to automatically acquire task-specific representations from
raw sensory data, learning representations usually requires
a large amount of data. This is one of the reasons that the
application of RL algorithms typically needs millions of
steps of data collection. This limits the applicability of RL
algorithms to real-world problems, especially problems in
continuous control and robotics. This has driven tremendous
research in the RL community to develop sample-efficient
algorithms (Buckman et al., 2018; Kurutach et al., 2018;
Kalweit & Boedecker, 2017; Munos et al., 2016).
In general, state representation learning (SRL) (Lesort et al.,
2018) focuses on representation learning where learned features are in low dimension, evolve through time, and are
influenced by actions of an agent. Learning lower dimensional representation is motivated by the intuition that state
of a system represents the sufficient statistic required to
predict its future and in general, sufficient statistic for a
lot of physical systems is fairly small dimensional. In the
SRL framework, the raw sensory data provided by the environment where RL agents are deployed is called an observation, and its low-dimensional representation is called a
state. Such a state variable is expected to have all task relevant information, and ideally only such information. The
representation is usually learned from auxiliary tasks, that
enables the state variable to contain prior knowledge of the
task domain (Jonschkowski & Brock, 2014) or the dynamics
of the environment. In contrast to auxiliary tasks, the task
that the RL agents needs to learn ultimately is called the
actual task in this paper.
Conventional wisdom suggests that the lower the dimensionality of the state vector, the faster and better RL algorithms will learn. This reasoning justifies various al-

