Fast Deterministic CUR Matrix Decomposition with Accuracy Assurance

Yasutoshi Ida 1 2 Sekitoshi Kanai 1 Yasuhiro Fujiwara 3 Tomoharu Iwata 3
Koh Takeuchi 2 4 Hisashi Kashima 2 4

Abstract
The deterministic CUR matrix decomposition is a
low-rank approximation method to analyze a data
matrix. It has attracted considerable attention due
to its high interpretability, which results from the
fact that the decomposed matrices consist of subsets of the original columns and rows of the data
matrix. The subset is obtained by optimizing an
objective function with sparsity-inducing norms
via coordinate descent. However, the existing
algorithms for optimization incur high computation costs. This is because coordinate descent
iteratively updates all the parameters in the objective until convergence. This paper proposes
a fast deterministic CUR matrix decomposition.
Our algorithm safely skips unnecessary updates
by efficiently evaluating the optimality conditions
for the parameters to be zeros. In addition, we
preferentially update the parameters that must be
nonzeros. Theoretically, our approach guarantees
the same result as the original approach. Experiments demonstrate that our algorithm speeds up
the deterministic CUR while achieving the same
accuracy.

1. Introduction
Matrix decomposition is a fundamental tool of machine
learning, and it is used to decompose the data matrix into
its low-rank approximations. Among the various matrix
decomposition methods such as Singular Value Decomposition (SVD), CUR matrix decomposition (CUR) (Mahoney
& Drineas, 2009) has been a popular method due to its high
interpretability. This is because the decomposed matrices
consist of the subsets of the original columns and rows of
1

NTT Software Innovation Center, Tokyo, Japan 2 Department
of Intelligence Science and Technology, Kyoto University, Kyoto,
Japan 3 NTT Communication Science Laboratories, Kyoto, Japan
4
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Tokyo, Japan.
Correspondence to: Yasutoshi Ida <yasutoshi.ida@ieee.org>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

the data matrix. Namely, the decomposed matrices preserve the original elements in the data matrix. Thanks to
its high interpretability, CUR has been successfully applied
to a large number of domains, including gene expression
data (Bien et al., 2010), network traffic data (Tong et al.,
2008), bibliographic data (Sun et al., 2007), collaborative
filtering (Mackey et al., 2011), hyperspectral medical image
(Mahoney et al., 2006), and text data (Drineas et al., 2008).
In the literature, randomized algorithms (Mahoney &
Drineas, 2009; Sun et al., 2007; Drineas et al., 2006; Tong
et al., 2008) and deterministic algorithms (Bien et al., 2010;
Mairal et al., 2011; Papailiopoulos et al., 2014) were proposed for CUR. Although randomized algorithms were proposed first, they would be disconcerting to the practitioners
as they obtain a different result on every run (Bien et al.,
2010; Mairal et al., 2011). Specifically, when the sizes of
the decomposed matrices are small, they can obtain a poor
approximate result because the variance of the approximate
results is large (Sun et al., 2007; Bien et al., 2010). To
overcome these drawbacks, researchers have focused on
deterministic algorithms that utilize a sparse optimization
approach (Bien et al., 2010; Mairal et al., 2011). In deterministic algorithms, matrix decomposition is seen as a
convex optimization problem with sparsity-inducing norms
on the basis of group Lasso (Yuan & Lin, 2006). In particular, they optimize an objective with respect to the parameter
vectors corresponding to the columns and the rows of the
data matrix. Since the unimportant parameter vectors are
turned into zero vectors by the sparsity-inducing norms,
they can deterministically obtain the important columns and
rows, which are used to construct the decomposed matrices.
Although deterministic algorithms are attractive, they suffer from high computation costs. In order to optimize the
objective, they usually use coordinate descent, which iteratively updates each parameter vector corresponding to each
column and row of the data matrix (Bien et al., 2010). Unfortunately, the computation cost of updating a parameter
vector is quadratic with respect to the number of columns or
rows of the data matrix. In addition, they need to iteratively
update all the parameters until convergence. For the aforementioned reasons, deterministic algorithms require longer
processing times as the sizes of data matrices increase.

