The Differentiable Cross-Entropy Method
Brandon Amos 1 Denis Yarats 1 2

Abstract
We study the cross-entropy method (CEM) for
the non-convex optimization of a continuous and
parameterized objective function and introduce
a differentiable variant that enables us to differentiate the output of CEM with respect to the
objective function’s parameters. In the machine
learning setting this brings CEM inside of the endto-end learning pipeline where this has otherwise
been impossible. We show applications in a synthetic energy-based structured prediction task and
in non-convex continuous control. In the control
setting we show how to embed optimal action sequences into a lower-dimensional space. DCEM
enables us to fine-tune CEM-based controllers
with policy optimization.

1. Introduction
Recent work in the machine learning community has shown
how optimization procedures can create new buildingblocks for the end-to-end machine learning pipeline (Gould
et al., 2016; Johnson et al., 2016; Amos et al., 2017; Amos
& Kolter, 2017; Domke, 2012; Metz et al., 2016; Finn et al.,
2017; Zhang et al., 2019; Belanger et al., 2017; Rusu et al.,
2018; Srinivas et al., 2018; Amos et al., 2018; Agrawal et al.,
2019a). In this paper we focus on the setting of optimizing an unconstrained, non-convex, and continuous objective
function f✓ (x) : Rn ⇥ ⇥ ! R as
x̂ := arg min f✓ (x),
x

(1)

where we assume x̂ is unique and that f is parameterized
by ✓ 2 ⇥ and has inputs x 2 Rn . If it exists, some
(sub-)derivative r✓ x̂ is useful in the machine learning setting to make the output of the optimization procedure endto-end learnable. For example, ✓ could parameterize a predictive model that generates outcomes conditional on x.
1

Facebook AI Research 2 New York University.
Correspondence to: Brandon Amos <bda@fb.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

End-to-end learning in these settings can be done by defining a loss function L on top of x̂ and taking gradient steps
r✓ L. If f✓ were convex this gradient is easy to analyze and
compute when it exists and is unique (Gould et al., 2016;
Johnson et al., 2016; Amos et al., 2017; Amos & Kolter,
2017). Analyzing and computing a “derivative” through the
non-convex arg min in eq. (1) is not as easy and is challenging in theory and practice. The derivative may not exist or
may be uninformative in theory, it might not be unique, and
even if it does, the numerical solver being used to compute
the solution may not find a global or even local optimum
of f . One promising direction to sidestep these issues is
to approximate the arg min operation with an explicit optimization procedure that is interpreted as another compute
graph and unrolled through, i.e. seen as a sequence of differentiable computations. This is most commonly done with
gradient descent as in Domke (2012); Metz et al. (2016);
Finn et al. (2017); Belanger et al. (2017); Rusu et al. (2018);
Srinivas et al. (2018); Foerster et al. (2018); Zhang et al.
(2019). This approximation adds definition and structure to
an otherwise ill-defined desiderata at the cost of biasing the
gradients and enabling the learning procedure to over-fit to
the hyper-parameters of the optimization algorithm, such as
the number of gradient steps or the learning rate.
In this paper we show how to use the cross-entropy method
(CEM) (Rubinstein, 1997; De Boer et al., 2005) to approximate the derivative through an unconstrained, non-convex,
and continuous arg min. CEM for optimization is a zerothorder optimizer and works by generating a sequence of
samples from the objective function. We show a simple
and computationally negligible way of making CEM differentiable that we call DCEM by using the smooth top-k
operation from Amos et al. (2019). This also brings CEM
into the end-to-end learning process in scenarios such as
control where there is otherwise a disconnection between
the objective that is being learned and the objective that is
induced by deploying CEM on top of those models.
We first study DCEM in a simple non-convex energy-based
learning setting for regression. We contrast using unrolled
gradient descent and DCEM for optimizing over a SPEN
(Belanger & McCallum, 2016). We show that unrolling
through gradient descent in this setting over-fits to the number of gradient steps taken and that DCEM generates a more
reasonable energy surface.

