Harmonic Decompositions of Convolutional Networks

Meyer Scetbon 1 2 Zaid Harchaoui 2

Abstract
We present a description of the function space
and the smoothness class associated with a convolutional network using the machinery of reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces. We show that the
mapping associated with a convolutional network
expands into a sum involving elementary functions akin to spherical harmonics. This functional
decomposition can be related to the functional
ANOVA decomposition in nonparametric statistics. Building off our functional characterization
of convolutional networks, we obtain statistical
bounds highlighting an interesting trade-off between the approximation error and the estimation
error.

1. Introduction
The renewed interest in convolutional neural networks (Fukushima, 1980; LeCun et al., 1995) in computer
vision and signal processing has led to a major leap in generalization performance on common task benchmarks, supported by the recent advances in graphical processing hardware and the collection of huge labelled datasets for training
and evaluation. Convolutional neural networks pose major
challenges to statistical learning theory. First and foremost,
a convolutional network learns from data, jointly, both a feature representation through its hidden layers and a prediction
function through its ultimate layer. A convolutional neural
network implements a function unfolding as a composition
of basic functions (respectively nonlinearity, convolution,
and pooling), which appears to model well visual information in images. Yet the relevant function spaces to analyze
their statistical performance remain unclear.
The analysis of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) has
been an active research topic. Different viewpoints have
been developed. A straightforward viewpoint is to dismiss
1

CREST, ENSAE 2 Department of Statistics, University of Washington. Correspondence to: Meyer Scetbon
<meyer.scetbon@ensae.fr>, Zaid Harchaoui <zaid@uw.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

completely the grid- or lattice-structure of images and analyze a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) instead acting on vectorized images, which has the downside to set aside the most
interesting property of CNNs which is to model well images
that is data with a 2D lattice structure.
The scattering transform viewpoint and the i-theory viewpoint (Mallat, 2012; Bruna & Mallat, 2013; Mallat, 2016;
Poggio & Anselmi, 2016; Oyallon et al., 2018) keeps the
triad of components nonlinearity-convolution-pooling and
their combination in a deep architecture and characterize
the group-invariance properties and compression properties
of convolutional neural networks. Recent work (Bietti &
Mairal, 2017) considers risk bounds involving appropriately
defined spectral norms for convolutional kernel networks
acting on continuous-domain images.
We present in this paper the construction of a function space
including the mapping associated with a convolutional network acting on discrete-domain images. Doing so, we characterize the sequence of eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of
the related integral operator, hence shedding light on the
harmonic structure of the function space of a convolutional
neural network. Indeed the eigenvalue decay controls the
statistical convergence rate. Thanks to this spectral characterization, we establish high-probability statistical bounds,
relating the eigenvalue decay and the convergence rate.
We show that a convolutional network function admits a
decomposition whose structure is related to a functional
tensor-product space ANOVA model decomposition (Lin,
2000). Such models extend the popular additive models in
order to capture interactions of any order between covariates. Indeed a tensor-product space ANOVA model decomposes a high-dimensional multivariate function as a sum of
one-dimensional functions (main effects), two-dimensional
functions (two-way interactions), and so on.
A remarkable property of such models is their statistical
convergence rate, which is within a log factor of the rate in
one dimension, under appropriate assumptions. We bring
to light a similar structure in the decomposition of mapping
associated with a convolutional network. This structure
plays an essential role in the convergence rates we present.
This suggests that an important component of the modeling power of a convolutional network is to capture spatial
interactions between sub-images or patches.

