Transformation of ReLU-based recurrent neural networks from discrete-time
to continuous-time
Zahra Monfared * 1 Daniel Durstewitz * 1 2

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks (RNN) as used in machine learning are commonly formulated in discrete time, i.e. as recursive maps. This brings a lot
of advantages for training models on data, e.g. for
the purpose of time series prediction or dynamical systems identification, as powerful and efficient inference algorithms exist for discrete time
systems and numerical integration of differential
equations is not necessary. On the other hand,
mathematical analysis of dynamical systems inferred from data is often more convenient and
enables additional insights if these are formulated
in continuous time, i.e. as systems of ordinary or
partial differential equations (ODE/ PDE). Here
we show how to perform such a translation from
discrete to continuous time for a particular class
of ReLU-based RNN. We prove three theorems
on the mathematical equivalence between the discrete and continuous time formulations under a
variety of conditions, and illustrate how to use our
mathematical results on different machine learning and nonlinear dynamical systems examples.

1. Introduction
Recurrent neural networks (RNN) are popular devices in
machine learning and AI for tasks that require processing
and prediction of temporal sequences, like machine
translation (Sutskever et al., 2014), natural language
processing (Kumar et al., 2016; Zaheer et al., 2017), or
tracking of moving objects in videos (Milan et al., 2017).
More recently, in the natural sciences, biology and physics
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Theoretical Neuroscience, Central Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany
2
Faculty of Physics and Astronomy, Heidelberg University,
Heidelberg, Germany.
Correspondence to: Zahra Monfared <zahra.monfared@zi-mannheim.de>, Daniel Durstewitz
<daniel.durstewitz@zi-mannheim.de>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

in particular, RNN were also introduced as powerful tools
for approximating the unknown nonlinear dynamical system
(DS) that produced a set of empirically observed time series,
i.e. for identifying the data-generating nonlinear DS in a
completely data-driven, bottom-up way (Durstewitz, 2017;
Koppe et al., 2019; Razaghi & Paninski, 2019; Vlachas
et al., 2018; Zhao & Park, 2017). Theoretically, it has been
proven that (continuous) RNN can approximate the flow
field of any other nonlinear DS to arbitrary precision on
compact sets of the real space under some mild conditions
(Funahashi & Nakamura, 1993; Hanson & Raginsky, 2020;
Kimura & Nakano, 1998; Trischler & D’Eleuterio, 2016).
RNN, in the form most widely used in machine
learning, constitute discrete-time DS defined by a recursive
transition rule (difference equation) which maps the
network’s activation states among consecutive time steps,
zt = Fθ (zt−1 , st ), where θ are parameters of the system
and {st } is a sequence of external inputs. This formulation
is highly advantageous for training RNN on observed
data sequences since efficient variational inference and
Expectation-Maximization algorithms, which do not
require numerical integration of nonlinear ODE, exist for
discrete-time systems (Durstewitz, 2017; Koppe et al.,
2019; Razaghi & Paninski, 2019; Zhao & Park, 2017). In
many scientific contexts, like neuroscience (Koch & Segev,
2003), ODE systems are often highly nonlinear and stiff and
thus require more involved implicit numerical integration
schemes to achieve accurate and stable solutions (Koch &
Segev, 2003; Ozaki, 2012; Press et al., 2007). Furthermore,
empirical data are always sampled at discrete time points,
such that in most cases this assumption may not be too
limiting for the purpose of model inference.
On the other hand, natural systems evolve in continuous time, and hence most mathematical theories in physics
and biology are formulated in continuous time. Thus, for
the purpose of theoretical analysis of models inferred from
experimental data a continuous-time formulation of the
system with biologically or physically meaningful time
constants would be preferable. Moreover, a continuous
time ODE system enables to analyze properties of the DS
under study that are much more difficult or impossible to
assess in discrete time. For instance, a continuous time

