Leveraging Frequency Analysis for Deep Fake Image Recognition

Joel Frank 1 Thorsten Eisenhofer 1 Lea Schönherr 1 Asja Fischer 1 Dorothea Kolossa 1 Thorsten Holz 1

Abstract
Deep neural networks can generate images that
are astonishingly realistic, so much so that it is
often hard for humans to distinguish them from
actual photos. These achievements have been
largely made possible by Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). While deep fake images
have been thoroughly investigated in the image
domain—a classical approach from the area of
image forensics—an analysis in the frequency
domain has been missing so far. In this paper,
we address this shortcoming and our results reveal that in frequency space, GAN-generated images exhibit severe artifacts that can be easily
identified. We perform a comprehensive analysis,
showing that these artifacts are consistent across
different neural network architectures, data sets,
and resolutions. In a further investigation, we
demonstrate that these artifacts are caused by upsampling operations found in all current GAN
architectures, indicating a structural and fundamental problem in the way images are generated
via GANs. Based on this analysis, we demonstrate how the frequency representation can be
used to identify deep fake images in an automated
way, surpassing state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
GANs produce sample outputs—images, audio signals, or
complete video sequences—that are astonishingly effective at fooling humans into believing their veracity (Fried
et al., 2019; Karras et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2019; Song
et al., 2020). The difficulty of distinguishing these so-called
deep fakes from real media is for example demonstrated at
whichfaceisreal.com (West & Bergstrom, 2019), a website
on which a user can see two different images: one from
1

Ruhr-University Bochum, Horst Görtz Institute for ITSecurity, Bochum, Germany. Correspondence to: Joel Frank
<joel.frank@rub.de>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

the Flicker-Faces-HQ data set and one generated by StyleGAN (Karras et al., 2019). The task is to decide which of
these two images is real. Even though humans generally do
better than random guessing, players’ performance reportedly peaked at around 75% accuracy (Simonite, 2019).
At a time where fake news have become a practical problem
and Internet information campaigns might have influenced
democratic processes (Thompson & Lapowsky, 2017), developing automated detection methods is a crucial task. A
worrying reminder is the example of Gabon’s president Ali
Bongo: In late 2018, the president fell ill, not appearing in
public for months. As the public grew weary, the government released a video of the president, only to be immediately labeled as a deep fake. Albeit never to be confirmed as
such, one week later the military launched an unsuccessful
coup, citing the video as part of the motivation (Hao, 2019).
Previous research on detecting GAN-generated images has
either utilized large, complex convolutional networks directly trained in the image domain (Mo et al., 2018; Yu
et al., 2019a; Tariq et al., 2019) or used hand-crafted features from the frequency domain (Marra et al., 2019; Valle
et al., 2018). In contrast, we provide in this paper a comprehensive analysis of the frequency spectrum across multiple
different GAN architectures and data sets. The surprising
finding is that all GAN architectures exhibit severe artifacts
in the frequency domain. Speculating that these artifacts
stem from upsampling operations, we experiment with different upsampling techniques and identify patterns which
are consistent with our earlier observations.
Based on these insights, we demonstrate that the frequency
domain can be utilized for (i) efficiently separating real from
fake images, as well as, (ii) identifying by which specific
GAN a sample was generated. In the first case, we demonstrate that the artifacts are so severe that a linear separation
of the data is possible in the frequency space. In the second
case, we demonstrate that we can achieve higher accuracy,
while simultaneously utilizing significantly less complex
models, than state-of-the-art approaches (Yu et al., 2019a)
(using roughly 1.9% of their parameters). Additionally, we
demonstrate that classifiers trained in the frequency domain
are more robust against common image perturbations (e.g.,
blurring or cropping). The code to reproduce our experi-

