Frustratingly Simple Few-Shot Object Detection

Xin Wang * 1 Thomas E. Huang * 2 Trevor Darrell 1 Joseph E. Gonzalez 1 Fisher Yu 1

Abstract
Detecting rare objects from a few examples is
an emerging problem. Prior works show metalearning is a promising approach. But, finetuning techniques have drawn scant attention. We
find that fine-tuning only the last layer of existing detectors on rare classes is crucial to the
few-shot object detection task. Such a simple
approach outperforms the meta-learning methods by roughly 2∼20 points on current benchmarks and sometimes even doubles the accuracy
of the prior methods. However, the high variance in the few samples often leads to the unreliability of existing benchmarks. We revise
the evaluation protocols by sampling multiple
groups of training examples to obtain stable comparisons and build new benchmarks based on
three datasets: PASCAL VOC, COCO and LVIS.
Again, our fine-tuning approach establishes a new
state of the art on the revised benchmarks. The
code as well as the pretrained models are available at https://github.com/ucbdrive/
few-shot-object-detection.

1. Introduction
Machine perception systems have witnessed significant
progress in the past years. Yet, our ability to train models
that generalize to novel concepts without abundant labeled
data is still far from satisfactory when compared to human
visual systems. Even a toddler can easily recognize a new
concept with very little instruction (Landau et al., 1988;
Samuelson & Smith, 2005; Smith et al., 2002).
The ability to generalize from only a few examples (so called
few-shot learning) has become a key area of interest in the
machine learning community. Many (Vinyals et al., 2016;
Snell et al., 2017; Finn et al., 2017; Hariharan & Girshick,
*

Equal contribution 1 EECS, UC Berkeley 2 EECS, University of
Michigan. Correspondence to: Xin Wang <xinw@berkeley.edu>,
Thomas E. Huang <thomaseh@umich.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

2017; Gidaris & Komodakis, 2018; Wang et al., 2019a)
have explored techniques to transfer knowledge from the
data-abundant base classes to the data-scarce novel classes
through meta-learning. They use simulated few-shot tasks
by sampling from base classes during training to learn to
learn from the few examples in the novel classes.
However, much of this work has focused on basic image
classification tasks. In contrast, few-shot object detection
has received far less attention. Unlike image classification,
object detection requires the model to not only recognize
the object types but also localize the targets among millions
of potential regions. This additional subtask substantially
raises the overall complexity. Several (Kang et al., 2019;
Yan et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019b) have attempted to
tackle the under-explored few-shot object detection task,
where only a few labeled bounding boxes are available for
novel classes. These methods attach meta learners to existing object detection networks, following the meta-learning
methods for classification. But, current evaluation protocols
suffer from statistical unreliability, and the accuracy of baseline methods, especially simple fine-tuning, on few-object
detection are not consistent in the literature.
In this work, we propose improved methods to evaluate
few-shot object detection. We carefully examine finetuning based approaches, which are considered to be underperforming in the previous works (Kang et al., 2019; Yan
et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019b). We focus on the training schedule and the instance-level feature normalization of
the object detectors in model design and training based on
fine-tuning.
We adopt a two-stage training scheme for fine-tuning as
shown in Figure 1. We first train the entire object detector, such as Faster R-CNN (Ren et al., 2015), on the dataabundant base classes, and then only fine-tune the last layers
of the detector on a small balanced training set consisting
of both base and novel classes while freezing the other parameters of the model. During the fine-tuning stage, we
introduce instance-level feature normalization to the box
classifier inspired by Gidaris & Komodakis (2018); Qi et al.
(2018); Chen et al. (2019).
We find that this two-stage fine-tuning approach (TFA) outperforms all previous state-of-the-art meta-learning based
methods by 2∼20 points on the existing PASCAL VOC (Ev-

