The Shapley Taylor Interaction Index

Kedar Dhamdhere 1 Ashish Agarwal 1 Mukund Sundararajan 1

Abstract
The attribution problem, that is the problem of
attributing a model’s prediction to its base features, is well-studied. We extend the notion of
attribution to also apply to feature interactions.
The Shapley value is a commonly used method
to attribute a model’s prediction to its base features. We propose a generalization of the Shapley
value called Shapley-Taylor index that attributes
the model’s prediction to interactions of subsets
of features up to some size k. The method is
analogous to how the truncated Taylor Series decomposes the function value at a certain point
using its derivatives at a different point. In fact,
we show that the Shapley Taylor index is equal
to the Taylor Series of the multilinear extension
of the set-theoretic behavior of the model. We
axiomatize this method using the standard Shapley axioms—linearity, dummy, symmetry and efficiency—and an additional axiom that we call the
interaction distribution axiom. This new axiom
explicitly characterizes how interactions are distributed for a class of functions that model pure
interaction. We contrast the Shapley-Taylor index
against the previously proposed Shapley Interaction index (cf. (9)) from the cooperative game
theory literature. We also apply the Shapley Taylor index to three models and identify interesting
qualitative insights.

1. Introduction
1.1. Motivation
There is considerable literature on feature importance/attribution for deep networks(cf. (2; 23; 22; 3; 26;
14; 28; 14)). The basic idea of attribution is to distribute the
prediction score of a model for a specific input to its base
features; the attribution to a base feature can be interpreted
1
Google LLC. Correspondence to: Mukund Sundararajan
<mukunds@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

as its contribution to the prediction. For instance, when
attribution is applied to a network that predicts the sentiment associated with a paragraph of text, it quantifies the
influence of every word in the text on the network’s score.
This can be used, for instance, to tell if the model bases its
prediction on words that connote a protected category like
a specific race/gender/religion. This would be indicative
of the model possibly being biased along the protected dimension. Attribution/feature importance for Deep Networks
has been applied to a variety of real world applications, for
instance in health, drug-discovery, machine translation, natural language tasks, recommendation systems etc. Thus,
attributions are quite useful despite their simple form; notice they don’t reveal the logic of the network beyond base
feature importance.
In this paper, we take a step towards making attributions
a somewhat richer form of explanation by identifying the
importance of feature interactions, either pairwise or of
higher orders. We would like to identify to what extent a
set of features exert influence in conjunction as opposed to
independently. We expect the study of interactions to be
fruitful. Deep networks are likely to have an abundance of
strong feature interactions, because they excel at creating
higher-order representations (e.g. filters) out of the base
features (e.g. pixels). We also expect the study of interactions to be critical for the tasks that cannot be performed by
features acting independently. We study two such tasks in
Section 5. In the sentiment analysis task, negation, should
manifest as an interaction between the negation word (e.g.
not) and the sentiment bearing word (e.g. good or bad) that
it modifies. If such an interaction is not detectable, then
the network needs fixing. Another example is reading comprehension, i.e., question answering about paragraphs of
text. A good model will match question words to certain
words/phrases in the paragraph, and these matches should
manifest as interactions between those words.
Before we describe our contributions, we mention some
related work on feature interactions besides the attribution
literature briefly described above.

