Information-Theoretic Local Minima Characterization and Regularization

Zhiwei Jia 1 Hao Su 1

Abstract
Recent advances in deep learning theory have
evoked the study of generalizability across different local minima of deep neural networks (DNNs).
While current work focused on either discovering
properties of good local minima or developing
regularization techniques to induce good local
minima, no approach exists that can tackle both
problems. We achieve these two goals successfully in a unified manner. Specifically, based on
the observed Fisher information we propose a
metric both strongly indicative of generalizability
of local minima and effectively applied as a practical regularizer. We provide theoretical analysis
including a generalization bound and empirically
demonstrate the success of our approach in both
capturing and improving the generalizability of
DNNs. Experiments are performed on CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-100 and ImageNet for various network
architectures.

initions of “flatness/sharpness” have been introduced and
analyzed (Keskar et al., 2017; Neyshabur et al., 2018; 2017;
Wu et al., 2017; Liang et al., 2017). However, they suffer
from one or more of the problems: (1) being mostly theoretical with no or poor empirical evaluations on modern
neural networks, (2) lack of theoretical analysis and understanding, (3) in practice not applicable to finding better
local minima. Regarding the “how” question, existing approaches (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Sokolić et al.,
2017; Chaudhari et al., 2017; Hoffer et al., 2017; Neyshabur
et al., 2015a; Izmailov et al., 2018) share some of the common drawbacks: (1) derived only from intuitions but no
specific metrics provided to characterize local minima, (2)
no or weak analysis of such metrics, (3) not applicable or no
consistent generalization improvement for modern DNNs.

Recently, there has been a surge in the interest of acquiring
a theoretical understanding over deep neural network’s behavior. Breakthroughs have been made in characterizing the
optimization process, showing that learning algorithms such
as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) tend to end up in one
of the many local minima which have close-to-zero training loss (Choromanska et al., 2015; Dauphin et al., 2014;
Kawaguchi, 2016; Nguyen & Hein, 2018; Du et al., 2018).
However, these numerically similar local minima typically
exhibit very different behaviors in terms of generalizability.
It is, therefore, natural to ask two closely related questions:
(a) What kind of local minima can generalize better? (b)
How to find those better local minima?

In this paper, we tackle both the “what” and the “how” questions in a unified manner. Our answer provides both the theory and applications for the generalization problems across
different local minima. Based on the determinant of Fisher
information estimated from the training set, we propose a
metric that solves all the aforementioned issues. The metric
can well capture properties that characterize local minima
of different generalization ability. We provide its theoretical analysis, primarily a generalization bound based on
PAC-Bayes (McAllester, 1999b;a). For modern DNNs in
practice, it is necessary to provide a tractable approximation
of our metric. We propose an intuitive and efficient approximation to compare it across different local minima. Our
empirical evaluations fully illustrate the effectiveness of the
metric as a strong indicator of local minima’s generalizability. Moreover, from the metric we further derive and design
a practical regularization technique that guides the optimization process in finding better generalizable local minima.
The experiments on image classification datasets demonstrate that our approach gives consistent generalization boost
for a range of DNN architectures. The code is available at
https://github.com/SeanJia/InfoMCR.

To our knowledge, existing work focused only on one of
the two questions. For the “what” question, various def-

2. Related Work

1. Introduction

1

University of California, San Diego. Correspondence to: Zhiwei Jia <zjia@ucsd.edu>, Hao Su <haosu@eng.ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the
author(s).

It has been empirically shown that larger batch sizes lead
to worse generalization (Keskar et al., 2017). Hoffer et al.
(2017) analyzed how the training dynamics is affected by
different batch sizes and presented a perturbed batch nor-

