Enhanced POET: Open-ended Reinforcement Learning through Unbounded
Invention of Learning Challenges and their Solutions

Rui Wang 1 Joel Lehman 1 Aditya Rawal 1 Jiale Zhi 1 Yulun Li 1 Jeff Clune * 2 Kenneth O. Stanley * 1

Abstract
Creating open-ended algorithms, which generate
their own never-ending stream of novel and appropriately challenging learning opportunities, could
help to automate and accelerate progress in machine learning. A recent step in this direction is
the Paired Open-Ended Trailblazer (POET), an
algorithm that generates and solves its own challenges, and allows solutions to goal-switch between challenges to avoid local optima. However,
the original POET was unable to demonstrate its
full creative potential because of limitations of
the algorithm itself and because of external issues
including a limited problem space and lack of a
universal progress measure. Importantly, both limitations pose impediments not only for POET, but
for the pursuit of open-endedness in general. Here
we introduce and empirically validate two new innovations to the original algorithm, as well as two
external innovations designed to help elucidate its
full potential. Together, these four advances enable the most open-ended algorithmic demonstration to date. The algorithmic innovations are (1)
a domain-general measure of how meaningfully
novel new challenges are, enabling the system
to potentially create and solve interesting challenges endlessly, and (2) an efficient heuristic
for determining when agents should goal-switch
from one problem to another (helping open-ended
search better scale). Outside the algorithm itself,
to enable a more definitive demonstration of openendedness, we introduce (3) a novel, more flexible
way to encode environmental challenges, and (4)
a generic measure of the extent to which a system continues to exhibit open-ended innovation.
Enhanced POET produces a diverse range of so*
Co-senior authors 1 Uber AI 2 OpenAI. Work done at Uber
AI. Correspondence to: Rui Wang <ruiwang@uber.com>, Jeff
Clune <jclune@gmail.com>, Kenneth O. Stanley <kennethostanley@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

phisticated behaviors that solve a wide range of
environmental challenges, many of which cannot
be solved through other means.

1. Introduction
The progress of machine learning so far mostly relies upon a
series of challenges and benchmarks that are manually conceived by the community (e.g. MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998),
ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009), pole balancing (Anderson,
1989), and Atari (Bellemare et al., 2013)). Once a learning
algorithm converges, or solves a task, there is nothing to gain
by running it longer in that domain. Sometimes, learned parameters are transferred between challenges (Yosinski et al.,
2014). However, in such cases a human manually chooses
which task to transfer from and to, slowing the process and
limiting the opportunities to harness such transfer to cases
where humans recognize its value.
A fundamentally different approach is to create open-ended
algorithms (Standish, 2003; Langdon, 2005; Bedau, 2008;
Taylor et al., 2016; Stanley et al., 2017; Schmidhuber, 2013;
Forestier et al., 2017) that propel themselves forward by
conceiving simultaneously both challenges and solutions,
thereby creating a never-ending stream of learning opportunities across expanding and sometimes circuitous webs of
stepping stones. Such an algorithm also need not rely on
our intuitions to determine either the right stepping stones
or in what order they should be traversed to learn complex tasks, both notoriously difficult decisions (Stanley &
Lehman, 2015). Instead, it could continually invent environments that pose novel challenges of appropriate difficulty, to
stimulate further capabilities without being so difficult that
all gradient of improvement is lost. The environments need
not arrive in a strict sequence either; they can be discovered
in parallel and asynchronously, in an ever-expanding tree of
diverse challenges and their solutions.
The concept of open-endedness takes inspiration from natural evolution, which creates problems (also known as challenges, niches, environments, learning opportunities, etc.),
such as reaching and eating the leaves of trees for nutrition,
and their solutions, such as giraffes and caterpillars, in an
ongoing process that has avoided stagnation and continued

