Generalizing Convolutional Neural Networks for Equivariance
to Lie Groups on Arbitrary Continuous Data

Marc Finzi 1

Samuel Stanton 1

Pavel Izmailov 1

Andrew Gordon Wilson 1

Abstract
The translation equivariance of convolutional layers enables convolutional neural networks to generalize well on image problems. While translation
equivariance provides a powerful inductive bias
for images, we often additionally desire equivariance to other transformations, such as rotations,
especially for non-image data. We propose a general method to construct a convolutional layer
that is equivariant to transformations from any
specified Lie group with a surjective exponential
map. Incorporating equivariance to a new group
requires implementing only the group exponential
and logarithm maps, enabling rapid prototyping.
Showcasing the simplicity and generality of our
method, we apply the same model architecture to
images, ball-and-stick molecular data, and Hamiltonian dynamical systems. For Hamiltonian systems, the equivariance of our models is especially
impactful, leading to exact conservation of linear
and angular momentum.

1. Introduction
Symmetry pervades the natural world. The same law of
gravitation governs a game of catch, the orbits of our planets, and the formation of galaxies. It is precisely because
of the order of the universe that we can hope to understand
it. Once we started to understand the symmetries inherent
in physical laws, we could predict behavior in galaxies billions of light-years away by studying our own local region
of time and space. For statistical models to achieve their
full potential, it is essential to incorporate our knowledge
of naturally occurring symmetries into the design of algorithms and architectures. An example of this principle is
the translation equivariance of convolutional layers in neural networks (LeCun et al., 1995): when an input (e.g. an
1
New York University.
<maf820@nyu.edu>.

Correspondence to: Marc Finzi

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Many modalities of spatial data do not lie on a grid, but
still possess important symmetries. We propose a single model
to learn from continuous spatial data that can be specialized to
respect a given continuous symmetry group.

image) is translated, the output of a convolutional layer is
translated in the same way.
Group theory provides a mechanism to reason about symmetry and equivariance. Convolutional layers are equivariant
to translations, and are a special case of group convolution. A group convolution is a general linear transformation
equivariant to a given group, used in group equivariant convolutional networks (Cohen and Welling, 2016a).
In this paper, we develop a general framework for equivariant models on arbitrary continuous (spatial) data represented as coordinates and values {(xi , fi )}N
i=1 . Spatial data
is a broad category, including ball-and-stick representations
of molecules, the coordinates of a dynamical system, and
images (shown in Figure 1). When the inputs or group
elements lie on a grid (e.g., image data) one can simply
enumerate the values of the convolutional kernel at each
group element. But in order to extend to continuous data,
we define the convolutional kernel as a continuous function
on the group parameterized by a neural network.
We consider the large class of continuous groups known as
Lie groups. In most cases, Lie groups can be parameterized
in terms of a vector space of infinitesimal generators (the Lie
algebra) via the logarithm and exponential maps. Many useful transformations are Lie groups, including translations,
rotations, and scalings. We propose LieConv, a convolutional layer that can be made equivariant to a given Lie
group by defining exp and log maps. We demonstrate the

