Efficiently Solving MDPs with Stochastic Mirror Descent

Yujia Jin 1 Aaron Sidford 1

Abstract
We present a unified framework based on primaldual stochastic mirror descent for approximately
solving infinite-horizon Markov decision processes (MDPs) given a generative model. When
applied to an average-reward MDP with Atot
total actions and mixing time bound tmix our
method computes an -optimal policy with an
e 2 Atot −2 ) samples from the stateexpected O(t
mix
transition matrix, removing the ergodicity dependence of prior art. When applied to a γ-discounted
MDP with Atot total actions our method come
putes an -optimal policy with an expected O((1−
−4
−2
γ) Atot  ) samples, improving over previous
primal-dual methods and matching the state-ofthe-art up to a (1 − γ)−1 factor. Both methods are
model-free, update state values and policies simultaneously, and run in time linear in the number of
samples taken. We achieve these results through a
more general stochastic mirror descent framework
for solving bilinear saddle-point problems with
simplex and box domains and we demonstrate the
flexibility of this framework by providing further
applications to constrained MDPs.

1

Introduction

Markov decision processes (MDPs) are a fundamental mathematical abstraction for sequential decision making under
uncertainty and they serve as a basic modeling tool in reinforcement learning (RL) and stochastic control (Bertsekas
& Tsitsiklis, 1995; Puterman, 2014; Sutton & Barto, 2018).
Two prominent classes of MDPs are discounted MDPs
(DMDPs) and average-reward MDPs (AMDPs). Each have
been studied extensively; DMDPs have a number of nice
theoretical properties including reward convergence and operator monotonicity (Bertsekas et al., 1995) and AMDPs are
1

Management Science and Engineering (MS&E), Stanford
University, Stanford, United States. Correspondence to: Yujia Jin
<yujiajin@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

applicable to optimal control, learning automata, and various real-world reinforcement learning settings (Mahadevan,
1996; Auer & Ortner, 2007; Ouyang et al., 2017).
In this paper we consider the prevalent computational learning problem of finding an approximately optimal policy of
an MDP given only restricted access to the model. In particular, we consider the problem of computing an -optimal
policy, i.e. a policy with an additive  error in expected
cumulative reward over infinite horizon, under the standard
assumption of a generative model (Kearns & Singh, 1999;
Kakade et al., 2003), which allows one to sample from statetransitions given the current state-action pair. This problem
is well-studied and there are multiple known upper and
lower bounds on its sample complexity (Azar et al., 2012;
Wang, 2017a; Sidford et al., 2018a; Wainwright, 2019).
In this work, we provide a unified framework based on
primal-dual stochastic mirror descent (SMD) for learning
an -optimal policies for both AMDPs and DMDPs with a
generative model. We show that this framework achieves
sublinear running times for solving dense bilinear saddlepoint problems with simplex and box domains, and (as a
special case) `∞ regression (Sherman, 2017; Sidford & Tian,
2018). As far as we are aware, this is the first such sub-linear
running time for this problem. We achieve our results by
applying this framework to saddle-point representations of
AMDPs and DMDPs and proving that approximate equilibria yield approximately optimal policies.
Our MDP algorithms have sample complexity linear in the
total number of possible actions, denoted by Atot . For
an AMDP with bounded mixing time tmix for all polie 2 Atot −2 ) 1 ,
cies, we prove a sample complexity of O(t
mix
which removes the ergodicity condition of prior art (Wang,
2017b) (which can in the worst-case be unbounded). For
DMDP with discount factor γ, we prove a sample come
plexity of O((1
− γ)−4 Atot −2 ), improving over the bestknown achievable sample complexity by primal-dual methods (Wang, 2017a) and matching the state-of-the-art (Sidford et al., 2018a; Wainwright, 2019) and lower bound (Azar
et al., 2012) up to a (1 − γ)−1 factor.
1
e to hide poly-logarithmic facThroughout the paper we use O
tors in Atot , tmix , 1/(1 − γ), 1/, and the number of states of the
MDP.

