Small Data, Big Decisions: Model Selection in the Small-Data Regime

Jörg Bornschein 1 Francesco Visin 1 Simon Osindero 1

Abstract
Highly overparametrized neural networks can display curiously strong generalization performance –
a phenomenon that has recently garnered a wealth
of theoretical and empirical research in order to
better understand it. In contrast to most previous
work, which typically considers the performance
as a function of the model size, in this paper we
empirically study the generalization performance
as the size of the training set varies over multiple
orders of magnitude. These systematic experiments lead to some interesting and potentially
very useful observations; perhaps most notably
that training on smaller subsets of the data can
lead to more reliable model selection decisions
whilst simultaneously enjoying smaller computational overheads. Our experiments furthermore allow us to estimate Minimum Description Lengths
for common datasets given modern neural network architectures, thereby paving the way for
principled model selection taking into account
Occams-razor.

formance (in terms of error) when applied to classification
problems, even though the generalization cross-entropy exhibits all the characteristics of overfitting. There has recently
been renewed interest in studying this phenomenon, both
theoretically and empirically (Advani & Saxe, 2017; Spigler
et al., 2018). Belkin et al. (2019) for example argue that
beside the classical underfitting and overfitting regimes, a
third one for massively overparameterised models exists.
The transition into this regime is called the interpolation
threshold and is characterized by a peak in generalization
error, followed by a phase of further decrease. The peculiar shape of the generalization-error over model-size curve
lends the term double-descent to this phenomenon. Work by
Nakkiran et al. (2019) has sharpened this picture and shown
that this behaviour can be observed when training modern
neural network architectures on established, challenging
datasets. Most of the work studying generalization of neural
networks focuses on the relationship between generalization
performance and model size. Instead we present an empirical study that investigates the generalization performance
as a function of the training set size.
In the rest of the Introduction we outline the main contributions of our work.

1. Introduction

1.1. Performance analysis

According to classical statistical learning theory, achieving
an optimal generalisation loss requires selecting a model
capacity that strikes the best balance between underfitting
and overfitting, i.e., between not having enough capacity
to model the training data accurately and having too much,
and thus prone to adapt too closely to the training data at
the expense of generalisation. Under this theory, the final
generalisation loss plotted against model capacity should
behave as a U-shaped curve – initially decreasing as the capacity increases (underfitting) to reach a minimum (optimal
model size) and then finally increase again (overfitting).

One of our key contributions is to gather performance curves
as a function of the training set size for a wide range of architectures on ImageNet, CIFAR10, MNIST and EMNIST. We
also perform an extensive sweep over a wide range of architectures, model sizes, optimizers and, crucially, we vary the
size of the training sets over multiple orders of magnitude,
starting from the full dataset down to only few examples per
class. Our study covers even extreme cases – for example
the training of oversized ResNet architectures with 10 or
less examples per class. This is, to the best of our knowledge, the most extensive empirical analysis conducted on
generalization for massively overparameterized models, and
strengthens the emerging understanding of training regimes
for modern deep learning.

Contrary to these results, it has long been observed that
neural networks show a curiously good generalization per1
DeepMind, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Jörg Bornschein <bornschein@google.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1.2. A ranking-hypothesis
One salient observation we have made has not been described in the literature: overparameterized model archi-

