Sparse Subspace Clustering with Entropy-Norm

Liang Bai 1 Jiye Liang 1

Abstract
In this paper, we provide an explicit theoretical connection between Sparse subspace clustering (SSC) and spectral clustering (SC) from
the perspective of learning a data similarity matrix. We show that spectral clustering with Gaussian kernel can be viewed as sparse subspace
clustering with entropy-norm (SSC+E). Compared to SSC, SSC+E can obtain an analytical, symmetrical, nonnegative and nonlinearlyrepresentational similarity matrix. Besides, SSC+E makes use of Gaussian kernel to compute
the sparse similarity matrix of objects, which can
avoid the complex computation of the sparse optimization program of SSC. Finally, we provide
the experimental analysis to compare the efficiency and effectiveness of sparse subspace clustering and spectral clustering on ten benchmark data sets. The theoretical and experimental analysis can well help users for the selection of highdimensional data clustering algorithms.

1. Introduction
Clustering is an important problem in statistical multivariate analysis, data mining and machine learning
(Han & Kamber, 2001). The goal of clustering is to group
a set of objects into clusters so that the objects in the same
cluster are highly similar but remarkably dissimilar with
objects in other clusters (Jain, 2008). To tackle this problem, various types of clustering algorithms have been developed in the literature (e.g., (Aggarwal & Reddy, 2014)
and references therein), including partitional, hierarchical,
density-based, grid-based clustering, etc.
Recently, increasing attention has been paid to clustering
*

Equal contribution 1 Key Laboratory of Computational Intelligence and Chinese Information Processing of Ministry of Education, School of Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi
University, Taiyuan, Shanxi Province, China. Correspondence to:
Jiye Liang <ljy@sxu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

high-dimensional data which is ubiquitous in real-world
data mining applications, such as image processing, text
analysis, and bioinformatics et al. Sparsity is an accompanying phenomenon of high-dimensional data, which leads
to “curse of dimensionality”, i.e., all pairs of points tend
to be almost equidistant from one another. It is a special challenge for clustering high-dimensional data. In
order to solve this problem, lots of clustering algorithms
have been developed in the literature (e.g., (Parsons et al.,
2004; Elhamifar & Vidal, 2013) and references therein). Among them, spectral clustering and sparse subspace clustering are two state-of-the-art methods to effectively separate the high-dimensional data in accordance with the underlying subspace. Spectral clustering (Shi & Malik, 2000;
Ng et al., 2001) is a representative of graph-based clustering, which first converts a data set into a graph or a data similarity matrix and then uses a graph cutting method
to identify clusters. However, the clustering results of the
spectral clustering are sensitive to the converted graph. In
the classical spectral clustering algorithm, the graph is often constructed by kernel functions (Dhillon et al., 2007)
or k-nearest neighbors (KNN) (Zhu et al., 2014). Besides,
some scholars developed graph-learning methods to obtain
a high-quality graph from the data set. For example, Nie et
al. proposed a clustering algorithm with adaptive neighbors
(Nie et al., 2014), which learns the data similarity matrix by
assigning the adaptive and optimal neighbors for each data
point based on the local connectivity.
Sparse subspace clustering can also be seen as a special
spectral clustering. It makes use of self representation of
the data to construct the sparse similarity graph and apply
spectral clustering on such graph to obtain the final clustering result. In (Elhamifar & Vidal, 2009), Elhamifar and
Vidal presented the SSC algorithm with L1 -norm in detail.
Furthermore, several variants of SSC have been proposed
to find out the sparse representation of the data under different assumptions. Wang and Xu proposed noisy SSC to
handle noisy data that lie close to disjoint or overlapping
subspaces (Wang & Xu, 2016). Yang et al. proposed SSC
with L0 -norm (Yang et al., 2016). Liu et al. proposed a low
rank representation of all data jointly by using the structured sparsity loss (Liu et al., 2013). Hu et al. investigated theoretically the grouping effect for self-representation
based approaches and presented a smooth representation

