Understanding the Curse of Horizon in Off-Policy Evaluation via Conditional
Importance Sampling

Yao Liu 1 Pierre-Luc Bacon 2 Emma Brunskill 1

Abstract
Off-policy policy estimators that use importance
sampling (IS) can suffer from high variance in
long-horizon domains, and there has been particular excitement over new IS methods that leverage the structure of Markov decision processes.
We analyze the variance of the most popular approaches through the viewpoint of conditional
Monte Carlo. Surprisingly, we find that in finite horizon MDPs there is no strict variance
reduction of per-decision importance sampling
or marginalized importance sampling, comparing with vanilla importance sampling. We then
provide sufficient conditions under which the perdecision or marginalized estimators will provably
reduce the variance over importance sampling
with finite horizons. For the asymptotic (in terms
of horizon T ) case, we develop upper and lower
bounds on the variance of those estimators which
yields sufficient conditions under which there exists an exponential v.s. polynomial gap between
the variance of importance sampling and that of
the per-decision or stationary/marginalized estimators. These results help advance our understanding of if and when new types of IS estimators will improve the accuracy of off-policy estimation.

1. Introduction
Off-policy (Sutton & Barto, 2018) policy evaluation is the
problem of estimating the expected return of a given target
policy from the distribution of samples induced by a different policy. Due in part to the growing sources of data
about past sequences of decisions and their outcomes – from
1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University 2 Mila University of Montreal. This research was conducted when PierreLuc Bacon was a post-doc at Stanford.. Correspondence to: Yao
Liu <yaoliu@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

marketing to energy management to healthcare – there is
increasing interest in developing accurate and efficient algorithms for off-policy policy evaluation.
For Markov Decision Processes, this problem was addressed
(Precup et al., 2000; Peshkin & Shelton, 2002) early on
by importance sampling (IS)(Rubinstein, 1981), a method
prone to large variance due to rare events (Glynn, 1994;
L’Ecuyer et al., 2009). The per-decision importance sampling estimator of (Precup et al., 2000) tries to mitigate
this problem by leveraging the temporal structure – earlier
rewards cannot depend on later decisions – of the domain.
While neither importance sampling (IS) nor per-decision
IS (PDIS) assumes the underlying domain is Markov, more
recently, a new class of estimators (Hallak & Mannor, 2017;
Liu et al., 2018; Gelada & Bellemare, 2019) has been proposed that leverages the Markovian structure. In particular,
these approaches propose performing importance sampling
over the stationary or marginalized state-action distributions
induced by the corresponding Markov chain for a particular
policy. By avoiding the explicit accumulation of likelihood ratios along the trajectories, it is hypothesized that
such ratios of stationary/marginalized distributions could
substantially reduce the variance of the resulting estimator,
thereby overcoming the “curse of horizon” (Liu et al., 2018)
plaguing off-policy evaluation. The recent flurry of empirical results shows significant performance improvements
over the alternative methods on a variety of simulation domains. Yet so far there has not been a formal analysis of
the accuracy of IS, PDIS, and marginalized state–action IS
which will strengthen our understanding of their properties,
benefits and limitations.
To formally understand the variance relationship between
those unbiased estimators, we link this to a more general
class of estimators: the extended (Bratley et al., 1987) form
of the conditional Monte Carlo estimators (Hammersley,
1956; Dubi & Horowitz, 1979; Granovsky, 1981), and thus
view those importance sampling estimators in a unified
framework and referred to as conditional importance sampling, since they are computing weights as conditional expectation of likelihood ratio conditioning on different choice
of statistics. Though the intuition from prior work suggests
that marginalized importance sampling should have the best

