Hallucinative Topological Memory for Zero-Shot Visual Planning

Kara Liu * 1 Thanard Kurutach * 1 Christine Tung 1 Pieter Abbeel 1 Aviv Tamar 1 2

Abstract
In visual planning (VP), an agent learns to plan
goal-directed behavior from observations of a
dynamical system obtained offline, e.g., images
obtained from self-supervised robot interaction.
Most previous works on VP approached the problem by planning in a learned latent space, resulting in low-quality visual plans, and difficult
training algorithms. Here, instead, we propose
a simple VP method that plans directly in image
space and displays competitive performance. We
build on the semi-parametric topological memory
(SPTM) method: image samples are treated as
nodes in a graph, the graph connectivity is learned
from image sequence data, and planning can be
performed using conventional graph search methods. We propose two modifications on SPTM.
First, we train an energy-based graph connectivity
function using contrastive predictive coding that
admits stable training. Second, to allow zero-shot
planning in new domains, we learn a conditional
VAE model that generates images given a context
describing the domain, and use these hallucinated
samples for building the connectivity graph and
planning. We show that this simple approach significantly outperform the SOTA VP methods, in
terms of both plan interpretability and success
rate when using the plan to guide a trajectoryfollowing controller. Interestingly, our method
can pick up non-trivial visual properties of objects, such as their geometry, and account for it in
the plans.

1. Introduction
We are interested in goal-directed planning problems where
the state observations are high-dimensional images, the sys*
Equal contribution 1 Berkeley AI Research, University of
California, Berkeley 2 Technion. Correspondence to: Kara
Liu <karamarieliu@berkeley.edu>, Thanard Kurutach <thanard.kurutach@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

tem dynamics are not known, and only a data set of state
transitions is available. In particular, given a starting state
observation and a goal state observation, we wish to generate a sequence of actions that transition the system from
start to goal. One application for such problems is in selfsupervised robot learning, where it is relatively easy to acquire such data by letting the robot explore its environment
randomly, and the problem becomes how to process this
data for solving various tasks (Nair et al., 2017; Wang et al.,
2019; Pinto & Gupta, 2016; Finn & Levine, 2017).
Given a reward function, deep reinforcement learning (RL)
can plan with high-dimensional inputs, and batch off-policy
RL algorithms (Lange et al., 2012) can be applied to the
problem above (Haarnoja et al., 2018; Ebert et al., 2018;
Mnih et al., 2015; Schulman et al., 2015). However, goalbased planning is a sparse reward task, which is known to
be difficult for RL (Andrychowicz et al., 2017). Moreover,
RL provides black-box decision policies, which are not interpretable, and can only be evaluated by running them on
a robot. Addressing both data-driven modeling and interpretability, the visual planning (VP) paradigm seeks to first
generate a visual plan – a sequence of images that transition
the system from start to goal, which can be understood by a
human observer – and only then take actions that follow the
plan using visual servoing methods.
Bearing similarity to model-based RL (Sutton et al., 1998),
most VP approaches learn a low-dimensional latent variable
model for the system dynamics, and plan a state-to-goal
sequence by searching in the latent space (Kurutach et al.,
2018; Asai, 2019; Ebert et al., 2018; Hafner et al., 2018;
Nair & Finn, 2019). There are two shortcomings to this
approach: training deep generative models with a structured
latent space can be tricky in practice (Watter et al., 2015;
Kurutach et al., 2018), and consequentially, the resulting
visual plans are often of low visual fidelity.
In this work, we propose a simple VP method that plans
directly in image space. We build on the semi-parametric
topological memory (SPTM) method proposed by Savinov
et al. (Savinov et al., 2018). In SPTM, images collected
offline are treated as nodes in a graph and represent the
possible states of the system. To connect nodes in this
graph, an image classifier is trained to predict whether pairs
of images were ‘close’ in the data or not, effectively learning

