DeepCoDA: personalized interpretability for compositional health data

Thomas P. Quinn * 1 Dang Nguyen * 1 Santu Rana 1 Sunil Gupta 1 Svetha Venkatesh 1

Abstract
Interpretability allows the domain-expert to directly evaluate the model’s relevance and reliability, a practice that offers assurance and builds
trust. In the healthcare setting, interpretable models should implicate relevant biological mechanisms independent of technical factors like data
pre-processing. We define personalized interpretability as a measure of sample-specific feature attribution, and view it as a minimum requirement for a precision health model to justify its conclusions. Some health data, especially
those generated by high-throughput sequencing
experiments, have nuances that compromise precision health models and their interpretation. These
data are compositional, meaning that each feature is conditionally dependent on all other features. We propose the Deep Compositional Data
Analysis (DeepCoDA) framework to extend precision health modelling to high-dimensional compositional data, and to provide personalized interpretability through patient-specific weights.
Our architecture maintains state-of-the-art performance across 25 real-world data sets, all while
producing interpretations that are both personalized and fully coherent for compositional data.

1. Introduction
Interpretability is pivotal for the adoption and use of predictive deep models in healthcare. As one physician noted,
“Without [English-language] explanations, it is obviously
unreasonable for the physician to rely on such programs;
ultimately, a program, like any consultant, must justify its
conclusions to the physician responsible for the patient’s
care” (Schwartz et al., 1987). Interpretability allows the
domain-expert to directly evaluate the model’s relevance
and reliability, a practice that offers assurance and builds
*

Equal contribution 1 Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute
(A I ), Deakin University, Geelong, Australia. Correspondence to:
Thomas P. Quinn <contacttomquinn@gmail.com>.
2 2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

trust. In the healthcare setting, interpretable models should
implicate relevant biological mechanisms independent of
technical factors like data pre-processing. Precision health
research aims to target disease prevention and health promotion to individual patients (Ashley, 2016). Although this
field has benefited tremendously from the availability of
clinical data, its mission requires new models that offer interpretability at the level of the individual patient. We define
personalized interpretability as a measure of sample-specific
feature attribution, and view it as a minimum requirement
for a precision health model to justify its conclusions.
The attention mechanism offers one approach to personalized interpretability (Bahdanau et al., 2016), and has been
used recently to study cancer heterogeneity (Beykikhoshk
et al., 2020). The self-explaining neural network (SENN),
may likewise enable precision health through its formulation y = θ(x)> x (Alvarez-Melis and Jaakkola, 2018). This
equation is well-suited to personalized interpretability for 3
reasons: (a) the input features xj are clearly anchored to the
observed empirical measurements; (b) each parameter θ(x)j
estimates the quantitative contribution of its corresponding
feature xj to the predicted value; and (c) the aggregation
of feature specific terms θ(x)j xj is additive, allowing for a
feature-by-feature interpretation of impact. However, selfexplanation has not yet been tailored to high-throughput
health biomarker data, which exist not as absolute measurements but rather multivariate compositions.
Much of the health data generated by high-throughput sequencing experiments have nuances that compromise precision health models and their interpretation. These data are
compositional, meaning that they arise from an inexhaustive
sampling procedure in which each feature is conditionally
dependent on all other features (Gloor et al., 2017; Quinn
et al., 2018; Calle, 2019). Compositional data can be defined
as the proportions of x∗ (Aitchison, 1986)
x=

[x∗1 , ..., x∗D ]
PD ∗
j xj

(1)

where x is a composition with D parts. By considering
this equation carefully, one can gain an intuition for why
compositional data are so difficult to analyze. For example, consider the 3-part vector x∗ = [a∗ , b∗ , c∗ ] of absolute
abundances and its corresponding composition x = [a, b, c]
of relative abundances. When c∗ increases, c will also in-

