AutoML-Zero: Evolving Machine Learning Algorithms From Scratch
Esteban Real * 1 Chen Liang * 1 David R. So 1 Quoc V. Le 1

Abstract
Machine learning research has advanced in multiple aspects, including model structures and learning methods. The effort to automate such research, known as AutoML, has also made significant progress. However, this progress has
largely focused on the architecture of neural networks, where it has relied on sophisticated expertdesigned layers as building blocks—or similarly
restrictive search spaces. Our goal is to show that
AutoML can go further: it is possible today to automatically discover complete machine learning
algorithms just using basic mathematical operations as building blocks. We demonstrate this by
introducing a novel framework that significantly
reduces human bias through a generic search
space. Despite the vastness of this space, evolutionary search can still discover two-layer neural networks trained by backpropagation. These
simple neural networks can then be surpassed by
evolving directly on tasks of interest, e.g. CIFAR10 variants, where modern techniques emerge
in the top algorithms, such as bilinear interactions, normalized gradients, and weight averaging. Moreover, evolution adapts algorithms to
different task types: e.g., dropout-like techniques
appear when little data is available. We believe
these preliminary successes in discovering machine learning algorithms from scratch indicate a
promising new direction for the field.

1. Introduction
In recent years, neural networks have reached remarkable
performance on key tasks and seen a fast increase in their
popularity [e.g. He et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016; Wu et al.,
2016]. This success was only possible due to decades of
machine learning (ML) research into many aspects of the
*

Equal contribution 1 Google Brain/Google Research, Mountain View, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Esteban Real <ereal@
google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

field, ranging from learning strategies to new architectures
[Rumelhart et al., 1986; LeCun et al., 1995; Hochreiter
& Schmidhuber, 1997, among many others]. The length
and difficulty of ML research prompted a new field, named
AutoML, that aims to automate such progress by spending machine compute time instead of human research time
(Fahlman & Lebiere, 1990; Hutter et al., 2011; Finn et al.,
2017). This endeavor has been fruitful but, so far, modern studies have only employed constrained search spaces
heavily reliant on human design. A common example is
architecture search, which typically constrains the space
by only employing sophisticated expert-designed layers as
building blocks and by respecting the rules of backpropagation (Zoph & Le, 2016; Real et al., 2017; Tan et al.,
2019). Other AutoML studies similarly have found ways
to constrain their search spaces to isolated algorithmic aspects, such as the learning rule used during backpropagation
(Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Ravi & Larochelle, 2017), the
data augmentation (Cubuk et al., 2019a; Park et al., 2019) or
the objective function in reinforcement learning (Houthooft
et al., 2018; Kirsch et al., 2019; Alet et al., 2019); in these
works, all other algorithmic aspects remain hand-designed.
This approach may save compute time but has two drawbacks. First, human-designed components bias the search
results in favor of human-designed algorithms, possibly reducing the innovation potential of AutoML. Innovation is
also limited by having fewer options (Elsken et al., 2019b).
Indeed, dominant aspects of performance are often left out
(Yang et al., 2020). Second, constrained search spaces need
to be carefully composed (Zoph et al., 2018; So et al., 2019;
Negrinho et al., 2019), thus creating a new burden on researchers and undermining the purported objective of saving
their time.
To address this, we propose to automatically search for
whole ML algorithms using little restriction on form and
only simple mathematical operations as building blocks.
We call this approach AutoML-Zero, following the spirit
of previous work which aims to learn with minimal human participation [e.g. Silver et al., 2017]. In other words,
AutoML-Zero aims to search a fine-grained space simultaneously for the model, optimization procedure, initialization,
and so on, permitting much less human-design and even allowing the discovery of non-neural network algorithms. To
demonstrate that this is possible today, we present an initial

