Characterizing Distribution Equivalence and Structure Learning for
Cyclic and Acyclic Directed Graphs

AmirEmad Ghassami 1 Alan Yang 1 Negar Kiyavash 2 Kun Zhang 3

Abstract
The main approach to deﬁning equivalence
among acyclic directed causal graphical models
is based on the conditional independence relation­
ships in the distributions that the causal models
can generate, in terms of the Markov equivalence.
However, it is known that when cycles are allowed
in the causal structure, conditional independence
may not be a suitable notion for equivalence of
two structures, as it does not reﬂect all the infor­
mation in the distribution that is useful for identi­
ﬁcation of the underlying structure. In this paper,
we present a general, uniﬁed notion of equiva­
lence for linear Gaussian causal directed graphical
models, whether they are cyclic or acyclic. In our
proposed deﬁnition of equivalence, two structures
are equivalent if they can generate the same set
of data distributions. We also propose a weaker
notion of equivalence called quasi-equivalence,
which we show is the extent of identiﬁability from
observational data. We propose analytic as well as
graphical methods for characterizing the equiva­
lence of two structures. Additionally, we propose
a score-based method for learning the structure
from observational data, which successfully deals
with both acyclic and cyclic structures.

1. Introduction
The problem of learning directed graphical models from
data has received a signiﬁcant amount of attention over the
past three decades since those models provide a compact and
ﬂexible way to represent constraints on the joint distribution
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Univer­
sity of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA 2 College
´
of Management of Technology, Ecole
Polytechnique F´ed´erale
de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland 3 Department of Philosophy,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspondence
to: AmirEmad Ghassami <ghassam2@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

of the data (Koller & Friedman, 2009). When interpreted
causally, they can model causal relationships among the
variables of the system and help make predictions under
intervention (Pearl, 2009; Spirtes et al., 2000).
There exists an extensive literature on learning causal graph­
ical models from observational data under the assumption
that the model is a directed acyclic graph (DAG) (Zhang
et al., 2018). Existing approaches include constraint-based
methods (Spirtes et al., 2000; Pearl, 2009), score-based
methods (Heckerman et al., 1995; Chickering, 2002), hy­
brid methods (Tsamardinos et al., 2006), as well as meth­
ods which make extra assumptions on the data generating
process. For example, the model may be assumed to be lin­
ear with non-Gaussian exogenous noise variables (Shimizu
et al., 2006) or contain speciﬁc types of non-linearity in the
causal modules (Hoyer et al., 2009; Zhang & Hyvärinen,
2009).
Most real-life causal systems con­
!$
tain feedback loops, since feedback
is generally required to stabilize the
!" !&
!#
system and improve performance in
the presence of noise. Hence, the
!%
causal directed graph (DG) correFigure
1.
sponding to such systems will be
cyclic (Spirtes, 1995; Hyttinen et al.,
2012). However, there are relatively few works on learn­
ing structures that contain cycles. In many state-of-the-art
causal models, not only is feedback ignored, it is also explic­
itly assumed that there are no cycles passing information
among the considered quantities. Note that ignoring cycles
in structure learning can be very consequential. For instance,
in Figure 1, if one uses a conditional independence-based
learning method designed for DAGs such as the PC algo­
rithm (Spirtes et al., 2000), in the absence of the dashed
feedback loop the skeleton will be estimated correctly on
the population dataset and the directions for all edges into
XS can be determined. However, in the presence of the
feedback loop, the output is a complete directed graph since
no two variables will be independent conditioned on any
subset of the rest of the variables.
The lack of attention to cyclic structures in the literature
is primarily due to the simplicity of working with acyclic

