Label-Noise Robust Domain Adaptation
Xiyu Yu 1 Tongliang Liu 2 Mingming Gong 3 Kun Zhang 4 Kayhan Batmanghelich 5 Dacheng Tao 2

Abstract
Domain adaptation aims to correct the classifiers
when faced with distribution shift between source
(training) and target (test) domains. State-of-theart domain adaptation methods make use of deep
networks to extract domain-invariant representations. However, existing methods assume that all
the instances in the source domain are correctly
labeled; while in reality, it is unsurprising that
we may obtain a source domain with noisy labels.
In this paper, we are the first to comprehensively
investigate how label noise could adversely affect
existing domain adaptation methods in various
scenarios. Further, we theoretically prove that
there exists a method that can essentially reduce
the side-effect of noisy source labels in domain
adaptation. Specifically, focusing on the generalized target shift scenario, where both label distribution PY and the class-conditional distribution
PX|Y can change, we discover that the denoising
Conditional Invariant Component (DCIC) framework can provably ensures (1) extracting invariant
representations given examples with noisy labels
in the source domain and unlabeled examples
in the target domain and (2) estimating the label distribution in the target domain with no bias.
Experimental results on both synthetic and realworld data verify the effectiveness of the proposed
method.

1. Introduction
In the classical domain adaptation setting, given raw features {xT1 , · · · , xTn } from a target domain, we aim to learn
1

Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu
Incorporation 2 UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, The University of
Sydney 3 School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Melbourne 4 Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of
Pittsburgh 5 Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University.
Correspondence to: Xiyu Yu <yuxiyu@baidu.com>, Tongliang
Liu <tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

a function to predict the labels {y1T , · · · , ynT } using labeled
S
data {(xS1 , y1S ), · · · , (xSm , ym
)} from a different but related
source domain (Wu et al., 2019). Let X and Y be the variables of features and labels, respectively. In contrast to the
S
standard supervised learning, the joint distributions PXY
T
and PXY are different. For example, in medical data analysis, health record data collected from patients of different
age groups or hospital locations often vary (Purushotham
et al., 2017). Inferring invariant knowledge from a domain
(e.g., an age group or a location) with a large set of labeled
examples to another with unlabeled data is desirable (Raghu
et al., 2019) since it is often laborious to obtain high-quality
labels for clinical data (Dubois et al., 2017).
According to the assumptions about how the joint distribution PXY shifts across domains, several domain adaptation
scenarios have been studied. (1) Covariate shift assumes
that the marginal distribution PX changes but the conditional distribution PY |X stays the same. In this situation,
methods have been proposed to correct the shift in PX , for
instance, by importance reweighting (Huang et al., 2007)
and invariant feature learning (Long et al., 2015; Kumagai
et al., 2019; Meyerson & Miikkulainen, 2019; Chen et al.,
2019a). (2) Model shift (Wang et al., 2014) assumes that
PX and PY |X change independently. In this case, it also requires Y to be continuous, the change in PY |X to be smooth,
and some labeled data to be available in the target domain.
(3) Target shift (Zhang et al., 2013a; Azizzadenesheli et al.,
2019) assumes that PY shifts while PX|Y stays the same.
In this scenario, PX and PY |X change dependently because
their changes are caused by the change in PY . (4) Generalized target shift (Zhang et al., 2013a) assumes that PX|Y
and PY change independently across domains, causing PX
and PY |X to change dependently. An interpretation of the
difference between these scenarios from a causal standpoint
was also provided (Schölkopf et al., 2012a).
Additionally, the aforementioned domain adaptation methods extract invariant features across different domains based
on a strong assumption; that is, the source domain labels
are accurate. However, since accurately labeling training
set tends to be expensive, time-consuming, and sometimes
impossible, this assumption is often violated in practice. For
example, in medical data analysis, due to the subjectivity of
domain experts, insufficient discriminative information, and
digitalization errors (Sáez et al., 2016), noisy labels are of-

