One Size Fits All: Can We Train One Denoiser for All Noise Levels?
Abhiram Gnansambandam 1 Stanley H. Chan 1 2

Abstract
When training an estimator such as a neural network for tasks like image denoising, it is often
preferred to train one estimator and apply it to
all noise levels. The de facto training protocol
to achieve this goal is to train the estimator with
noisy samples whose noise levels are uniformly
distributed across the range of interest. However,
why should we allocate the samples uniformly?
Can we have more training samples that are less
noisy, and fewer samples that are more noisy?
What is the optimal distribution? How do we obtain such a distribution? The goal of this paper is
to address this training sample distribution problem from a minimax risk optimization perspective.
We derive a dual ascent algorithm to determine
the optimal sampling distribution of which the
convergence is guaranteed as long as the set of
admissible estimators is closed and convex. For
estimators with non-convex admissible sets such
as deep neural networks, our dual formulation
converges to a solution of the convex relaxation.
We discuss how the algorithm can be implemented
in practice. We evaluate the algorithm on linear
estimators and deep networks.

arguably universal for all learning-based estimators. When
such a problem arises, the most straight-forward solution is
to create a suite of denoisers trained at different noise levels
and use the one that matches best with the input noisy image
(such as those used in the “Plug-and-Play” priors (Zhang
et al., 2017; Chan et al., 2016; Chan, 2019)). However, this
ensemble approach is not effective since the model capacity
is multiple times larger than necessary.
A more widely adopted solution is to train one denoiser and
use it for all noise levels. The idea is to train the denoiser
using a training dataset containing images of different noise
levels. The competitiveness of these “one size fits all” denoisers compared to the best individually trained denoisers
has been demonstrated in (Zhang et al., 2017; 2018; Mao
et al., 2016a; Remez et al., 2017). However, as we will
illustrate in this paper, there is no guarantee for such arbitrarily trained one-size-fits-all denoiser to have a consistent
performance over the entire noise range. At some noise
levels, usually at the lower tail of the noise range, the performance could be much worse than the best individuals.
The cause of this phenomenon is related to how we draw
the noisy samples, which is usually uniform across the noise
range. The question we ask here is that if we allocate more
low-noise samples and fewer high-noise samples, will we
be able to get a more consistent result?
1.2. Objective and Contributions

1. Introduction
1.1. “One Size Fits All” Denoisers
The following phenomenon could be familiar to those who
develop learning-based image denoisers. If the denoiser is
trained at a noise level σ, then its performance is maximized
when the testing noise level is also σ. As soon as the testing
noise level deviates from the training noise level, the performance drops (Choi et al., 2019; Kim et al., 2019). This is
a typical mismatch between training and testing, which is
1
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 2 Department
of Statistics, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47906,
United States. Correspondence to: Stanley Chan <stanchan@purdue.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

The objective of this paper is to find a sampling distribution
such that for every noise level the performance is consistent. Here, by consistent we meant that the gap between the
estimator and the best individuals is balanced. The idea is
illustrated in Figure 1. The black curve in the figure represents the ensemble of the best individually trained denoisers.
It is a virtual curve obtained by training the denoiser at each
noise level. A typical “one size fits all” denoiser is trained
by using noisy samples from a uniform distribution, which
is denoted by the blue curve. This figure illustrates a typical
in-consistence where there is a significant gap at low-noise
but small gap at high noise. The objective of the paper is
to find a new sampling distribution (denoted by the orange
bars) such that we can achieve a consistent performance
throughout the entire range. The result returned by our
method is a trade-off between the overall performance and
the worst cases scenarios.

