Quadratically Regularized Subgradient Methods for Weakly Convex
Optimization with Weakly Convex Constraints

Runchao Ma 1 Qihang Lin 1 Tianbao Yang 2
Here, we assume that X ⊂ Rd is a compact convex set
that allows for a simple projection and fi for i = 0, . . . , m
are weakly-convex (potentially non-smooth) functions. A
solution x̄ ∈ X is ε-optimal if f (x̄) − f ∗ ≤ ε and ε-feasible
if x̄ ∈ X and g(x̄) ≤ ε. Many optimization models in
machine learning contain nonlinear constraints. Examples
include Neyman-Pearson classification (Rigollet & Tong,
2011) and learning with dataset constraints (Goh et al., 2016)
(e.g. fairness constraints and churn rate constraints).

Abstract
Optimization models with non-convex constraints
arise in many tasks in machine learning, e.g.,
learning with fairness constraints or NeymanPearson classification with non-convex loss. Although many efficient methods have been developed with theoretical convergence guarantees for
non-convex unconstrained problems, it remains a
challenge to design provably efficient algorithms
for problems with non-convex functional constraints. This paper proposes a class of subgradient methods for constrained optimization where
the objective function and the constraint functions
are weakly convex and nonsmooth. Our methods
solve a sequence of strongly convex subproblems,
where a quadratic regularization term is added to
both the objective function and each constraint
function. Each subproblem can be solved by various algorithms for strongly convex optimization.
Under a uniform Slater’s condition, we establish
the computation complexities of our methods for
finding a nearly stationary point.

Optimization problems with a convex objective function
and convex constraints have been well studied in literature with many efficient algorithms and their theoretical
complexity developed (Bertsekas, 2014; 1999; Nocedal &
Wright, 2006). However, the parallel development for optimization with non-convex objective functions and nonconvex constraints, especially for theoretically provable
algorithms, remains limited, restricting the practices of statistical modeling and decision making in many disciplines.
It is well-known that finding a global minimizer for a general non-convex function without any constraints has been
intractable (Sahni, 1974). The difficulty will increase when
constraints appear and will increase even further when those
constraints are non-convex.

1. Introduction
Continuous optimization models with nonlinear constraints
have been widely used in many disciplines including machine learning, statistics, and data mining with many realworld applications. A general optimization problem with
inequality constraints is formulated as
f ∗ ≡ min{f (x) ≡ f0 (x)}
x∈X

s.t.

g(x) ≡ max fi (x) ≤ 0

(1)

i=1,...,m

1
Department of Business Analytics, University of Iowa, Iowa
City, IA, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, University
of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. Correspondence to: Qihang Lin
<qihang-lin@uiowa.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Therefore, when designing an algorithm for (1) with nonconvex objective and constraint functions, the first question
to be addressed is what kind of solutions can the algorithm
guarantees and what complexity the algorithm has in order
to find such solutions. In the recent studies on unconstrained
or simply constrained1 non-convex minimization (Davis &
Drusvyatskiy, 2018c;a;b; Davis & Grimmer, 2017; Drusvyatskiy, 2017; Drusvyatskiy & Paquette, 2018; Ghadimi &
Lan, 2013; 2016; Lan & Yang, 2018; Paquette et al., 2018;
Reddi et al., 2016a;b), algorithms have been proposed to find
a nearly stationary point, which is a feasible solution close
to another feasible solution where the subdifferential of the
objective function almost contains zero. However, these
methods and analysis cannot be applied to (1) as they require the exact projection to the feasible set which is hard to
perform for (1) due to the functional constraints. To address
1
Here, being simply constrained means the feasible set is a
simple set, e.g., a box or a ball, that allows for a closed-form for
the projection mapping.

