Fundamental Tradeoffs between Invariance and
Sensitivity to Adversarial Perturbations
Florian Tramèr 1 Jens Behrmann 2 Nicholas Carlini 3 Nicolas Papernot 3 Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen 4

Abstract
Adversarial examples are malicious inputs crafted
to induce misclassification. Commonly studied
sensitivity-based adversarial examples introduce
semantically-small changes to an input that result
in a different model prediction. This paper studies
a complementary failure mode, invariance-based
adversarial examples, that introduce minimal semantic changes that modify an input’s true label
yet preserve the model’s prediction. We demonstrate fundamental tradeoffs between these two
types of adversarial examples. We show that defenses against sensitivity-based attacks actively
harm a model’s accuracy on invariance-based attacks, and that new approaches are needed to resist both attack types. In particular, we break stateof-the-art adversarially-trained and certifiablyrobust models by generating small perturbations
that the models are (provably) robust to, yet that
change an input’s class according to human labelers. Finally, we formally show that the existence
of excessively invariant classifiers arises from the
presence of overly-robust predictive features in
standard datasets.

1. Introduction
Research on adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2013;
Biggio et al., 2013) is motivated by a spectrum of questions, ranging from the security of models in adversarial
settings (Tramèr et al., 2019), to limitations of learned representations under natural distribution shift (Gilmer et al.,
2018). The broadest accepted definition of an adversarial
example is “an input to a ML model that is intentionally
designed by an attacker to fool the model into producing an
incorrect output” (Goodfellow & Papernot, 2017).
1

Stanford University 2 University of Bremen 3 Google Brain
Vector Institute and University of Toronto. Correspondence to:
Florian Tramèr <tramer@cs.stanford.edu>.

4

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Adversarial examples are commonly formalized as inputs
obtained by adding some perturbation to test examples to
change the model output. We refer to this class of malicious
inputs as sensitivity-based adversarial examples.
To enable concrete progress, the adversary’s capabilities are
typically constrained by bounding the size of the perturbation added to the original input. The goal of this constraint
is to ensure that semantics of the input are left unaffected by
the perturbation. In the computer vision domain, `p norms
have grown to be a default metric to measure semantic similarity. This led to a series of proposals for increasing the
robustness of models to sensitivity-based adversaries that
operate within the constraints of an `p ball (Madry et al.,
2017; Wong & Kolter, 2018; Raghunathan et al., 2018).
In this paper, we show that optimizing a model’s robustness
to `p -bounded perturbations is not only insufficient to resist
general adversarial examples, but also potentially harmful.
As `p distances are a crude approximation to the visual similarity in a given task, over-optimizing a model’s robustness
to `p -bounded perturbations renders the model excessively
invariant to real semantics of the underlying task.
Excessive invariance of a model causes vulnerability against
invariance adversarial examples (Jacobsen et al., 2019).
These are perturbations that change the human-assigned
label of a given input but keep the model prediction unchanged. For example in Figure 1 an MNIST image of a
digit ‘3’ is perturbed to be an image of a ‘5’ by changing
only 20 pixels; models that are excessively invariant do not
change their decision and incorrectly label both images as a
‘3’, despite the fact that the oracle label has changed.
This paper exposes a fundamental tradeoff between
sensitivity-based and invariance-based adversarial examples. We show that due to a misalignment between formal
robustness notions (e.g., `p -balls) and a task’s perceptual
metric, current defenses against adversarial examples cannot
prevent both sensitivity-based and invariance-based attacks,
and must trade-off robustness to each (see Figure 2). Worse,
we find that increasing robustness to sensitivity-based attacks decreases a model’s robustness to invariance-based
attacks. We introduce new algorithms to craft `p -bounded
invariance-based adversarial examples, and illustrate the

