Does Label Smoothing Mitigate Label Noise?

Michal Lukasik 1 Srinadh Bhojanapalli 1 Aditya Krishna Menon 1 Sanjiv Kumar 1

Abstract
Label smoothing is commonly used in training
deep learning models, wherein one-hot training labels are mixed with uniform label vectors. Empirically, smoothing has been shown to improve both
predictive performance and model calibration. In
this paper, we study whether label smoothing is
also effective as a means of coping with label
noise. While label smoothing apparently amplifies this problem — being equivalent to injecting
symmetric noise to the labels — we show how it
relates to a general family of loss-correction techniques from the label noise literature. Building
on this connection, we show that label smoothing is competitive with loss-correction under label
noise. Further, we show that when distilling models from noisy data, label smoothing of the teacher
is beneficial; this is in contrast to recent findings
for noise-free problems, and sheds further light
on settings where label smoothing is beneficial.

1. Introduction
Label smoothing is commonly used to improve the performance of deep learning models (Szegedy et al., 2016;
Chorowski & Jaitly, 2017; Vaswani et al., 2017; Zoph et al.,
2018; Real et al., 2018; Huang et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020).
Rather than standard training with one-hot training labels,
label smoothing prescribes using smoothed labels by mixing
in a uniform label vector. This procedure is generally understood as a means of regularisation (Szegedy et al., 2016;
Zhang et al., 2018) that improves generalization and model
calibration (Pereyra et al., 2017; Müller et al., 2019).
How does label smoothing affect the robustness of deep
networks? Such robustness is desirable when learning from
data subject to label noise (Angluin & Laird, 1988). Modern
deep networks can perfectly fit such noisy labels (Zhang
et al., 2017). Can label smoothing address this problem?

Interestingly, there are two competing intuitions. On the one
hand, smoothing might mitigate the problem, as it prevents
overconfidence on any one example. On the other hand,
smoothing might accentuate the problem, as it is equivalent
to injecting uniform noise into all labels (Xie et al., 2016).
Which of these intuitions is borne out in practice? A systematic study of this question is, to our knowledge, lacking.
Indeed, label smoothing is conspicuously absent in most
treatments of the noisy label problem (Patrini et al., 2016;
Han et al., 2018b; Charoenphakdee et al., 2019; Thulasidasan et al., 2019; Amid et al., 2019; Menon et al., 2020). Intriguingly, however, a cursory inspection at popular loss correction techniques in this literature (Natarajan et al., 2013;
Patrini et al., 2017; van Rooyen & Williamson, 2018) reveals
a strong similarity to label smoothing (see §3). But what is
the precise relationship between these methods, and does it
imply label smoothing is a viable denoising technique?
In this paper, we address these questions by first connecting label smoothing to existing label noise techniques. At
first glance, this connection indicates that smoothing has
an opposite effect to one such loss-correction technique.
However, we empirically show that smoothing is competitive with such techniques in denoising, and that it improves
performance of distillation (Hinton et al., 2015) under label
noise. We then explain its denoising ability by analysing
smoothing as a regulariser. In sum, our contributions are:
(i) we present a novel connection of label smoothing to
loss correction techniques from the label noise literature (Natarajan et al., 2013; Patrini et al., 2017).
(ii) we empirically demonstrate that label smoothing significantly improves performance under label noise at
varying noise levels, and is competitive with loss correction techniques. Our experiments show that smoothing improves accuracy on both the clean and noisy
parts of the data, while preserving model calibration.
We explain these denoising effects by relating label
smoothing to `2 regularisation.

Google Research. Correspondence to: Michal Lukasik
<mlukasik@google.com>.

(iii) we show that when distilling from noisy labels, smoothing the teacher improves the student; this is in marked
contrast to recent findings in noise-free settings.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Contributions (i) and (ii) establish that label smoothing can
be beneficial under noise, and also highlight that a regularisation view can complement a loss view, the latter

1

