Taylor Expansion Policy Optimization

Yunhao Tang 1 Michal Valko 2 Rémi Munos 2

Abstract
In this work, we investigate the application of
Taylor expansions in reinforcement learning. In
particular, we propose Taylor expansion policy optimization, a policy optimization formalism that
generalizes prior work (e.g., TRPO) as a firstorder special case. We also show that Taylor expansions intimately relate to off-policy evaluation.
Finally, we show that this new formulation entails
modifications which improve the performance of
several state-of-the-art distributed algorithms.

1. Introduction
Policy optimization is a major framework in model-free
reinforcement learning (RL), with successful applications in
challenging domains (Silver et al., 2016; Berner et al., 2019;
Vinyals et al., 2019). Along with scaling up to powerful
computational architectures (Mnih et al., 2016; Espeholt
et al., 2018), significant algorithmic performance gains are
driven by insights into the drawbacks of naı̈ve policy gradient algorithms (Sutton et al., 2000). Among all algorithmic
improvements, two of the most prominent are: trust-region
policy search (Schulman et al., 2015; 2017; Abdolmaleki
et al., 2018; Song et al., 2020) and off-policy corrections
(Munos et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2017; Gruslys et al., 2018;
Espeholt et al., 2018).
At the first glance, these two streams of ideas focus on orthogonal aspects of policy optimization. For trust-region
policy search, the idea is to constrain the size of policy
updates. This limits the deviations between consecutive
policies and lower-bounds the performance of the new policy (Kakade and Langford, 2002; Schulman et al., 2015).
On the other hand, off-policy corrections require that we account for the discrepancy between target policy and behavior
policy. Espeholt et al. (2018) has observed that the corrections are especially useful for distributed algorithms, where
behavior policy and target policy typically differ. Both al-

gorithmic ideas have contributed significantly to stabilizing
policy optimization.
In this work, we partially unify both algorithmic ideas into a
single framework. In particular, we noticed that as a ubiquitous approximation method, Taylor expansions share highlevel similarities with both trust region policy search and
off-policy corrections. To get high-level intuitions of such
similarities, consider a simple 1D example of Taylor expansions. Given a sufficiently smooth real-valued function on
the real line f : R → R, the k-th order Taylor expansion of
Pk
f (x) at x0 is fk (x) , f (x0 ) + i=1 [f (i) (x0 )/i!](x − x0 )i,
where f (i) (x0 ) are the i-th order derivatives at x0 . First,
a common feature shared by Taylor expansions and trustregion policy search is the inherent notion of a trust region
constraint. Indeed, in order for convergence to take place,
a trust-region constraint is required |x − x0 | < R(f, x0 )1 .
Second, when using the truncation as an approximation to
the original function fK (x) ≈ f (x), Taylor expansions
satisfy the requirement of off-policy evaluations: evaluate
target policy with behavior data. Indeed, to evaluate the
truncation fK (x) at any x (target policy), we only require
the behavior policy “data” at x0 (i.e., derivatives f (i) (x0 )).
Our paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we start with a
general result of applying Taylor expansions to Q-functions.
When we apply the same technique to the RL objective,
we reuse the general result and derive a higher-order policy optimization objective. This leads to Section 3, where
we formally present the Taylor Expansion Policy Optimization (TayPO) and generalize prior work (Schulman et al.,
2015; 2017) as a first-order special case. In Section , we
make clear connection between Taylor expansions and Q(λ)
(Harutyunyan et al., 2016), a common return-based offpolicy evaluation operator. Finally, in Section 5, we show
the performance gains due to the higher-order objectives
across a range of state-of-the-art distributed deep RL agents.

2. Taylor expansion for reinforcement
learning

1
Columbia University, New York, USA 2 DeepMind Paris,
France. Correspondence to: yt2541@coluymbia.edu <Yunhao>.

Consider a Markov Decision Process (MDP) with state
space X and action space A. Let policy π(·|x) be a dis-

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

1
Here, R(f, x0 ) is the convergence radius of the expansions,
which in general depends on the function f and origin x0 .

