Encoding Musical Style with Transformer Autoencoders
Kristy Choi 1 * Curtis Hawthorne 2 Ian Simon 2 Monica Dinculescu 2 Jesse Engel 2

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning high-level
controls over the global structure of generated sequences, particularly in the context of symbolic
music generation with complex language models.
In this work, we present the Transformer autoencoder, which aggregates encodings of the input
data across time to obtain a global representation
of style from a given performance. We show it
is possible to combine this global representation
with other temporally distributed embeddings, enabling improved control over the separate aspects
of performance style and melody. Empirically, we
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on
various music generation tasks on the MAESTRO
dataset and a YouTube dataset with 10,000+ hours
of piano performances, where we achieve improvements in terms of log-likelihood and mean
listening scores as compared to baselines.

1. Introduction
There has been significant progress in generative modeling,
particularly with respect to creative applications such as art
and music (Oord et al., 2016; Engel et al., 2017b; Ha & Eck,
2017; Huang et al., 2019a; Payne, 2019). As the number
of generative applications increase, it becomes increasingly
important to consider how users can interact with such systems, particularly when the generative model functions as
a tool in their creative process (Engel et al., 2017a; Gillick
et al., 2019) To this end, we consider how one can learn
high-level controls over the global structure of a generated
sample. We focus on the domain of symbolic music generation, where Music Transformer (Huang et al., 2019b) is the
current state-of-the-art in generating high-quality samples
that span over a minute in length.
The challenge in controllable sequence generation is
1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University *Work
completed during an internship at Google Brain 2 Google Brain.
Correspondence to: Kristy Choi <kechoi@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

twofold. First, Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) and
their variants excel as unconditional language models or in
sequence-to-sequence tasks such as translation, but it is less
clear as to how they can: (1) learn and (2) incorporate global
conditioning information at inference time. This contrasts
with traditional generative models for images such as the
variational autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2013)
or generative adversarial network (GAN) (Goodfellow et al.,
2014), both of which can incorporate global conditioning
information (e.g. one-hot encodings of class labels) as part
of their training procedure (Sohn et al., 2015; Sønderby
et al., 2016; Isola et al., 2017; Van den Oord et al., 2016).
Second, obtaining a ”ground truth” annotation that captures
all the salient features of a musical performance may be
a prohibitively difficult or expensive task that requires domain expertise (Bertin-Mahieux et al., 2011). Thus even if
conditioning was straightforward, the set of performance
features that will be relevant for synthesizing a desired sample will remain ambiguous without descriptive tags to guide
generation.
In this work, we introduce the Transformer autoencoder,
where we aggregate encodings across time to obtain a holistic representation of the performance style in an unsupervised fashion. We demonstrate that this learned global representation can be incorporated with other forms of structural
conditioning in two ways. First, we show that given a performance, our model can generate samples that are similar
in style to the provided input. Then, we explore different
methods to combine melody and performance representations to harmonize a new melody in the style of the given
performance. We validate this notion of ”perceptual similarity” through quantitative analyses based on note-based
features of performances as well as qualitative user listening
studies and interpolations. In both cases, we show that combining both global and fine-scale encodings of the musical
performance allows us to gain better control of generation,
separately manipulating both the style and melody of the
resulting sample without the need for explicit labeling.
Empirically, we evaluate our model on two datasets: the
publicly-available MAESTRO (Hawthorne et al., 2019)
dataset, and a YouTube dataset of piano performances transcribed from 10,000+ hours of audio (Simon et al., 2019).
We find that the Transformer autoencoder is able to generate
not only performances that sound similar to the input, but

