A Distributional View on Multi-Objective Policy Optimization

Abbas Abdolmaleki * 1 Sandy H. Huang * 1 Leonard Hasenclever 1 Michael Neunert 1 H. Francis Song 1
Martina Zambelli 1 Murilo F. Martins 1 Nicolas Heess 1 Raia Hadsell 1 Martin Riedmiller 1

Abstract
Many real-world problems require trading off multiple competing objectives. However, these objectives are often in different units and/or scales,
which can make it challenging for practitioners to
express numerical preferences over objectives in
their native units. In this paper we propose a novel
algorithm for multi-objective reinforcement learning that enables setting desired preferences for
objectives in a scale-invariant way. We propose
to learn an action distribution for each objective,
and we use supervised learning to fit a parametric
policy to a combination of these distributions. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on
challenging high-dimensional real and simulated
robotics tasks, and show that setting different preferences in our framework allows us to trace out
the space of nondominated solutions.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms do an excellent
job at training policies to optimize a single scalar reward
function. Recent advances in deep RL have made it possible to train policies that exceed human-level performance
on Atari (Mnih et al., 2015) and Go (Silver et al., 2016),
perform complex robotic manipulation tasks (Zeng et al.,
2019), learn agile locomotion (Tan et al., 2018), and even
obtain reward in unanticipated ways (Amodei et al., 2016).
However, many real-world tasks involve multiple, possibly
competing, objectives. For instance, choosing a financial
portfolio requires trading off between risk and return; controlling energy systems requires trading off performance
and cost; and autonomous cars must trade off fuel costs, efficiency, and safety. Multi-objective reinforcement learning
(MORL) algorithms aim to tackle such problems (Roijers
*

Equal contribution 1 DeepMind. Correspondence to: Abbas
Abdolmaleki <aabdolmaleki@google.com>, Sandy H. Huang
<shhuang@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. We demonstrate our approach in four complex continuous control domains, in simulation and in the real world. Videos
are at http://sites.google.com/view/mo-mpo.

et al., 2013; Liu et al., 2015). A common approach is scalarization: based on preferences across objectives, transform
the multi-objective reward vector into a single scalar reward (e.g., by taking a convex combination), and then use
standard RL to optimize this scalar reward.
It is tricky, though, for practitioners to pick the appropriate
scalarization for a desired preference across objectives, because often objectives are defined in different units and/or
scales. For instance, suppose we want an agent to complete a task while minimizing energy usage and mechanical wear-and-tear. Task completion may correspond to a
sparse reward or to the number of square feet a vacuuming
robot has cleaned, and reducing energy usage and mechanical wear-and-tear could be enforced by penalties on power
consumption (in kWh) and actuator efforts (in N or Nm),
respectively. Practitioners would need to resort to using
trial and error to select a scalarization that ensures the agent
prioritizes actually doing the task (and thus being useful)
over saving energy.
Motivated by this, we propose a scale-invariant approach for
encoding preferences, derived from the RL-as-inference perspective. Instead of choosing a scalarization, practitioners
set a constraint per objective. Based on these constraints, we
learn an action distribution per objective that improves on
the current policy. Then, to obtain a single updated policy
that makes these trade-offs, we use supervised learning to
fit a policy to the combination of these action distributions.
The constraints control the influence of each objective on
the policy, by constraining the KL-divergence between each
objective-specific distribution and the current policy. The
higher the constraint value, the more influence the objective has. Thus, a desired preference over objectives can be
encoded as the relative magnitude of these constraint values.

