Perceptual Generative Autoencoders

Zijun Zhang 1 Ruixiang Zhang 2 Zongpeng Li 3 Yoshua Bengio 2 Liam Paull 2

Abstract
Modern generative models are usually designed
to match target distributions directly in the data
space, where the intrinsic dimension of data can
be much lower than the ambient dimension. We argue that this discrepancy may contribute to the difficulties in training generative models. We therefore propose to map both the generated and target
distributions to a latent space using the encoder
of a standard autoencoder, and train the generator (or decoder) to match the target distribution
in the latent space. Specifically, we enforce the
consistency in both the data space and the latent
space with theoretically justified data and latent
reconstruction losses. The resulting generative
model, which we call a perceptual generative autoencoder (PGA), is then trained with a maximum
likelihood or variational autoencoder (VAE) objective. With maximum likelihood, PGAs generalize the idea of reversible generative models to
unrestricted neural network architectures and arbitrary number of latent dimensions. When combined with VAEs, PGAs substantially improve
over the baseline VAEs in terms of sample quality.
Compared to other autoencoder-based generative
models using simple priors, PGAs achieve stateof-the-art FID scores on CIFAR-10 and CelebA.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed great interest in generative
models, mainly due to the success of generative adversarial
networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Radford et al.,
2016; Karras et al., 2018; Brock et al., 2019). Despite their
prevalence, the adversarial nature of GANs can lead to a
number of challenges, such as unstable training dynamics
and mode collapse. Since the advent of GANs, substantial
1
University of Calgary, Canada 2 MILA, Université de Montréal,
Canada 3 Wuhan University, China. Correspondence to: Zijun Zhang <zijun.zhang@ucalgary.ca>, Ruixiang Zhang <ruixiang.zhang@umontreal.ca>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

efforts have been devoted to addressing these challenges
(Salimans et al., 2016; Arjovsky et al., 2017; Gulrajani
et al., 2017; Miyato et al., 2018), while non-adversarial
approaches that are free of these issues have also gained attention. Examples include variational autoencoders (VAEs)
(Kingma & Welling, 2014), reversible generative models
(Dinh et al., 2014; 2017; Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018), and
Wasserstein autoencoders (WAEs) (Tolstikhin et al., 2018).
However, non-adversarial approaches often have significant
limitations. For instance, VAEs tend to generate blurry samples, while reversible generative models require restricted
neural network architectures or solving neural differential
equations (Grathwohl et al., 2019). Furthermore, to use
the change of variable formula, the latent space of a reversible model must have the same dimension as the data
space, which is unreasonable considering that real-world,
high-dimensional data (e.g., images) tends to lie on lowdimensional manifolds, and thus results in redundant latent
dimensions and variability. Intriguingly, recent research
(Arjovsky et al., 2017; Dai & Wipf, 2019) suggests that the
discrepancy between the intrinsic and ambient dimensions
of data also contributes to the difficulties in training GANs
and VAEs.
In this work, we present a novel framework for training
autoencoder-based generative models, with non-adversarial
losses and unrestricted neural network architectures. Given
a standard autoencoder and a target data distribution, instead
of matching the target distribution in the data space, we map
both the generated and target distributions to a latent space
using an encoder, while also minimizing the divergence
between the mapped distributions. We prove, under mild
assumptions, that by minimizing a form of latent reconstruction error, matching the target distribution in the latent
space implies matching it in the data space. We call this
framework perceptual generative autoencoder (PGA). We
show that PGAs enable training generative autoencoders
with maximum likelihood, without restrictions on architectures or latent dimensionalities. In addition, when combined
with VAEs, PGAs can generate sharper samples than vanilla
VAEs.1
We summarize our main contributions as follows:
1

Code is available at https://github.com/zj10/PGA.

