Universal Average-Case Optimality of Polyak Momentum

Damien Scieur * 1 Fabian Pedregosa * 2

Abstract
Polyak momentum (PM), also known as the
heavy-ball method, is a widely used optimization method that enjoys an asymptotic optimal
worst-case complexity on quadratic objectives.
However, its remarkable empirical success is not
fully explained by this optimality, as the worstcase analysis –contrary to the average-case– is
not representative of the expected complexity of
an algorithm. In this work we establish a novel
link between PM and the average-case analysis.
Our main contribution is to prove that any optimal average-case method converges in the number of iterations to PM, under mild assumptions.
This brings a new perspective on this classical
method, showing that PM is asymptotically both
worst-case and average-case optimal.

1. Introduction
Polyak momentum (PM), also known as the heavy-ball
method, is a widely used optimization method. Originally developed to solve linear equations (Frankel, 1950;
Rutishauser, 1959), it was generalized to smooth functions
and popularized in the optimization community by Boris
Polyak (Polyak, 1964; 1987). This method has seen a
renewed interest in recent years, as its stochastic variant
which replaces the gradient with a stochastic estimate is effective on deep learning problems (Sutskever et al., 2013;
Zhang et al., 2020).
PM also enjoys a locally optimal rate of convergence for
strongly convex and twice differentiable objectives. As is
common within the optimization literature, this optimality
is relative to the worst-case analysis, that provides complexity bounds for any input from a function class, no matter how unlikely. Despite its widespread use, the worstcase is not representative of the typical behavior of opti*

Equal contribution 1 Samsung SAIT AI Lab, Montreal
Google Research.
Correspondence to: Damien Scieur
<damien.scieur@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

mization methods. The simplex method, for example, has
a worst-case exponential complexity, that becomes polynomial when considering the average-case (Spielman & Teng,
2004).
A more representative analysis of the typical behavior
is given by the average-case complexity, which averages the algorithm’s complexity over all possible inputs.
The average-case analysis is standard for analyzing sorting (Knuth, 1997) and cryptography (Katz & Lindell, 2014)
algorithms, to name a few. However, little is known of
the average-complexity of optimization algorithms, whose
analysis depends on the often unknown probability distribution over the inputs.
The recent work of Pedregosa & Scieur (2020); Lacotte &
Pilanci (2020) overcame this dependency on the input probability distribution through the use of random matrix theory
techniques. In the same papers, the authors noticed the convergence of some optimal average-case methods to PM, as
the number of iterations grows (see Figure 1). This is rather
surprising given their crucial differences. For instance,
average-case optimal methods use knowledge of the full
spectral distribution, while PM only requires knowledge of
its edges (i.e., smallest and largest eigenvalue). Since this
convergence was only shown on specific methods, it raises
the question on whether this is a spurious phenomenon or
if this holds more generally:
Conjecture
As the number of iterations grows, all average-case
optimal methods converge to Polyak momentum.

The main contribution of this paper is to give a positive
answer to this conjecture. The main, but not so restrictive
assumption, is that the probability density function of the
eigenvalues is non-zero on the interval containing its support. With this we can show the previously unknown property that PM is asymptotically optimal under the averagecase analysis, bringing a new perspectiveon the remarkable
empirical performance of this classical method. Furthermore, this statement is universal, i.e., independent of the
probability distribution over the inputs.

