Why bigger is not always better: on finite and infinite neural networks

Laurence Aitchison 1

Abstract
Recent work has argued that neural networks can
be understood theoretically by taking the number
of channels to infinity, at which point the outputs become Gaussian process (GP) distributed.
However, we note that infinite Bayesian neural
networks lack a key facet of the behaviour of
real neural networks: the fixed kernel, determined
only by network hyperparameters, implies that
they cannot do any form of representation learning. The lack of representation or equivalently
kernel learning leads to less flexibility and hence
worse performance, giving a potential explanation for the inferior performance of infinite networks observed in the literature (e.g. Novak et
al. 2019). We give analytic results characterising
the prior over representations and representation
learning in finite deep linear networks. We show
empirically that the representations in SOTA architectures such as ResNets trained with SGD
are much closer to those suggested by our deep
linear results than by the corresponding infinite
network. This motivates the introduction of a new
class of network: infinite networks with bottlenecks, which inherit the theoretical tractability of
infinite networks while at the same time allowing
representation learning.

One approach to understanding and improving neural networks is to perform Bayesian inference in an infinitely wide
network (Lee et al., 2018; Matthews et al., 2018; GarrigaAlonso et al., 2019; Novak et al., 2019). In this limit the
outputs become Gaussian process distributed, enabling efficient and exact reasoning about uncertainty, and giving
a means of interpretation using the parameter-free kernel
function (which depends only on network hyperparameters
such as depth). However, the performance of Bayesian infinite networks lags considerably behind state-of-the-art finite
1
University of Bristol, Bristol, UK. Correspondence to: Laurence Aitchison <laurence.aitchison@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

networks trained using SGD (e.g. compare performance
in Garriga-Alonso et al. (2019), Novak et al. (2019) and
Arora et al. (2019) against He et al. (2016) and Chen et al.
(2018)). This seems surprising, because, to our knowledge,
there are no reports of wider networks degrading classification performance (indeed, the opposite is sometimes
argued; see Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016), and because
exact Bayesian inference is provably optimal, if the prior
accurately describes our beliefs (Ramsey, 1926). Indeed,
recent work on the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) (Li et al.,
2019) has suggested that deterministic gradient descent in
an infinite network gives slighly lower performance than
Bayesian inference in the same network.
Our hypothesis is that the poor performance of Bayesian
infinite networks arises because the top-layer representation
(equivalent to the kernel), is fixed by the network hyperparameters, and thus cannot be learned from data. This breaks
many of our key intuitions about why deep networks are
effective. For instance in transfer learning (Huh et al., 2016)
we use a large-scale dataset such as ImageNet to a learn a
good high-level representation, then apply this representation to other tasks where less data is available. However,
transfer learning is impossible in infinite Bayesian neural
networks, because the top-layer representation is fixed by
the network hyperparameters and so cannot be learned using
e.g. ImageNet.
To understand these issues, we analysed finite networks
using tools from the infinite network literature (Lee et al.,
2018; Matthews et al., 2018; Garriga-Alonso et al., 2019;
Novak et al., 2019). We begin by giving a toy, two-layer example, contrasting the flexibility of finite networks with the
inflexibility of infinite networks, showing that flexible finite
networks offer benefits under conditions of model-mismatch.
We then introduce infinite networks with bottlenecks, which
combine the theoretical tractability of infinite networks with
the flexibility of finite networks. To obtain an analytic understanding of kernel/representation flexibility and learning
in such networks, we consider linear infinite networks with
bottlenecks, which are equivalent to finite deep linear networks. We took two approaches to characterising these
networks. First, we considered the prior viewpoint, i.e. the
covariance in the top-layer kernel induced by randomness
in the lower-layer weights. In particular, we showed that
narrower, deeper networks offer more flexibility, and that

