Naive Exploration is Optimal for Online LQR

Max Simchowitz 1 Dylan J. Foster 2

Abstract
We consider the problem of online adaptive control of the linear quadratic regulator, where the
true system parameters are unknown. We prove
new upper and lower bounds demonstrating
that
p
the optimal regret scales as e
Θ( d2u dx T ), where
T is the number of time steps, du is the dimension
of the input space, and dx is the dimension of the
system state. Notably, our lower bounds rule out
the possibility of a poly(log T )-regret algorithm,
which had been conjectured due to the apparent
strong convexity of the problem. Our upper bound
is attained by a simple variant of certainty equivalent control, where the learner selects control
inputs according to the optimal controller for their
estimate of the system while injecting exploratory
random noise (Mania et al., 2019).
Central to our upper and lower bounds is a new
approach for controlling perturbations of Riccati
equations called the self-bounding ODE method,
which we use to derive suboptimality bounds
for the certainty equivalent controller synthesized
from estimated system dynamics. This in turn enables regret upper bounds which hold for any stabilizable instance and scale with natural controltheoretic quantities.

develop a non-asymptotic theory of data-driven continuous
control, with an emphasis on understanding key algorithmic
principles and fundamental limits.
In the non-asymptotic theory of reinforcement learning,
much attention has been focused on the so-called “tabular”
setting where states and actions are discrete, and the optimal
rates for this setting are by now relatively well-understood
(Jaksch et al., 2010; Dann & Brunskill, 2015; Azar et al.,
2017). Theoretical results for continuous control setting
have been more elusive, with progress spread across various models (Kakade et al., 2003; Munos & Szepesvári,
2008; Jiang et al., 2017; Jin et al., 2020), but the linearquadratic regulator (LQR) problem has recently emerged as
a candidate for a standard benchmark for continuous control
and RL. For tabular reinforcement learning problems, it is
widely understood that careful exploration is essential for
sample efficiency. Recently, however, it was shown that
for the online variant of the LQR problem, relatively simple exploration strategies suffice to obtain the best-known
performance guarantees (Mania et al., 2019). In this paper,
we address a curious question raised by these results: Is sophisticated exploration helpful for LQR, or is linear control
in fact substantially easier than the general reinforcement
learning setting? More broadly, we aim to shed light on the
question:
To what extent to do sophisticated exploration
strategies improve learning in online
linear-quadratic control?

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning has recently achieved great success
in application domains including Atari (Mnih et al., 2015),
Go (Silver et al., 2016), and robotics (Lillicrap et al., 2015).
All of these breakthroughs leverage data-driven methods
for continuous control in large state spaces. Their success,
along with challenges in deploying RL in the real world, has
led to renewed interest on developing continuous control
algorithms with improved reliability and sample efficiency.
In particular, on the theoretical side, there has been a push to
1

UC Berkeley 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Max Simchowitz <msimchow@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

Is ε-Greedy Optimal for Online LQR? In the LQR
problem, the system state xt evolves according to
xt+1 = Axt + But + wt ,

where x1 = 0,

(1.1)

and where ut ∈ Rdu is the learner’s control input, wt ∈
i.i.d.
Rdx is a noise process drawn as wt ∼ N (0, I), and A ∈
Rdx ×dx , B ∈ Rdx ×du are unknown system matrices.
Initially the learner has no knowledge of the system dynamics, and their goal is to repeatedly select control inputs and
observing
PT states over T rounds so as to minimize their total
cost t=1 c(xt , ut ), where c(x, u) = x> Rx x + u> Ru u
is a known quadratic function. In the online variant of the
LQR problem, we measure performance via regret to the

