Efficient Optimistic Exploration in Linear-Quadratic Regulators
via Lagrangian Relaxation

Marc Abeille 1 Alessandro Lazaric 2

Abstract
We study the exploration-exploitation dilemma
in the linear quadratic regulator (LQR) setting.
Inspired by the extended value iteration algorithm
used in optimistic algorithms for finite MDPs, we
propose to relax the optimistic optimization of
OFU-LQ and cast it into a constrained extended
LQR problem, where an additional control variable implicitly selects the system dynamics within
a confidence interval. We then move to the corresponding Lagrangian formulation for which we
prove strong duality. As a result, we show that
an -optimistic controller can be computed
effi
ciently by solving at most O log(1/) Riccati
equations. Finally, we prove that relaxing the original OFU problem does not impact the
√ learning
e T ) regret
performance, thus recovering the O(
of OFU-LQ. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first computationally efficient confidencebased algorithm for LQR with worst-case optimal
regret guarantees.

1. Introduction
Exploration-exploitation in Markov decision processes
(MDPs) with continuous state-action spaces is a challenging
problem: estimating the parameters of a generic MDP may
require many samples, and computing the corresponding
optimal policy may be computationally prohibitive. The linear quadratic regulator (LQR) model formalizes continuous
state-action problems, where the dynamics is linear and the
cost is quadratic in state and action variables. Thanks to its
specific structure, it is possible to efficiently estimate the
parameters of the LQR by least-squares regression and the
optimal policy can be computed by solving a Riccati equation. As a result, several exploration strategies have been
adapted to the LQR to obtain effective learning algorithms.
1
Criteo AI Lab 2 Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to:
Marc Abeille <m.abeille@criteo.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Confidence-based exploration. Bittanti et al. (2006) introduced an adaptive control system based on the “bet on best”
principle and proved asymptotic performance guarantees
showing that their method would eventually converge to
the optimal control. Abbasi-Yadkori
& Szepesvári (2011)
√
e T ) regret bound for OFU-LQ,
later proved a finite-time O(
later generalized to less restrictive stabilization and noise
assumptions by Faradonbeh et al. (2017). Unfortunately, neither exploration strategy comes with a computationally efficient algorithm to solve the optimistic LQR, and thus they
cannot be directly implemented.
On the TS side, Ouyang
√
e T ) regret for the Bayesian regret,
et al. (2017) proved a O(
while Abeille & Lazaric (2018) showed that a similar bound
holds in the frequentist case but restricted to 1-dimensional
problems. While TS-based approaches require solving a
single (random) LQR, the theoretical analysis of Abeille &
Lazaric (2018) suggests that a new LQR instance should be
solved at each time step, thus leading to a computational
complexity growing linearly with the total number of steps.
On the other hand, OFU-based methods allow for “lazy”
updates, which require solving an optimistic LQR only a
logarithmic number of times w.r.t. the total number of steps.
A similar lazy-update scheme is used by Dean et al. (2018),
who leveraged robust control theory to devise the first learning algorithm with polynomial complexity and sublinear
regret. Nonetheless, the resulting adaptive algorithm suffers
e 2/3 ) regret, which is significantly worse than
from a√O(T
e
the O( T ) achieved by OFU-LQ.
To the best of our knowledge, the only efficient
algorithm for
√
confidence-based exploration with e
O( T ) regret has been
recently proposed by Cohen et al. (2019). Their method,
called OSLO, leverages an SDP formulation of the LQ problem, where an optimistic version of the constraints is used.
As such, it translates the original non-convex OFU-LQ optimization problem into a convex SDP. While solving an SDP
is known to have polynomial complexity, no explicit analysis
is provided and it is said that the runtime may scale polynomially with LQ-specific parameters and the time horizon T
(Cor. 5), suggesting that OSLO may become impractical for
moderately large T . Furthermore, OSLO requires
an initial
√
system identification phase of length e
O( T ) to properly
initialize the method. This strong requirement effectively
reduces OSLO to an explore-then-commit strategy, whose

