REALM: Retrieval-Augmented Language Model Pre-Training

Kelvin Guu * 1 Kenton Lee * 1 Zora Tung 1 Panupong Pasupat 1 Ming-Wei Chang 1

Abstract
Language model pre-training has been shown to
capture a surprising amount of world knowledge,
crucial for NLP tasks such as question answering.
However, this knowledge is stored implicitly in
the parameters of a neural network, requiring everlarger networks to cover more facts.
To capture knowledge in a more modular and interpretable way, we augment language model pretraining with a latent knowledge retriever, which
allows the model to retrieve and attend over documents from a large corpus such as Wikipedia, used
during pre-training, fine-tuning and inference. For
the first time, we show how to pre-train such a
knowledge retriever in an unsupervised manner,
using masked language modeling as the learning
signal and backpropagating through a retrieval
step that considers millions of documents.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of RetrievalAugmented Language Model pre-training
(REALM) by fine-tuning on the challenging task
of Open-domain Question Answering (Open-QA).
We compare against state-of-the-art models for
both explicit and implicit knowledge storage on
three popular Open-QA benchmarks, and find
that we outperform all previous methods by a
significant margin (4-16% absolute accuracy),
while also providing qualitative benefits such as
interpretability and modularity.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in language model pre-training have
shown that models such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2018),
RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) and T5 (Raffel et al., 2019)

Figure 1. REALM augments language model pre-training with
a neural knowledge retriever that retrieves knowledge from a
textual knowledge corpus, Z (e.g., all of Wikipedia). Signal
from the language modeling objective backpropagates all the way
through the retriever, which must consider millions of documents
in Z—a significant computational challenge that we address.

store a surprising amount of world knowledge, acquired
from the massive text corpora they are trained on (Petroni
et al., 2019). For example, BERT is able to correctly predict the missing word in the following sentence: “The
is the currency of the United
Kingdom” (answer: “pound”).

Equal contribution 1 Google Research. Correspondence
to: Kelvin Guu <kguu@google.com>, Kenton Lee <kentonl@google.com>, Zora Tung <gatoatigrado@google.com>,
Panupong Pasupat <ppasupat@google.com>, Ming-Wei Chang
<mingweichang@google.com>.

In these language models, the learned world knowledge is
stored implicitly in the parameters of the underlying neural
network. This makes it difficult to determine what knowledge is stored in the network and where. Furthermore, storage space is limited by the size of the network—to capture
more world knowledge, one must train ever-larger networks,
which can be prohibitively slow or expensive.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

To capture knowledge in a more interpretable and modular
way, we propose a novel framework, Retrieval-Augmented
Language Model (REALM) pre-training, which augments

*

