XTREME: A Massively Multilingual Multi-task Benchmark
for Evaluating Cross-lingual Generalization

Junjie Hu * 1 Sebastian Ruder * 2 Aditya Siddhant 3 Graham Neubig 1 Orhan Firat 3 Melvin Johnson 3

Abstract
Much recent progress in applications of machine
learning models to NLP has been driven by benchmarks that evaluate models across a wide variety
of tasks. However, these broad-coverage benchmarks have been mostly limited to English, and
despite an increasing interest in multilingual models, a benchmark that enables the comprehensive
evaluation of such methods on a diverse range of
languages and tasks is still missing. To this end,
we introduce the Cross-lingual TRansfer Evaluation of Multilingual Encoders (XTREME) benchmark, a multi-task benchmark for evaluating the
cross-lingual generalization capabilities of multilingual representations across 40 languages and 9
tasks. We demonstrate that while models tested on
English reach human performance on many tasks,
there is still a sizable gap in the performance of
cross-lingually transferred models, particularly
on syntactic and sentence retrieval tasks. There
is also a wide spread of results across languages.
We release the benchmark1 to encourage research
on cross-lingual learning methods that transfer
linguistic knowledge across a diverse and representative set of languages and tasks.

1. Introduction
In natural language processing (NLP), there is a pressing
urgency to build systems that serve all of the world’s approximately 6,900 languages to overcome language barriers
and enable universal information access for the world’s citizens (Ruder et al., 2019; Aharoni et al., 2019; Arivazhagan
et al., 2019). At the same time, building NLP systems for
*

1
Equal contribution
Carnegie Mellon University
3
DeepMind Google Research.
Correspondence to: Junjie Hu <junjieh@cs.cmu.edu>, Melvin Johnson
<melvinp@google.com>.

most of these languages is challenging due to a stark lack of
data. Luckily, many languages have similarities in syntax or
vocabulary, and multilingual learning approaches that train
on multiple languages while leveraging the shared structure
of the input space have begun to show promise as ways
to alleviate data sparsity. Early work in this direction focused on single tasks, such as grammar induction (Snyder
et al., 2009), part-of-speech (POS) tagging (Täckström et al.,
2013), parsing (McDonald et al., 2011), and text classification (Klementiev et al., 2012). Over the last few years,
there has been a move towards general-purpose multilingual
representations that are applicable to many tasks, both on
the word level (Mikolov et al., 2013; Faruqui & Dyer, 2014;
Artetxe et al., 2017) or the full-sentence level (Devlin et al.,
2019; Lample & Conneau, 2019). Despite the fact that such
representations are intended to be general-purpose, evaluation of them has often been performed on a very limited
and often disparate set of tasks—typically focusing on translation (Glavaš et al., 2019; Lample & Conneau, 2019) and
classification (Schwenk & Li, 2018; Conneau et al., 2018b)—
and typologically similar languages (Conneau et al., 2018a).
To address this problem and incentivize research on truly
general-purpose cross-lingual representation and transfer
learning, we introduce the Cross-lingual TRansfer Evaluation of Multilingual Encoders (XTREME) benchmark.
XTREME covers 40 typologically diverse languages spanning 12 language families and includes 9 tasks that require
reasoning about different levels of syntax or semantics.2
In addition, we introduce pseudo test sets as diagnostics
that cover all 40 languages by automatically translating
the English test set of the natural language inference and
question-answering dataset to the remaining languages.
XTREME focuses on the zero-shot cross-lingual transfer sce-

nario, where annotated training data is provided in English
but none is provided in the language to which systems must
transfer.3 We evaluate a range of state-of-the-art machine

2

1
The benchmark is publicly available at https://sites.
research.google/xtreme. The codes used for downloading data and training baseline models are available at https:
//github.com/google-research/xtreme.

2
By typologically diverse, we mean languages that span a
wide set of linguistic phenomena such as compounding, inflection,
derivation, etc. which occur in many of the world’s languages.
3
This is done both for efficiency purposes (as it only requires
testing, not training, on each language) and practical considerations
(as annotated training data is not available for many languages).

