OPtions as REsponses:
Grounding Behavioural Hierarchies in Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets * 1 Yuhuai Tony Wu * 1 2 Maria Eckstein 3 1 Rémi Leblond 1 Joel Z. Leibo 1

Abstract
This paper investigates generalisation in multiagent games, where the generality of the agent
can be evaluated by playing against opponents
it hasn’t seen during training. We propose
two new games with concealed information and
complex, non-transitive reward structure (think
rock/paper/scissors). It turns out that most current
deep reinforcement learning methods fail to efficiently explore the strategy space, thus learning
policies that generalise poorly to unseen opponents. We then propose a novel hierarchical agent
architecture, where the hierarchy is grounded in
the game-theoretic structure of the game – the top
level chooses strategic responses to opponents,
while the low level implements them into policy
over primitive actions. This grounding facilitates
credit assignment across the levels of hierarchy.
Our experiments show that the proposed hierarchical agent is capable of generalisation to unseen
opponents, while conventional baselines fail to
generalise whatsoever.

1. Introduction
The outstanding feature of human intelligence is its generality. Although great strides in deep RL have been made,
agents are often not capable of generalisation beyond trivial
changes in the environment (Leike et al., 2017; Machado
et al., 2018; Cobbe et al., 2019), which limits the practical
impact. Consequently, researchers have begun advocating
borrowing experimental design from supervised learning
with explicitly separated testing and training version of the
environment (Machado et al., 2018; Cobbe et al., 2019;
Racanière et al., 2017). In this paper we want to address the
*
Equal contribution 1 DeepMind, London, UK 2 University
of Toronto, Canada 3 University of California Berkeley, USA.
Correspondence to: Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets <vezhnick@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

problem of building agents with general competence over
a wide varieties of tasks, including those not experienced
during training. It is an open question how these tasks could
be created for either training or evaluation. Here we pursue
an avenue for investigating generalisation and problem generation, which comes from multi-agent research. As argued
in (Leibo et al., 2019), multi-agent systems can display intrinsic dynamics arising from competition and cooperation
that provide a naturally emergent and dynamically growing set of problems. A solution of one multi-agent task
begets a new task, continually generating novel challenges.
Recent success stories like AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2016)
and AlphaStar (Vinyals et al., 2019) have demonstrated generalisation by playing directly against professional human
players, which they had no experience playing before. AlphaStar (Vinyals et al., 2019) has explicitly generated an
ever growing set of opponents to both train and evaluate
the agent against. Although StarCraft is a great challenge,
its computational demands and game complexity can be
prohibitive for fundamental research.
The first contribution of this paper are two grid world
multi-agent games with simple implementation, yet complex multi-agent dynamics with non-transitive reward (think
rock/paper/scissors) and concealed information. We can empirically measure generalisation by playing policies learnt
by different agents against each-other and a pre-trained holdout set of policies. If the agent has understood the rules of
the game and explored the space of strategies well, its policy
should fare well against a novel adversary. Our experiments
show that most common deep RL agent architectures (Espeholt et al., 2018; Foerster et al., 2018; Lowe et al., 2017)
generalise poorly, even if designed for multi-agent specifically (Foerster et al., 2018; Lowe et al., 2017).
Our second contribution is a novel hierarchical agent architecture, which is grounded in the game-theoretic structure
of the game. To discover that structure, we factorise the
value function over a latent representation of the concealed
information and then re-use this latent space to factorise the
policy. Low-level policies (options) are trained to respond
to particular states of other agents grouped by the latent
representation, while the top level (meta-policy) learns to
infer the latent representation from its own observation and

