Inductive-bias-driven Reinforcement Learning for Efficient Schedules in
Heterogeneous Clusters

Subho S. Banerjee 1 Saurabh Jha 1 Zbigniew T. Kalbarczyk 1 Ravishankar K. Iyer 1

Abstract
The problem of scheduling of workloads onto
heterogeneous processors (e.g., CPUs, GPUs, FPGAs) is of fundamental importance in modern
data centers. Current system schedulers rely on
application/system-specific heuristics that have to
be built on a case-by-case basis. Recent work has
demonstrated ML techniques for automating the
heuristic search by using black-box approaches
which require significant training data and time,
which make them challenging to use in practice. This paper presents Symphony, a scheduling
framework that addresses the challenge in two
ways: (i) a domain-driven Bayesian reinforcement learning (RL) model for scheduling, which
inherently models the resource dependencies identified from the system architecture; and (ii) a sampling-based technique to compute the gradients of
a Bayesian model without performing full probabilistic inference. Together, these techniques
reduce both the amount of training data and the
time required to produce scheduling policies that
significantly outperform black-box approaches by
up to 2.2×.

1. Introduction
The problem of scheduling of workloads on heterogeneous
processing fabrics (i.e., accelerated datacenters including
GPUs, FPGAs, and ASICs, e.g., Asanović (2014); Shao &
Brooks (2015)), is at its core an intractable NP-hard problem (Mastrolilli & Svensson, 2008; 2009). System schedulers generally rely on application- and system-specific
heuristics with extensive domain-expert-driven tuning of
scheduling policies (e.g., Isard et al. (2009); Giceva et al.
(2014); Lyerly et al. (2018); Mars et al. (2011); Mars & Tang
(2013); Ousterhout et al. (2013); Xu et al. (2018); Yang et al.
(2013); Zhang et al. (2014); Zhuravlev et al. (2010); Za1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA. Correspondence to: Subho S. Banerjee <ssbaner2@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

haria et al. (2010)). Such heuristics are difficult to generate,
as variations across applications and system configurations
mean that significant amounts of time and money must be
spent in painstaking heuristic searches. Recent work has
demonstrated machine learning (ML) techniques (Delimitrou & Kozyrakis, 2013; 2014; Mao et al., 2016; 2018)
for automating heuristic searches by using black-box approaches which require significant training data and time,
making them challenging to use in practice.
This paper presents Symphony, a scheduling framework
that addresses the challenge in two ways: (i) we use a
domain-guided Bayesian-model-based partially observable
Markov decision process (POMDP) (Astrom, 1965; Kaelbling et al., 1998) to decrease the amount of training data
(i.e., sampled trajectories); and (ii) a sampling-based technique that allows one to compute the gradients of a Bayesian
model without performing full probabilistic inference. We
thus, significantly reduce the costs of (i) running a large heterogeneous computing system that uses an efficient scheduling policy; and (ii) training the policy itself.
Reducing Training Data. State-of-the-art methods for
choosing an optimal action in POMDPs rely on training of
neural networks (NNs) (Mnih et al., 2016; Dhariwal et al.,
2017). As these approaches are model-free, training of the
NN requires large quantities of data and time to compute
meaningful policies. In contrast, we provide an inductive
bias for the reinforcement learning (RL) agent by encoding domain knowledge as a Bayesian model that can infer
the latent state from observations, while at the same time
leveraging the scalability of deep learning methods through
end-to-end gradient descent. In the case of scheduling, our
inductive bias is a set of statistical relationships between
measurements from microarchitectural monitors (Dreyer &
Alpert, 1997). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
paper to exploit those relationships and measurements to
infer resource utilization in the system (i.e., latent state) to
build RL-based scheduling polices.
Reducing Training Time. The addition of the inductive
bias, while making the training process less data-hungry
(i.e., requiring fewer workload executions to train the
model), comes at the cost of additional training time: the
cost of performing full-Bayesian inference at every training
step (Dagum & Luby, 1993; Russell et al., 1995; Binder

