Reinforcement Learning in Feature Space: Matrix Bandit, Kernels, and Regret
Bound
Lin F. Yang 1 Mengdi Wang 2

Abstract
Exploration in reinforcement learning (RL) suffers from the curse of dimensionality when the
state-action space is large. A common practice
is to parameterize the high-dimensional value
and policy functions using given features. However existing methods either have no theoretical guarantee or suffer a regret that is exponential in the planning horizon H. In this paper, we propose an online RL algorithm, namely
the MatrixRL, that leverages ideas from linear
bandit to learn a low-dimensional representation of the probability transition model while
carefully balancing the exploitation-exploration
tradeoff. We show that MatrixRL
achieves a
√ 
regret bound O H 2 d log T T where d is the
number of features, independent with the number of state-action pairs. MatrixRL has an
equivalent kernelized version, which is able to
work with an arbitrary kernel Hilbert space without using explicit features. In this case, the
kernelized MatrixRL
satisfies a regret bound
√ 
2e
O H d log T T , where de is the effective dimension of the kernel space.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is about learning to make sequential decisions in an unknown environment through trial
and error. It finds wide applications in robotics (Kober
et al., 2013), autonomous driving (Shalev-Shwartz et al.,
2016), game AI (Silver et al., 2017) and beyond. We
consider a basic RL model - the Markov decision process
(MDP). In the MDP, an agent at a state s ∈ S is able to
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of California, Los Angeles 2 Department of
Electrical Engineering and Center for Statistics and Machine Learning, Princeton University.
Correspondence
to: Lin F. Yang <linyang@ee.ucla.edu>, Mengdi Wang
<mengdiw@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

play an action a ∈ A, where S and A are the state and
action spaces. Then the system transitions to another state
s0 ∈ S according to an unknown probability P (s0 | s, a),
while returning an immediate reward r(s, a) ∈ [0, 1]. The
goal of the agent is to obtain the maximal possible return
after playing for a period of time - even though she has no
knowledge about the transition probabilities at the beginning.
The performance of a learning algorithm is measured by
“regret”. Regret is the difference between the cumulative
reward obtained using the best possible policy and the cumulative reward obtained by the learning algorithm. Any
algorithm that is capable of learning requires to have a regret sublinear in T , the number of time steps. In the tabular
setting where S and A are finite sets, there exist algorithms
√
that achieve asymptotic regret ∼ poly(|S||A|) · T (e.g.
(Jaksch et al., 2010; Dann & Brunskill, 2015; Osband &
Van Roy, 2016; Osband et al., 2017; Agrawal & Jia, 2017;
Azar et al., 2017; Dann et al., 2018; Jin et al., 2018)). However, the aforementioned regret bound depends polynomially on |S| and |A|, sizes of the state and action space,
which can be very large or even infinite. For instance, the
game of Go has 3361 unique states, and a robotic arm has
infinitely many continuous-valued states.
√ In the most general sense, the regret poly(|S||A|) · T is nonimprovable
in the worst case (Jaksch et al., 2010). This issue is more
generally known as the “curse of dimensionality” of control
and dynamic programming (Bellman, 1966).
To tackle the dimensionality, a common practice is to use
features to parameterize high-dimensional value and policy
functions in compact presentations, with the hope that the
features can capture leading structures of the MDP. In fact,
there are phenomenal empirical successes of reinforcement
learning using explicit features and/or neural networks as
implicit features (see e.g., (Mnih et al., 2015)). However,
there is a lack of theoretical understanding about using features for exploration in RL and its learning complexity. In
this paper, we are interested in the following theoretical
question:
How to use features for provably efficient exploration in
reinforcement learning?
Furthermore, we consider online RL in a reproducing ker-

