Learning Adversarially Robust Representations via
Worst-Case Mutual Information Maximization
Sicheng Zhu * 1 Xiao Zhang * 1 David Evans 1

Abstract
Training machine learning models that are robust
against adversarial inputs poses seemingly insurmountable challenges. To better understand adversarial robustness, we consider the underlying
problem of learning robust representations. We
develop a notion of representation vulnerability
that captures the maximum change of mutual information between the input and output distributions, under the worst-case input perturbation.
Then, we prove a theorem that establishes a lower
bound on the minimum adversarial risk that can
be achieved for any downstream classifier based
on its representation vulnerability. We propose an
unsupervised learning method for obtaining intrinsically robust representations by maximizing the
worst-case mutual information between the input
and output distributions. Experiments on downstream classification tasks support the robustness
of the representations found using unsupervised
learning with our training principle.

1. Introduction
Machine learning has made remarkable breakthroughs in
many fields, including computer vision (He et al., 2016)
and natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2019), especially when evaluated on classification accuracy on a given
dataset. However, adversarial vulnerability (Szegedy et al.,
2014; Engstrom et al., 2017), remains a serious problem
that impedes the deployment of the state-of-the-art machine
learning models in safety-critical applications, such as autonomous driving (Eykholt et al., 2018) and face recognition
(Sharif et al., 2016). Despite extensive efforts to improve
model robustness, state-of-the-art adversarially robust training methods (M ˛
adry et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019) still
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
University of Virginia. Correspondence to: Sicheng Zhu
<sz6hw@virginia.edu>, Xiao Zhang <xz7bc@virginia.edu>,
David Evans <evans@virginia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

fail to produce robust models, even for simple classification
tasks on CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009).
In addition to many ineffective empirical attempts for achieving model robustness, recent studies have identified intrinsic
difficulties for learning in the presence of adversarial examples. For instance, a line of works (Gilmer et al., 2018;
Fawzi et al., 2018; Mahloujifar et al., 2019; Shafahi et al.,
2018) proved that adversarial vulnerability is inevitable if
the underlying input distribution is concentrated. Schmidt
et al. (2018) showed that for certain learning problems, adversarially robust generalization requires more sample complexity compared with standard one, whereas Bubeck et al.
(2019) constructed a specific task on which adversarially
robust learning is computationally intractable.
Motivated by the apparent empirical and theoretical difficulties of robust learning with adversarial examples, we
focus on the underlying problem of learning adversarially
robust representations (Garg et al., 2018; Pensia et al., 2020).
Given an input space X ⊆ Rd and a feature space Z ⊆ Rn ,
any function g : X → Z is called a representation with
respect to (X , Z). Adversarially robust representations denote the set of functions from X to Z that are less sensitive
to adversarial perturbations with respect to some metric ∆
defined on X . Note that one can always get an overall classification model by learning a downstream classifier given
a representation, thus learning representations that are robust can be viewed as an intermediate step for the ultimate
goal of finding adversarially robust models. In this sense,
learning adversarially robust representations may help us
better understand adversarial examples, and perhaps more
importantly, bypass some of the aforementioned intrinsic
difficulties for achieving model robustness.
In this paper, we give a general definition for robust representations based on mutual information, then study its
implications on model robustness for a downstream classification task. Finally, we propose empirical methods for
estimating and inducing representation robustness.
Contributions. Motivated by the empirical success of standard representation learning using the mutual information
maximization principle (Bell & Sejnowski, 1995; Hjelm
et al., 2018), we first give a formal definition on representa-

