Intrinsic Reward Driven Imitation Learning via Generative Model
2020.02.05

Xingrui Yu 1 Yueming Lyu 1 Ivor W. Tsang 1

Abstract
Imitation learning in a high-dimensional environment is challenging. Most inverse reinforcement
learning (IRL) methods fail to outperform the
demonstrator in such a high-dimensional environment, e.g., Atari domain. To address this challenge, we propose a novel reward learning module
to generate intrinsic reward signals via a generative model. Our generative method can perform
better forward state transition and backward action encoding, which improves the module’s dynamics modeling ability in the environment. Thus,
our module provides the imitation agent both the
intrinsic intention of the demonstrator and a better
exploration ability, which is critical for the agent
to outperform the demonstrator. Empirical results
show that our method outperforms state-of-the-art
IRL methods on multiple Atari games, even with
one-life demonstration. Remarkably, our method
achieves performance that is up to 5 times the
performance of the demonstration.

1. Introduction
Imitation Learning (IL) offers an approach to train an agent
to mimic the demonstration of an expert. Behavioral cloning
(BC) is probably the simplest form of imitation learning
(Pomerleau, 1991). The promise of this method is to train a
policy to predict the demonstrator’s actions from the states
using supervised learning. However, despite its simplicity, behavioral cloning suffers from a compounding error
problem if the data distribution diverges too much from the
training set (Ross et al., 2011). In other words, an initial
minor error can result in severe deviation from the demonstrator’s behavior. On the other hand, inverse reinforcement
learning (IRL) (Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Ng & Russell, 2000)
aims at recovering a reward function from the demonstra1
Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute, University of Technology Sydney.
Correspondence to: Xingrui Yu <Xingrui.Yu@student.uts.edu.au>, Ivor W. Tsang
<Ivor.Tsang@uts.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Beyond Expert

Start

Expert Level
Demonstration Level

Figure 1. Generative intrinsic reward driven imitation learning
(GIRIL) seeks a reward function to achieve three imitation goals.
1) Match the basic demonstration-level performance. 2) Reach the
expert-level performance. and 3) Exceed expert-level performance.
GIRIL performs beyond the expert by generating a family of intrinsic rewards for sampling-based self-supervised exploration.

tion, and then execute reinforcement learning (RL) on that
reward function. However, even with many demonstrations,
most state-of-the-art inverse reinforcement learning methods fail to outperform the demonstrator in high-dimensional
environments, e.g., Atari domain.
In our quest to find a solution to this curse of dimensionality,
the primary goal to train an agent to reach the expert-level
performance with limited demonstration data. This goal is
very challenging because, in our context, limited demonstration data means that the agent can only learn from the states
and actions recorded from gameplay up until the demonstrator, i.e. the player, loses their first life. We call this
a “one-life demonstration”. With currently-available approaches, it is unrealistic to expect an agent to even develop
sufficient skills to match a player’s basic demonstrationlevel performance. Our ultimate goal for imitation learning
is to build an agent that yields better-than-expert imitation
performance from only a one-life demonstration. Figure 1
illustrates the three steps towards achieving this goal.
Most existing IRL methods fail to reach the first goal in
Figure 1, i.e. the demonstration-level performance. This is
because IRL methods seek a reward function that justifies
demonstrations only. Given extremely limited state-action
data in a one-life demonstration, the recovered reward can
be biased. Executing RL on such reward usually results in
an agent performing worse than the demonstration. To address this problem, we propose Generative Intrinsic Reward
driven Imitation Learning (GIRIL), which seeks a family

