An Accelerated DFO Algorithm for Finite-sum Convex Functions

Yuwen Chen 1 Antonio Orvieto 1 Aurelien Lucchi 1

Abstract
Derivative-free optimization (DFO) has recently
gained a lot of momentum in machine learning,
spawning interest in the community to design
faster methods for problems where gradients are
not accessible. While some attention has been
given to the concept of acceleration in the DFO
literature, existing stochastic algorithms for objective functions with a finite-sum structure have
not been shown theoretically to achieve an accelerated rate of convergence. Algorithms that use
acceleration in such a setting are prone to instabilities, making it difficult to reach convergence. In
this work, we exploit the finite-sum structure of
the objective in order to design a variance-reduced
DFO algorithm that provably yields acceleration.
We prove rates of convergence for both smooth
convex and strongly-convex finite-sum objective
functions. Finally, we validate our theoretical
results empirically on several tasks and datasets.

1. Introduction
While gradient-based techniques are extremely popular in
machine learning, there are applications where derivatives
are too expensive to compute or might not even be accessible (black-box optimization). In such cases, an alternative is
to use derivative-free methods which rely on function values
instead of explicitly computing gradients. These methods
date to the 1960’s, including e.g. (Matyas, 1965; Nelder &
Mead, 1965) and have recently gained more attention in
machine learning in areas such as black-box adversarial attacks (Chen et al., 2017), reinforcement learning (Salimans
et al., 2017), online learning (Bubeck et al., 2012), etc.
We focus our attention on optimizing finite-sum objective
functions which are commonly encountered in machine
1
Computer Science Department, ETH Zürich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Chen, Yuwen <aaronchenyuwen@gmail.com>,
Orvieto, Antonio <antonio.orvieto@inf.ethz.ch>, Lucchi, Aurelien <aurelien.lucchi@inf.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

learning and which can be formulated as:
"
#
n
1X
min f (x) :=
fi (x) ,
n i=1
x∈Rd

(1)

where each function fi : Rd → R is convex and differentiable, but its derivatives are not directly accessible.
The problem of optimizing Eq. (1) has been addressed in a
seminal work by (Nesterov & Spokoiny, 2011) who introduced a deterministic random1 gradient-free method (RGF)
using a two-point Gaussian random gradient estimator. The
authors derived a rate of convergence for RGF for both
convex and strongly-convex functions and they also introduced a variant with a provably accelerated rate of convergence. Subsequently, (Ghadimi & Lan, 2013) developed a
stochastic variant of RGF, proving a nearly2 optimal rate of
convergence for convex functions.
In the field of first-order gradient-based methods, gradient
descent has long been known to achieve a suboptimal convergence rate. In a seminal paper, Nesterov (1983) showed
that one can construct an optimal – i.e. accelerated – algorithm that achieves faster rates of convergence for both
convex and strongly-convex functions. Accelerated methods have attracted a lot of attention in machine learning,
pioneering some popular momentum-based methods such
as Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) which is commonly used
to train deep neural networks. It therefore seems natural
to ask whether provably accelerated methods can be designed in a derivative-free setting. While this question has
been considered in a deterministic setting in (Nesterov &
Spokoiny, 2011) as well as in a stochastic setting (Gorbunov
et al., 2018; 2019), none of these works provably derived
an accelerated rate of convergence for the finite-sum setting
presented in Eq. (1).
The inherent difficulty of designing a stochastic algorithm
with an accelerated rate of convergence is due to the instability of the momentum term (Allen-Zhu, 2017; Orvieto
et al., 2019). One way to reduce instabilities is to rely on
stochastic variance reduction (Johnson & Zhang, 2013; Defazio et al., 2014) which allows to achieve a linear rate of
convergence for smooth and strongly convex functions in
1

The term random refers to the use of randomly sampled directions to estimate derivatives.
2
For a precise definition, see (Ghadimi & Lan, 2013).

