Ordinal Non-negative Matrix Factorization for Recommendation

Olivier Gouvert 1 Thomas Oberlin 2 Cédric Févotte 1

Abstract
We introduce a new non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) method for ordinal data, called
OrdNMF. Ordinal data are categorical data which
exhibit a natural ordering between the categories.
In particular, they can be found in recommender
systems, either with explicit data (such as ratings)
or implicit data (such as quantized play counts).
OrdNMF is a probabilistic latent factor model that
generalizes Bernoulli-Poisson factorization (BePoF) and Poisson factorization (PF) applied to
binarized data. Contrary to these methods, OrdNMF circumvents binarization and can exploit a
more informative representation of the data. We
design an efficient variational algorithm based on
a suitable model augmentation and related to variational PF. In particular, our algorithm preserves
the scalability of PF and can be applied to huge
sparse datasets. We report recommendation experiments on explicit and implicit datasets, and
show that OrdNMF outperforms BePoF and PF
applied to binarized data.

1. Introduction
Collaborative filtering (CF) is a popular recommendation
technique based only on the feedbacks of users on items.
These feedbacks can be stored into a matrix Y of size
U × I, where U and I are the number of users and items
respectively. Matrix factorization (MF) methods (Hu et al.,
2008; Koren et al., 2009; Ma et al., 2011) aim to approximate the feedback matrix Y by a low-rank structure WHT
×K
where W ∈ RU
corresponds to user preferences and
+
I×K
H ∈ R+ to item attributes.
Poisson factorization (PF) (Canny, 2004; Cemgil, 2009;
Gopalan et al., 2015) is a non-negative matrix factorization
(NMF) model (Lee & Seung, 1999; 2001; Févotte & Idier,
1

IRIT, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, France 2 ISAESUPAERO, Université de Toulouse, France. Correspondence to:
Olivier Gouvert <oliviergouvert@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

2011) which aims to predict future interactions between
users and items in order to make recommendations. For
this purpose, PF is often applied to a binarized version of
the data, i.e., Y ∈ {0, 1}U ×I , containing only the information that a user is interacting with an item or not. A
variant of PF, called Bernoulli-Poisson factorization (BePoF) (Acharya et al., 2015), has been proposed to explicitly
model binary data. However, for both PF and BePoF, the
binarization stage induces a loss of information, since the
value associated to an interaction is removed. Although
several attempts in the literature tried to directly model raw
data, both for explicit (Hernandez-Lobato et al., 2014) and
implicit data (Basbug & Engelhardt, 2016; Zhou, 2017;
Gouvert et al., 2019), this remains a challenging problem.
In an attempt to keep as much information as possible, we
propose in this paper to consider ordinal rather than binary
data. Ordinal data (Stevens, 1946) are nominal/categorical
data which exhibit a natural ordering (for example: cold
≺ warm ≺ hot). This type of data is encountered in recommender systems with explicit data such as ratings. It
can also be created by quantizing implicit data such as play
counts. Such a pre-processing remains softer than binarization and stays closer to the raw data, as soon as the number
of classes is chosen big enough. In this paper, without loss
of generality, we will work with ordinal data belonging to
{0, . . . , V }. Note that for this type of data, the notion of
distance between the different classes is not defined. For
example, this implies that the mean is not adapted to these
data, unlike the median.
There are two naive ways to process ordinal data. The first
one consists in applying classification methods. The scale
of the ordering relation which links the different categories
is then ignored. The second way considers these data as
real values in order to apply regression models. By doing
this, it artificially creates a distance between the different
categories. These two naive methods do not fully consider
the specificity of ordinal data, since they remove or add information to the data. Threshold models (McCullagh, 1980;
Verwaeren et al., 2012) are popular ordinal data processing
methods that alleviate this issue. They assume that the data
results from the quantization of continuous latent variables
with respect to (w.r.t.) an increasing sequence of thresholds.
The aim of these models is then to train a predictive model
on the latent variables and to learn the sequence of thresh-

