Adversarial Learning Guarantees for
Linear Hypotheses and Neural Networks

Pranjal Awasthi 1 Natalie S. Frank 2 Mehryar Mohri 3

Abstract
Adversarial or test time robustness measures the
susceptibility of a classifier to perturbations to
the test input. While there has been a flurry of
recent work on designing defenses against such
perturbations, the theory of adversarial robustness
is not well understood. In order to make progress
on this, we focus on the problem of understanding generalization in adversarial settings, via the
lens of Rademacher complexity. We give upper
and lower bounds for the adversarial empirical
Rademacher complexity of linear hypotheses with
adversarial perturbations measured in lr -norm for
an arbitrary r ≥ 1. We then extend our analysis
to provide Rademacher complexity lower and upper bounds for a single ReLU unit. Finally, we
give adversarial Rademacher complexity bounds
for feed-forward neural networks with one hidden
layer.

1. Introduction
Robustness is a key requirement when designing machine
learning models and comes in various forms such as robustness to training set corruptions, missing feature values, and
model misspecification. In recent years, requiring robustness to adversarial or test time perturbations has become a
key requirement. Starting with the work of Szegedy et al.
(2014) it has now been well established that deep neural
networks trained via standard gradient descent based algorithms are highly susceptible to imperceptible corruptions
to the input at test time (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Chen
et al., 2017; Eykholt et al., 2018; Carlini & Wagner, 2018).
This has led to a proliferation of work aimed at designing
classifiers robust to such perturbations (Madry et al., 2017;
1

Google Research and Rutgers University 2 Courant Institute of Math. Sciences 3 Google Research and Courant Institute of Math. Sciences. Correspondence to: Natalie S. Frank
<nf1066@nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Gowal et al., 2018; 2019; Schott et al., 2018) and works
aimed at designing more sophisticated attacks to break such
classifiers (Athalye et al., 2018; Carlini & Wagner, 2017;
Sharma & Chen, 2017)
While the above works have made significant progress in
designing practical defenses, theoretical aspects of adversarial robustness are currently poorly understood unlike other
notions of training set corruptions that have been widely
studied in both the statistics and the computer science communities (Huber, 2011; Kearns & Li, 1993; Kearns et al.,
1994). Theoretical understanding of adversarial robustness
presents three main challenges. The first is a computational
one since even checking the robustness of a given model
at a given test input is an NP-hard problem (Awasthi et al.,
2019). This has been explored in recent works that construct specific instances of learning problems where standard non-robust learning can be done efficiently, but learning
a robust classifier becomes computationally hard (Bubeck
et al., 2018b;a; Nakkiran, 2019; Degwekar et al., 2019). The
second challenge concerns whether achieving adversarial
robustness requires one to compromise on standard accuracy. Recent works have shown specific instance where this
tradeoff is inherent (Tsipras et al., 2018; Raghunathan et al.,
2019).
Finally, the third challenge, the main focus of this work,
is the question of what quantity governs generalization in
adversarial settings, and how generalization in adversarial
settings compares to its non-adversarial counterpart. The
recent work of Schmidt et al. (2018) has shown, via specific
constructions, that in some scenarios achieving adversarial
generalization requires more data as compared to adversarial generalization. Furthermore, the work of Montasser et al.
(2019) casts a shadow of doubt on the use of classical quantities such as the VC-dimension of explain generalization in
adversarial settings.
However, generalization for function classes of infinite VCdimension (such as SVMs with a Gaussian kernel) can be
explained via margin-based bounds. Characterizing the
Rademacher complexity of the function class is essential in
these estimates. In a similar vein, we believe that providing
non-trivial bounds on the adversarial Rademacher complexity can help shed light on when generalization is possible in

