Stochastic Latent Residual Video Prediction
Jean-Yves Franceschi * 1 Edouard Delasalles * 1 Mickaël Chen 1 Sylvain Lamprier 1 Patrick Gallinari 1 2

Abstract
Designing video prediction models that account
for the inherent uncertainty of the future is challenging. Most works in the literature are based
on stochastic image-autoregressive recurrent networks, which raises several performance and applicability issues. An alternative is to use fully latent temporal models which untie frame synthesis
and temporal dynamics. However, no such model
for stochastic video prediction has been proposed
in the literature yet, due to design and training
difficulties. In this paper, we overcome these difficulties by introducing a novel stochastic temporal
model whose dynamics are governed in a latent
space by a residual update rule. This first-order
scheme is motivated by discretization schemes of
differential equations. It naturally models video
dynamics as it allows our simpler, more interpretable, latent model to outperform prior stateof-the-art methods on challenging datasets.

1. Introduction
Being able to predict the future of a video from a few conditioning frames in a self-supervised manner has many applications in fields such as reinforcement learning (Gregor
et al., 2019) or robotics (Babaeizadeh et al., 2018). More
generally, it challenges the ability of a model to capture
visual and dynamic representations of the world. Video
prediction has received a lot of attention from the computer
vision community. However, most proposed methods are deterministic, reducing their ability to capture video dynamics,
which are intrinsically stochastic (Denton & Fergus, 2018).
Stochastic video prediction is a challenging task which has
been tackled by recent works. Most state-of-the-art approaches are based on image-autoregressive models (Denton & Fergus, 2018; Babaeizadeh et al., 2018), built around
*
Equal contribution. 1 Sorbonne Université, CNRS, LIP6, F75005 Paris, France 2 Criteo AI Lab, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Jean-Yves Franceschi <jean-yves.franceschi@lip6.fr>,
Edouard Delasalles <edouard.delasalles@lip6.fr>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), where each generated
frame is fed back to the model to produce the next frame.
However, performances of their temporal models innately
depend on the capacity of their encoder and decoder, as each
generated frame has to be re-encoded in a latent space. Such
autoregressive processes induce a high computational cost,
and strongly tie the frame synthesis and temporal models,
which may hurt the performance of the generation process
and limit its applicability (Gregor et al., 2019; Rubanova
et al., 2019).
An alternative approach consists in separating the dynamic
of the state representations from the generated frames,
which are independently decoded from the latent space. In
addition to removing the aforementioned link between frame
synthesis and temporal dynamics, this is computationally appealing when coupled with a low-dimensional latent space.
Moreover, such models can be used to shape a complete representation of the state of a system, e.g. for reinforcement
learning applications (Gregor et al., 2019), and are more
interpretable than autoregressive models (Rubanova et al.,
2019). Yet, these State-Space Models (SSMs) are more difficult to train as they require non-trivial inference schemes
(Krishnan et al., 2017) and a careful design of the dynamic
model (Karl et al., 2017). This leads most successful SSMs
to only be evaluated on small or artificial toy tasks.
In this work, we introduce a novel stochastic dynamic model
for the task of video prediction which successfully leverages structural and computational advantages of SSMs that
operate on low-dimensional latent spaces. Its dynamic component determines the temporal evolution of the system
through residual updates of the latent state, conditioned on
learned stochastic variables. This formulation allows us to
implement an efficient training strategy and process in an
interpretable manner complex high-dimensional data such
as videos. This residual principle can be linked to recent
advances relating residual networks and Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs) (Chen et al., 2018). This interpretation opens new perspectives such as generating videos at
different frame rates, as demonstrated in our experiments.
The proposed approach outperforms current state-of-theart models on the task of stochastic video prediction, as
demonstrated by comparisons with competitive baselines
on representative benchmarks.

