Gradient-free Online Learning in Games with Delayed Rewards

Amélie Héliou 1 Panayotis Mertikopoulos 2 1 Zhengyuan Zhou 3

Abstract
Motivated by applications to online advertising
and recommender systems, we consider a gametheoretic model with delayed rewards and asynchronous, payoff-based feedback. In contrast to
previous work on delayed multi-armed bandits,
we focus on multi-player games with continuous
action spaces, and we examine the long-run behavior of strategic agents that follow a no-regret
learning policy (but are otherwise oblivious to the
game being played, the objectives of their opponents, etc.). To account for the lack of a consistent
stream of information (for instance, rewards can
arrive out of order, with an a priori unbounded
delay, etc.), we introduce a gradient-free learning
policy where payoff information is placed in a
priority queue as it arrives. In this general context, we derive new bounds for the agents’ regret;
furthermore, under a standard diagonal concavity
assumption, we show that the induced sequence
of play converges to Nash equilibrium (NE) with
probability 1, even if the delay between choosing
an action and receiving the corresponding reward
is unbounded.

1. Introduction
A major challenge in the application of learning theory to
online advertising and recommender systems is that there
is often a significant delay between action and reaction: for
instance, a click on an ad can be observed within seconds
of the ad being displayed, but the corresponding sale can
take hours or days to occur – if it occurs at all. Putting aside
all questions of causality and “what if” reasoning (e.g., the
attribution of the sale to a given click), this delay has an
adverse effect on all levels of the characterization between
marketing actions and a user’s decisions.
1
Criteo AI Lab 2 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LIG, 38000 Grenoble, France 3 Stern School of Business,
NYU, and IBM Research. Correspondence to: Panayotis Mertikopoulos <panayotis.mertikopoulos@imag.fr>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Similar issues also arise in operations research, online
machine learning, and other fields where online decisionmaking is the norm; as an example, we mention here the
case of traffic allocation and online path planning, signal
coveriance optimization in signal processing, etc. In view
of all this, a key question that arises is a) to quantify the
impact of a delayed reward / feedback structure on multiagent learning; and b) to design policies that exploit obsolete
information in a way as to minimize said impact.
Context. In this paper, we examine the above questions
in the general framework of online learning in games with
continuous action spaces. In more detail, we focus on recurrent decision processes that unfold as follows: At each
stage t = 1, 2, . . . , the decision-maker (or player) selects
an action Xt from a set of possible actions X . This action
subsequently triggers a reward ut (Xt ) based on some (a
priori unknown) payoff function ut : X → R. However,
in contrast to the standard online optimization setting, this
reward is only received by the player dt stages later, i.e.,
at round t + dt . As a result, the player may receive no
information at round t, or they may receive older, obsolete
information from some previous round s < t.
This very broad framework places no assumptions on the
governing dynamics between actions and rewards, the
payoff-generating process, or the delays encountered by
the player. As such, the most common performance measure for a realized sequence of actions is the player’s regret,
i.e., the difference between the player’s cumulative payoff
over a given horizon and that of the best fixed action in
hindsight. Thus, in the absence of more refined knowledge
about the environments, the most sensible choice would be
to deploy a policy which, at the very least, leads to no regret.
A specific instance of this “agnostic” framework – and one
that has attracted considerable interest in the literature –
is when the rewards of a given player are determined by
the player’s interactions with other players, even though
the dynamics of these interactions can be unknown to the
decision-making players beforehand. For instance, when
placing a bid for reserving ad space, the ultimate payoff
of a bidder will be determined by the bids of all other participating players and the rules of the underlying auction.
The exact details of the auction (e.g., its reserve price) may
be unknown to the bidders, and the bidders may not know

