Online Convex Optimization in the Random Order Model

Dan Garber 1 Gal Korcia 2 Kfir Y. Levy 2

Abstract
Online Convex Optimization (OCO) is a powerful
framework for sequential prediction, portraying
the natural uncertainty inherent in data-streams
as though the data were generated by an almost
omniscient adversary. However, this view, which
is often too pessimistic for real-world data, comes
with a price. The complexity of solving many important online tasks in this adversarial framework
becomes much worse than that of their offline and
even stochastic counterparts. In this work we consider a natural random-order version of the OCO
model, in which the adversary can choose the set
of loss functions, but does not get to choose the
order in which they are supplied to the learner;
Instead, they are observed in uniformly random
order. Focusing on two important families of online tasks, one in which the cumulative loss function is strongly convex (though individual loss
functions may not even be convex), and the other
being online k-PCA, we show that under standard well-conditioned-data assumptions, standard
online gradient descent (OGD) methods become
much more efficient in the random-order model.
In particular, for the first group of tasks OGD
guarantees poly-logarithmic regret. In the case of
online k-PCA, OGD guarantees sublinear regret
using only a rank-k SVD on each iteration and
memory linear in the size of the solution.

1. Introduction
Online Convex Optimization (OCO) (Hazan, 2016; ShalevShwartz, 2012) has emerged in the past two decades as a

powerful and popular paradigm for modeling sequential prediction problems in face of uncertainty. Its main strength
is that the notion of uncertainty considered is very strong
and involves worst-case scenarios, i.e., the sequence of loss
functions is considered to be selected by an adversary who
knows the prediction algorithm (perhaps up to potential
randomness used for prediction). At the same time, this
paradigm lands itself to tractable optimization, and theoretically efficient algorithms that provably minimize the regret
are known to exist.
Of course, when considering applications of this paradigm
to practical prediction tasks which involve very high dimensional settings and high-throughput rates, classical
polynomial-time efficiency may be prohibitive, and there is
a need for practically efficient algorithms, usually such that
require at most linear (in the dimension) memory and linear
runtime per prediction round.
Unfortunately, for several important online tasks such as
online linear regression and online PCA, state-of-the-art
methods require quadratic memory and at least quadratic
runtime per round, which greatly limits their applicability
to high dimensional data, see for instance (Garber, 2019a;b)
and references therein. Perhaps surprisingly, in both of
these cases, this is in clear contrast to their offline and even
stochastic counterparts, which admit significantly more efficient algorithms, under standard well-conditionedness assumptions (e.g., moderate condition number of data matrix
in linear regression, or non-negligible eigengap in covariance matrix for PCA). In particular, in both cases these
efficient algorithms are simply gradient descent / stochastic
gradient descent methods. It is thus natural to ask, if Online
Gradient Descent (Zinkevich, 2003a), which requires only
linear memory and linear runtime (putting aside to gradient
computation time) could be shown to be efficient for online
variants of such fundamental tasks.

1

Department of Industrial Engineering and Management, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa,
Israel 2 Department of Electrical Engineering, Technion Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.
Correspondence to:
Dan Garbar <dangar@technion.ac.il>, Gal
Korcia <galko@campus.technion.ac.il>, Kfir Y. Levy
<kfirylevy@technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Towards obtaining highly-efficient algorithms for online
sequential prediction, in this work we consider a weaker
variant of OCO, in which, while we still allow an adversary
to choose the set of loss functions (with complete knowledge of the prediction algorithm), we do not allow him to
control the order in which they are supplied to the learner.
Instead, here we assume that the losses are observed in
a random order, according to a uniformly chosen permu-

