Provably Convergent Two-Timescale Off-Policy Actor-Critic
with Function Approximation

Shangtong Zhang 1 Bo Liu 2 Hengshuai Yao 3 Shimon Whiteson 1

Abstract
We present the first provably convergent twotimescale off-policy actor-critic algorithm (COFPAC) with function approximation. Key to COFPAC is the introduction of a new critic, the emphasis critic, which is trained via Gradient Emphasis Learning (GEM), a novel combination of the
key ideas of Gradient Temporal Difference Learning and Emphatic Temporal Difference Learning.
With the help of the emphasis critic and the canonical value function critic, we show convergence
for COF-PAC, where the critics are linear, and the
actor can be nonlinear.

1. Introduction
The policy gradient theorem and the corresponding actorcritic algorithm (Sutton et al., 2000; Konda, 2002) have
recently enjoyed great success in various domains, e.g., defeating the top human player in Go (Silver et al., 2016),
achieving human-level control in Atari games (Mnih et al.,
2016). However, the canonical actor-critic algorithm is onpolicy and hence suffers from significant data inefficiency
(e.g., see Mnih et al. (2016)). To address this issue, Degris
et al. (2012) propose the Off-Policy Actor-Critic (Off-PAC)
algorithm. Off-PAC has been extended in various ways,
e.g., off-policy Deterministic Policy Gradient (DPG, Silver
et al. 2014), Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG,
Lillicrap et al. 2015), Actor Critic with Experience Replay
(ACER, Wang et al. 2016), off-policy Expected Policy Gradient (EPG, Ciosek & Whiteson 2017), TD3 (Fujimoto
et al., 2018), and IMPALA (Espeholt et al., 2018). Off-PAC
and its extensions have enjoyed great empirical success as
the canonical on-policy actor-critic algorithm. There is,
however, a theoretical gap between the canonical on-policy
actor-critic and Off-PAC. Namely, on-policy actor-critic has
1

2

3

University of Oxford Auburn University Huawei
Technologies.
Correspondence to:
Shangtong Zhang
<shangtong.zhang@cs.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

a two-timescale convergent analysis under function approximation (Konda, 2002), but Off-PAC is convergent only in the
tabular setting (Degris et al., 2012). While there have been
several attempts to close this gap (Imani et al., 2018; Maei,
2018; Zhang et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019), none of them is
convergent under function approximation without imposing
strong assumptions (e.g., assuming the critic converges).
In this paper, we close this long-standing theoretical gap via
the Convergent Off-Policy Actor-Critic (COF-PAC) algorithm, the first provably convergent two-timescale off-policy
actor-critic algorithm. COF-PAC builds on Actor-Critic
with Emphatic weightings (ACE, Imani et al. 2018), which
reweights Off-PAC updates with emphasis through the followon trace (Sutton et al., 2016). The emphasis accounts for
off-policy learning by adjusting the state distribution, and
the followon trace approximates the emphasis (see Sutton
et al. 2016).4 Intuitively, estimating the emphasis of a state
using the followon trace is similar to estimating the value
of a state using a single Monte Carlo return. Thus it is not
surprising that the followon trace can have unbounded variance (Sutton et al., 2016) and large emphasis approximation
error, complicating the convergence analysis of ACE.
Instead of using the followon trace, we propose a novel
stochastic approximation algorithm, Gradient Emphasis
Learning (GEM), to approximate the emphasis in COFPAC, inspired by Gradient TD methods (GTD, Sutton et al.
2009b;a), Emphatic TD methods (ETD, Sutton et al. 2016),
and reversed TD methods (Wang et al., 2007; 2008; Hallak
& Mannor, 2017; Gelada & Bellemare, 2019). We prove
the almost sure convergence of GEM, as well as other GTDstyle algorithms, with linear function approximation under
a slowly changing target policy. With the help of GEM, we
prove the convergence of COF-PAC, where the policy parameterization can be nonlinear, and the convergence level
is the same as the on-policy actor-critic (Konda, 2002).
4
We use emphasis to denote the limit of the expectation of the
followon trace, which is slightly different from Sutton et al. (2016)
and is clearly defined in the next section.

