Lifted Disjoint Paths with Application in Multiple Object Tracking

Andrea Hornakova * 1 Roberto Henschel * 2 Bodo Rosenhahn 2 Paul Swoboda 1

Abstract
We present an extension to the disjoint paths problem in which additional lifted edges are introduced to provide path connectivity priors. We
call the resulting optimization problem the lifted
disjoint paths problem. We show that this problem is NP-hard by reduction from integer multicommodity flow and 3-SAT. To enable practical
global optimization, we propose several classes of
linear inequalities that produce a high-quality LPrelaxation. Additionally, we propose efficient cutting plane algorithms for separating the proposed
linear inequalities. The lifted disjoint path problem is a natural model for multiple object tracking
and allows an elegant mathematical formulation
for long range temporal interactions. Lifted edges
help to prevent id switches and to re-identify persons. Our lifted disjoint paths tracker achieves
nearly optimal assignments with respect to input
detections. As a consequence, it leads on all three
main benchmarks of the MOT challenge, improving significantly over state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
The disjoint paths problem, a special case of the network
flow problem with flows constrained to be binary, is a classical combinatorial optimization problem for which fast
combinatorial solvers exist. It is a natural model for the
multiple object tracking problem (MOT) in computer vision (Zhang et al., 2008). In the form of the tracking-bydetection paradigm, MOT consists of two steps: First, an
object detector is applied to each frame of a video sequence
to find the putative locations of all objects appearing in the
video. Then, in the data association step, false positive de-

Figure 1. Illustration of connections between detections in three
consecutive video frames together with a feasible labeling. We
enhance the network flow model (black) with lifted edges (blue)
representing whether two detections belong to the same track or not.
Solid edges labeled by 1 represent active connections, dashed edges
labeled by zero represent inactive connections between detections.

tections are removed while correct detections are associated
to the corresponding identities, thereby forming trajectories.
In this work, we concentrate on the latter task.
While for MOT even very large data association instances
can be solved using the disjoint paths formulation, it has
been shown that the basic disjoint paths problem alone is
not sufficient to provide trajectories of high accuracy. The
main limitation for MOT is the implicit assumption of a
first-order Markov chain. In particular, costs only indicate
whether two detections directly follow each other in a track.

*
Equal contribution 1 Computer Vision and Machine Learning,
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Saarland, Germany 2 Institut for Image Processing, Leibniz University Hannover,
Hannover, Niedersachsen, Germany. Correspondence to: Andrea
Hornakova <andrea.hornakova@mpi-inf.mpg.de>, Roberto Henschel <henschel@tnt.uni-hannover.de>.

Our contribution is three-fold: First, to overcome the limited
expressiveness of disjoint paths, we propose to augment it
with lifted edges which take into account long range interactions, see Figure 1. We call the resulting problem the
lifted disjoint paths problem, see Section 3. We prove the
problem to be NP-hard in Section 6. Second, we study
the optimization problem from a polyhedral perspective,
proposing a high-quality linear programming relaxation, see
Section 4. Separation routines for the proposed constraints
are described in Section 5. Third, we apply the lifted disjoint
paths problem to MOT and show that our solver significantly
outperforms state-of-the-art trackers on the popular MOT
challenge, see Section 7.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

We argue that our model has advantages from the modelling
and optimization point of view. From the modelling standpoint, the lifted disjoint paths problem does not change the

