Graph Convolutional Network for Recommendation
with Low-pass Collaborative Filters

Wenhui Yu 1 Zheng Qin 1 2

Abstract
Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) is widely
used in graph data learning tasks such as recommendation. However, when facing a large graph,
the graph convolution is very computationally expensive thus is simplified in all existing GCNs,
yet is seriously impaired due to the oversimplification. To address this gap, we leverage the
original graph convolution in GCN and propose a
Low-pass Collaborative Filter (LCF) to make it
applicable to the large graph. LCF is designed to
remove the noise caused by exposure and quantization in the observed data, and it also reduces the
complexity of graph convolution in an unscathed
way. Experiments show that LCF improves the
effectiveness and efficiency of graph convolution and our GCN outperforms existing GCNs
significantly. Codes are available on https:
//github.com/Wenhui-Yu/LCFN.

1. Introduction
Graph convolution (Shuman et al., 2013) is the extension of
convolution from the Euclidean domain to the graph domain
and Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) is the extension
of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). GCN is widely
explored in graph learning tasks such as recommendation
since it can extract abundant information from the graph
data. However, the eigen-decomposition of a large matrix
is required in the graph convolution (Shuman et al., 2013),
which is extremely space- and time-consuming in real-world
applications. To avoid the eigen-decomposition, all existing
GCNs constrain (even fix) the convolutional kernel and
simplify graph convolution to graph propagation (Defferrard
et al., 2016; Kipf & Welling, 2017). Graph Neural Network
(GNN) propagates signals through the graph, and refines
1

Tsinghua University 2 Corresponding author. Correspondence
to: Wenhui Yu <yuwh16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Zheng Qin
<qingzh@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

the signal of each node with its neighborhoods (Zhou et al.,
2018). By constraining the kernel, GCNs lose the ability of
convolution and degenerate to GNNs (discussed in detail
in Section 5.4). To address the oversimplification issue,
we propose a new GCN that can really leverage the ability
of graph convolution and validate the effectiveness in the
recommendation task. In our GCN, we propose a Lowpass Collaborative Filter (LCF) both to filter the noise in
observed data and to reduce the time consumption of graph
convolution without hurting its ability.
LCF is devised to remove the noise in the observed data.
In this paper, we adopt implicit feedback data (interactions
such as “purchase”, “click”, “watch” records, denoted by
binary variables) since it is generally applicable in recommendation tasks. A matrix for observed interactions is illustrated in Figure 1(c), and Figure 1 shows how it is generated:
There is an unknown underlying numeric rating matrix R0
indicating the true preference score for each user towards
each item, shown in Figure 1(a). When browsing items on
a website, users can only browse a small proportion of the
mass items, thus many items are not exposed to the users,
including many preferred items. Reflected in the matrix
representation, many elements in R0 are set to 0 randomly,
shown in Figure 1(b). To simulate this process, we add exposure noise N1 to the rating matrix R0 . For the remaining
exposed items, a user will interact with them only if she
like them. In the matrix representation, we discretize the
matrix R0 + N1 with a threshold, which is set as 0.5 in this
example. The quantization noise is denoted as N2 , and we
have R = R0 + N1 + N2 . Our task is to reconstruct R0
from observed R and rank all items for each user based on
the reconstruction.
Considering R0 is low frequency due to the strong dependence and N1 and N2 are high frequency due to the randomness (we will introduce the reason in detail in Section
3.1), we can remove noise by low-pass filtering. However,
different from the images, R, R0 , N1 and N2 are all 2D
graph signals, thus conventional filters are not effective. For
signals defined in the Euclidean domain like images and
timing signals, the dependence is based on position, such as
pixels near in the space position or sampling points near in
the time axis. Nevertheless, for signals defined in the graph

