Finding trainable sparse networks through Neural Tangent Transfer

Tianlin Liu 1 2 Friedemann Zenke 1

Abstract
Deep neural networks have dramatically transformed machine learning, but their memory and
energy demands are substantial. The requirements
of real biological neural networks are rather modest in comparison, and one feature that might underlie this austerity is their sparse connectivity.
In deep learning, trainable sparse networks that
perform well on a specific task are usually constructed using label-dependent pruning criteria.
In this article, we introduce Neural Tangent Transfer, a method that instead finds trainable sparse
networks in a label-free manner. Specifically, we
find sparse networks whose training dynamics, as
characterized by the neural tangent kernel, mimic
those of dense networks in function space. Finally, we evaluate our label-agnostic approach on
several standard classification tasks and show that
the resulting sparse networks achieve higher classification performance while converging faster.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks achieve human-level performance in a
variety of domains (LeCun et al., 2015; Schmidhuber, 2015;
Silver et al., 2017). Unlike biological neural networks, however, deep learning systems require extensive computational
resources and energy. This demand poses a major impediment for future applications in which deep networks are
embedded in always-on edge devices and in the Internet of
Things (IoT) (Neftci, 2018; Roy et al., 2019; LeCun, 2019).
One approach to make artificial neural networks more
energy-efficient is to exploit sparseness at both the activity
and connectivity level (Gong et al., 2014; Lebedev et al.,
2015; Jaderberg et al., 2014). This approach echoes the
sparseness principle of biological neural systems, which underlies their superior energy efficiency (Sterling & Laughlin,

2017). To this date, most of the studies on sparse artificial
neural networks have focused on post hoc pruning, whereby
sparse networks are derived from trained dense networks.
This approach, however, is computationally costly because it
does not allow us to benefit from sparseness during training.
To tackle this issue, recent work (Lee et al., 2019b; Wang
et al., 2020) proposed identifying trainable sparse networks
by pruning dense networks before training them. Such
foresight pruning results in sparse networks that can learn
quickly and generalize well in subsequent supervised learning tasks despite having only a few adjustable, nonzero
parameters. Although they perform well in many scenarios,
existing foresight pruning methods can be improved in two
ways. First, current methods solely rely on labeled data to
determine which parameters to prune. But since labeled
data are often scarce (Xu et al., 2019; Rigollet & Weed,
2019), label-free pruning methods that leverage abundant
unlabeled data could offer a decisive advantage. Second, existing foresight pruning approaches have focused on global
pruning criteria, which are known to remove weights primarily from the fully connected layers of convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) while preserving most parameters in the
convolutional layers. Yet, because convolutional layers are
responsible for most of the computational burden (Yang
et al., 2017), global pruning results in comparatively small
savings. Here, pruning methods that effectively sparsify
convolutional filters in a layerwise manner could offer substantial performance improvements.
In this article, we introduce neural tangent transfer (NTT),
a foresight pruning method that works well in the layerwise setting and without labeled data. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first work to find trainable sparse networks in a label-free manner. Importantly, we show that our
method reliably finds trainable CNNs with sparse convolutional filters, a situation in which existing foresight pruning
methods struggle.

2. Prior work

1

Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel,
Switzerland. 2 University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Friedemann Zenke <friedemann.zenke@fmi.ch>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

The problem of instantiating sparse neural networks has
been considered in several previous studies. They can be
broadly divided into three categories. First, post hoc pruning approaches rely on removing redundant parameters from
trained, dense networks. Second, on-the-fly pruning meth-

