Bisection-Based Pricing for Repeated Contextual Auctions
against Strategic Buyer

Anton Zhiyanov 1 2 Alexey Drutsa 1 2

Abstract
We are interested in learning algorithms that optimize revenue in repeated contextual posted-price
auctions where a single seller faces a single strategic buyer. In our setting, the buyer maximizes
his expected cumulative discounted surplus, and
his valuation of a good is assumed to be a fixed
function of a d-dimensional context (feature) vector. We introduce a novel deterministic learning
algorithm that is based on ideas of the Bisection
method and has strategic regret upper bound of
O(log2 T ). Unlike previous works, our algorithm
does not require any assumption on the distribution of context information, and the regret guarantee holds for any realization of feature vectors
(adversarial upper bound). To construct our algorithm we non-trivially adopted techniques of
integral geometry to act against buyer strategicness and improved the penalization trick to work
in contextual auctions.

1. Introduction
Revenue maximization is a permanent development goal in
large Internet companies such as Real-time ad exchanges
(RTB) and web search engines (Aggarwal et al., 2006; Vanunts & Drutsa, 2019). Ad inventory is usually sold by
means of second-price auctions (He et al., 2013; Golrezaei
et al., 2019; Drutsa, 2020a) and their variations for multiple
ads per a web page, e.g., GSP (Varian, 2007) or VCG (Varian, 2009). Reserve prices are mainly used to extract optimal revenue in these online auction (Myerson, 1981; CesaBianchi et al., 2013). In the case of a single advertiser (a
frequent scenario in ad auctions (Amin et al., 2013; Mohri &
1

Yandex Research, Moscow, Russian Federation 2 Faculty
of Mechanics and Mathematics, Moscow State University im.
Lomonosova, Moscow, Russian Federation. Correspondence
to: Anton Zhiyanov <zhiyanovap@gmail.com>, Alexey Drutsa
<adrutsa@yandex.ru>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

Munoz, 2014; Drutsa, 2018)), a second-price auction with
reserve prices reduces to a posted-price auction. In this
mechanism, the auctioneer (the seller) sets a reserve price
for an advertisement space (a good) and the advertiser (the
buyer) decides whether to reject or accept this price: to bid
below or above it (Kleinberg & Leighton, 2003).
In this work, we focus on a scenario when a single seller
repeatedly interacts through posted-price auctions with the
same strategic buyer (Amin et al., 2013; 2014). In each
round, the currently offered good is described by a context
information (feature vector), which is observed by both the
buyer and the seller. The buyer holds a private (valuation)
function to calculate his valuation of a good from its feature vector. For instance, this scenario models well an Ad
exchange that sequentially offers different ad spaces to the
same advertiser, who values differently visit of different
users on different web sites. This dependence of the buyer’s
valuation on context is fixed and is unknown to the seller.
We assume that the valuation function is from a certain parametric class and, for sake of exposition, this is the class of
linear1 models, following (Amin et al., 2014; Cohen et al.,
2016; Leme & Schneider, 2018; Golrezaei et al., 2019).
The seller uses an online learning algorithm to set prices
in each round based on previous decisions of the buyer and
the observed context information of offered goods. This
pricing algorithm is announced to the buyer in advance,
and the strategic buyer seeks to maximize his expected
cumulative discounted surplus (Amin et al., 2013; Drutsa,
2017b) with respect to some private distribution D of feature
vectors (Amin et al., 2014; Golrezaei et al., 2019; Drutsa,
2020b). The seller is aimed to maximize her cumulative
revenue over a finite time horizon T via regret minimization,
i.e., she seeks for a pricing algorithm with a sublinear regret
on T (a no-regret pricing) (Amin et al., 2013; 2014; Mohri
& Munoz, 2014; Drutsa, 2018).
For this scenario, Amin et al. (2014) proposed the algorithm LEAP, which is based on Gradient Descent and
has upper
√ bound on expected strategic regret of the form
O(T 2/3 log T ). Golrezaei et al. (2019) recently improved
1

However, the results of our study hold for a variety of nonlinear parametric functions (e.g., kernel models), see Sec. 7.

