Preference Modeling with Context-Dependent Salient Features
Amanda Bower 1 Laura Balzano 2

Abstract
We consider the problem of estimating a ranking
on a set of items from noisy pairwise comparisons given item features. We address the fact that
pairwise comparison data often reflects irrational
choice, e.g. intransitivity. Our key observation is
that two items compared in isolation from other
items may be compared based on only a salient
subset of features. Formalizing this framework,
we propose the salient feature preference model
and prove a finite sample complexity result for
learning the parameters of our model and the underlying ranking with maximum likelihood estimation. We also provide empirical results that
support our theoretical bounds and illustrate how
our model explains systematic intransitivity. Finally we demonstrate strong performance of maximum likelihood estimation of our model on both
synthetic data and two real data sets: the UT Zappos50K data set and comparison data about the
compactness of legislative districts in the US.

1. Introduction
The problem of estimating a ranking is ubiquitous and has
applications in a wide variety of areas such as recommender
systems, review of scientific articles or proposals, search
results, sports tournaments, and understanding human perception. Collecting full rankings of n items from human
users is infeasible if the number of items n is large. Therefore, k-wise comparisons, k < n, are typically collected
and aggregated instead. Pairwise comparisons (k = 2)
are popular since it is believed that humans can easily and
quickly answer these types of comparisons. However, it
has been observed that data from k-wise comparisons for
small k often exhibit what looks like irrational choice, such
as systematic intransitivity among comparisons. Common
1
Department of Mathematics, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI 2 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI. Correspondence
to: Amanda Bower <amandarg@umich.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

models address this issue with modeling noise, ignoring its
systematic nature. We observe, as others have before us
(Seshadri et al., 2019; Rosenfeld et al., 2020; Pfannschmidt
et al., 2019; Kleinberg et al., 2017; Benson et al., 2016; Chen
and Joachims, 2016b;a), that these systematic irrational behaviors can likely be better modeled as rational behaviors
made in context, meaning that the particular k items used in
a k-wise comparison will affect the comparison outcome.
Consider the most common model for learning a single
ranking from pairwise comparisons, the Bradley-Terry-Luce
(BTL) model. In this model, there exists a judgment vector
w⇤ 2 Rd that indicates the favorability of each of the d
features of an item (e.g. for shoes: cost, width, material
quality, etc), and each item has an embedding Ui 2 Rd ,
i = 1, . . . , n, indicating the value of each feature for that
given item. Subsequently, the outcome of a comparison is
made with probability related to the inner product hUi , w⇤ i;
the larger this inner product, the more likely item i will
be ranked above other items to which it is compared. A
key implicit assumption is that the features used to rank all
n items are the same features used to rank just k items in
the absence of the other n k items. However, we argue
that the context of that particular pairwise comparison is
also relevant; it is likely that when a pairwise comparison is
collected, if there are a small number of features that “stand
out,” a person will use only these features and ignore the rest
when he or she makes a comparison judgment. Otherwise,
if there are no salient features between a pair of items, a
person will take all features into consideration. This theory
has been hypothesized by the social science community to
explain violations of rational choice (Tversky, 1972; Tversky and Simonson, 1993; Rieskamp et al., 2006; Brown and
Peterson, 2009; Shepard, 1964; Torgerson, 1965; Tversky,
1977; Bordalo et al., 2013). For example, (Kaufman et al.,
2017) collected preference data to understand human perception of the compactness of legislative districts. They
hypothesized that the features respondents use in a pairwise
comparison task to judge district compactness vary from
pair to pair, which explains why their data are more reliable
for larger k. To illustrate this point, we highlight a concrete example from their experiments. Given two images
of districts, they asked respondents to pick which district
is more compact. When comparing district A with district
B or district C in Figure 1, one of the most salient features

