Probing Emergent Semantics in Predictive Agents via Question Answering

Abhishek Das* 1 Federico Carnevale* 2 Hamza Merzic 2 Laura Rimell 2 Rosalia Schneider 2 Josh Abramson 2
Alden Hung 2 Arun Ahuja 2 Stephen Clark 2 Gregory Wayne 2 Felix Hill 2

Abstract
Recent work has shown how predictive modeling can endow agents with rich knowledge
of their surroundings, improving their ability
to act in complex environments. We propose
question-answering as a general paradigm to decode and understand the representations that such
agents develop, applying our method to two recent approaches to predictive modeling – actionconditional CPC (Guo et al., 2018) and SimCore (Gregor et al., 2019). After training agents
with these predictive objectives in a visually-rich,
3D environment with an assortment of objects,
colors, shapes, and spatial configurations, we
probe their internal state representations with synthetic (English) questions, without backpropagating gradients from the question-answering decoder into the agent. The performance of different agents when probed this way reveals that they
learn to encode factual, and seemingly compositional, information about objects, properties and
spatial relations from their physical environment.
Our approach is intuitive, i.e. humans can easily
interpret responses of the model as opposed to inspecting continuous vectors, and model-agnostic,
i.e. applicable to any modeling approach. By revealing the implicit knowledge of objects, quantities, properties and relations acquired by agents
as they learn, question-conditional agent probing can stimulate the design and development of
stronger predictive learning objectives.

1. Introduction
Since the time of Plato, philosophers have considered the
apparent distinction between “knowing how” (procedural
knowledge or skills) and “knowing what” (propositional
knowledge or facts). It is uncontroversial that deep rein2

*
1
Equal contribution
Georgia Institute of Technology
DeepMind. Correspondence to: <felixhill@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

forcement learning (RL) agents can effectively acquire procedural knowledge as they learn to play games or solve tasks.
Such knowledge might manifest in an ability to find all of
the green apples in a room, or to climb all of the ladders
while avoiding snakes. However, the capacity of such agents
to acquire factual knowledge about their surroundings – of
the sort that can be readily hard-coded in symbolic form in
classical AI – is far from established. Thus, even if an agent
successfully climbs ladders and avoids snakes, we have no
certainty that it ‘knows’ that ladders are brown, that there
are five snakes nearby, or that the agent is currently in the
middle of a three-level tower with one ladder left to climb.
The acquisition of knowledge about objects, properties, relations and quantities by learning-based agents is desirable
for several reasons. First, such knowledge should ultimately
complement procedural knowledge when forming plans that
enable execution of complex, multi-stage cognitive tasks.
Second, there seems (to philosophers at least) to be something fundamentally human about having knowledge of facts
or propositions (Stich, 1979). If one of the goals of AI is to
build machines that can engage with, and exhibit convincing
intelligence to, human users (e.g. justifying their behaviour
so humans understand/trust them), then a need for uncovering and measuring such knowledge in learning-based agents
will inevitably arise.
Here, we propose the question-conditional probing of agent
internal states as a means to study and quantify the knowledge about objects, properties, relations and quantities encoded in the internal representations of neural-networkbased agents. Couching an analysis of such knowledge
in terms of question-answering has several pragmatic advantages. First, question-answering provides a general purpose
method for agent-analysis and an intuitive investigative tool
for humans – one can simply ask an agent what it knows
about its environment and get an answer back, without having to inspect internal activations. Second, the space of
questions is essentially open-ended – we can pose arbitrarily complex questions to an agent, enabling a comprehensive analysis of the current state of its propositional knowledge. Question-answering has previously been studied in
textual (Rajpurkar et al., 2016; 2018; Devlin et al., 2018;
Yang et al., 2019), visual (Malinowski & Fritz, 2014; Antol
et al., 2015; Das et al., 2017) and embodied (Gordon et al.,

