Manifold Identification for Ultimately Communication-Efficient Distributed
Optimization

Yu-Sheng Li * 1 Wei-Lin Chiang * 1 Ching-pei Lee 2

Abstract
This work proposes a progressive manifold identification approach for distributed optimization
with sound theoretical justifications to greatly
reduce both the rounds of communication and
the bytes communicated per round for partlysmooth regularized problems such as the `1 and group-LASSO-regularized ones. Our twostage method first uses an inexact proximal quasiNewton method to iteratively identify a sequence
of low-dimensional manifolds in which the final
solution would lie, and restricts the model update
within the current manifold to gradually lower the
order of the per-round communication cost from
the problem dimension to the dimension of the
manifold that contains a solution and makes the
problem within it smooth. After identifying this
manifold, we take superlinear-convergent truncated semismooth Newton steps computed by preconditioned conjugate gradient to largely reduce
the communication rounds by improving the convergence rate from the existing linear or sublinear
ones to a superlinear rate. Experiments show that
our method can be orders of magnitudes lower in
the communication cost and an order of magnitude faster in the running time than the state of
the art.

1. Introduction
Distributed computing that simultaneously utilizes multiple
machines is essential for dealing with the huge volume of
data faced nowadays. Therefore, distributed optimization
has become an active research topic in machine learning
*

1

Equal contribution
Department of Computer Science,
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan 2 Department of
Mathematics & Institute for Mathematical Sciences, National
University of Singapore, Singapore.
Correspondence to:
Yu-Sheng Li <r07922087@csie.ntu.edu.tw>, Wei-Lin
Chiang <r06922166@csie.ntu.edu.tw>, Ching-pei Lee
<leechingpei@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

in recent years. In distributed optimization, the additional
computing power and storage from multiple machines can
greatly reduce the time for computation, memory access,
and disk I/O. On the other hand, expensive inter-machine
communication is frequently needed to synchronize the current model and calculate the update steps, so the communication cost, which can be an order of magnitude more
expensive than local computation, usually becomes the bottleneck.
It is clear that the overall communication cost is proportional to both (i) the number of communication rounds and
(ii) the cost per round, so reducing either factor can lower
the overall expense on communication. State-of-the-art
communication-efficient distributed optimization methods
such as (Zhang & Xiao, 2015; Zheng et al., 2017; Lee et al.,
2017; Lee & Chang, 2019; Lee et al., 2019) mainly focused
on improving the former, which is closely related to the
iteration complexity or the convergence speed. On the other
hand, the reduction of the latter is usually achieved by compression or coding techniques that communicate inexact information using fewer bytes (Aji & Heafield, 2017; Lin et al.,
2017; Wen et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2018). These approaches
can harm the convergence speed of the optimization process
due to the introduced noise, so the overall communication
cost might not be reduced because of the increased communication rounds, and relevant study is restricted to specific
problem classes with limited theoretical support. This work
aims at decreasing both factors simultaneously through a
two-stage progressive manifold identification approach with
thorough theoretical guarantees.
We consider a distributed setting of minimizing the following regularized problem using K machines.
min

w∈<d

F (w) :=

K
X

fk (w) + Ψ(w),

(1)

k=1

where each fk is differentiable and exclusively available
on the kth machine, their sum is Lipschitz-continuouslydifferentiable (sometimes called smooth) but might not be
convex, and the regularization term Ψ is convex, proper, and
closed but possibly nonsmooth. We assume further that (1)
has a solution set Ω 6= ∅ and Ψ is partly smooth (Lewis,
2002) everywhere. Loosely speaking, a convex function

