Influenza Forecasting Framework based on Gaussian Processes

Christoph Zimmer 1 Reza Yaesoubi 2

Abstract
The seasonal epidemic of influenza costs thousands of lives each year in the US. While influenza
epidemics occur every year, timing and size of the
epidemic vary strongly from season to season.
This complicates the public health efforts to adequately respond to such epidemics. Forecasting
techniques to predict the development of seasonal
epidemics such as influenza, are of great help to
public health decision making. Therefore, the
US Center for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) has initiated a yearly challenge to forecast influenza-like illness. Here, we propose a
new framework based on Gaussian process (GP)
for seasonal epidemics forecasting and demonstrate its capability on the CDC reference data
on influenza like illness: our framework leads to
accurate forecasts with small but reliable uncertainty estimation. We compare our framework
to several state of the art benchmarks and show
competitive performance. We, therefore, believe
that our GP based framework for seasonal epidemics forecasting will play a key role for future
influenza forecasting and, lead to further research
in the area.

1. Introduction
The seasonal epidemic of influenza causes a tremendous
burden on public health each year (Chretien et al., 2014).
In the U.S. alone it is responsible for 9.2 to 35.6 million
cases, 140,000 to 710,000 hospitalizations, and 12,000 to
56,000 deaths (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
c). To allow for better public health policies and resource
allocation, it is important to have reliable forecasts of
future influenza development at hand. Therefore, the
Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has
1

Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Renningen, Germany 2 Health Policy and Management, Yale School of Public
Health, New Haven, USA. Correspondence to: Christoph Zimmer
<christoph.zimmer@de.bosch.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

invested effort into research on forecasting Influenza. This
includes establishing a challenge to forecast influenza
activities. In this challenge, various research groups utilize
a variety of techniques and data sets to forecast difference
influenza-related targets such as the number of influenza
cases during future weeks.
Since the establishment of this challenge in 2013, progress
has been made (Biggerstaff et al., 2016), within two
directions: identifying and utilizing new data sources and
developing new forecasting methodologies. The CDC
influenza-like illness (ILI) data is published with a 1-3
weeks delay (Paul et al., 2014), so indirect online data
has been used to obtain real-time ILI estimates. Google
Flu trends (Ginsberg et al., 2009) uses the frequency of
influenza related search terms such as ”cough” or ”fever” to
estimate the number of ILI cases in real-time. Similarly,
Twitter texts can be analyzed (Broniatowski et al., 2013)
or the number of visits to Wikipedia pages (McIver &
Brownstein, 2014).
With respect to methodological advances, a variety of
statistical and mechanistic models have been developed to
use both CDC ILI data and other real-time data sources to
forecast influenza activities.(Adhikari et al., 2019; Brooks
et al., 2015; Farrow, 2016; Osthus et al., 2017; Ray et al.,
2017; Shaman et al., 2013; Yang et al., 2014; Zimmer et al.,
2018a;b).

In this work, we develop a new framework for influenza
forecasting that is based on Gaussian Processes regression.
Applying this framework to the official CDC reference data
set on influenza-like illness, we demonstrate the performance of this framework by retrospective forecasting on
seven influenza seasons.
We compare our framework to several state of the art forecasting techniques and show that our results suggest clear
and significant improvement for seasonal influenza forecasting in US compared to state of the art benchmarks.
Main contribution:
• A new framework based on Gaussian process regres-

