PowerNorm: Rethinking Batch Normalization in Transformers
Sheng Shen * 1 Zhewei Yao * 1 Amir Gholami 1 Michael W. Mahoney 1 Kurt Keutzer 1

Abstract
The standard normalization method for neural
network (NN) models used in Natural Language
Processing (NLP) is layer normalization (LN).
This is different than batch normalization (BN),
which is widely-adopted in Computer Vision. The
preferred use of LN in NLP is principally due to
the empirical observation that a (naive/vanilla)
use of BN leads to significant performance degradation for NLP tasks; however, a thorough understanding of the underlying reasons for this is
not always evident. In this paper, we perform
a systematic study of NLP transformer models
to understand why BN has a poor performance,
as compared to LN. We find that the statistics
of NLP data across the batch dimension exhibit
large fluctuations throughout training. This results in instability, if BN is naively implemented.
To address this, we propose Power Normalization (PN), a novel normalization scheme that resolves this issue by (i) relaxing zero-mean normalization in BN, (ii) incorporating a running
quadratic mean instead of per batch statistics to
stabilize fluctuations, and (iii) using an approximate backpropagation for incorporating the running statistics in the forward pass. We show
theoretically, under mild assumptions, that PN
leads to a smaller Lipschitz constant for the loss,
compared with BN. Furthermore, we prove that
the approximate backpropagation scheme leads
to bounded gradients. We extensively test PN for
transformers on a range of NLP tasks, and we
show that it significantly outperforms both LN
and BN. In particular, PN outperforms LN by
0.4/0.6 BLEU on IWSLT14/WMT14 and 5.6/3.0
PPL on PTB/WikiText-103. We make our code
publicly available at https://github.com/
sIncerass/powernorm.
*
Equal contribution 1 UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Amir
Gholami <amirgh@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

1. Introduction
Normalization has become one of the critical components
in Neural Network (NN) architectures for various machine
learning tasks, in particular in Computer Vision (CV) and
Natural Language Processing (NLP). However, currently
there are very different forms of normalization used in CV
and NLP. For example, Batch Normalization (BN) (Ioffe
& Szegedy, 2015) is widely adopted in CV, but it leads to
significant performance degradation when naively used in
NLP. Instead, Layer Normalization (LN) (Ba et al., 2016) is
the standard normalization scheme used in NLP. All recent
NLP architectures, including Transformers (Vaswani et al.,
2017), have incorporated LN instead of BN as their default
normalization scheme. In spite of this, the reasons why BN
fails for NLP have not been clarified, and a better alternative
to LN has not been presented.
In this work, we perform a systematic study of the challenges associated with BN for NLP, and based on this we
propose Power Normalization (PN), a novel normalization
method that significantly outperforms LN. In particular, our
contributions are as follows:
• We find that there are clear differences in the batch
statistics of NLP data versus CV data. In particular, we
observe that batch statistics for NLP data have a very
large variance throughout training. This variance exists
in the corresponding gradients as well. In contrast,
CV data exhibits orders of magnitude smaller variance.
See Figure 2 and 3 for a comparison of BN in CV and
NLP.
• To reduce the variation of batch statistics, we modify typical BN by relaxing zero-mean normalization,
and we replace the variance with the quadratic mean.
We denote this scheme as PN-V. We show theoretically that PN-V preserves the first-order smoothness
property as in BN; see Lemma 2.
• We show that using running statistics for the quadratic
mean results in significantly better performance, up to
1.5/2.0 BLEU on IWSLT14/WMT14 and 7.7/3.4 PPL
on PTB/WikiText-103, as compared to BN; see Table 1
and 2. We denote this scheme as PN. Using running
statistics requires correcting the typical backpropagation scheme in BN. As an alternative, we propose an

