IPBoost – Non-Convex Boosting via Integer Programming

Marc Pfetsch * 1 Sebastian Pokutta * 2

Abstract
Recently non-convex optimization approaches for
solving machine learning problems have gained
significant attention. In this paper we explore
non-convex boosting in classification by means of
integer programming and demonstrate real-world
practicability of the approach while circumventing shortcomings of convex boosting approaches.
We report results that are comparable to or better
than the current state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Boosting is an important (and by now standard) technique
in classification to combine several ‘low accuracy’ learners, so-called base learners, into a ‘high accuracy’ learner,
a so-called boosted learner. Pioneered by the AdaBoost
approach of (Freund & Schapire, 1995), in recent decades
there has been extensive work on boosting procedures and
analyses of their limitations. In a nutshell, boosting procedures are (typically) iterative schemes that roughly work as
follows: for t = 1, . . . , T do the following:
1. Train a learner µt from a given class of base learners
on the data distribution Dt .
2. Evaluate performance of µt by computing its loss.
3. Push weight of the data distribution Dt towards misclassified examples leading to Dt+1 .
Finally, the learners are combined by some form of voting
(e.g., soft or hard voting, averaging, thresholding). A close
inspection of most (but not all) boosting procedures reveals
that they solve an underlying convex optimization problem
over a convex loss function by means of coordinate gradient
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, TU Darmstadt, Germany 2 Department of Mathematics, TU Berlin and
Zuse Institute Berlin, Berlin, Germany. Correspondence to:
Marc Pfetsch <pfetsch@opt.tu-darmstadt.de>, Sebastian Pokutta
<pokutta@zib.de>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

descent. Boosting schemes of this type are often referred to
as convex potential boosters. These procedures can achieve
exceptional performance on many data sets if the data is correctly labeled. However, it was shown in (Long & Servedio,
2008; 2010) that any convex potential booster can be easily
defeated by a very small amount of label noise (this also
cannot be easily fixed by early termination). The intuitive
reason for this is that convex boosting procedures might
progressively zoom in on the (small percentage of) misclassified examples in an attempt to correctly label them, while
simultaneously moving distribution weight away from the
correctly labeled examples. As a consequence, the boosting
procedure might fail and produce a boosted learner with
arbitrary bad performance on unseen data.
Let D = {(xi , yi ) | i ∈ I} ⊆ Rd × {±1} be a set of
training examples and for some logical condition C, define
I[C] = 1 if C is true and I[C] = −1 otherwise. Typically,
the true loss function of interest is of a form similar to
X
`(D, θ) :=
I[hθ (xi ) 6= yi ],
(1)
i∈I

i.e., we want to minimize the number of misclassifications,
where hθ is some learner parameterized by θ; this function
can be further modified to incorporate margin maximization
as well as include a measure of complexity of the boosted
learner to help generalization etc. It is important to observe
that the loss in Equation (1) is non-convex and hard to minimize. Thus, traditionally this loss has been replaced by
various convex relaxations, which are at the core of most
boosting procedures. In the presence of mislabeled examples (or more generally label noise) minimizing these convex
relaxations might not be a good proxy for minimizing the
true loss function arising from misclassifications.
Going beyond the issue of label noise, one might ask more
broadly, why not directly minimizing misclassifications
(with possible regularizations) if one could? In the past,
this has been out of the question due to the high complexity
of minimizing the non-convex loss function. In this paper,
we will demonstrate that this is feasible and practical with
today’s integer programming techniques. We propose to
directly work with a loss function of the form as given in
(1) (and variations) and solve the non-convex combinatorial
optimization problem with state-of-the-art integer programming (IP) techniques including column generation. This

