The FAST Algorithm for Submodular Maximization
Adam Breuer 1 Eric Balkanski 1 Yaron Singer 1

Abstract
In this paper we describe a new parallel algorithm called Fast Adaptive Sequencing Technique (FAST) for maximizing a monotone submodular function under a cardinality constraint
k. This algorithm achieves the optimal 1 1/e
approximation guarantee and is orders of magnitude faster than the state-of-the-art on a variety
of experiments over real-world data sets. Following recent work by Balkanski & Singer (2018a),
there has been a great deal of research on algorithms whose theoretical parallel runtime is exponentially faster than algorithms used for submodular maximization over the past 40 years.
However, while these new algorithms are fast in
terms of asymptotic worst-case guarantees, it is
computationally infeasible to use them in practice even on small data sets because the number of rounds and queries they require depend on
large constants and high-degree polynomials in
terms of precision and confidence. The design
principles behind the FAST algorithm we present
here are a significant departure from those of recent theoretically fast algorithms. Rather than
optimize for asymptotic theoretical guarantees,
the design of FAST introduces several new techniques that achieve remarkable practical and theoretical parallel runtimes. The approximation
guarantee obtained by FAST is arbitrarily close
to 1
1/e, and its asymptotic parallel runtime (adaptivity) is O(log(n) log2 (log k)) using
O(n log log(k)) total queries. We show that
FAST is orders of magnitude faster than any algorithm for submodular maximization we are aware
of, including hyper-optimized parallel versions
of state-of-the-art serial algorithms, by running
experiments on large data sets.
1
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA. Correspondence to:
Adam Breuer <breuer@g.harvard.edu>,
Eric Balkanski <ebalkans@gmail.com>, Yaron Singer
<yaron@seas.harvard.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
In this paper we describe a fast parallel algorithm for submodular maximization.1 Informally, a function is submodular if it exhibits a natural diminishing returns property. For
the canonical problem of maximizing a monotone submodular function under a cardinality constraint, it is well known
that the greedy algorithm, which iteratively adds elements
whose marginal contribution is largest to the solution,
obtains a 1 1/e approximation guarantee (Nemhauser
et al., 1978) which is optimal for polynomial-time algorithms (Nemhauser & Wolsey, 1978). The greedy algorithm and other submodular maximization techniques are
heavily used in machine learning and data mining as many
fundamental objectives such as entropy, mutual information, graphs cuts, diversity, and set cover are submodular.
In recent years there has been a great deal of progress on
fast algorithms for submodular maximization designed to
accelerate computation on large data sets. The first line
of work considers serial algorithms where queries can be
evaluated on a single processor (Leskovec et al., 2007;
Badanidiyuru & Vondrák, 2014; Mirzasoleiman et al.,
2015; 2016; Ene & Nguyen, 2019b;c). For serial algorithms the state-of-the-art for maximization under a cardinality constraint is the lazier-than-lazy-greedy (LTLG)
algorithm which returns a solution that is in expectation arbitrarily close to the optimal 1 1/e and does so in a linear
number of queries (Mirzasoleiman et al., 2015). This algorithm is a stochastic greedy algorithm coupled with lazy
updates, which not only performs well in terms of the quality of the solution it returns, but is also very fast in practice.
Accelerating computation beyond linear runtime requires
parallelization. The parallel runtime of blackbox optimization is measured by adaptivity, which is the number of sequential rounds an algorithm requires when polynomiallymany queries can be executed in parallel in every round.
For maximizing a submodular function defined over a
ground set of n elements under a cardinality constraint k,
the adaptivity of the naive greedy algorithm is O(k), which
in the worst case is O(n). Until recently no algorithm was
known to have better parallel runtime than that of greedy.
A very recent line of work initiated by Balkanski &
1

Code is available from www.adambreuer.com/code.

