Approximation Capabilities of Neural ODEs and Invertible Residual Networks

Han Zhang 1 Xi Gao 1 Jacob Unterman 1 Tom Arodz 1

Abstract
Neural ODEs and i-ResNet are recently proposed
methods for enforcing invertibility of residual neural models. Having a generic technique for constructing invertible models can open new avenues
for advances in learning systems, but so far the
question of whether Neural ODEs and i-ResNets
can model any continuous invertible function remained unresolved. Here, we show that both of
these models are limited in their approximation
capabilities. We then prove that any homeomorphism on a p-dimensional Euclidean space can
be approximated by a Neural ODE operating on
a 2p-dimensional Euclidean space, and a similar
result for i-ResNets. We conclude by showing
that capping a Neural ODE or an i-ResNet with a
single linear layer is sufficient to turn the model
into a universal approximator for non-invertible
continuous functions.

1. Introduction
A neural network block is a function F that maps an input
0
vector x ∈ X ⊂ Rp to output vector F (x, θ) ∈ Rp , and is
parameterized by a weight vector θ. We require that F is
almost everywhere differentiable with respect to both of its
arguments, allowing the use of gradient methods for tuning
θ based on training data and an optimization criterion, and
for passing the gradient to preceding network blocks.
One type of neural building blocks that has received attention in recent years is a residual block (He et al., 2016),
where F (x, θ) = x + f (x, θ), with f being some differentiable, nonlinear, possibly multi-layer transformation. Input and output dimensionality of a residual block are the
same, p, and such blocks are usually stacked in a sequence,
a ResNet, xt+1 = xt + ft (xt , θt ). Often, the functional
form of ft is the same for all blocks t ∈ {1, ...T } in the
1

Department of Computer Science, Virginia Commonwealth
University, Richmond, Virginia, USA. Correspondence to: Tom
Arodz <tarodz@vcu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

sequence. Then, we can represent the sequence through
xt+1 − xt = fΘ (xt , t), where Θ consists of trainable parameters for all blocks in the sequence; the second argument,
t, allows us to pick the proper subset of parameters, θt . If we
allow arbitrary fΘ , for example a neural network with input
and output dimensionality p but with many hidden layers of
dimensionality higher than p, a sequence of residual blocks
can, in principle, model arbitrary mappings x → φT (x),
where we define φT (x0 ) = xT to be the result of applying
the sequence of T residual blocks to the initial input x0 .
For example, a linear layer preceded by a deep sequence
of residual blocks is a universal approximator for Lebesgue
integrable functions Rp → R (Lin & Jegelka, 2018).
Recently, models arising from residual blocks have gained
attention as a means to construct invertible networks; that
is, training a network results in a mapping x0 → xT for
which an inverse mapping xT → x0 exists. Ability to train
a mapping that is guaranteed to be invertible has practical
applications; for example, they give rise to normalizing
flows (Deco & Brauer, 1995; Rezende & Mohamed, 2015),
which allow for sampling from a complicated, multi-modal
probability distribution by generating samples from a simple
one, and transforming them through an invertible mapping.
Thus, it is important to know whether an invertible model
can be trained to approximate arbitrary invertible mappings,
or if its approximation capabilities are limited.
1.1. Invertible Models
We focus our attention on two invertible models proposed
recently: i-ResNet, a constrained ResNet, and Neural ODE,
a continuous generalization of a ResNet.
Invertible Residual Networks While ResNets refer to
arbitrary networks with any residual blocks xt+1 = xt +
fΘ (xt , t), that is, can have any residual mapping fΘ (xt , t), iResNets (Behrmann et al., 2019), and their improved variant,
Residual Flows (Chen et al., 2019), are built from blocks
in which fΘ is Lipschitz-continuous with constant lower
than 1 as a function of xt for fixed t, which we denote by
Lip(fΘ ) < 1. This constraint is sufficient (Behrmann et al.,
2019) to guarantee invertibility of the residual network, that
is, to make xt → xt+1 a one-to-one mapping.
Given the constraint on the Lipschitz constant, an invert-

