Context-Aware Local Differential Privacy
Jayadev Acharya 1 K. A. Bonawitz 2 Peter Kairouz 2 Daniel Ramage 2 Ziteng Sun 1 3

Abstract
Local differential privacy (LDP) is a strong notion of privacy that often leads to a significant
drop in utility. The original definition of LDP assumes that all the elements in the data domain
are equally sensitive. However, in many reallife applications, some elements are more sensitive than others. We propose a context-aware
framework for LDP that allows the privacy level
to vary across the data domain, enabling system designers to place privacy constraints where
they matter without paying the cost where they
do not. For binary data domains, we provide
a universally optimal privatization scheme and
highlight its connections to Warner’s randomized response and Mangat’s improved response.
Motivated by geo-location and web search applications, for k-ary data domains, we consider
two special cases of context-aware LDP: blockstructured LDP and high-low LDP. We study
minimax discrete distribution estimation under
both cases and provide communication-efficient,
sample-optimal schemes and information theoretic lower bounds. We show, using worst-case
analyses and experiments on Gowalla’s 3.6 million check-ins to 43,750 locations, that contextaware LDP achieves a far better accuracy under
the same number of samples.

1. Introduction
Differential privacy (DP) is a rigorous notion of privacy
that enforces a worst-case bound on the privacy loss due
to release of query results (Dwork et al., 2006). Its local
1
ECE, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA 2 Google,
Seattle, USA 3 JA and ZS are supported by NSF-CCF-1846300
(CAREER), NSF-CRII-1657471 and a Google Faculty Research
Award. Work partially done while ZS was visiting Google. Correspondence to: Jayadev Acharya <acharya@cornell.edu>,
K.
A.
Bonawitz
<bonawitz@google.com>,
Peter
Kairouz <kairouz@google.com>, Daniel Ramage <dramage@google.com>, Ziteng Sun <zs335@cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

version, local differential privacy (LDP) (Definition 1), provides context-free privacy guarantees even in the absence of
a trusted data collector (Warner, 1965; Beimel et al., 2008;
Kasiviswanathan et al., 2011). Under LDP, all pairs of elements in a data domain are assumed to be equally sensitive,
leading to harsh privacy-utility trade-offs in many learning
applications. In many real-life settings, however, some elements are more sensitive than others. For example, in URL
applications, users may want to differentiate sensitive URLs
from non-sensitive ones, and in geo-location applications,
users may want to hide their precise location within a city,
but not the city itself.
This work introduces a unifying context-aware notion of
LDP where different pairs of domain elements can have “arbitrary” sensitivity levels. For binary domains, we provide a
universal optimality result and highlight interesting connections to Warner’s response and Mangat’s improved response.
For k-ary domains, we look at two canonical examples of
context-aware LDP: block-structured LDP and high-low
LDP. For block-structured LDP, the domain is partitioned
into m blocks and the goal is to hide the identity of elements
within the same block but not the block identity. This is
motivated by geo-location applications where users can be
in different cities, and it is not essential to hide the city of
a person but rather where exactly within that city a person
is (i.e., which bars, restaurants, or businesses they visit). In
other words, in this context, users would like to hide which
element in a given block of the domain their data belongs
to – and not necessarily which block their data is in, which
may be known from side information or application context.
For high-low LDP, we assume there is a set of sensitive elements and we only require the information about possessing
sensitive elements to be protected. This can be applied in
web browsing services, where there are a large number of
URLs and not all of them contain sensitive information.
1.1. Related work
Recent works consider relaxations of DP (Chatzikokolakis
et al., 2013; Doudalis et al., 2017; Borgs et al., 2018; Asi
et al., 2019; Feyisetan et al., 2019; Dong et al., 2019) and
LDP (Chatzikokolakis et al., 2017; Alvim et al., 2018; Murakami & Kawamoto, 2018; Kawamoto & Murakami, 2019;
Geumlek & Chaudhuri, 2019) that incorporate the context and structure of the underlying data domain. Indeed,

