Fiedler Regularization: Learning Neural Networks with Graph Sparsity

Edric Tam 1 David Dunson 1

Abstract
We introduce a novel regularization approach for
deep learning that incorporates and respects the
underlying graphical structure of the neural network. Existing regularization methods often focus
on penalizing weights in a global/uniform manner that ignores the connectivity structure of the
neural network. We propose to use the Fiedler
value of the neural network’s underlying graph as
a tool for regularization. We provide theoretical
support for this approach via spectral graph theory.
We show several useful properties of the Fiedler
value that make it suitable for regularization. We
provide an approximate, variational approach for
faster computation during training. We provide an
alternative formulation of this framework in the
form of a structurally weighted L1 penalty, thus
linking our approach to sparsity induction. We
performed experiments on datasets that compare
Fiedler regularization with traditional regularization methods such as Dropout and weight decay.
Results demonstrate the efficacy of Fiedler regularization.

1. Introduction
Neural networks (NNs) are important tools with many applications in various machine learning domains such as
computer vision, natural language processing and reinforcement learning. NNs have been very effective in settings
where large labeled datasets are available. Empirical and
theoretical evidence has pointed to the ever-increasing capacity of recent NN models, both in depth and width, as
an important contributor to their modeling flexibility and
success. However, even the largest datasets can still be potentially overfitted by NNs with millions of parameters or
more. A wide range of techniques for regularizing NNs
have thus been developed. These techniques often regu1

Department of Statistical Science, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA. Correspondence to: Edric Tam
<edric.tam@duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

larize the network from a global/uniform perspective, e.g.
weight decay (Krogh & Hertz, 1992), L1/L2 penalization
of weights, dropping nodes/weights in a Bernoulli manner
with uniform probability across units/layers (Hinton et al.,
2012; Srivastava et al., 2014; Wan et al., 2013), or stopping
training early. These commonly used approaches ignore
the NN’s underlying graphical structure, which can provide
valuable connectivity information for regularization.
One natural generalization of these existing approaches is to
take the graph structure of the NN into consideration during
regularization. Existing feedforward NN architectures, e.g.
multi-layer perceptrons, frequently employ fully connected
layers that lead to many redundant paths between nodes of
the network. These redundant connections can contribute
to over-fitting through the phenomenon of co-adaptation,
where weights become dependent on one another, leading
to highly correlated behavior amongst different hidden units
(Hinton et al., 2012). Empirical work has shown that dropping weights and nodes randomly during training can significantly improve test performance by reducing co-adaptation
(Hinton et al., 2012; Srivastava et al., 2014; Wan et al.,
2013).
In this work, we would like to regularize the NN through
reducing co-adaptation and penalizing extraneous connections in a way that respects the NN’s graphical/connectivity
structure. We introduce Fiedler regularization, borrowing
from advances in spectral graph theory (Godsil & Royle,
2013; Chung, 1997; Spielman, 2019). The Fiedler value of
a connected graph, denoted λ2 , also known as the algebraic
connectivity, is the second smallest eigenvalue of the graph’s
Laplacian matrix. Its magnitude characterizes how well connected a graph is. By adding the Fiedler value as a penalty
term to the loss function during training, we can penalize the
connectedness of the NN and reduce co-adaptation while
taking into account the graph’s connectivity structure. We
also explore several useful characteristics of the Fiedler
value. We show that the Fiedler value is a concave function
on the sizes of the NN’s weights, implying that using it
as a penalty will not substantially worsen the optimization
landscape. We additionally show that the Fiedler value’s gradient with respect to the network’s weights admits a closed
form expression, which allows for direct employment of
existing gradient-based stochastic optimization techniques
for Fiedler regularization.

