Deep Graph Random Process for
Relational-Thinking-Based Speech Recognition

Hengguan Huang 1 Fuzhao Xue 1 Hao Wang 2 Ye Wang 1

Abstract
Lying at the core of human intelligence, relational thinking is characterized by initially relying on innumerable unconscious percepts pertaining to relations between new sensory signals
and prior knowledge, consequently becoming a
recognizable concept or object through coupling
and transformation of these percepts. Such mental processes are difficult to model in real-world
problems such as in conversational automatic
speech recognition (ASR), as the percepts (if they
are modelled as graphs indicating relationships
among utterances) are supposed to be innumerable and not directly observable. In this paper, we
present a Bayesian nonparametric deep learning
method called deep graph random process (DGP)
that can generate an infinite number of probabilistic graphs representing percepts. We further
provide a closed-form solution for coupling and
transformation of these percept graphs for acoustic modeling. Our approach is able to successfully
infer relations among utterances without using
any relational data during training. Experimental evaluations on ASR tasks including CHiME-2
and CHiME-5 demonstrate the effectiveness and
benefits of our method.

1. Introduction
Relational thinking is believed to be a fundamental human
learning process. In this type of thinking, people obtain
sensory signals such as sounds, sights, and smells without
consciously perceiving them, but those signals nonetheless
lead to thought outcomes. For example, take the process
of a baby learning to listen or speak (Alexander, 2016).
This learning process is characterized by initially relying
1

National University of Singapore 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Correspondence to: Ye Wang
<wangye@comp.nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

on innumerable unconscious percepts pertaining to relations between current sensory signals and prior knowledge
(Malmberg & Annis, 2012; Murai & Yotsumoto, 2018),
then subsequently discovering recognizable concepts or
objects through coupling and transformation of these percepts (Alexander, 2016). In contrast, relational reasoning
is a higher-level learning process that intentionally or consciously reasons about relations among objects or concepts.
While relational reasoning has inspired perspectives of artificial intelligence (Hudson & Manning, 2019; Smolensky,
1987), relational thinking is largely unexplored in solving
machining learning problems.
Human conversation is essentially a process of exchanging
thoughts between two or more talkers. Speech processing
(or, specifically, speech recognition) is one of the critical
components of this highly complex process, and neurobiology research acknowledges that this component is connected
to human thinking (Hickok & Poeppel, 2007; Birjandi &
Sabah, 2015). In contrast, automatic speech recognition
(ASR) has long been treated as a typical pattern matching
problem in the machine learning area (Rabiner, 1989; Hinton et al., 2012; Amodei et al., 2016). Ironically, this task is
generally decomposed into two parts, namely acoustic modeling and linguistic decoding, and the essential relational
thinking process is ignored (Alexander, 2016). This process
is difficult to incorporate into a traditional speech recognition system because the percepts (e.g. mental impressions
formed while hearing sounds) involved in relational thinking
are supposed to be innumerable and not directly observable.
However, the dialogue history during the conversation might
reflect such underlying mental processes, allowing an indirect way of modeling speech processing (Derix et al., 2014).
Even when only using one previous dialogue embedding
as an additional input to an acoustic model, the proposed
framework in (Moses et al., 2019) achieves significantly
better results on a spoken Q&A dataset. More powerful representation learning might be achieved by weighting over
multiple context inputs (e.g. utterances) (Palm et al., 2018;
Chen et al., 2016; Pundak et al., 2018; Zoph & Knight, 2016;
Kim & Metze, 2018).
Despite recent advances, it is still challenging to explicitly modeling the percept of relational thinking for acous-

