Online Learned Continual Compression with Adaptive Quantization Modules
Lucas Caccia 1 2 3 Eugene Belilovsky 2 4 Massimo Caccia 2 4 5 Joelle Pineau 1 2 3

Abstract
We introduce and study the problem of Online
Continual Compression, where one attempts to
simultaneously learn to compress and store a representative dataset from a non i.i.d data stream,
while only observing each sample once. A naive
application of auto-encoders in this setting encounters a major challenge: representations derived from earlier encoder states must be usable
by later decoder states. We show how to use
discrete auto-encoders to effectively address this
challenge and introduce Adaptive Quantization
Modules (AQM) to control variation in the compression ability of the module at any given stage
of learning. This enables selecting an appropriate
compression for incoming samples, while taking
into account overall memory constraints and current progress of the learned compression. Unlike
previous methods, our approach does not require
any pretraining, even on challenging datasets. We
show that using AQM to replace standard episodic
memory in continual learning settings leads to significant gains on continual learning benchmarks.
Furthermore we demonstrate this approach with
larger images, LiDAR, and reinforcement learning agents.

1. Introduction
Interest in machine learning in recent years has been fueled
by the plethora of data being generated on a regular basis.
Effectively storing and using this data is critical for many
applications, especially those involving continual learning.
In general, compression techniques can greatly improve
data storage capacity, and, if done well, reduce the memory
and compute usage in downstream machine learning tasks
(Gueguen et al., 2018; Oyallon et al., 2018). Thus, learned
compression has become a topic of great interest (Theis
1
McGill 2 Mila 3 Facebook AI Research 4 University of
Montreal 5 ElementAI. Correspondence to: Lucas Caccia
<lucas.page-caccia@mail.mcgill.ca>, Eugene Belilovsky <eugene.belilovsky@umontreal.ca>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

et al., 2017; Ballé et al., 2016; Johnston et al., 2018). Yet
its application in reducing the size of datasets bound for
machine learning applications has been limited.
This work focuses on the following familiar setting: new
training data arrives continuously for a learning algorithm
to exploit, however this data might not be iid, and furthermore there is insufficient storage capacity to preserve all
the data uncompressed. We may want to train classifiers,
reinforcement learning policies, or other models continuously from this data as it’s being collected, or use samples
randomly drawn from it at a later point for a downstream
task. For example, an autonomous vehicle (with bounded
memory) collects large amounts of high-dimensional training data (video, 3D lidar) in a non-stationary environment
(e.g. changing weather conditions), and overtime applies an
ML algorithm to improve its behavior using this data. This
data might be transferred at a later point for use in downstream learning. Current learned compression algorithms,
e.g. (Torfason et al., 2018), are not well designed to deal
with this case, as their convergence speed is too slow to be
usable in an online setting.
In the field of continual/lifelong learning (Thrun & Mitchell,
1995), which has for now largely focused on classification,
approaches based on storing memories for later use have
emerged as some of the most effective in online settings
(Lopez-Paz et al., 2017; Aljundi et al., 2018; Chaudhry
et al.; 2019; Aljundi et al., 2019). These memories can be
stored as is, or via a generative model (Shin et al., 2017).
Then, they can either be used for rehearsal (Chaudhry et al.,
2019; Aljundi et al., 2019) or for constrained optimization
(Lopez-Paz et al., 2017; Chaudhry et al.; Aljundi et al.,
2018). Indeed many continual learning applications would
be greatly improved with replay approaches if one could
afford to store all samples. These approaches are however
inherently limited by the amount of data that can be stored
Learning a generative model to compress the previous data
stream thus seems like an appealing idea. However, learning generative models, particularly in the online and nonstationary setting, continues to be challenging, and can
greatly increase the complexity of the continual learning
task. Furthermore, such models are susceptible to catastrophic forgetting (Aljundi et al., 2019). An alternate approach is to learn a compressed representation of the data,

