Deep Coordination Graphs

Wendelin Böhmer 1 Vitaly Kurin 1 Shimon Whiteson 1

Abstract
This paper introduces the deep coordination
graph (DCG) for collaborative multi-agent reinforcement learning. DCG strikes a flexible tradeoff between representational capacity and generalization by factoring the joint value function of
all agents according to a coordination graph into
payoffs between pairs of agents. The value can
be maximized by local message passing along the
graph, which allows training of the value function end-to-end with Q-learning. Payoff functions are approximated with deep neural networks
that employ parameter sharing and low-rank approximations to significantly improve sample efficiency. We show that DCG can solve predatorprey tasks that highlight the relative overgeneralization pathology, as well as challenging StarCraft
II micromanagement tasks.

1. Introduction
One of the central challenges in cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL, Oroojlooy jadid & Hajinezhad,
2019) is coping with the size of the joint action space, which
grows exponentially in the number of agents. For example,
just eight agents, each with six actions, yield a joint action
space with more than a million actions. Efficient MARL
methods must thus generalize over large joint action spaces,
in the same way that convolutional neural networks allow
deep RL to generalize over large visual state spaces.
MARL often addresses the issue of large joint observation
and action spaces by assuming that the learned control policy is fully decentralized, that is, each agent acts independently based on its own observations only. For example,
Figure 1a shows how the joint value function can be factored
into utility functions that each depend only on the actions
of one agent (Sunehag et al., 2018; Rashid et al., 2018).
1

Department of Computer Science, Oxford University,
United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Wendelin Böhmer
<wendelin.boehmer@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Consequently, the joint value function can be efficiently
maximized if each agent simply selects the action that maximizes its corresponding utility function. This factorization
can represent any deterministic (and thus at least one optimal) joint policy. However, that policy may not be learnable
due to a game-theoretic pathology called relative overgeneralization1 (Panait et al., 2006): during exploration other
agents act randomly and punishment caused by uncooperative agents may outweigh rewards that would be achievable
with coordinated actions. If the employed value function
does not have the representational capacity to distinguish the
values of coordinated and uncoordinated actions, an optimal
policy cannot be learned.
A higher-order value factorization can be expressed as an
undirected coordination graph (CG, Guestrin et al., 2002a),
where each vertex represents one agent and each (hyper-)
edge one payoff function over the joint action space of the
connected agents. Figure 1b shows a CG with pairwise
edges and the corresponding value factorization. Here the
value depends non-trivially on the actions of all agents,
yielding a richer representation. Although the value can no
longer be maximized by each agent individually, the greedy
action can be found using message passing along the edges
(also known as belief propagation, Pearl, 1988). Sparse
cooperative Q-learning (Kok & Vlassis, 2006) applies CGs
to MARL, but does not scale to real-world tasks, as each
payoff function (f 12 and f 23 in Figure 1b) is represented
as a table over the state and joint action space of the connected agents. Castellini et al. (2019) use neural networks
to approximate payoff functions in the simplified case of
non-sequential one-shot games. Moreover, neither approach
shares parameters between the approximated payoff functions, so agents in each factor, represented by an edge, must
experience all corresponding action combinations. This can
require visiting a large subset of the joint action space.
While decentralization can be a requirement of the task at
hand, for example when communication between agents
is impossible, many important applications that allow for
centralized or distributed controllers face the same issues.
Examples are power, water or heat grids (Correa-Posada
& Sánchez-Martin, 2015), electronic trading (Bacoyannis
1

Not to be confused with the general term generalization in
the context of function approximation mentioned earlier.

