Control Frequency Adaptation via Action Persistence
in Batch Reinforcement Learning

Alberto Maria Metelli 1 Flavio Mazzolini 1 Lorenzo Bisi 1 2 Luca Sabbioni 1 2 Marcello Restelli 1 2

Abstract
The choice of the control frequency of a system
has a relevant impact on the ability of reinforcement learning algorithms to learn a highly performing policy. In this paper, we introduce the
notion of action persistence that consists in the
repetition of an action for a fixed number of decision steps, having the effect of modifying the
control frequency. We start analyzing how action persistence affects the performance of the
optimal policy, and then we present a novel algorithm, Persistent Fitted Q-Iteration (PFQI), that
extends FQI, with the goal of learning the optimal value function at a given persistence. After
having provided a theoretical study of PFQI and
a heuristic approach to identify the optimal persistence, we present an experimental campaign
on benchmark domains to show the advantages of
action persistence and proving the effectiveness
of our persistence selection method.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Reinforcement Learning (RL, Sutton &
Barto, 2018) has proven to be a successful approach to address complex control tasks: from robotic locomotion (e.g.,
Peters & Schaal, 2008; Kober & Peters, 2014; Haarnoja
et al., 2019; Kilinc et al., 2019) to continuous system control (e.g., Schulman et al., 2015; Lillicrap et al., 2016; Schulman et al., 2017). These classes of problems are usually
formalized in the framework of the discrete–time Markov
Decision Processes (MDP, Puterman, 2014), assuming that
the control signal is issued at discrete time instants. However, many relevant real–world problems are more naturally defined in the continuous–time domain (Luenberger,
1979). Even though a branch of literature has studied RL in
1

Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy. 2 Institute for Scientific
Interchange Foundation, Turin, Italy. Correspondence to: Alberto
Maria Metelli <albertomaria.metelli@polimi.it>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

continuous–time MDPs (Bradtke & Duff, 1994; Munos &
Bourgine, 1997; Doya, 2000), the majority of the research
has focused on the discrete–time formulation, which appears
to be a necessary, but effective, approximation.
Intuitively, increasing the control frequency of the system
offers the agent more control opportunities, possibly leading to improved performance as the agent has access to
a larger policy space. This might wrongly suggest that
we should control the system with the highest frequency
possible, within its physical limits. However, in the RL
framework, the environment dynamics is unknown, thus,
a too fine discretization could result in the opposite effect,
making the problem harder to solve. Indeed, any RL algorithm needs samples to figure out (implicitly or explicitly)
how the environment evolves as an effect of the agent’s actions. When increasing the control frequency, the advantage
of individual actions becomes infinitesimal, making them
almost indistinguishable for standard value-based RL approaches (Tallec et al., 2019). As a consequence, the sample
complexity increases. Instead, low frequencies allow the environment to evolve longer, making the effect of individual
actions more easily detectable. Furthermore, in the presence
of a system characterized by a “slowly evolving” dynamics,
the gain obtained by increasing the control frequency might
become negligible. Finally, in robotics, lower frequencies
help to overcome some partial observability issues, like
action execution delays (Kober & Peters, 2014).
Therefore, we experience a fundamental trade–off in the
control frequency choice that involves the policy space
(larger at high frequency) and the sample complexity
(smaller at low frequency). Thus, it seems natural to wonder:
“what is the optimal control frequency?” An answer to this
question can disregard neither the task we are facing nor
the learning algorithm we intend to employ. Indeed, the
performance loss we experience by reducing the control frequency depends strictly on the properties of the system and,
thus, of the task. Similarly, the dependence of the sample
complexity on the control frequency is related to how the
learning algorithm will employ the collected samples.
In this paper, we analyze and exploit this trade–off in the
context of batch RL (Lange et al., 2012), with the goal of
enhancing the learning process and achieving higher perfor-

