Stochastic Hamiltonian Gradient Methods for Smooth Games
Nicolas Loizou 1 Hugo Berard 1 2 Alexia Jolicoeur-Martineau 1 Pascal Vincent† 1 2 Simon Lacoste-Julien† 1
Ioannis Mitliagkas† 1
for every x1 ∈ Rd1 and x2 ∈ Rd2 . We call point, x∗ , a saddle point, min-max solution or Nash equilibrium of (1). In
its general form, this problem is hard. In this work we focus
on the simplest family of problems where some important
questions are still open: the case where all stationary points
are global min-max solutions.

Abstract
The success of adversarial formulations in machine learning has brought renewed motivation
for smooth games. In this work, we focus on the
class of stochastic Hamiltonian methods and provide the first convergence guarantees for certain
classes of stochastic smooth games. We propose a
novel unbiased estimator for the stochastic Hamiltonian gradient descent (SHGD) and highlight its
benefits. Using tools from the optimization literature we show that SHGD converges linearly
to the neighbourhood of a stationary point. To
guarantee convergence to the exact solution, we
analyze SHGD with a decreasing step-size and
we also present the first stochastic variance reduced Hamiltonian method. Our results provide
the first global non-asymptotic last-iterate convergence guarantees for the class of stochastic
unconstrained bilinear games and for the more
general class of stochastic games that satisfy a
“sufficiently bilinear” condition, notably including
some non-convex non-concave problems. We supplement our analysis with experiments on stochastic bilinear and sufficiently bilinear games, where
our theory is shown to be tight, and on simple
adversarial machine learning formulations.

Motivated by recent applications in machine learning, we
are particularly interested in cases where the objective, g, is
naturally expressed as a finite sum
n

min

x1 ∈Rd1 x2 ∈Rd2

We consider the min-max optimization problem
min

max g(x1 , x2 )

1X
gi (x1 , x2 ) ,
n i=1

(3)

where each component function gi : Rd1 × Rd2 → R is
assumed to be smooth. Indeed, in problems like domain generalization (Albuquerque et al., 2019), generative adversarial
networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014), and some formulations
in reinforcement learning (Pfau & Vinyals, 2016), empirical
risk minimization yields finite sums of the form of (3). We
refer to this formulation as a stochastic smooth game.1 We
call problem (1) a deterministic game.

1. Introduction

x1 ∈Rd1 x2 ∈Rd2

max g(x1 , x2 ) =

(1)

where g : Rd1 × Rd2 → R is a smooth objective. Our goal
is to find x∗ = (x∗1 , x∗2 )> ∈ Rd where d = d1 + d2 such
that
g(x∗1 , x2 ) ≤ g(x∗1 , x∗2 ) ≤ g(x1 , x∗2 ),
(2)
1

Mila, Université de Montréal † Canada CIFAR AI Chair
Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to: Nicolas Loizou
<loizouni@mila.quebec>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

The deterministic version of the problem has been studied in a number of classic (Korpelevich, 1976; Nemirovski,
2004) and recent results (Mescheder et al., 2017; Ibrahim
et al., 2019; Gidel et al., 2018; Daskalakis et al., 2018; Gidel
et al., 2019; Mokhtari et al., 2020; Azizian et al., 2020a;b)
in various settings. Importantly, the majority of these results
provide last-iterate convergence guarantees. In contrast,
for the stochastic setting, guarantees on the classic extragradient method and its variants rely on iterate averaging
over compact domains (Nemirovski, 2004). However, Chavdarova et al. (2019) highlighted a possibility of pathological
behavior where the iterates diverge towards and then rotate near the boundary of the domain, far from the solution,
while their average is shown to converge to the solution (by
convexity).2 This behavior is also problematic in the context
of applying the method on non-convex problems, where averaging do not necessarily yield a solution (Daskalakis et al.,
1
We note that all of our results except the one on variance
reduction do not require the finite-sum assumption and can be
easily adapted to the stochastic setting (see Appendix C.3).
2
This is qualitatively very different to stochastic minimization
where the iterates converge towards a neighborhood of the solution
and averaging is only used to stabilize the method.

