Private Reinforcement Learning with PAC and Regret Guarantees

Giuseppe Vietri 1 Borja Balle 2 Akshay Krishnamurthy 3 Zhiwei Steven Wu 1

Abstract
Motivated by high-stakes decision-making domains like personalized medicine where user information is inherently sensitive, we design privacy preserving exploration policies for episodic
reinforcement learning (RL). We first provide a
meaningful privacy formulation using the notion
of joint differential privacy (JDP)–a strong variant of differential privacy for settings where each
user receives their own sets of output (e.g., policy recommendations). We then develop a private
optimism-based learning algorithm that simultaneously achieves strong PAC and regret bounds,
and enjoys a JDP guarantee. Our algorithm only
pays for a moderate privacy cost on exploration:
in comparison to the non-private bounds, the privacy parameter only appears in lower-order terms.
Finally, we present lower bounds on sample complexity and regret for reinforcement learning subject to JDP.

1. Introduction
Privacy-preserving machine learning is critical to the deployment of data-driven solutions in applications involving sensitive data. Differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006) is
a de-facto standard for designing algorithms with strong privacy guarantees for individual data. Large-scale industrial
deployments – e.g. by Apple (Team, 2017), Google (Erlingsson et al., 2014) and the US Census Bureau (Abowd, 2018) –
and general purpose DP tools for machine learning (Andrew
et al., 2019) and data analysis (Holohan et al., 2019; Wilson
et al., 2019) exemplify that existing methods are well-suited
for simple data analysis tasks (e.g. averages, histograms,
frequent items) and batch learning problems where the train*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, University of Minnesota 2 Now at Deepmind
3
Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: Giuseppe Vietri <vietr002@umn.edu>, Zhiwei Steven Wu <zstevenwu@cmu.edu>,
Akshay Krishnamurthy <akshaykr@microsoft.com>, Borja Balle
<borja.balle@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

ing data is available beforehand. While these techniques
cover a large number of applications in the central and (noninteractive) local models, they are often insufficient to tackle
machine learning applications involving other threat models. This includes federated learning problems (Kairouz
et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019) where devices cooperate to
learn a joint model while preserving their individual privacy,
and, more generally, interactive learning in the spirit of the
reinforcement learning (RL) framework (Sutton & Barto,
2018).
In this paper we contribute to the study of reinforcement
learning from the lens of differential privacy. We consider
sequential decision-making tasks where users interact with
an agent for the duration of a fixed-length episode. At each
time-step the current user reveals a state to the agent, which
responds with an appropriate action and receives a reward
generated by the user. Like in standard RL, the goal of
the agent is to learn a policy that maximizes the rewards
provided by the users. However, our focus is on situations
where the states and rewards that users provide to the agent
might contain sensitive information. While users might be
ready to reveal such information to an agent in order to receive a service, we assume they want to prevent third parties
from making unintended inferences about their personal
data. This includes external parties who might have access
to the policy learned by the agent, as well as malicious users
who can probe the agent’s behavior to trigger actions informed by its interactions with previous users. For example,
Pan et al. (2019) recently showed how RL policies can be
probed to reveal information about the environment where
the agent was trained.
The question we ask in this paper is: how should the learnings an agent can extract from an episode be balanced
against the potential information leakages arising from the
behaviors of the agent that are informed by such learnings?
We answer the question by making two contributions to
the analysis of the privacy-utility trade-off in reinforcement
learning: (1) we provide the first privacy-preserving RL
algorithm with formal accuracy guarantees, and (2) we provide lower bounds on the regret and number of sub-optimal
episodes for any differentially private RL algorithm. To
measure the privacy provided by episodic RL algorithms
we introduce a notion of episodic joint differential privacy
(JDP) under continuous observation, a variant of joint differ-

