A Sequential Self Teaching Approach for
Improving Generalization in Sound Event Recognition

Anurag Kumar 1 Vamsi Krishna Ithapu 1

Abstract
An important problem in machine auditory perception is to recognize and detect sound events. In
this paper, we propose a sequential self-teaching
approach to learning sounds. Our main proposition is that it is harder to learn sounds in adverse
situations such as from weakly labeled and/or
noisy labeled data, and in these situations a single
stage of learning is not sufficient. Our proposal is
a sequential stage-wise learning process that improves generalization capabilities of a given modeling system. We justify this method via technical
results and on Audioset, the largest sound events
dataset, our sequential learning approach can lead
to up to 9% improvement in performance. A comprehensive evaluation also shows that the method
leads to improved transferability of knowledge
from previously trained models, thereby leading
to improved generalization capabilities on transfer
learning tasks.

1. Introduction
Human interaction with the environment is driven by multisensory perception. Sounds and sound events, natural or
otherwise, play a vital role in this first person interaction. To
that end, it is imperative that we build acoustically intelligent
devices and systems which can recognize and understand
sounds. Although this aspect has been identified to an extent,
and the field of Sound Event Recognition and detection
(SER) is at least a couple of decades old (Xiong et al., 2003;
Atrey et al., 2006), much of the progress has been in the last
few years (Virtanen et al., 2018). Similar to related research
domains in machine perception, like speech recognition,
most of the early works in SER were fully supervised and
driven by strongly labeled data. Here, audio recordings were
carefully (and meticulously) annotated with time stamps of
1
Facebook Reality Labs, Redmond, USA. Correspondence to:
Anurag Kumar <anuragkr@fb.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

sound events to produce exemplars. These exemplars then
drive the training modules in supervised learning methods.
Clearly, obtaining well annotated strongly labeled data is
prohibitively expensive and cannot be scaled in practice.
Hence, much of the recent progress on SER has focused on
efficiently leveraging weakly labeled data (Kumar & Raj,
2016).
Weakly labeled audio recordings are only tagged with presence or absence of sounds (i.e., a binary label), and no
temporal information about the event is provided. Although
this has played a crucial role in scaling SER, large scale
learning of sounds remains a challenging and open problem. This is mainly because, even in the presence of strong
labels, large scale SER brings adverse learning conditions
into the picture, either implicitly by design or explicitly
because of the sheer number and variety of classes. This
becomes more critical when we replace strong labels with
weak labels. Tagging (a.k.a. weak labeling) very large
number of sound categories in large number of recordings,
often leads to considerable label noise in the training data.
This is expected. Implicit noise via human annotation errors is clearly one of the primary factors contributing to
this. Audioset (Gemmeke et al., 2017), currently the largest
sound event dataset, suffers from this implicit label noise
issue. Correcting for this implicit noise is naturally very
expensive (one has to perform multiple re-labeling of the
same dataset). Beyond this, there are more nuanced noise
inducing attributes, which are outcomes of the number and
variance of the classes themselves. For instance, real world
sound events often overlap and as we increase the sound
vocabulary and audio data size, the “mass” of overlapping
audio in the training data can become large enough to start
affecting the learning process. This is trickier to address in
weakly labeled data where temporal locations of events are
not available.
Lastly, when working with large real world datasets, one cannot avoid the noise in the inputs themselves. For SER these
manifest either via signal corruption in the audio snippets
themselves (i.e., acoustic noise), or signals from non-target
sound events, both of which will interfere in the learning
process. In weakly labeled setting, by definition, this noise
level would be high, presenting harsher learning space for

