Robust Pricing in Dynamic Mechanism Design

Yuan Deng 1 Sébastien Lahaie 2 Vahab Mirrokni 2

Abstract
Motivated by the repeated sale of online ads via
auctions, optimal pricing in repeated auctions has
attracted a large body of research. While dynamic
mechanisms offer powerful techniques to improve
on both revenue and efficiency by optimizing auctions across different items, their reliance on exact
distributional information of buyers’ valuations
(present and future) limits their use in practice.
In this paper, we propose robust dynamic mechanism design. We develop a new framework to
design dynamic mechanisms that are robust to
both estimation errors in value distributions and
strategic behavior. We apply the framework in
learning environments, leading to the first policy that achieves provably low regret against the
optimal dynamic mechanism in contextual auctions, where the dynamic benchmark has full and
accurate distributional information.

1. Introduction
Motivated by the popularity of selling online ads via auctions, pricing in dynamic auctions has been extensively studied in recent years. Dynamic auctions open up the possibility
of linking the auction rules and payments across time to enhance revenue or welfare. Formally, dynamic mechanism
design considers an environment in which the seller has exact distributional information over the buyers’ values for the
items, for the current stage and all future stages, and designs
revenue-maximizing dynamic mechanisms that adapt the
auction rules based on the buyer’s historical bids (Thomas &
Worrall, 1990; Bergemann & Välimäki, 2010; Ashlagi et al.,
2016; Mirrokni et al., 2016a; 2018; Deng et al., 2019b).
This line of study provides simple dynamic mechanisms, in
terms of descriptive complexity, that compare favorably to
the revenue-optimal dynamic benchmark. However, these
mechanisms are clairvoyant and rely on exact knowledge of
1

Department of Computer Science, Duke University, Durham,
NC, USA 2 Google Research, New York City, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Yuan Deng <ericdy@cs.duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

future value distributions to align buyers’ incentives (across
time) and guarantee desirable outcomes. This strong requirement limits the application of dynamic auctions in practice
because the seller may only have access to approximate
models of distributions. As one attempt to address this concern, Mirrokni et al. (2018) consider another extreme and
propose non-clairvoyant dynamic mechanisms, which do
not rely on any information about the future. They show
that a non-clairvoyant dynamic mechanism can achieve a
constant approximation of the revenue-optimal clairvoyant
dynamic mechanism that knows the future in advance.
In this work we take an intermediate stance where the designer can model present and future distributional information subject to an estimation error. Designing revenueoptimal and incentive-compatible auctions in this framework
is challenging for the following reason: when the seller’s
distributional information is not perfectly aligned with the
buyer’s true value distributions, it is impossible for the seller
to offer a prior-dependent dynamic mechanism in which the
optimal strategy for the buyer is to report her valuation truthfully at every stage (i.e., dynamic incentive-compatible).
Furthermore, in a dynamic mechanism the buyer’s misreport can potentially affect auctions for all future items. We
overcome these obstacles and provide a robust dynamic
mechanism where the extent of the buyers’ misreports and
the revenue loss can be related to and bounded by the estimation error of the buyers’ distributions.
We then apply our robust dynamic mechanism to the problem of robust price learning. In particular, we focus on
contextual auctions, where a buyer’s valuation for an item
depends on the context that describes the item, but the relationship between the buyer’s valuation and the context is
unknown to the seller. The seller’s task is to design a policy to adapt the mechanism based on the buyer’s historical
bids, with the objective of maximizing revenue. Previous
results (Amin et al., 2014; Golrezaei et al., 2019) give a
no-regret policy against the optimal static mechanism in
which the auction ignores the history and does not evolve
over time. However, Papadimitriou et al. (2016) have shown
that the revenue gap between optimal static and dynamic
mechanisms can be arbitrarily large. We tailor the structure
of our robust dynamic mechanism to a learning environment,
leading to a no-regret policy against the optimal clairvoyant
contextual auction that knows the relationship in advance.

