Improving Generalization by Controlling
Label-Noise Information in Neural Network Weights
Hrayr Harutyunyan 1 Kyle Reing 1 Greg Ver Steeg 1 Aram Galstyan 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Supervised learning with deep neural networks has shown
great success in the last decade. Despite having millions of
parameters, modern neural networks generalize surprisingly
well. However, their training is particularly susceptible to
noisy labels, as shown by Zhang et al. (2016) in their analysis of generalization error. In the presence of noisy or
incorrect labels, networks start to memorize the training labels, which degrades the generalization performance (Chen
et al., 2019). At the extreme, standard architectures have the
1

Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California, Marina del Rey, CA 90292. Correspondence to: Hrayr
Harutyunyan <hrayrh@isi.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

no regularization

dropout 0.5

weight decay 0.003

Train accuracy
on noisy labels

0.6
overfitting ⬆

0.2

1.0
Test accuracy
on clean laEels

In the presence of noisy or incorrect labels, neural
networks have the undesirable tendency to memorize information about the noise. Standard regularization techniques such as dropout, weight decay
or data augmentation sometimes help, but do not
prevent this behavior. If one considers neural network weights as random variables that depend on
the data and stochasticity of training, the amount
of memorized information can be quantified with
the Shannon mutual information between weights
and the vector of all training labels given inputs,
I(w; y | x). We show that for any training algorithm, low values of this term correspond to
reduction in memorization of label-noise and better generalization bounds. To obtain these low
values, we propose training algorithms that employ an auxiliary network that predicts gradients
in the final layers of a classifier without accessing labels. We illustrate the effectiveness of our
approach on versions of MNIST, CIFAR-10, and
CIFAR-100 corrupted with various noise models,
and on a large-scale dataset Clothing1M that has
noisy labels.

proposed

1.0

0.6

0.2

Epochs

Figure 1: Neural networks tend to memorize labels when
trained with noisy labels (80% noise in this case), even
when dropout or weight decay are applied. Our training
approach limits label-noise information in neural network
weights, avoiding memorization of labels and improving
generalization. Please refer to Sec. 2.1 for more details.
capacity to achieve 100% classification accuracy on training
data, even when labels are assigned at random (Zhang et al.,
2016). Furthermore, standard explicit or implicit regularization techniques such as dropout, weight decay or data
augmentation do not directly address nor completely prevent
label memorization (Zhang et al., 2016; Arpit et al., 2017).
Poor generalization due to label memorization is a significant problem because many large, real-world datasets are
imperfectly labeled. Label noise may be introduced when
building datasets from unreliable sources of information or
using crowd-sourcing resources like Amazon Mechanical
Turk. A practical solution to the memorization problem is
likely to be algorithmic as sanitizing labels in large datasets
is costly and time consuming. Existing approaches for addressing the problem of label-noise and generalization performance include deriving robust loss functions (Natarajan
et al., 2013; Ghosh et al., 2017; Zhang & Sabuncu, 2018; Xu
et al., 2019), loss correction techniques (Sukhbaatar et al.,
2014; Tong Xiao et al., 2015; Goldberger & Ben-Reuven,
2017; Patrini et al., 2017), re-weighting samples (Jiang et al.,
2017; Ren et al., 2018), detecting incorrect samples and re-

