On Breaking Deep Generative Model-based Defenses and Beyond

Yanzhi Chen 1 Renjie Xie 2 Zhanxing Zhu 3

Abstract
Deep neural networks have been proven to be
vulnerable to the so-called adversarial attacks.
Recently there have been efforts to defend such
attacks with deep generative models. These defenses often predict by inverting the deep generative models rather than simple feedforward propagation. Such defenses are difficult to attack due
to the obfuscated gradients caused by inversion.
In this work, we propose a new white-box attack
to break these defenses. The idea is to view the
inversion phase as a dynamical system, through
which we extract the gradient w.r.t the image by
backtracking its trajectory. An amortized strategy
is also developed to accelerate the attack. Experiments show that our attack better breaks stateof-the-art defenses (e.g DefenseGAN, ABS) than
other attacks (e.g BPDA). Additionally, our empirical results provide insights for understanding the
weaknesses of deep generative model defenses.

1. Introduction
How to make deep neural network (DNN) more robust?
This has been a hot research problem with a long history
and has been recently re-emphasized due to the discovery
of adversarial samples (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow
et al., 2014). In short, adversarial samples are synthetic images that are perceptually similar to natural images, but can
dramatically yield sub-optimal or even completely wrong
decisions in a DNN. Such samples clearly reflect the frangibility of DNN and call for robustification solutions.
Many efforts have been devoted to defend DNN from adversarial samples. This includes regularization (Lyu et al.,
2015; Ross & Doshi-Velez, 2018; Zhang et al., 2019), adversarial training (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Madry et al.,
1
School of Informatics, The University of Edinburgh, UK
School of Information Engineering, Southeast University, China
3
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, China. Correspondence to: Zhanxing Zhu <zhanxing.zhu@pku.edu.cn>.
2

th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

2018), feature denoising (Liao et al., 2018; Xie et al., 2019),
randomized smoothing (Salman et al., 2019; Cohen et al.,
2019), etc. Recently, a new line of research has focused on
the use of deep generative model in defense (Samangouei
et al., 2018; Schott et al., 2019; Ghosh et al., 2019). These
defenses do not perform prediction by feedforward propagation. Rather, they first invert the generative model G to find
the most plausible latent representation z∗ that could have
generated the image x (e.g by solving an optimization problem), then use z∗ to predict. Compared to other defenses,
deep generative model-based defenses are attractive as they
provide a natural way to realize the on-manifold conjecture.
However, they also bring new challenges to how to correctly
evaluate their robustness, as the gradients in these defenses
are obfuscated (Athalye et al., 2018) due to the inversion.
In this work, we propose a new white-box attack to break
deep generative model-based defenses. We find that existing
attacks for breaking these defenses like Backward Pass Differential Approximation (BPDA, (Athalye et al., 2018)) are
indeed sub-optimal and might overestimate the robustness.
We then develop a new attack based on a novel gradient
estimation mechanism. Our contributions are two-folds:
• We develop a new white-box attack for breaking deep
generative model defenses. Compared to BPDA, our
attack can find adversarial samples with lower distortion
and higher efficiency. Our attack can be applied to a
wide range of deep generative model defenses including
DefenseGAN (Samangouei et al., 2018), ABS (Schott
et al., 2019) and (Ghosh et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2019).
• With our attack, we also analyze factors that cause deep
generative model defenses to fail. For example, we find
that there are ‘holes’ in the latent space of these defenses
that can generate samples outside of the data distribution
or even belonging to unseen classes, which make them
vulnerable. The detection of these holes are difficult. We
also provide some suggestions to improve these defenses.

2. Background
Throughout this paper, we denote the normal image by
x ∈ X , the class label by y ∈ Y and the classifier by F :
X 7→ Y. In this work, we mainly consider the case where
the classifier F (or part of F ) is a deep neural network.

