Source Separation with Deep Generative Priors

Vivek Jayaram * John Thickstun *

Abstract

With no further constraints or regularization, solving Equation (1) for x is highly underdetermined. Classical “blind”
approaches to single-channel source separation resolve this
ambiguity by privileging solutions to (1) that satisfiy mathematical constraints on the components x, such as statistical
independence (Davies & James, 2007) sparsity (Lee et al.,
1999) or non-negativity (Lee & Seung, 1999). These constraints can be be viewed as weak priors on the structure of
sources, but the approaches are blind in the sense that they
do not require adaptation to a particular dataset.

Despite substantial progress in signal source separation, results for richly structured data continue
to contain perceptible artifacts. In contrast, recent deep generative models can produce authentic samples in a variety of domains that are indistinguishable from samples of the data distribution. This paper introduces a Bayesian approach to source separation that uses generative
models as priors over the components of a mixture of sources, and noise-annealed Langevin dynamics to sample from the posterior distribution
of sources given a mixture. This decouples the
source separation problem from generative modeling, enabling us to directly use cutting-edge
generative models as priors. The method achieves
state-of-the-art performance for MNIST digit separation. We introduce new methodology for evaluating separation quality on richer datasets, providing quantitative evaluation of separation results
on CIFAR-10. We also provide qualitative results
on LSUN.

Recently, most works have taken a data-driven approach. To
separate a mixture of sources, it is natural to suppose that
we have access to samples x of individual sources, which
can be used as a reference for what the source components
of a mixture are supposed to look like. This data can be used
to regularize solutions of Equation (1) towards structurally
plausible solutions. The prevailing way to do this is to
construct a supervised regression model that maps an input
mixture m to components xi (Huang et al., 2014; Halperin
et al., 2019). Paired training data (m, x) can be constructed
by summing randomly chosen samples from the component
distributions xi and labeling these mixtures with the ground
truth components.

1. Introduction
The single-channel source separation problem (Davies &
James, 2007) asks us to decompose a mixed signal m ∈ X
into a linear combination of k components x1 , . . . , xk ∈ X
with scalar mixing coefficients αi ∈ R:
m = g(x) ≡

k
X

αi xi .

(1)

i=1

This is motivated by, for example, the “cocktail party problem” of isolating the utterances of individual speakers xi
from an audio mixture m captured at a busy party, where
multiple speakers are talking simultaneously.
*
Equal contribution. Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science
and Engineering, University of Washington. Correspondence to:
Vivek Jayaram <vjayaram@cs.washington.edu>, John
Thickstun <thickstn@cs.washington.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

Instead of regressing against components x, we use samples
to train a generative prior p(x); we separate a mixed signal
m by sampling from the posterior distribution p(x|m). For
some mixtures this posterior is quite peaked, and sampling
from p(x|m) recovers the only plausible separation of m
into likely components. But in many cases, mixtures are
highly ambiguous: see, for example, the orange-highlighted
MNIST images in Figure 1. This motivates our interest in
sampling, which explores the space of plausible separations.
In Section 3 we introduce a procedure for sampling from
the posterior, an extension of the noise-annealed Langevin
dynamics introduced in Song & Ermon (2019), which we
call Bayesian Annealed SIgnal Source separation: “BASIS”
separation.
Ambiguous mixtures pose a challenge for traditional source
separation metrics, which presume that the original mixture
components are identifiable and compare the separated components to ground truth. For ambiguous mixtures of rich
data, we argue that recovery of the original mixture components is not a well-posed problem. Instead, the problem

