Equivariant Flows: Exact Likelihood Generative Learning for Symmetric
Densities
Jonas Köhler * 1 Leon Klein * 1 Frank Noé 1 2 3

Abstract
Normalizing flows are exact-likelihood generative
neural networks which approximately transform
samples from a simple prior distribution to samples of the probability distribution of interest. Recent work showed that such generative models can
be utilized in statistical mechanics to sample equilibrium states of many-body systems in physics
and chemistry. To scale and generalize these results, it is essential that the natural symmetries
in the probability density – in physics defined by
the invariances of the target potential – are built
into the flow. We provide a theoretical sufficient
criterion showing that the distribution generated
by equivariant normalizing flows is invariant with
respect to these symmetries by design. Furthermore, we propose building blocks for flows which
preserve symmetries which are usually found in
physical/chemical many-body particle systems.
Using benchmark systems motivated from molecular physics, we demonstrate that those symmetry
preserving flows can provide better generalization
capabilities and sampling efficiency.

1. Introduction
Generative learning using exact-likelihood methods based
on invertible transformations has had remarkable success
in accurately representing distributions of images (Kingma
& Dhariwal, 2018), audio (Oord et al., 2017) and 3D point
cloud data (Liu et al., 2019b; Noé et al., 2019).
Recently, Boltzmann Generators (BG) (Noé et al., 2019)
have been introduced for sampling Boltzmann type distributions ρ0 (x) ∝ exp(−u(x)) of high-dimensional many-body
*

Equal contribution 1 Freie Universität Berlin, Department of
Mathematics and Computer Science. 2 Freie Universität Berlin, Department of Physics. 3 Rice University, Department of Chemistry.
Correspondence to: Jonas Köhler <jonas.koehler@fu-berlin.de>,
Frank Noé <frank.noe@fu-berlin.de>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

problems, such as valid conformations of proteins.
This approach is widely applicable in the physical sciences,
and has also been employed in the sampling of spin lattice
states (Nicoli et al., 2019; Li & Wang, 2018) and nuclear
physics models (Albergo et al., 2019). In contrast to typical
generative learning problems, the target density ρ0 (x) is
specified by definition of the many-body energy function
u(x) and the difficulty lies in learning to sample it efficiently.
BGs do that by combining an exact-likelihood method that
is trained to approximate the Boltzmann density ρ0 (x), and
a statistical mechanics algorithm to reweigh the generated
density to the target density ρ0 (x).
Physical systems of interest usually comprise symmetries,
such as invariance with respect to global rotations or permutations of identical elements. As we show in experiments
ignoring such symmetries in flow-based approaches to density estimation and enhanced sampling, e.g. using BGs, can
lead to inferior results which can be a barrier for further
progress in this domain. In our work we thus provide the
following contributions:
• We show how symmetry-preserving generative models,
satisfying the exact-likelihood requirements of Boltzmann generators, can be obtained via equivariant flows.
• We show that symmetry preservation can be critical for
success by showing experiments on highly symmetric
many-body particle systems. Concretely, equivariant
flows are able to approximate the system’s densities
and generalize beyond biased data, whereas approaches
based on non-equivariant normalizing flows cannot.
• We provide a numerically tractable and efficient implementation of the framework for many-body particle
systems utilizing gradient flows derived from a simple
mixture potential.
While this work focuses mostly on applications in the physical sciences the results could provide a takeaway towards a
greater ML audience: studying symmetries of target distributions and considering them in the architecture of a density
estimation / sampling mechanism can lead to better generalization and can even be critical for successful learning.

