Almost Tune-Free Variance Reduction
Bingcong Li 1 Lingda Wang 2 Georgios B. Giannakis 1

Abstract

The standard approach to solve (1) is gradient descent (GD)
(Nesterov, 2004), which updates the decision variable via

The variance reduction class of algorithms including the representative ones, SVRG and SARAH,
have well documented merits for empirical risk
minimization problems. However, they require
grid search to tune parameters (step size and the
number of iterations per inner loop) for optimal
performance. This work introduces ‘almost tunefree’ SVRG and SARAH schemes equipped with
i) Barzilai-Borwein (BB) step sizes; ii) averaging;
and, iii) the inner loop length adjusted to the BB
step sizes. In particular, SVRG, SARAH, and
their BB variants are first reexamined through an
‘estimate sequence’ lens to enable new averaging
methods that tighten their convergence rates theoretically, and improve their performance empirically when the step size or the inner loop length is
chosen large. Then a simple yet effective means
to adjust the number of iterations per inner loop is
developed to enhance the merits of the proposed
averaging schemes and BB step sizes. Numerical
tests corroborate the proposed methods.

xk+1 = xk − η∇f (xk )
where k is the iteration index and η the step size (or learning
rate). For a strongly convex f , GD convergences linearly
to x∗ , that is, kxk − x∗ k2 ≤ (cκ )k kx0 − x∗ k2 for some
κ-dependent constant cκ ∈ (0, 1) (Nesterov, 2004).
In the big data regime, however, where n is large, obtaining
the gradient per iteration can be computationally prohibitive.
To cope with this, the stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
reduces the computational burden by drawing uniformly
at random an index ik ∈ [n] per iteration k, and adopting
∇fik (xk ) as an estimate of ∇f (xk ). Albeit computationally lightweight with the simple update
xk+1 = xk − ηk ∇fik (xk )
the price paid is that SGD comes with sublinear convergence,
hence slower than GD (Robbins and Monro, 1951; Bottou
et al., 2016). It has been long recognized that the variance
E[k∇fit (xt ) − ∇f (xt )k2 ] of the gradient estimate affects
critically SGD’s convergence slowdown.

1. Introduction
In this work, we deal with the frequently encountered empirical risk minimization (ERM) problem expressed as
min f (x) :=

x∈Rd

1 X
fi (x)
n

(1)

i∈[n]

where x ∈ Rd is the parameter vector to be learned from
data; the set [n] := {1, 2, . . . , n} collects data indices; and,
fi is the loss function associated with datum i. Suppose
that f is µ-strongly convex and has L-Lipchitz continuous
gradient. The condition number of f is denoted by κ :=
L/µ. Throughout, x∗ denotes the optimal solution of (1).
1

Uiversity of Minnesota, MN, USA. 2 University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA. Correspondence to: Bingcong Li
<lixx5599@umn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

This naturally motivated gradient estimates with reduced
variance compared with SGD’s simple ∇fik (xk ). A gradient estimate with reduced variance can be obtained by
capitalizing on the finite sum structure of (1). One idea is to
judiciously evaluate a so-termed snapshot gradient ∇f (xs ),
and use it as an anchor of the stochastic draws in subsequent
iterations. Members of the variance reduction family include SVRG (Johnson and Zhang, 2013), SAG (Roux et al.,
2012), SAGA (Defazio et al., 2014), MISO (Mairal, 2013),
SARAH (Nguyen et al., 2017), and their variants (Konecnỳ
and Richtárik, 2013; Lei et al., 2017; Kovalev et al., 2019;
Li et al., 2020). Most of these algorithms rely on the update xk+1 = xk − ηvk , where η is a constant step size
and vk is an algorithm-specific gradient estimate that takes
advantage of the snapshot gradient. In this work, SVRG and
SARAH are of central interest because they are memory
efficient compared with SAGA, and have no requirement
for the duality arguments that SDCA (Shalev-Shwartz and
Zhang, 2013) entails. Variance reduction methods converge
linearly when f is strongly convex. To fairly compare the
complexity of (S)GD with that of variance reduction algorithms which combine snapshot gradients with the stochastic

