Learning Reasoning Strategies in End-to-End Differentiable Proving

Pasquale Minervini 1 Sebastian Riedel 1 2 Pontus Stenetorp 1 Edward Grefenstette 1 2 Tim Rocktäschel 1 2

Abstract
Attempts to render deep learning models interpretable, data-efficient, and robust have seen some
success through hybridisation with rule-based systems, for example, in Neural Theorem Provers
(NTPs). These neuro-symbolic models can induce interpretable rules and learn representations
from data via back-propagation, while providing
logical explanations for their predictions. However, they are restricted by their computational
complexity, as they need to consider all possible
proof paths for explaining a goal, thus rendering them unfit for large-scale applications. We
present Conditional Theorem Provers (CTPs), an
extension to NTPs that learns an optimal rule selection strategy via gradient-based optimisation.
We show that CTPs are scalable and yield stateof-the-art results on the CLUTRR dataset, which
tests systematic generalisation of neural models
by learning to reason over smaller graphs and evaluating on larger ones. Finally, CTPs show better
link prediction results on standard benchmarks
in comparison with other neural-symbolic models, while being explainable. All source code and
datasets are available online. 1

1. Introduction
Neural Natural Language Understanding (NLU) systems—
wherein a deep neural network is used as a function approximator (LeCun et al., 2015; Goodfellow et al., 2016)—have
been extremely successful at various natural language tasks,
such as Question Answering (QA) and Natural Language
Inference (NLI) (Goldberg, 2017), achieving strong generalisation results on datasets available for these tasks (Seo
et al., 2017; Hu et al., 2018; Shen et al., 2016; Huang et al.,
1
UCL Centre for Artificial Intelligence, University College London 2 Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to: Pasquale Minervini <p.minervini@ucl.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
1
At https://github.com/uclnlp/ctp

2018). Even strong performance on NLU problems have
been recently achieved with advent of large models pretrained via self-supervision, such as BERT (Devlin et al.,
2019), XLNet (Yang et al., 2019), and RoBERTa (Liu et al.,
2019).
Generalisation in Neural Models However, there are
growing concerns about the ability of NLU systems, and
neural networks more generally, to generalise in a systematic and robust way (Bahdanau et al., 2019; Lake & Baroni,
2018; Johnson et al., 2017; Sinha et al., 2019). For instance,
Jia & Liang (2017) highlight the brittleness of NLU systems
to adversarial examples, while Gururangan et al. (2018);
Kaushik & Lipton (2018) show that neural NLU models
tend to exploit annotation artefacts and spurious correlations in the data. Furthermore, analysing and supervising
the inner workings of such models is not trivial, due to
their inherent black-box nature (Doshi-Velez & Kim, 2017;
Lipton, 2018).
More generally, Garnelo & Shanahan (2019) emphasise
several limitations of neural models, in terms of i) data
inefficiency and high sample complexity—the need of high
volumes of training data in order to be effective, ii) poor
generalisation—modern neural models may not produce
the correct predictions when exposed to data outside the
training distribution, and iii) lack of interpretability—such
models are black boxes where internal representations and
computations are hardly interpretable by humans.
In this vein, Sinha et al. (2019) measured and compared the
systematic generalisation abilities of several neural models
(including very strong baselines such as BERT (Devlin et al.,
2019) and Graph Attention Networks (GATs) (Velickovic
et al., 2018)) on the task of answering questions about family
relationship graphs, by evaluating on held-out combinations
of reasoning patterns and by adding curated distracting noisy
facts. Interestingly, they found that performance degrades
monotonically for every model in their pool as they increase
the complexity of the relational graph, highlighting the challenge of systematic generalisation (Lake & Baroni, 2018;
Sodhani et al., 2018).
Neuro-Symbolic Reasoning A promising direction for
overcoming these issues consists in combining neural models and symbolic reasoning given their complementary
strengths and weaknesses (d’Avila Garcez et al., 2015;

