Nearly Linear Row Sampling Algorithm for Quantile Regression

Yi Li 1 Ruosong Wang 2 Lin Yang 3 Hanrui Zhang 4

Abstract
We give a row sampling algorithm for the quantile
loss function with sample complexity nearly linear in the dimensionality of the data, improving
upon the previous best algorithm whose sampling
complexity has at least cubic dependence on the
dimensionality. Based upon our row sampling algorithm, we give the fastest known algorithm for
quantile regression and a graph sparsification algorithm for balanced directed graphs. Our main technical contribution is to show that Lewis weights
sampling, which has been used in row sampling
algorithms for `p norms, can also be applied in
row sampling algorithms for a variety of loss functions. We complement our theoretical results by
experiments to demonstrate the practicality of our
approach.

1. Introduction
Linear regression is a fundamental problem in machine
learning and statistics. For a data matrix A ∈ Rn×d and a
response vector b ∈ Rn with n  d, the overconstrained linear regression problem can be formulated as solving the optimization problem minx∈Rd φ(Ax−b) where φ : Rn → R is
a loss function. Via the technique of row sampling, we have
obtained remarkable speedups for solving linear regression
for a wide range of loss functions. Such techniques involve
designing an importance sampling scheme and showing that
if one samples the data matrix A and the response vector b
accordingly, φ(Ax − b) is approximately preserved for all
x ∈ Rd . Thus, one can obtain an approximate solution to
the original linear regression problem by solving a linear
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Department of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, USA 3 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California Los Angeles, USA 4 Department
of Computer Science, Duke University, USA. Correspondence to: Yi Li <yili@ntu.edu.sg>, Ruosong Wang <ruosongw@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

regression instance on the sampled data matrix and response
vector, which is usually much smaller in size.
The technique of row sampling has received much attention
in randomized numerical linear algebra and machine learning. It is known that if one samples O(d log d/ε2 ) rows of
A according the to leverage scores, the resulting matrix A0
would satisfy
(1 − ε)kAxk2 ≤ kA0 xk2 ≤ (1 + ε)kAxk2
for all x ∈ Rd with high probability (Tropp, 2012). Moreover, such row sampling algorithm can be implemented in
e
O(nnz(A)
+ poly(d)) time1 (Clarkson & Woodruff, 2013;
Meng & Mahoney, 2013; Nelson & Nguyen, 2013; Li et al.,
2013; Cohen et al., 2015), where nnz(A) is the number of
non-zero entries of A. Building upon the result of Clarkson
(2005) for p = 1, Dasgupta et al. (2009) obtain the first row
sampling algorithm for general `p norms. They show that
O(dmax{p/2+1,p}+1 /ε2 ) rows of A according
by sampling e
to the `p leverage scores, the resulting matrix A0 satisfies
(1 − ε)kAxkp ≤ kA0 xkp ≤ (1 + ε)kAxkp
for all x ∈ Rd simultaneously with high probability. The
5
e
algorithm in (Dasgupta et al., 2009) runs in O(nd
) time,
e
and the running time is further improved to O(nnz(A) +
poly(d)) in (Sohler & Woodruff, 2011; Clarkson et al.,
2016; Meng & Mahoney, 2013; Woodruff & Zhang, 2013;
Wang & Woodruff, 2019). Later, based on results in Banach
space theory (Talagrand, 1990; 1995; Bourgain et al., 1989),
Cohen & Peng (2015) show that by sampling according
to `p Lewis weights, the number of sampled rows can be
further reduced to e
O(d/ε2 ) when p < 2 and e
O(dp/2 /ε2 )
when p ≥ 2 which is nearly optimal as recently shown by Li
et al. (2020). Row sampling algorithms are also obtained
for other loss functions, including M -estimators (Clarkson
& Woodruff, 2015b;a), the Tukey loss function (Clarkson
et al., 2019) and Orlicz norms (Song et al., 2019).
Yang et al. (2013) study row sampling algorithms for the
quantile loss function. Let τ ∈ (0, 1] be a parameter and
y = Ax − b. The quantile loss function is defined to be
1
Throughout the
O(f polylog f ).

paper,

we

use

e )
O(f

to

denote

