Rethinking Bias-Variance Trade-off for Generalization of Neural Networks

Zitong Yang * 1 Yaodong Yu * 1 Chong You 1 Jacob Steinhardt 1 2 Yi Ma 1

Abstract
The classical bias-variance trade-off predicts that
bias decreases and variance increases with model
complexity, leading to a U-shaped risk curve.
Recent work calls this into question for neural
networks and other over-parameterized models,
for which it is often observed that larger models
generalize better. We provide a simple explanation for this by measuring the bias and variance
of neural networks: while the bias is monotonically decreasing as in the classical theory, the
variance is unimodal or bell-shaped: it increases
then decreases with the width of the network. We
vary the network architecture, loss function, and
choice of dataset and confirm that variance unimodality occurs robustly for all models we considered. The risk curve is the sum of the bias
and variance curves and displays different qualitative shapes depending on the relative scale of
bias and variance, with the double descent curve
observed in recent literature as a special case. We
corroborate these empirical results with a theoretical analysis of two-layer linear networks with
random first layer. Finally, evaluation on out-ofdistribution data shows that most of the drop in accuracy comes from increased bias while variance
increases by a relatively small amount. Moreover, we find that deeper models decrease bias
and increase variance for both in-distribution and
out-of-distribution data.

1. Introduction
Bias-variance trade-off is a fundamental principle for understanding the generalization of predictive learning models
(Hastie et al., 2001). The bias is an error term that stems
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley.
2
Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Zitong Yang <zitong@berkeley.edu>, Yaodong
Yu <yyu@eecs.berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

from a mismatch between the model class and the underlying data distribution, and is typically monotonically nonincreasing as a function of the complexity of the model. The
variance measures sensitivity to fluctuations in the training
set and is often attributed to a large number of model parameters. Classical wisdom predicts that model variance
increases and bias decreases monotonically with model complexity (Geman et al., 1992). Under this perspective, we
should seek a model that has neither too little nor too much
capacity and achieves the best trade-off between bias and
variance.
In contrast, modern practice for neural networks repeatedly demonstrates the benefit of increasing the number of
neurons (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Simonyan & Zisserman,
2015; Zhang et al., 2017), even up to the point of saturating available memory. The inconsistency between classical
theory and modern practices suggests that some arguments
in the classical theory can not be applied to modern neural
networks.
Geman et al. (1992) first studied the bias and variance of
the neural networks and give experimental evidence that
the variance is indeed increasing as the width of the neural network increases. Since Geman et al. (1992), Neal
et al. (2019) first experimentally measured the variance of
modern neural network architectures and shown that the
variance can actually be decreasing as the width increases to
a highly overparameterized regime. Recently, Belkin et al.
(2019a; 2018; 2019b) directly studied the risk of modern
machine learning models and proposed a double descent risk
curve, which has also been analytically characterized for certain regression and classification models (Mei & Montanari,
2019; Hastie et al., 2019; Spigler et al., 2019; Deng et al.,
2019; Advani & Saxe, 2017; Bartlett et al., 2020; Chatterji
& Long, 2020). However, there exists two mysteries around
the double descent risk curve. First, the double descent
phenomenon can not be robustly observed (Nakkiran et al.,
2019; Ba et al., 2020). In particular, to observe it in modern
neural network architectures, we sometimes have to artificially inject label noise (Nakkiran et al., 2019). Second,
there lacks an explanation for why the double descent risk
curve should occur. In this work, we offer an simple explanation for these two mysteries by proposing an unexpected
unimodal variance curve.

