Recovery of Sparse Signals from a Mixture of Linear Samples

Arya Mazumdar 1 Soumyabrata Pal 1

Abstract

We will refer to the values returned by the oracle given these
queries as samples.

Mixture of linear regressions is a popular learning
theoretic model that is used widely to represent
heterogeneous data. In the simplest form, this
model assumes that the labels are generated from
either of two different linear models and mixed
together. Recent works of Yin et al. and Krishnamurthy et al., 2019, focus on an experimental
design setting of model recovery for this problem.
It is assumed that the features can be designed and
queried with to obtain their label. When queried,
an oracle randomly selects one of the two different sparse linear models and generates a label
accordingly. How many such oracle queries are
needed to recover both of the models simultaneously? This question can also be thought of as
a generalization of the well-known compressed
sensing problem (Candès and Tao, 2005, Donoho,
2006). In this work we address this query complexity problem and provide efficient algorithms
that improves on the previously best known results.

For a β ∈ Rn , the best k-sparse approximation β(k) is
defined to be the vector obtained from β where all except
the k-largest (by absolute value) coordinates are set to 0.
For each β ∈ {β 1 , β 2 }, our objective in this setting is to
return a sparse approximation of β̂ using minimum number
of queries such that
||β̂ − β|| ≤ c||β − β(k) || + γ
where c is an absolute constant, γ is a user defined nonnegative parameter representing the precision up to which we
want to recover the unknown vectors, and the norms are
arbitrary. For any algorithm that performs this task, the total
number of samples acquired from the oracle is referred to
as the query complexity.
If we had one, instead of two unknown vectors, then
the problem would exactly be that of compressed sensing
(Candès et al., 2006; Donoho, 2006). However having two
vectors makes this problem significantly different and challenging. Further, if we allow γ = Ω(kβ 1 − β 2 k), then we
can treat all the samples to be coming from the same vector
and output only a single vector as an approximation to both
vectors. So in practice, obtaining γ = o(kβ 1 − β 2 k) is more
interesting.

1. Introduction
Suppose, there are two unknown distinct vectors β 1 , β 2 ∈
Rn , that we want to recover. We can measure these vectors
by taking linear samples, however the linear samples come
without the identifier of the vectors. To make this statement
rigorous, assume the presence of an oracle O : Rn → R
which, when queried with a vector x ∈ Rn , returns the
noisy output y ∈ R:
y = hx, βi + ζ

(1)

where β is chosen uniformly from {β 1 , β 2 } and ζ is additive
Gaussian noise with zero mean and known variance σ 2 > 0.
1
Computer Science Department at the University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA01003, USA. Correspondence
to: Arya Mazumdar <arya@cs.umass.edu>, Soumyabrata Pal
<soumyabratap@umass.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

On another technical note, under this setting it is always
possible to make the noise ζ negligible by increasing the
norm of the query x. To make the problem well-posed, let
us define the Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) for a query x:
SNR(x) ,

E|hx, β 1 − β 2 i|2
Eζ 2

where the expectation is over the randomness of the
query. Furthermore define the overall SNR to be SNR :=
maxx SNR(x), where the maximization is over all the
queries used in the recovery process.
1.1. Most Relevant Works
Previous works that are most relevant to our problem are by
Yin et al. (Yin et al., 2019) and Krishnamurthy et al. (Krishnamurthy et al., 2019). Both of these papers address
the exact same problem as above; but provide results under

