Effcient Continuous Pareto Exploration in Multi-Task Learning

Pingchuan Ma * 1 Tao Du * 1 Wojciech Matusik 1

Abstract
Tasks in multi-task learning often correlate, confict, or even compete with each other. As a result,
a single solution that is optimal for all tasks rarely
exists. Recent papers introduced the concept of
Pareto optimality to this feld and directly cast
multi-task learning as multi-objective optimization problems, but solutions returned by existing
methods are typically fnite, sparse, and discrete.
We present a novel, effcient method that generates locally continuous Pareto sets and Pareto
fronts, which opens up the possibility of continuous analysis of Pareto optimal solutions in machine learning problems. We scale up theoretical
results in multi-objective optimization to modern machine learning problems by proposing a
sample-based sparse linear system, for which standard Hessian-free solvers in machine learning can
be applied. We compare our method to the stateof-the-art algorithms and demonstrate its usage
of analyzing local Pareto sets on various multitask classifcation and regression problems. The
experimental results confrm that our algorithm
reveals the primary directions in local Pareto sets
for trade-off balancing, fnds more solutions with
different trade-offs effciently, and scales well to
tasks with millions of parameters.

1. Introduction
Conficting objectives are common in machine learning
problems: designing a machine learning model takes into
account model complexity and generalizability, training a
model minimizes bias and variance errors from datasets, and
evaluating a model typically involves multiple metrics that
are, more often than not, competing with each other. Such
trade-offs among objectives often invalidate the existence of
one single solution optimal for all objectives. Instead, they
*
Equal contribution 1 MIT CSAIL. Correspondence to:
Pingchuan Ma <pcma@csail.mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

give rise to a set of solutions, known as the Pareto set, with
varying preferences on different objectives.
In this paper, we are interested in the topic of recovering
Pareto sets in deep multi-task learning (MTL) problems.
Despite that MTL is inherently a multi-objective problem
and trade-offs are frequently observed in theory and practice, most of prior work focused on obtaining one optimal
solution that is universally used for all tasks. To solve this
problem, prior approaches proposed new model architectures (Misra et al., 2016) or developed new optimization
algorithms (Kendall et al., 2018; Sener & Koltun, 2018).
Work on exploring a diverse set of solutions with tradeoffs is surprisingly rare and limited to fnite and discrete
solutions (Lin et al., 2019). In this work, we address this
challenging problem by proposing an effcient method that
reconstructs a frst-order accurate continuous approximation
to Pareto sets in MTL problems.
The signifcant leap from fnding a discrete Pareto set to discovering a continuous one requires a fundamentally novel
algorithm. Typically, generating one solution in a Pareto
set is a time-consuming process that requires expensive
optimization (e.g., training a neural network). In order to
obtain an effcient algorithm for computing a continuous
Pareto set, it is necessary to exploit local information. Our
technical method is inspired by second-order methods in
multi-objective optimization (MOO) (Hillermeier, 2001;
Martı́n & Schütze, 2018; Schulz et al., 2018) which connect
the local tangent plane, the gradient information, and the
Hessian matrices at a Pareto optimal solution all in one concise linear equation. This theorem allows us to construct a
continuous, frst-order approximation of the local Pareto set.
However, naively applying this method to deep MTL scales
poorly with the number of parameters (e.g., the number of
weights in a neural network) due to its need to compute full
Hessian matrices. Motivated by other second-order methods
in deep learning (Martens, 2010; Vinyals & Povey, 2012),
we propose to resolve the scalability issue by using Krylov
subspace iteration methods, a family of matrix-free, iterative linear solvers, and present a complete algorithm for
generating families of continuous Pareto sets in deep MTL.
We empirically evaluate our method on fve datasets with
various size and model complexity, ranging from MultiMNIST (Sabour et al., 2017) that consists of 60k images

