Low-Variance and Zero-Variance Baselines for Extensive-Form Games
Trevor Davis 1 † Martin Schmid 2 Michael Bowling 2 1

Abstract
Extensive-form games (EFGs) are a common
model of multi-agent interactions with imperfect
information. State-of-the-art algorithms for solving these games typically perform full walks of
the game tree that can prove prohibitively slow
in large games. Alternatively, sampling-based
methods such as Monte Carlo Counterfactual Regret Minimization walk one or more trajectories
through the tree, touching only a fraction of the
nodes on each iteration, at the expense of requiring more iterations to converge due to the variance
of sampled values. In this paper, we extend recent
work that uses baseline estimates to reduce this
variance. We introduce a framework of baselinecorrected values in EFGs that generalizes the previous work. Within our framework, we propose
new baseline functions that result in significantly
reduced variance compared to existing techniques.
We show that one particular choice of such a function — predictive baseline — is provably optimal
under certain sampling schemes. This allows for
efficient computation of zero-variance value estimates even along sampled trajectories.

1. Introduction
Multi-agent strategic interactions are often modeled as
extensive-form games (EFGs), a game tree representation
that allows for hidden information, stochastic outcomes, and
sequential interactions. Research on solving EFGs has been
driven by the experimental domain of poker games, in which
the Counterfactual Regret Minimization (CFR) algorithm
(Zinkevich et al., 2008) has been the basis of several breakthroughs. Approaches incorporating CFR have been used
to essentially solve one nontrivial poker game (Bowling
†

Work done during an internship at DeepMind. 1 Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute, Department of Computing Science,
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada 2 DeepMind,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. Correspondence to: Trevor Davis
<trdavis1@ualberta.ca>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

et al., 2015), and to beat human professionals in another
(Moravčík et al., 2017; Brown & Sandholm, 2018).
CFR is in essence a policy improvement algorithm that
iteratively evaluates and improves a strategy for playing
an EFG. As part of this process, it must walk the entire
game tree on every iteration. However, many games have
prohibitively large trees when represented as EFGs. For
example, many commonly played poker games have more
possible game states than there are atoms in the universe
(Johanson, 2013). In such cases, performing even a single
iteration of traditional CFR is impossible.
The prohibitive cost of CFR iterations is the motivation
for Monte Carlo Counterfactual Regret Minimization (MCCFR), which samples trajectories to walk through the tree
to allow for significantly faster iterations (Lanctot et al.,
2009). Additionally, while CFR spends equal time updating
every game state, the sampling scheme of MCCFR can be
altered to target updates to parts of the game that are more
critical or more difficult to learn (Gibson et al., 2012b;a).
As a trade-off for these benefits, MCCFR requires more
iterations to converge due to the variance of sampled values.
In the Reinforcement Learning (RL) community, variance
reduction in sampling algorithms has been extensively studied. In particular, baseline functions that estimate state
values are typically used within policy gradient methods
to decrease the variance of value estimates along sampled
trajectories (Williams, 1992; Greensmith et al., 2004; Bhatnagar et al., 2009; Schulman et al., 2016). Recent work by
Schmid et al. (2019) has adapted these ideas to reduce variance in MCCFR, resulting in the VR-MCCFR algorithm.
In this work, we generalize and extend the ideas of Schmid
et al. In Section 3, we introduce a framework for variance
reduction of sampled values in EFGs by use of state-action
baselines. In Section 4, we show that VR-MCCFR is a
specific application of our baseline framework that unnecessarily generalizes across dissimilar states. We introduce
alternative baseline functions that take advantage of our access to the full hidden state during training, avoiding this
generalization. We improve on prior theoretical analysis
of baseline performance, demonstrating that our baselines
are more directly tailored to reducing error. In Section 5,
we show empirically that our new baselines result in significantly reduced variance and faster convergence.

