Optimizing for the Future in Non-Stationary MDPs

Yash Chandak 1 Georgios Theocharous 2 Shiv Shankar 1
Martha White 3 Sridhar Mahadevan 1 2 Philip S. Thomas 1

Abstract
Most reinforcement learning methods are based
upon the key assumption that the transition dynamics and reward functions are fixed, that is, the
underlying Markov decision process is stationary.
However, in many real-world applications, this assumption is violated and using existing algorithms
may result in a performance lag. To proactively
search for a good future policy, we present a policy gradient algorithm that maximizes a forecast
of future performance. This forecast is obtained
by fitting a curve to the counter-factual estimates
of policy performance over time, without explicitly modeling the underlying non-stationarity. The
resulting algorithm amounts to a non-uniform
reweighting of past data, and we observe that minimizing performance over some of the data from
past episodes can be beneficial when searching
for a policy that maximizes future performance.
We show that our algorithm, called Prognosticator, is more robust to non-stationarity than two
online adaptation techniques, on three simulated
problems motivated by real-world applications.

1. Introduction
Policy optimization algorithms in RL are promising for
obtaining general purpose control algorithms. They are
designed for Markov decision processes (MDPs), which
model a large class of problems (Sutton & Barto, 2018).
This generality can facilitate application to a variety of realworld problems. However, most existing algorithms assume
that the transition dynamics and reward functions are fixed,
that is, the underlying Markov decision process is stationary.
This assumption is often violated in practical problems of
interest. For example, consider an assistive driving system.
1

University of Massachusetts, MA, USA. 2 Adobe Research,
CA, USA. 3 University of Alberta, AB, Canada. Correspondence
to: Yash Chandak <ychandak@cs.umass.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Over time, tires suffer from wear and tear, leading to increased friction. Similarly, in almost all human-computer
interaction applications, e.g., automated medical care, dialogue systems, and marketing, human behavior changes
over time. In such scenarios, if the automated system is not
adapted to take such changes into account, or if it is adapted
only after observing such changes, then the system might
quickly become sub-optimal, incurring severe loss (Moore
et al., 2014). This raises our main question: how do we
build systems that proactively search for a policy that will
be good for the future MDP?
In this paper we present a policy gradient based approach
to search for a policy that maximizes the forecasted future performance when the environment is non-stationary.
To capture the impact of changes in the environment on a
policy’s performance, first, the performance of the policy
during the past episodes is estimated using counter-factual
reasoning. Subsequently, a regression curve is fit to these
estimates to model the performance trend of the policy over
time, thereby enabling the forecast of future performance.
By differentiating this performance forecast with respect
to the parameters of the policy being evaluated, we obtain
a gradient-based optimization procedure that proactively
searches for a policy that will perform well in the future.1
Recently, Al-Shedivat et al. (2017) and Finn et al. (2019)
also presented methods that search for initial parameters
that are effective when the objective is changing over time.
These approaches are complementary to our own, as they
could be additionally applied to set the initial parameters of
our algorithms. In our empirical study, we show how the
adaptation procedure of their methods alone can result in
a performance lag that is mitigated by our method, which
explicitly captures the trend of the objective due to nonstationarity. A detailed survey on other approaches can be
found in the work by Padakandla (2020).
Advantages: The proposed method has the following advantages: (a) It does not require modeling the transition
function, reward function, or how either changes in a nonstationary environment, and thus scales gracefully with respect to the number of states and actions in the environment.
1
Code for our algorithm can be obtained using the following
link: https://github.com/yashchandak/OptFuture_NSMDP.

