Graph Optimal Transport for Cross-Domain Alignment

Liqun Chen 1 Zhe Gan 2 Yu Cheng 2 Linjie Li 2 Lawrence Carin 1 Jingjing Liu 2

Abstract
Cross-domain alignment between two sets of entities (e.g., objects in an image, words in a sentence) is fundamental to both computer vision
and natural language processing. Existing methods mainly focus on designing advanced attention
mechanisms to simulate soft alignment, with no
training signals to explicitly encourage alignment.
The learned attention matrices are also dense and
lacks interpretability. We propose Graph Optimal
Transport (GOT), a principled framework that germinates from recent advances in Optimal Transport (OT). In GOT, cross-domain alignment is
formulated as a graph matching problem, by representing entities into a dynamically-constructed
graph. Two types of OT distances are considered:
(i) Wasserstein distance (WD) for node (entity)
matching; and (ii) Gromov-Wasserstein distance
(GWD) for edge (structure) matching. Both WD
and GWD can be incorporated into existing neural network models, effectively acting as a dropin regularizer. The inferred transport plan also
yields sparse and self-normalized alignment, enhancing the interpretability of the learned model.
Experiments show consistent outperformance of
GOT over baselines across a wide range of tasks,
including image-text retrieval, visual question answering, image captioning, machine translation,
and text summarization.

1. Introduction
Cross-domain Alignment (CDA), which aims to associate
related entities across different domains, plays a central role
in a wide range of deep learning tasks, such as image-text
retrieval (Karpathy & Fei-Fei, 2015; Lee et al., 2018), visual
question answering (VQA) (Malinowski & Fritz, 2014; AnMost of this work was done when the first author was an intern
at Microsoft. 1 Duke University 2 Microsoft Dynamics 365 AI Research. Correspondence to: Liqun Chen <liqun.chen@duke.edu>,
Zhe Gan <zhe.gan@microsoft.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

tol et al., 2015), and machine translation (Bahdanau et al.,
2015; Vaswani et al., 2017). Considering VQA as an example, in order to understand the contexts in the image and
the question, a model needs to interpret the latent alignment between regions in the input image and words in the
question. Specifically, a good model should: (i) identify entities of interest in both the image (e.g., objects/regions) and
the question (e.g., words/phrases), (ii) quantify both intradomain (within the image or sentence) and cross-domain
relations between these entities, and then (iii) design good
metrics for measuring the quality of cross-domain alignment
drawn from these relations, in order to optimize towards
better results.
CDA is particularly challenging as it constitutes a weakly
supervised learning task. That is, only paired spaces of
entity are given (e.g., an image paired with a question),
while the ground-truth relations between these entities are
not provided (e.g., no supervision signal for a “dog” region in an image aligning with the word “dog” in the question). State-of-the-art methods principally focus on designing advanced attention mechanisms to simulate soft alignment (Bahdanau et al., 2015; Xu et al., 2015; Yang et al.,
2016b;a; Vaswani et al., 2017). For example, Lee et al.
(2018); Kim et al. (2018); Yu et al. (2019) have shown that
learned co-attention can model dense interactions between
entities and infer cross-domain latent alignments for visionand-language tasks. Graph attention has also been applied to
relational reasoning for image captioning (Yao et al., 2018)
and VQA (Li et al., 2019a), such as graph attention network
(GAT) (Veličković et al., 2018) for capturing relations between entities in a graph via masked attention, and graph
matching network (GMN) (Li et al., 2019b) for graph alignment via cross-graph soft attention. However, conventional
attention mechanisms are guided by task-specific losses,
with no training signal to explicitly encourage alignment.
And the learned attention matrices are often dense and uninterpretable, thus inducing less effective relational inference.
We address whether there is a more principled approach to
scalable discovery of cross-domain relations. To explore
this, we present Graph Optimal Transport (GOT),1 a new
1

Another GOT framework was proposed in Maretic et al. (2019)
for graph comparison. We use the same acronym for the proposed
algorithm; however, our method is very different from theirs.

