Sequential Cooperative Bayesian Inference

Junqi Wang 1 Pei Wang 1 Patrick Shafto 1

Abstract
Cooperation is often implicitly assumed when
learning from other agents. Cooperation implies
that the agent selecting the data, and the agent
learning from the data, have the same goal, that
the learner infer the intended hypothesis. Recent models in human and machine learning have
demonstrated the possibility of cooperation. We
seek foundational theoretical results for cooperative inference by Bayesian agents through sequential data. We develop novel approaches analyzing consistency, rate of convergence and stability of Sequential Cooperative Bayesian Inference
(SCBI). Our analysis of the effectiveness, sample
efficiency and robustness show that cooperation
is not only possible in specific instances but theoretically well-founded in general. We discuss implications for human-human and human-machine
cooperation.

1. Introduction
Learning often occurs sequentially, as opposed to in batch,
and from data provided by other agents, as opposed to from
a fixed random sampling process. The canonical example
of sequential learning from an agent occurs in educational
contexts where the other agent is a teacher whose goal is to
help the learner. However, instances appear across a wide
range of contexts including informal learning, language,
and robotics. In contrast with typical contexts considered in
machine learning, it is reasonable to expect the cooperative
agent to adapt their sampling process after each trial, consistent with the goal of helping the learner learn more quickly.
It is also reasonable to expect that learners, in dealing with
such cooperative agents, would know the other agent intends
to cooperate and incorporate that knowledge when updating their beliefs. In this paper, we analyze basic statistical
properties of such sequential cooperative inferences.
1

CoDaS Lab, Department of Math & CS, Rutgers University
at Newark, New Jersey, USA. Correspondence to: Junqi Wang
<junqi.wang@rutgers.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

Large behavioral and computational literatures highlight
the importance cooperation for learning. Across behavioral
sciences, cooperative information sharing is believed to be
a core feature of human cognition. Education, where a
teacher selects examples for a learner, is perhaps the most
obvious case. Other examples appear in linguistic pragmatics (Frank & Goodman, 2012), in speech directed to
infants (Eaves Jr et al., 2016), and children’s learning from
demonstrations (Bonawitz et al., 2011). Indeed, theorists
have posited that the ability to select data for and learn
cooperatively from others explains humans’ ability to learning quickly in childhood and accumulate knowledge over
generations (Tomasello, 1999; Csibra & Gergely, 2009).
Across computational literatures, cooperative information
sharing is also believed to be central to human-machine interaction. Examples include pedagogic-pragmatic value alignment in robotics (Fisac et al., 2017), cooperative inverse
reinforcement learning (Hadfield-Menell et al., 2016), machine teaching (Zhu, 2013), and Bayesian teaching (Eaves Jr
et al., 2016) in machine learning, and Teaching dimension
in learning theory (Zilles et al., 2008; Doliwa et al., 2014).
Indeed, rather than building in knowledge or training on
massive amounts of data, cooperative learning from humans
is a strong candidate for advancing machine learning theory
and improving human-machine teaming more generally.
While behavioral and computational research makes clear
the importance of cooperation for learning, we lack mathematical results that would establish statistical soundness. In
the development of probability theory, proofs of consistency
and rate of convergence were celebrated results that put
Bayesian inference on strong mathematical footing (Doob,
1949). Moreover, establishment of stability with respect
to mis-specification ensured that theoretical results could
apply despite the small differences between the model and
reality (Kadane et al., 1978; Berger et al., 1994). Proofs of
consistency, convergence, and stability ensure that intuitions
regarding probabilistic inference were formalized in ways
that satisfied basic desiderata.
Our goal is to provide a comparable foundation for sequential Cooperative Bayesian Inference as statistical inference
for understanding the strengths, limitations, and behavior of
cooperating agents. Grounded strongly in machine learning
(Murphy, 2012; Ghahramani, 2015) and human learning

