BoXHED: Boosted eXact Hazard Estimator with Dynamic covariates

Xiaochen Wang 1 Arash Pakbin 2 Bobak J. Mortazavi 2 Hongyu Zhao 1 Donald K.K. Lee 3

Abstract
The proliferation of medical monitoring devices
makes it possible to track health vitals at high
frequency, enabling the development of dynamic
health risk scores that change with the underlying
readings. Survival analysis, in particular hazard
estimation, is well-suited to analyzing this stream
of data to predict disease onset as a function of the
time-varying vitals. This paper introduces the software package BoXHED (pronounced ‘box-head’)
for nonparametrically estimating hazard functions
via gradient boosting. BoXHED 1.0 is a novel treebased implementation of the generic estimator
proposed in Lee et al. (2017), which was designed
for handling time-dependent covariates in a fully
nonparametric manner. BoXHED is also the first
publicly available software implementation for
Lee et al. (2017). Applying it to a cardiovascular
disease dataset from the Framingham Heart Study
reveals novel interaction effects among known
risk factors, potentially resolving an open question in clinical literature. BoXHED is available
from GitHub: www.github.com/BoXHED.

1. Introduction
Driven by numerous applications in healthcare data analytics, interest in machine learning methods for survival data
is rising steadily. These machine learning techniques often
focus on classification problems (e.g. binary prediction of
mortality in the next 72 hours), but we may be interested
in not only the probability of an event occurring, but also
in when that event might occur. For patients admitted to an
Intensive Care Unit (ICU), for example, the high frequency
nature of data collected by electronic health record systems
1
Biostatistics Department, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, USA 2 Computer Science & Engineering, Texas A&M
University, College Station, Texas, USA 3 Goizueta Business
School and Department of Biostatistics & Bioinformatics, Emory
University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. Correspondence to: Donald
K.K. Lee <donald.lee@emory.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

allows us to prognosticate not only the chance of a patient
dying, but also when that might happen, in order to provide
timely critical care. Another example is the Framingham
Heart Study, where longitudinal measurements allow us to
ask not only if a patient will develop cardiovascular diseases
(CVDs), but also when they are likely to develop them. In
these settings, uncovering complex interactions of the dynamics of these risk factors could help quantify real-time
risk and enable life-saving care. We explore an approach to
this time-to-event analysis, called survival analysis in the
statistics literature, to improve upon existing techniques by
accounting for the time-varying nature of patient risk factors
and potentially addressing new clinical findings.
Survival data describe the time to an event of interest (e.g.
patient mortality), and a characteristic feature is the presence
of censoring and/or truncation of the actual time-to-event
T . This loss of information makes survival analysis fundamentally different from learning from continuous-valued
data on the real line. For example, in lieu of the density
P(T ∈ dt) and cumulative distribution P(T ≤ t), the
hazard λ(t) = P(T ∈ dt|T > t) and survivor function
S(t) = P(T > t) are more natural for the survival setting.
Recent works for survival analysis centre on methods for
estimating the conditional survivor function
 Z t

S(t|X) = P(T > t|X) = exp −
λ(u, X)du
(1)
0

given time-static covariates X ∈ Rp that are fixed at t = 0.
In many real world settings, the covariates X(t) ∈ Rp
can in fact change over time (e.g. patient temperature),
and thanks to advances in technology, their readings can
now be captured in real time. When X(t) is time-varying
there is no meaningful analogue to the survivor function (1),
since it involves integrating the hazard λ(u, X(u)) along the
unknown future trajectory of the covariates {X(u)}u∈(0,t] .
Thus in the time-dependent covariate setting, we are instead
interested in estimating the hazard λ(t, x) given X(t) = x,
which is informally the probability of the event happening
in the near future given it has not happened yet. Note that in
the time-static covariate setting, we can recover S(t|x) from
λ(t, x) via (1). Therefore, by focusing on hazard estimation
we can unify the analyses of both settings.
However, nonparametric hazard estimation in the time-

