Low Bias Low Variance Gradient Estimates
for Boolean Stochastic Networks
Adeel Pervez 1 Taco Cohen 2 Efstratios Gavves 1

Abstract
Stochastic neural networks with discrete random
variables are an important class of models for
their expressiveness and interpretability. Since
direct differentiation and backpropagation is not
possible, Monte Carlo gradient estimation techniques are a popular alternative. Efficient stochastic gradient estimators, such Straight-Through and
Gumbel-Softmax, work well for shallow stochastic models. Their performance, however, suffers
with hierarchical, more complex models. We focus on stochastic networks with Boolean latent
variables. To analyze such networks, we introduce
the framework of harmonic analysis for Boolean
functions to derive an analytic formulation for the
bias and variance in the Straight-Through estimator. Exploiting these formulations, we propose
FouST, a low-bias and low-variance gradient estimation algorithm that is just as efficient. Extensive experiments show that FouST performs
favorably compared to state-of-the-art biased estimators and is much faster than unbiased ones.

1. Introduction
Stochastic neural networks with discrete latent variables
have been an alluring class of models for their expressivity and interpretability, dating back to foundational work
on Helmholtz machines (Dayan et al., 1995) and sigmoid
belief nets (Neal, 1992). Since they are not directly differentiable, discrete random variables do not mesh well with
the workhorse of modern Deep Learning, that is the backpropagation algorithm. Monte Carlo gradient estimation is
an effective solution where, instead of computing the true
gradients, one can sample gradients from some distribution. The sample estimates can be either biased or unbiased.
1
QUVA Lab, Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam,
The Netherlands 2 Qualcomm AI Research, Qualcomm Technologies Netherlands B.V., The Netherlands. Correspondence to: Adeel
Pervez <a.a.pervez@uva.nl>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Unbiased gradient estimates like score function estimators
(Williams, 1992) come typically at the cost of high variance
leading to slow learning. In contrast, biased gradient estimates such Straight-Through (Bengio et al., 2013), while
efficient, run the risk of convergence to poor minima and
unstable training. To this end several solutions have recently
been proposed that either reduce variance in unbiased estimators (Mnih & Gregor, 2014; Gu et al., 2016; Tucker et al.,
2017; Rezende et al., 2014; Grathwohl et al.) or control
bias in biased estimators (Jang et al., 2017; Maddison et al.,
2017). These methods, however, have difficulty scaling up
to hierarchical neural networks with multiple stochastic layers: low-variance unbiased estimators are too expensive 1 ,
while the compounded bias from the continuous relaxations
on multiple stochastic layers leads to poor minima. In this
work we focus on biased estimators.
Our goal in this paper is a gradient estimator for Boolean
random variables that works for any complex hierarchical
neural networks also. We resort to the term Boolean instead of binary to emphasize that we work directly on the
Boolean space {−1, +1}, without any continuous relaxations or quantizations. With this in mind we re-purpose
the framework of harmonic analysis of Boolean functions,
widely used in computational learning and computational
complexity theory (O’Donnell, 2014; Linial et al., 1993;
Mossel et al., 2003; Mansour, 1994). We cast stochastic
neural networks as Boolean functions f (z) over Boolean
latent variables z sampled from probability distributions
p(z). We then use harmonic analysis to determine that the
bias in the Straight-Through gradient estimates corresponds
to the weighted sum of higher-order Taylor coefficients of
f (z). Moreover, we show that variance in stochastic neural
networks is caused by higher order Fourier coefficients. The
direct consequence is that one can control the bias and the
variance in the Straight-Through estimator by manipulating
the higher-order Fourier and Taylor coefficients of f (z).
Building upon the harmonic analysis of existing gradient
estimators, we present an algorithm, FouST, that admits
low bias and low variance gradient estimates for Boolean
latent variable models. In experiments, we are able to train
complex hierarchical neural networks with no difficulty,
1
Training a nonlinear sigmoid belief network model on GPU
with two stochastic layers on MNIST with REBAR took 1.5 days.

