When Does Self-Supervision Help Graph Convolutional Networks?

Yuning You * 1 Tianlong Chen * 1 Zhangyang Wang 1 Yang Shen 1

Abstract
Self-supervision as an emerging technique has
been employed to train convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for more transferrable, generalizable, and robust representation learning of images. Its introduction to graph convolutional networks (GCNs) operating on graph data is however
rarely explored. In this study, we report the first
systematic exploration and assessment of incorporating self-supervision into GCNs. We first
elaborate three mechanisms to incorporate selfsupervision into GCNs, analyze the limitations
of pretraining & finetuning and self-training, and
proceed to focus on multi-task learning. Moreover, we propose to investigate three novel selfsupervised learning tasks for GCNs with theoretical rationales and numerical comparisons. Lastly,
we further integrate multi-task self-supervision
into graph adversarial training. Our results show
that, with properly designed task forms and incorporation mechanisms, self-supervision benefits GCNs in gaining more generalizability and
robustness. Our codes are available at https:
//github.com/Shen-Lab/SS-GCNs.

1. Introduction
Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) (Kipf & Welling,
2016) generalize convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
(LeCun et al., 1995) to graph-structured data and exploit the
properties of graphs. They have outperformed traditional
approaches in numerous graph-based tasks such as node or
link classification (Kipf & Welling, 2016; Veličković et al.,
2017; Qu et al., 2019; Verma et al., 2019; Karimi et al., 2019;
You et al., 2020), link prediction (Zhang & Chen, 2018),
and graph classification (Ying et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2018),
many of which are semi-supervised learning tasks. In this
paper, we mainly focus our discussion on transductive semisupervised node classification, as a representative testbed
*
Equal contribution 1 Texas A&M University. Correspondence
to: Yang Shen <yshen@tamu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

for GCNs, where there are abundant unlabeled nodes and a
small number of labeled nodes in the graph, with the target
to predict the labels of remaining unlabeled nodes.
In a parallel note, self-supervision has raised a surge of interest in the computer vision domain (Goyal et al., 2019;
Kolesnikov et al., 2019; Mohseni et al., 2020) to make use
of rich unlabeled data. It aims to assist the model to learn
more transferable and generalized representation from unlabeled data via pretext tasks, through pretraining (followed
by finetuning), or multi-task learning. The pretext tasks
shall be carefully designed in order to facilitate the network
to learn downstream-related semantics features (Su et al.,
2019). A number of pretext tasks have been proposed for
CNNs, including rotation (Gidaris et al., 2018), exemplar
(Dosovitskiy et al., 2014), jigsaw (Noroozi & Favaro, 2016)
and relative patch location prediction (Doersch et al., 2015).
Lately, Hendrycks et al. (2019) demonstrated the promise
of self-supervised learning as auxiliary regularizations for
improving robustness and uncertainty estimation. Chen et al.
(2020) introduced adversarial training into self-supervision,
to provide the first general-purpose robust pretraining.
In short, GCN tasks usually admit transductive semisupervised settings, with tremendous unlabeled nodes;
meanwhile, self-supervision plays an increasing role in utilizing unlabeled data in CNNs. In view of the two facts, we
are naturally motivated to ask the following interesting, yet
rarely explored question:
Can self-supervised learning play a similar role in
GCNs to improve their generalizability and robustness?
Contributions. This paper presents the first systematic
study on how to incorporate self-supervision in GCNs, unfolded by addressing three concrete questions:
Q1: Could GCNs benefit from self-supervised learning in
their classification performance? If yes, how to incorporate it in GCNs to maximize the gain?
Q2: Does the design of pretext tasks matter? What are the
useful self-supervised pretext tasks for GCNs?
Q3: Would self-supervision also affect the adversarial robustness of GCNs? If yes, how to design pretext tasks?
Directly addressing the above questions, our contributions
are summarized as follows:

