Online Learning for Active Cache Synchronization

Andrey Kolobov 1 Sébastien Bubeck 1 Julian Zimmert 2

Abstract
Existing multi-armed bandit (MAB) models make
two implicit assumptions: an arm generates a payoff only when it is played, and the agent observes
every payoff that is generated. This paper introduces SYNCHRONIZATION BANDITS, a MAB variant where all arms generate costs at all times, but
the agent observes an arm’s instantaneous cost
only when the arm is played. S YNCHRONIZATION
MABs are inspired by online caching scenarios
such as Web crawling, where an arm corresponds
to a cached item and playing the arm means downloading its fresh copy from a server. We present
M IRROR S YNC, an online learning algorithm for
SYNCHRONIZATION BANDITS , establish an adversarial regret of O(T 2/3 ) for it, and show how to
make it practical.

1. Introduction
Multi-armed bandits (MAB) (Robbins, 1952) have been
widely applied in settings where an agent repeatedly faces
K choices (arms), each associated with its own payoff distribution unknown to the agent at the start, and needs to eventually identify the arm with the highest mean payoff by pulling
a subset of arms at a time and observing a payoff sampled
from their distributions. MABs’ defining property is that
the agent observes an arm’s instantaneous payoff when and
only when the agent plays it. A key hidden assumption that
goes hand-in-hand with it in the existing bandit models is
that each arm generates reward when and only when it is
played, which, combined with the bandit feedback property,
also implies that the agent observes all generated payoffs.
In this paper, we go beyond these seemingly fundamental
assumptions by identifying a class of practical settings that
violate them and analyzing it using online learning theory.
Specifically, this paper formalizes scenarios that we call
1
Microsoft Research, Redmond 2 Google Research, Berlin.
Work on this paper partially done during a visit to Microsoft
Research, Redmond. Correspondence to: Andrey Kolobov
<akolobov@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

SYNCHRONIZATION MABs. In these settings, the agent can
be thought of as holding copies of K files whose originals
come from different remote sources. As time goes by, the
files change at the sources, and their copies increasingly
differ from the originals, becoming stale. The agent’s task
is to refresh these files by occasionally downloading their
new copies from remote sources, under a constraint B on
the average number of downloads per time unit.

For each file, the agent is continually penalized for its staleness. The expected penalty at each time step due to this file
is a non-decreasing function of the time since the file’s last
refresh. Playing arm k here corresponds to refreshing file
k: doing so temporarily reduces its staleness and thereby
diminishes the cost incurred due to it per time unit. The goal
is to find a synchronization policy that minimizes regret in
terms of the average staleness penalties by refreshing files
according to a well-chosen schedule.
Crucially, at any moment the agent doesn’t know how outdated its copy of a given file is, except at the time when
it downloads its fresh copy, and therefore most of the time
doesn’t know the penalties it is incurring. It observes the
penalty only when it plays an arm, i.e., refreshes a file, and
has a chance to see how different the cached copy was right
before the refresh. Even this action reveals only the instantaneous penalty due to this file, not the cumulative penalty
the file has brought on since its last refresh.
S YNCHRONIZATION MABs are inspired by problems such
as web crawl scheduling (Wolf et al., 2002; Cho & GarciaMolina, 2003a; Azar et al., 2018; Kolobov et al., 2019a;
Upadhyay et al., 2020) and database update management
(Gal & Eckstein, 2001; Bright et al., 2006). All these settings involve a cache that must proactively initiate downloads to refresh its content. This is in contrast to, e.g., Web
browser caches that passively monitor a stream of download
requests initiated by another program. The few existing
works on policy learning for active caching (Kolobov et al.,
2019a; Upadhyay et al., 2020) apply only to specific penalty
functions. In contrast, the theoretical results in this paper
are independent of the penalties’ functional form, and come
with a practical online learning strategy for this model.

High-level analysis idea and paper outline. Online learning theory is a powerful tool for analyzing decision-making
models where an agent operates in discrete-time instantaneous rounds by playing a candidate solution (arm), imme-

