Unsupervised Discovery of Interpretable Directions in the GAN Latent Space

Andrey Voynov 1 Artem Babenko 1 2

Abstract
The latent spaces of GAN models often have
semantically meaningful directions.
Moving in these directions corresponds to humaninterpretable image transformations, such as
zooming or recoloring, enabling a more controllable generation process. However, the discovery of such directions is currently performed in a
supervised manner, requiring human labels, pretrained models, or some form of self-supervision.
These requirements severely restrict a range of directions existing approaches can discover. In this
paper, we introduce an unsupervised method to
identify interpretable directions in the latent space
of a pretrained GAN model. By a simple modelagnostic procedure, we find directions corresponding to sensible semantic manipulations without
any form of (self-)supervision. Furthermore, we
reveal several non-trivial findings, which would
be difficult to obtain by existing methods, e.g., a
direction corresponding to background removal.
As an immediate practical benefit of our work,
we show how to exploit this finding to achieve
competitive performance for weakly-supervised
saliency detection. The implementation of our
method is available online1 .

1. Introduction
Nowadays, generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) have become a leading paradigm of generative modeling in the computer vision domain. The stateof-the-art GANs (Brock et al., 2019; Karras et al., 2019)
are currently able to produce good-looking high-resolution
images often indistinguishable from real ones. The exceptional generation quality paves the road to ubiquitous usage
1

Yandex, Russia 2 National Research University Higher School
of Economics , Moscow, Russia. Correspondence to: Andrey
Voynov <an.voynov@yandex.ru>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
1
http://github.com/anvoynov/
GanLatentDiscovery

-Thi
c
knes
s+

-Hai
r+

-Rot
at
i
on +

-Bac
kgr
oundbl
ur+

-Bac
kgr
oundr
emoval+
Figure 1. Examples of interpretable directions discovered by our
unsupervised method for several datasets and generators.

of GANs in applications, e.g., image editing (Isola et al.,
2017; Zhu et al., 2017), super-resolution (Ledig et al., 2017),
video generation (Wang et al., 2018) and many others.
However, in most practical applications, GAN models are
typically used as black-box instruments without a complete
understanding of the underlying generation process. While
several recent papers (Bau et al., 2019; Voynov & Babenko,
2019; Yang et al., 2019; Karras et al., 2019; Jahanian et al.,
2020; Plumerault et al., 2020) address the interpretability of
GANs, this research area is still in its preliminary stage.
An active line of study on GANs interpretability investigates
the structure of their latent spaces. Namely, several works
(Jahanian et al., 2020; Plumerault et al., 2020; Goetschalckx
et al., 2019; Shen et al., 2019) aim to identify semantically meaningful directions, i.e., corresponding to humaninterpretable image transformations. At the moment, prior
works have provided enough evidence that a wide range
of such directions exists. Some of them induce domainagnostic transformations, like zooming or translation (Jahanian et al., 2020; Plumerault et al., 2020), while others
correspond to domain-specific transformations, e.g., adding
smile or glasses on face images (Radford et al., 2015).

