Moniqua: Modulo Quantized Communication in Decentralized SGD

Yucheng Lu 1 Christopher De Sa 1

Abstract
Running Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) in
a decentralized fashion has shown promising results. In this paper we propose Moniqua, a technique that allows decentralized SGD to use quantized communication. We prove in theory that
Moniqua communicates a provably bounded number of bits per iteration, while converging at the
same asymptotic rate as the original algorithm
does with full-precision communication. Moniqua improves upon prior works in that it (1) requires zero additional memory, (2) works with
1-bit quantization, and (3) is applicable to a variety of decentralized algorithms. We demonstrate empirically that Moniqua converges faster
with respect to wall clock time than other quantized decentralized algorithms. We also show that
Moniqua is robust to very low bit-budgets, allowing 1-bit-per-parameter communication without
compromising validation accuracy when training
ResNet20 and ResNet110 on CIFAR10.

1. Introduction
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD), as a widely adopted optimization algorithm for machine learning, has shown promising performance when running in parallel (Zhang, 2004;
Bottou, 2010; Dean et al., 2012; Goyal et al., 2017). However, the communication bottleneck among workers1 can
substantially slow down the training (Alistarh, 2018). Stateof-the-art frameworks such as TensorFlow (Abadi et al.,
2016), CNTK (Seide & Agarwal, 2016) and MXNet (Chen
et al., 2015) are built in a centralized fashion, where workers
exchange gradients either via a centralized parameter server
1

Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, United States.
Correspondence
to: Yucheng Lu <yl2967@cornell.edu>, Christopher De Sa
<cdesa@cs.cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
1
A worker could refer to any computing unit that is capable of
computing, communicating and has local memory such as CPU,
GPU, or even a single thread, etc.

(Li et al., 2014a;b) or the MPI AllReduce operation (Gropp
et al., 1999). Such a design, however, puts heavy pressure
on the central server and strict requirements on the underlying network. In other words, when the underlying network
is poorly constructed, i.e. high latency or low bandwidth, it
can easily cause degradation of training performance due to
communication congestion in the central server or stragglers
(slow workers) in the system.
There are two general approaches to deal with these problems: (1) decentralized training (Lian et al., 2017a;b; Tang
et al., 2018b; Hendrikx et al., 2018) and (2) quantized communication2 (Zhang et al., 2017; Alistarh et al., 2017; Wen
et al., 2017). In decentralized training, all the workers
are connected to form a graph and each worker communicates only with neighbors by averaging model parameters
between two adjacent optimization steps. This balances
load and is robust to scenarios where workers can only be
partially connected or the communication latency is high.
On the other hand, quantized communication reduces the
amount of data exchanged among workers, leading to faster
convergence with respect to wall clock time (Alistarh et al.,
2017; Seide et al., 2014; Doan et al., 2018; Zhang et al.,
2017; Wang et al., 2018). This is especially useful when the
communication bandwidth is restricted.
At this point, a natural question is: Can we apply quantized
communication to decentralized training, and thus benefit from both of them? Unfortunately, directly combining
them together negatively affects the convergence rate (Tang
et al., 2018a). This happens because existing quantization
techniques are mostly designed for centralized SGD, where
workers communicate via exchanging gradients (Alistarh
et al., 2017; Seide et al., 2014; Wangni et al., 2018). Gradients are robust to quantization since they get smaller in
magnitude near local optima and in some sense carry less
information, causing quantization error to approach zero
(De Sa et al., 2018). In contrast, decentralized workers
are communicating the model parameters, which do not
necessarily get smaller around local optima and thus the
quantization error does not approach zero without explicitly
increasing precision (Tang et al., 2018c). Previous work
2

For brevity, in this paper we generally refer to lossy compression methods including quantization, sparsification, etc, as
“quantization.”

