Principled Learning Method for Wasserstein Distributionally Robust
Optimization with Local Perturbations

Yongchan Kwon 1 Wonyoung Kim 2 Joong-Ho Won 2 Myunghee Cho Paik 2

Abstract

so the computation of the risk in (1) is impossible. We
instead observe a set Zn = {z1 , . . . , zn } of independent
and identically distributed samples from Pdata . Using the
dataset Zn , we solve the empirical risk minimization (ERM)
problem

Wasserstein distributionally robust optimization
(WDRO) attempts to learn a model that minimizes
the local worst-case risk in the vicinity of the empirical data distribution defined by Wasserstein
ball. While WDRO has received attention as a
promising tool for inference since its introduction,
its theoretical understanding has not been fully
matured. Gao et al. (2017) proposed a minimizer
based on a tractable approximation of the local
worst-case risk, but without showing risk consistency. In this paper, we propose a minimizer based
on a novel approximation theorem and provide the
corresponding risk consistency results. Furthermore, we develop WDRO inference for locally
perturbed data that include the Mixup (Zhang
et al., 2017) as a special case. Numerical experiments demonstrate robustness of the proposed
method using image classification datasets. Our
results show that the proposed method achieves
significantly higher accuracy than baseline models on contaminated datasets.

n

1X
inf R(Pn , h) = inf
h(zi ),
h∈H
h∈H n
i=1

Pn
where Pn := n−1 i=1 δzi is the empirical data distribution and δz is the Dirac delta distribution concentrating unit
mass at z.
ERM provides a practical framework for learning models
by replacing Pdata in (1) with Pn (Vapnik, 1999). However,
this replacement often yields poor risk estimation, and thus
a solution to (2) can have a small training error but a large
test error. This phenomenon is well known as overfitting,
and to avoid this, a great number of regularization methods
have been proposed: penalty-based methods (Tibshirani,
1996; Fan & Li, 2001; Bühlmann & van de Geer, 2011),
data augmentations (Zhang et al., 2017; Cubuk et al., 2019),
dropout (Wager et al., 2013; Srivastava et al., 2014), and
early stopping (Yao et al., 2007), to name a few.

1. Introduction
Statistical learning problems can be generally formulated as
an optimization problem of the form
inf R(Pdata , h),

h∈H

(1)

where Pdata is theRtrue data distribution, H is a set of losses,
and R(Q, h) := h(ζ)dQ(ζ) is the risk, or the expected
value of a loss h with respect to a probability measure Q.
In real-world applications, the Pdata is usually unknown,
This work was done while Yongchan Kwon was at Seoul National University. 1 Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University 2 Department of Statistics, Seoul National University. Correspondence to: Myunghee Cho Paik <myungheechopaik@snu.ac.kr>.
th

(2)

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

As an alternative approach to prevent overfitting, we
consider Wasserstein distributionally robust optimization
(WDRO) (Shafieezadeh-Abadeh et al., 2015; Sinha et al.,
2017; Blanchet et al., 2019). The goal of WDRO is to
learn a model that minimizes the local worst-case risk in
the vicinity of the empirical data distribution defined by a
Wasserstein ball. To be specific, let Mαn ,p (Pn ) be a set of
probability measures whose p-Wasserstein metric from Pn
is less than αn > 0. The local worst-case risk is defined
to be the supremum of the risk over the p-Wasserstein ball.
Then WDRO is formulated as follows.
inf

sup

h∈H Q∈Mα

R(Q, h).

n ,p (Pn )

Detailed definitions are available in Section 2.
By the design of the local worst-case risk, a solution to
WDRO can avoid overfitting to Pn and learn a robust model
against local perturbations. However, exact computation
of the local worst-case risk is intractable except for few

