Stochastic Optimization for Non-convex Inf-Projection Problems
Yan Yan 1 Yi Xu 2 Liijun Zhang 3 Xiaoyu Wang 4 Tianbao Yang 1

Abstract

X → Rm is a lower-semicontinuous differentiable mapping,
and h·, ·i is the inner product. The requirement of uniform
convexity on h is to ensure the inner minimization problem
is well defined and its solution is unique (cf. Section 2).
Define f (x, y) = g(x) + h(y) − hy, `(x)i, the objective
function F (x) is called the inf-projection of f (x, y) in the
literature. When g is convex, depending on dom(h), the two
subfamilies of above problem (1) deserve more discussion:
difference of convex (DC) and bi-convex functions.

In this paper, we study a family of non-convex and
possibly non-smooth inf-projection minimization
problems, where the target objective function is
equal to minimization of a joint function over another variable. This problem include difference of
convex (DC) functions and a family of bi-convex
functions as special cases. We develop stochastic
algorithms and establish their first-order convergence for finding a (nearly) stationary solution
of the target non-convex function under different conditions of the component functions. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first work
that comprehensively studies stochastic optimization of non-convex inf-projection minimization
problems with provable convergence guarantee.
Our algorithms enable efficient stochastic optimization of a family of non-decomposable DC
functions and a family of bi-convex functions.
To demonstrate the power of the proposed algorithms we consider an important application in
variance-based regularization. Experiments verify
the effectiveness of our inf-projection based formulation and the proposed stochastic algorithm in
comparison with previous stochastic algorithms
based on the min-max formulation for achieving
the same effect.

DC functions. When g is convex and dom(h) ⊆ Rm
+ and `
is convex 1 , the inf-projection minimization problem (1) is
equivalent to the following DC functions,
n
o
min F (x) = g(x) − h∗ (`(x)) ,
(2)
x∈X

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider a family of non-convex and possibly non-smooth problems with the following structure
min F (x) := {g(x) +

x∈X

min h(y) − hy, `(x)i},

y∈dom(h)

(1)

where X ⊆ Rd is a closed convex set, g : X → R is lowersemicontinuous, h : dom(h) → R is uniformly convex, ` :
1
University of Iowa 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
Nanjing University 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen). Correspondence to: Yan Yan <yan-yan-2@uiowa.edu>,
Tianbao Yang <tianbao-yang@uiowa.edu>.

where h∗ denotes the convex conjugate function of h, the
convexity of the second component h∗ (`(x)) is following
the composition rule of convexity (Boyd & Vandenberghe,
2004) 2 . Minimizing DC functions has wide applications in
machine learning and statistics (Nitanda & Suzuki, 2017;
Kiryo et al., 2017). Although stochastic algorithms for DC
problems have been considered recently (Nitanda & Suzuki,
2017; Xu et al., 2018a; Thi et al., 2017), working with the
inf-projection minimization (1) is preferred when h∗ (`(x))
is non-decomposable such that an unbiased stochastic gradient of h∗ (`(x)) is not easily accessible as that of hy, `(x)i
in (1). Inspired by this scenario, let us particularly consider an important instance variance-based regularization. It
refers to a learning paradigm that minimizes the empirical
loss and its variance simultaneously, by which a better biasvariance trade-off may be achieved (Maurer & Pontil, 2009).
To give a condensed understanding of its connection to the
inf-projection formulation, we can re-formulate the problem (cf. the details and comparison with a related convex
objective of (Namkoong & Duchi, 2017) in Section 5):
n
n
n
2
1X
1 X
λ 1 X
li (x) + λ
(li (x))2 −
li (x) ,
x∈X n
2n i=1
2 n i=1
i=1

min

(3)

3

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

where li (x) : X → R+ is the loss function of a model
x on the i-th example and λ > 0 is a regularization pa1

dom(h) ⊆ Rm
− and ` is concave can be transferred to the
considered case by a variable change.
2
Note that h∗ is monotonically increasing iff dom(h) ⊆ Rm
+.

