A Natural Lottery Ticket Winner:
Reinforcement Learning with Ordinary Neural Circuits

Ramin Hasani 1 2 * Mathias Lechner 3 * Alexander Amini 2 Daniela Rus 2 Radu Grosu 1

Abstract
We propose a neural information processing system obtained by re-purposing the function of a
biological neural circuit model to govern simulated and real-world control tasks. Inspired by
the structure of the nervous system of the soilworm, C. elegans, we introduce ordinary neural
circuits (ONCs), defined as the model of biological neural circuits reparameterized for the control
of alternative tasks. We first demonstrate that
ONCs realize networks with higher maximum
flow compared to arbitrary wired networks. We
then learn instances of ONCs to control a series of
robotic tasks, including the autonomous parking
of a real-world rover robot. For reconfiguration
of the purpose of the neural circuit, we adopt a
search-based optimization algorithm. Ordinary
neural circuits perform on par and, in some cases,
significantly surpass the performance of contemporary deep learning models. ONC networks are
compact, 77% sparser than their counterpart neural controllers, and their neural dynamics are fully
interpretable at the cell-level.

1. Introduction
We wish to explore a new class of machine learning algorithms for robot control inspired by nature. Through
natural evolution, the subnetworks within the nervous
system of the nematode, C. elegans, structured a nearoptimal wiring diagram from the wiring economy principle1 perspective (White et al., 1986; Pérez-Escudero &
de Polavieja, 2007). Its stereotypic brain composed of 302
neurons connected through approximately 8000 chemical
and electrical synapses (Chen et al., 2006). The wiring dia* Equal contribution 1 Technische Universität Wien (TU Wien)
2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) 3 Institute of Science

and Technology (IST) Austria. Correspondence to: Ramin Hasani
<rhasani@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

gram therefore, establishes a 91% sparsity and gives rise to
high-degrees of controllability, to process complex chemical
stimulations (Bargmann, 2006), express adaptive behavior
(Ardiel & Rankin, 2010), and to control muscles (Wen et al.,
2012).
This property is particularly attractive to the machine learning community that aims at reducing the size of fullyconnected neural networks to sparser representations while
maintaining the great output performance (LeCun et al.,
1990; Hassibi & Stork, 1993; Han et al., 2015; Hinton et al.,
2015; Frankle & Carbin, 2018). In this regard, the lottery
ticket hypothesis (Frankle & Carbin, 2018), suggested an algorithm to find sparse subnetworks (winning tickets) within
a dense, randomly initialized feedforward neural network,
which can achieve comparable (and sometimes greater) performance to the original network, when trained separately
(Frankle & Carbin, 2018; Zhou et al., 2019; Morcos et al.,
2019). The lottery ticket hypothesis motivated us to investigate whether subnetworks (neural circuits) within the
natural nervous systems are already formulation of winning
tickets originated from the natural evolution?
To study this question fundamentally, we take a computational approach to analyze neural circuit models from the
worm’s nervous system. The reason is that the function of
many circuits within its nervous system have been identified (Wicks & Rankin, 1995; Chalfie et al., 1985; Li et al.,
2012; Nichols et al., 2017; Kaplan et al., 2019), and simulated (Islam et al., 2016; Hasani et al., 2017; Sarma et al.,
2018; Gleeson et al., 2018), which makes it a suitable model
organism for further computational investigations.
The general network architecture in C. elegans establishes a
hierarchical topology from sensory neurons (source nodes)
through upper interneuron and command interneurons down
to motor neurons, sink nodes, (See Fig. 1A). Typically,
in these neuronal circuits, interneurons establish highly recurrent wiring diagrams with each other while sensors and
command neurons mostly realize feedforward connections
to their downstream neurons.
1 Under proper functionality of a network, the wiring economy

principle proposes that its morphology is organized such that the
cost of wiring its elements is minimal.

