Normalizing Flows on Tori and Spheres

Danilo Jimenez Rezende * 1 George Papamakarios * 1 Sébastien Racanière * 1 Michael S. Albergo 2
Gurtej Kanwar 3 Phiala E. Shanahan 3 Kyle Cranmer 2

Abstract

A normalizing flow implements two operations: sampling
via Equation (1), and evaluating the density via Equation (2).
These operations have distinct computational requirements:
generating samples and evaluating their density requires
only f and its Jacobian determinant, whereas evaluating
the density of arbitrary datapoints requires only f −1 and its
Jacobian determinant. Thus, the intended usage of the flow
dictates whether f , f −1 or both must have efficient implementations. For an overview of various implementations
and associated trade-offs, see (Papamakarios et al., 2019).

Normalizing flows are a powerful tool for building expressive distributions in high dimensions.
So far, most of the literature has concentrated on
learning flows on Euclidean spaces. Some problems however, such as those involving angles, are
defined on spaces with more complex geometries,
such as tori or spheres. In this paper, we propose
and compare expressive and numerically stable
flows on such spaces. Our flows are built recursively on the dimension of the space, starting from
flows on circles, closed intervals or spheres.

1. Introduction
Normalizing flows are a flexible way of defining complex
distributions on high-dimensional data. A normalizing flow
maps samples from a base distribution π(u) to samples from
a target distribution p(x) via a transformation f as follows:
x = f (u) where

u ∼ π(u).

(1)

The transformation f is restricted to be a diffeomorphism:
it must be invertible and both f and its inverse f −1 must
be differentiable. This restriction allows us to calculate the
target density p(x) via a change of variables:
 −1 

∂f
−1
p(x) = π f (x) det
.
(2)
∂x
In practice, π(u) is often taken to be a simple density that
can be easily evaluated and sampled from, and either f or
its inverse f −1 are implemented via neural networks such
that the Jacobian determinant is efficient to compute.
*

1

2

Equal contribution
DeepMind, London, U.K. New
York University, New York, U.S.A. 3 Center for Theoretical Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, U.S.A. Correspondence to: Danilo
Jimenez Rezende <danilor@google.com>, George Papamakarios <gpapamak@google.com>, Sébastien Racanière <sracaniere@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

In most existing implementations of normalizing flows, both
u and x are defined to live in the Euclidean space RD ,
where D is determined by the data dimensionality. However,
this Euclidean formulation is not always suitable, as some
datasets are defined on spaces with non-Euclidean geometry.
For example, if x represents an angle, its ‘natural habitat’
is the 1-dimensional circle; if x represents the location of
a particle in a box with periodic boundary conditions, x is
naturally defined on the 3-dimensional torus.
The need for probabilistic modelling of non-Euclidean data
often arises in applications where the data is a set of angles,
axes or directions (Mardia & Jupp, 2009). Such applications
include protein-structure prediction in molecular biology
(Hamelryck et al., 2006; Mardia et al., 2007; Boomsma et al.,
2008; Shapovalov & Dunbrack Jr, 2011), rock-formation
analysis in geology (Peel et al., 2001), and path navigation and motion estimation in robotics (Feiten et al., 2013;
Senanayake & Ramos, 2018). Non-Euclidean spaces have
also been explored in machine learning, and specifically
generative modelling, as latent spaces of variational autoencoders (Davidson et al., 2018; Falorsi et al., 2018; Wang &
Wang, 2019; Mathieu et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019).
A more general formulation of normalizing flows that is
suitable for non-Euclidean data is to take u ∈ M and
x ∈ N , where M and N are differentiable manifolds and
f : M → N is a diffeomorphism between them. A difficulty with this formulation is that M and N are diffeomorphic by definition, so they must have the same topological
properties (Kobayashi & Nomizu, 1963). To circumvent this
restriction, Gemici et al. (2016) first project M to RD , apply
the usual flows there, and then project RD back to N . However, a naive application of this approach can be problematic

