Adaptive Region-Based Active Learning

Corinna Cortes 1 Giulia DeSalvo 1 Claudio Gentile 1 Mehryar Mohri 1 2 Ningshan Zhang 3

Abstract
We present a new active learning algorithm that
adaptively partitions the input space into a finite
number of regions, and subsequently seeks a distinct predictor for each region. We prove theoretical guarantees for both the generalization error
and the label complexity of our algorithm, and
analyze the number of regions defined by the algorithm under some mild assumptions. We also
report the results of an extensive suite of experiments on several real-world datasets demonstrating substantial empirical benefits over existing
single-region and non-adaptive region-based active learning baselines.

1. Introduction
In many learning problems, including document classification, image annotation, and speech recognition, large
amounts of unlabeled data are at the learner’s disposal at
practically no cost. In contrast, reliable labeled data is often
more costly to acquire, since it requires careful assessments
by human labelers. To limit that cost, in active learning,
the learner seeks to request as few labels as possible to
learn an accurate predictor. This is an attractive learning
scenario with significant practical benefits, which remains a
challenging theoretical and algorithmic setting.
The literature on active learning is very broad. Thus, we
give only a brief discussion of previous work here and refer the reader to (Dasgupta, 2011) for an in-depth survey
of the main algorithmic and theoretical ideas, as well as
its current challenges. For separable problems, Cohn et al.
(1994) introduced the CAL algorithm, which only requires a
logarithmic number of label requests, log( 1 ), to achieve accuracy. Later, other on-line active learning algorithms for
general hypothesis classes and distributions were designed
1
Google Research, New York, NY; 2 Courant Institute of
Mathematical Sciences, New York, NY; 3 Hudson River Trading, New York, NY. Correspondence to: Ningshan Zhang
<nzhang@stern.nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

with guarantees both for generalization and label complexity
in the agnostic setting (Freund et al., 1997; Balcan et al.,
2006; Hanneke, 2007; Dasgupta et al., 2008; Beygelzimer
et al., 2009; 2010; Huang et al., 2015; Zhang & Chaudhuri, 2014), and in the separable settings (Dasgupta, 2004;
Golovin & Krause, 2017; Nowak, 2011; Tosh & Dasgupta,
2017).
The theoretical analysis of the label complexity of active
learning for various hypothesis classes and data distributions has been discussed in several publications (Dasgupta,
2006; Castro & Nowak, 2008; Koltchinskii, 2010; Hanneke
& Yang, 2015; Hanneke, 2014; Mussmann & Liang, 2018).
In particular, for hypothesis sets consisting of linear separators, a series of publications gave margin-based on-line
active learning algorithms that admit guarantees under some
specific distributional assumptions (Dasgupta et al., 2005;
Balcan et al., 2007; Balcan & Long, 2013; Awasthi et al.,
2015; Zhang, 2018).
For all these algorithms, the hypothesis set or version space
H is fixed beforehand and, over time, as more labeled information is acquired, it is gradually shrunk to rule out
hypotheses too far from the best-in-class hypothesis. This
paper initiates the study of an alternative family of algorithms where the hypothesis set H is first expanded over
time before shrinking. Specifically, we consider active learning algorithms that adaptively partition the input space into
a finite number of disjoint regions, each equipped with the
hypothesis set H, and that subsequently seek a distinct predictor for each region. Such algorithms can achieve a substantially better performance, as shown by our theoretical
analysis and largely demonstrated by our experiments.
The design of such algorithms raises several questions: How
should the input space be partitioned to ensure an improvement in overall performance? How can labels be requested
most effectively across regions to learn an accurate predictor
per region? Can we provide generalization and label complexity guarantees? In this paper, we tackle these questions
and devise an algorithm for this problem, called Adaptive
Region-Based Active Learning (ARBAL), benefiting from
favorable theoretical guarantees. From a theoretical standpoint, there are several challenging problems: ensuring that
the region-specific best-in-class hypothesis is not discarded,
the selection of the splitting criteria, and the dependency of

