A Simple Framework for Contrastive Learning of Visual Representations

Ting Chen 1 Simon Kornblith 1 Mohammad Norouzi 1 Geoffrey Hinton 1

Abstract
This paper presents SimCLR: a simple framework
for contrastive learning of visual representations.
We simplify recently proposed contrastive selfsupervised learning algorithms without requiring
specialized architectures or a memory bank. In
order to understand what enables the contrastive
prediction tasks to learn useful representations,
we systematically study the major components of
our framework. We show that (1) composition of
data augmentations plays a critical role in defining
effective predictive tasks, (2) introducing a learnable nonlinear transformation between the representation and the contrastive loss substantially improves the quality of the learned representations,
and (3) contrastive learning benefits from larger
batch sizes and more training steps compared to
supervised learning. By combining these findings,
we are able to considerably outperform previous
methods for self-supervised and semi-supervised
learning on ImageNet. A linear classifier trained
on self-supervised representations learned by SimCLR achieves 76.5% top-1 accuracy, which is a
7% relative improvement over previous state-ofthe-art, matching the performance of a supervised
ResNet-50. When fine-tuned on only 1% of the
labels, we achieve 85.8% top-5 accuracy, outperforming AlexNet with 100× fewer labels. 1

1. Introduction
Learning effective visual representations without human
supervision is a long-standing problem. Most mainstream
approaches fall into one of two classes: generative or discriminative. Generative approaches learn to generate or
otherwise model pixels in the input space (Hinton et al.,
2006; Kingma & Welling, 2013; Goodfellow et al., 2014).
1

Google Research, Brain Team. Correspondence to: Ting Chen
<iamtingchen@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).
1
Code available at https://github.com/google-research/simclr.

Figure 1. ImageNet Top-1 accuracy of linear classifiers trained
on representations learned with different self-supervised methods (pretrained on ImageNet). Gray cross indicates supervised
ResNet-50. Our method, SimCLR, is shown in bold.

However, pixel-level generation is computationally expensive and may not be necessary for representation learning.
Discriminative approaches learn representations using objective functions similar to those used for supervised learning,
but train networks to perform pretext tasks where both the inputs and labels are derived from an unlabeled dataset. Many
such approaches have relied on heuristics to design pretext
tasks (Doersch et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2016; Noroozi &
Favaro, 2016; Gidaris et al., 2018), which could limit the
generality of the learned representations. Discriminative
approaches based on contrastive learning in the latent space
have recently shown great promise, achieving state-of-theart results (Hadsell et al., 2006; Dosovitskiy et al., 2014;
Oord et al., 2018; Bachman et al., 2019).
In this work, we introduce a simple framework for contrastive learning of visual representations, which we call
SimCLR. Not only does SimCLR outperform previous work
(Figure 1), but it is also simpler, requiring neither specialized architectures (Bachman et al., 2019; Hénaff et al., 2019)
nor a memory bank (Wu et al., 2018; Tian et al., 2019; He
et al., 2019; Misra & van der Maaten, 2019).
In order to understand what enables good contrastive representation learning, we systematically study the major components of our framework and show that:

