My Fair Bandit: Distributed Learning of Max-Min Fairness with Multi-player
Bandits
Ilai Bistritz 1 Tavor Z. Baharav 1 Amir Leshem 2 Nicholas Bambos 1

Abstract
Consider N cooperative but non-communicating
players where each plays one out of M arms for
T turns. Players have different utilities for each
arm, representable as an N × M matrix. These
utilities are unknown to the players. In each turn
players select an arm and receive a noisy observation of their utility for it. However, if any other
players selected the same arm that turn, all colliding players will receive zero utility due to the
conflict. No other communication or coordination between the players is possible. Our goal is
to design a distributed algorithm that learns the
matching between players and arms that achieves
max-min fairness while minimizing the regret.
We present an algorithm and prove that it is regret optimal up to a log log T factor. This is the
first max-min fairness multi-player bandit algorithm with (near) order optimal regret.

1. Introduction
In online learning problems, an agent sequentially makes
decisions and receives an associated reward. When this reward is stochastic, the problem takes the form of a stochastic multi-armed bandit problem (Bubeck et al., 2012).
However, stochastic bandits assume stationary reward processes that are rarely the case in practice; they are too optimistic about the environment. To deal with this shortcoming, one can model the rewards as being determined
by an adversary, which leads to a formulation known as
non-stochastic or adversarial bandits (Bubeck et al., 2012).
Naturally, the performance guarantees against such a powerful adversary are much weaker than in the stochastic case,
as adversarial bandits are usually overly pessimistic about
1
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University
Faculty of Engineering, Bar-Ilan University. Correspondence
to: Ilai Bistritz <bistritz@stanford.edu>, Tavor Z. Baharav
<tavorb@stanford.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

the environment. Is there an alternative that lies in the gap
between the two?
Multi-player bandits is a promising answer, which has seen
a surge of interest in recent years (Anandkumar et al.,
2011; Avner & Mannor, 2014; 2016; Cohen et al., 2017;
Evirgen & Kose, 2017; Lai et al., 2008; Liu et al., 2013;
Liu & Zhao, 2010; Liu et al., 2019; Magesh & Veeravalli,
2019; Sankararaman et al., 2019; Vakili et al., 2013). One
primary motivation for studying multi-player bandits is
distributed resource allocation. Examples include channels in communication networks, computation resources on
servers, consumers and items, etc. In most applications of
interest, the reward of a player is a stochastic function of
the decisions of other players that operate in the same environment. Thinking of arms as resources, we see that while
these players are not adversaries, conflicts still arise due to
the players’ preferences among the limited resources. To
model that, we assign zero reward to players that choose
the same arm. The goal of multi-player bandit algorithms
is to provide a distributed way to learn how to share these
resources optimally in an online manner. This is useful in
applications where agents (players) follow a standard or
protocol, like in wireless networks, autonomous vehicles,
or with a team of robots.
A common network performance objective is the sum of
rewards of the players over time. As such, maximizing
the sum of rewards has received the vast majority of the
attention in the multi-player bandit literature (Besson &
Kaufmann, 2018; Bistritz & Leshem, 2018; Boursier &
Perchet, 2019; Boursier et al., 2019; Hanawal & Darak,
2018; Kalathil et al., 2014; Nayyar et al., 2016; Tibrewal
et al., 2019). However, in the broader literature of network
optimization, the sum of rewards is only one possible objective. One severe drawback of this objective is that it has
no fairness guarantees. As such, the maximal sum of rewards assignment might starve some users. In many applications, the designer wants to make sure that all users will
enjoy at least minimal target Quality of Service (QoS).
Ensuring fairness has recently been recognized by the machine learning community as a problem of key importance.
In addition to interest in fair classifiers (Zemel et al., 2013),
fairness has been recognized as a major design parameter

