Boosting Frank-Wolfe by Chasing Gradients

Cyrille W. Combettes 1 Sebastian Pokutta 2 3
if C = {X ∈ Rm×n | kXknuc ⩽ τ } is a nuclear norm-ball,
a projection onto C requires computing an SVD, which has
complexity O(mn min{m, n}), while a linear minimization over C requires only computing the pair of top singular
vectors, which has complexity O(nnz) where nnz denotes
the number of nonzero entries. Other examples include the
flow polytope, the Birkhoff polytope, the matroid polytope,
or the set of rotations; see, e.g., Hazan & Kale (2012).

Abstract
The Frank-Wolfe algorithm has become a popular
first-order optimization algorithm for it is simple
and projection-free, and it has been successfully
applied to a variety of real-world problems. Its
main drawback however lies in its convergence
rate, which can be excessively slow due to naive
descent directions. We propose to speed up the
Frank-Wolfe algorithm by better aligning the descent direction with that of the negative gradient
via a subroutine. This subroutine chases the negative gradient direction in a matching pursuit-style
while still preserving the projection-free property. Although the approach is reasonably natural, it produces very significant results. We derive convergence rates O(1/t) to O(e−ωt ) of our
method and we demonstrate its competitive advantage both per iteration and in CPU time over
the state-of-the-art in a series of computational
experiments.

1. Introduction
Let (H, h·, ·i) be a Euclidean space. In this paper, we address the constrained convex optimization problem
min f (x)
x∈C

(1)

where f : H → R is a smooth convex function and C ⊂ H
is a compact convex set. A natural approach to solving
Problem (1) is to apply any efficient method that works in
the unconstrained setting and add projections back onto C
when the iterates leave the feasible region. However, there
are situations where projections can be very expensive while
linear minimizations over C are much cheaper. For example,
1
School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA 2 Institute of Mathematics,
Technische Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany 3 Department for
AI in Society, Science, and Technology, Zuse Institute Berlin,
Berlin, Germany. Correspondence to: Cyrille W. Combettes
<cyrille@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

In these situations, the Frank-Wolfe algorithm (FW) (Frank
& Wolfe, 1956), a.k.a. conditional gradient algorithm (Levitin & Polyak, 1966), becomes the method of choice, as
it is a simple projection-free algorithm relying on a linear minimization oracle over C. At each iteration, it calls
the oracle vt ← arg minv∈C h∇f (xt ), vi and moves in
the direction of this vertex, ensuring that the new iterate
xt+1 ← xt + γt (vt − xt ) is feasible by convex combination, with a step-size γt ∈ [0, 1]. Hence, FW can be
seen as a projection-free variant of projected gradient descent trading the gradient descent direction −∇f (xt ) for
the vertex direction vt − xt minimizing the linear approximation of f at xt over C. FW has been applied to traffic
assignment problems (LeBlanc et al., 1975), low-rank matrix approximation (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2011), structural
SVMs (Lacoste-Julien et al., 2013), video co-localization
(Joulin et al., 2014), infinite RBMs (Ping et al., 2016), and,
e.g., adversarial learning (Chen et al., 2020).
The main drawback of FW is that the modified descent direction leads to a sublinear convergence rate O(1/t), which
cannot be improved upon in general as an asymptotic lower
bound Ω(1/t1+δ ) holds for any δ > 0 (Canon & Cullum,
1968). More recently, Jaggi (2013) provided a simple illustration of the phenomenon: if f : x ∈ Rn 7→ kxk22 is the
squared `2 -norm and C = ∆n is the standard simplex, then
the primal gap at iteration t ∈ J1, nK is lower bounded by
1/t−1/n; see also Lan (2013) for a lower bound Ω(LD2 /t)
on an equivalent setup, exhibiting an explicit dependence
on the smoothness constant L of f and the diameter D of C.
Hence, a vast literature has been devoted to the analysis of
higher convergence rates of FW if additional assumptions
on the properties of f , the geometry of C, or the location of
arg minC f are met. Important contributions include:
(i) O(e−ωt ) if C is strongly convex and inf C k∇f k > 0

