Robust and Stable Black Box Explanations

Himabindu Lakkaraju 1 Nino Arsov 2 Osbert Bastani 3

Abstract
As machine learning black boxes are increasingly
being deployed in real-world applications, there
has been a growing interest in developing post
hoc explanations that summarize the behaviors
of these black boxes. However, existing algorithms for generating such explanations have been
shown to lack stability and robustness to distribution shifts. We propose a novel framework for
generating robust and stable explanations of black
box models based on adversarial training. Our
framework optimizes a minimax objective that
aims to construct the highest fidelity explanation
with respect to the worst-case over a set of adversarial perturbations. We instantiate this algorithm
for explanations in the form of linear models and
decision sets by devising the required optimization procedures. To the best of our knowledge,
this work makes the first attempt at generating
post hoc explanations that are robust to a general
class of adversarial perturbations that are of practical interest. Experimental evaluation with realworld and synthetic datasets demonstrates that our
approach substantially improves robustness of explanations without sacrificing their fidelity on the
original data distribution.

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, there has been an increasing interest
in leveraging machine learning (ML) models to aid decision
making in critical domains such as healthcare and criminal
justice. However, the successful adoption of these models
in the real world relies heavily on how well decision makers
are able to understand and trust their functionality (DoshiVelez & Kim, 2017; Lipton, 2016). Decision makers must
have a clear understanding of the model behavior so they
can diagnose errors and potential biases in these models,
1

Harvard University 2 Macedonian Academy of Arts & Sciences 3 University of Pennsylvania. Correspondence to: Himabindu
Lakkaraju <hlakkaraju@hbs.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

and decide when and how to employ them. However, the
proprietary nature and increasing complexity of machine
learning models poses a severe challenge to understanding
these complex black boxes, motivating the need for tools
that can explain them in a faithful and interpretable manner.
Several different kinds of approaches have been proposed
to produce interpretable post hoc explanations of black box
models. For instance, LIME and SHAP (Ribeiro et al., 2016;
Lundberg & Lee, 2017b) explain individual predictions of
any given black box classifier via local approximations. On
the other hand, approaches such as MUSE (Lakkaraju et al.,
2019b) focus on explaining the high-level global behavior
of any given black box.
However, recent work has shown that post hoc explanation
methods are unstable (i.e., small perturbations to the input can substantially change the constructed explanations),
as well as not robust to distribution shifts (i.e., explanations constructed using a given data distribution may not
be valid on others) (Ghorbani et al., 2019; Lakkaraju &
Bastani, 2020). A key reason why many post hoc explanation methods are not robust is that they construct explanations by optimizing fidelity on a given covariate distribution p(x) (Ribeiro et al., 2018; 2016; Lakkaraju et al.,
2019b)—i.e., choose the explanation that makes the same
predictions as the black box on p(x). To see why these
approaches may fail to be robust, consider a covariate distribution p(x1 , x2 ) where x1 and x2 are perfectly correlated, and an outcome y = I[x1 ≥ 0]. Suppose we have
a black box B ∗ (x1 , x2 ) = I[x2 ≥ 0], and an explanation
Ê(x1 , x2 ) = I[x1 ≥ 0]. Since x1 and x2 are perfectly
correlated, the explanation has perfect fidelity—i.e.,
Pp(x1 ,x2 ) [Ê(x1 , x2 ) = B ∗ (x1 , x2 )] = 1.

(1)

Thus, Ê appears to be a good explanation of B ∗ . However,
if the underlying covariate distribution changes—e.g., to
p0 (x1 , x2 ) where x1 and x2 are independent—then Ê no
longer has high fidelity.
The lack of robustness is problematic because many of the
undesirable behaviors of black box models that can be diagnosed using interpretability relate to distribution shifts.
For instance, it has been shown that interpretability can
help users in assessing whether a model would transfer well
to a new domain (Ribeiro et al., 2016)—e.g., from one

