Data preprocessing to mitigate bias: A maximum entropy based approach

L. Elisa Celis 1 Vijay Keswani 1 Nisheeth K. Vishnoi 2

Abstract
Data containing human or social attributes may
over- or under-represent groups with respect to
salient social attributes such as gender or race,
which can lead to biases in downstream applications. This paper presents an algorithmic framework that can be used as a data preprocessing
method towards mitigating such bias. Unlike prior
work, it can efficiently learn distributions over
large domains, controllably adjust the representation rates of protected groups and achieve target
fairness metrics such as statistical parity, yet remains close to the empirical distribution induced
by the given dataset. Our approach leverages the
principle of maximum entropy – amongst all distributions satisfying a given set of constraints, we
should choose the one closest in KL-divergence
to a given prior. While maximum entropy distributions can succinctly encode distributions over
large domains, they can be difficult to compute.
Our main contribution is an instantiation of this
framework for our set of constraints and priors,
which encode our bias mitigation goals, and that
runs in time polynomial in the dimension of the
data. Empirically, we observe that samples from
the learned distribution have desired representation rates and statistical rates, and when used for
training a classifier incurs only a slight loss in
accuracy while maintaining fairness properties.

1. Introduction
Datasets often under- or over-represent social groups defined by salient attributes such as gender and race, and can
be a significant source of bias leading to discrimination in
the machine learning applications that use this data (O’Neil,
2016; Calders & Žliobaitė, 2013; Kay et al., 2015). Methods
1

Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yale University,
USA 2 Department of Computer Science, Yale University, USA.
Correspondence to: L. Elisa Celis <elisa.celis@yale.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

to debias data strive to ensure that either 1) the representation of salient social groups in the data is consistent with
ground truth (King & Zeng, 2001; Chawla et al., 2002; Zelaya, 2019), or 2) the outcomes (where applicable) across
salient social groups are fair (Calders et al., 2009; Kamiran
& Calders, 2012; Wang et al., 2019; Calmon et al., 2017;
Xu et al., 2018; Feldman et al., 2015; Gordaliza et al., 2019).
The goal of this paper is to learn a distribution that corrects
for representation and outcome fairness but also remains as
close as possible to the original distribution from which the
dataset was drawn. Such a distribution allows us to generate
new pseudo-data that can be used in downstream applications which is both true to the original dataset yet mitigates
the biases it contains; this has the additional benefit of not
requiring the original data to be released when there are privacy concerns. Learning this distribution in time polynomial
in the size of the dataset and dimension of the domain (as
opposed to the size of the domain, which is exponential in
the number of attributes and class labels) is crucial in order
for the method to be scalable. Further, attaining provable
guarantees on the efficiency and desired fairness properties
is an important concern. Hence, the question arises:
Can we develop methods to learn accurate distributions that
do not suffer from biases, can be computed efficiently over
large domains, and come with theoretical guarantees?
Our contributions. We propose a framework based on
the maximum entropy principle which asserts that among
all distributions satisfying observed constraints one should
choose the distribution that is “maximally non-committal”
with regard to the missing information. It has its origins in
the works of Boltzmann, Gibbs and Jaynes (Gibbs, 1902;
Jaynes, 1957a;b) and it is widely used in learning (Dudik,
2007; Singh & Vishnoi, 2014). Typically, it is used to learn
probabilistic models of data from samples by finding the distribution over the domain that minimizes the KL-divergence
with respect to a “prior” distribution, and whose expectation
matches the empirical average obtained from the samples.
Our framework leverages two properties of max-entropy
distributions: 1) any entropy maximizing distribution can
be succinctly represented with a small (proportional to the
dimension of the data) number of parameters (a consequence
of duality) and, 2) the prior and expectation vector provides
simple and interpretable “knobs” with which to control the
statistical properties of the learned distribution.

