SDE-Net: Equipping Deep Neural Networks with Uncertainty Estimates

Lingkai Kong 1 Jimeng Sun 2 Chao Zhang 1

Abstract
Uncertainty quantification is a fundamental yet unsolved problem for deep learning. The Bayesian
framework provides a principled way of uncertainty estimation but is often not scalable to modern deep neural nets (DNNs) that have a large
number of parameters. Non-Bayesian methods
are simple to implement but often conflate different sources of uncertainties and require huge computing resources. We propose a new method for
quantifying uncertainties of DNNs from a dynamical system perspective. The core of our method
is to view DNN transformations as state evolution
of a stochastic dynamical system and introduce a
Brownian motion term for capturing epistemic uncertainty. Based on this perspective, we propose
a neural stochastic differential equation model
(SDE-Net) which consists of (1) a drift net that
controls the system to fit the predictive function;
and (2) a diffusion net that captures epistemic
uncertainty. We theoretically analyze the existence and uniqueness of the solution to SDE-Net.
Our experiments demonstrate that the SDE-Net
model can outperform existing uncertainty estimation methods across a series of tasks where
uncertainty plays a fundamental role.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Nets (DNNs) have achieved enormous success
in a wide spectrum of tasks, such as image classification
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012), machine translation (Choukroun
et al., 2016), and reinforcement learning (Li, 2017). Despite
their remarkable predictive performance, DNNs are poor
at quantifying uncertainties for their predictions. Recent
studies have shown that DNNs are often overconfident in
their predictions and produce mis-calibrated output proba1
School of Computational Science and Engineering, Georgia
Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 2 Department of Computer
Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL.
Correspondence to: Chao Zhang <chaozhang@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

bilities for classification (Guo et al., 2017). Moreover, they
can make erroneous yet wildly confident predictions for outof-distribution samples that are very different from training
data (Nguyen et al., 2015). Uncertainty quantification, a
key component to equip DNNs with the ability of knowing
what they do not know, has become an urgent need for many
real-life applications, ranging from self-driving cars to cyber
security to automatic medical diagnosis.
Existing approaches to uncertainty quantification for neural
nets can be categorized into two lines. The first line is based
on Bayesian neural nets (BNNs) (Denker & Lecun, 1991;
MacKay, 1992). BNNs quantify predictive uncertainty by
imposing probability distributions over model parameters
instead of using point estimates. While BNNs provide a
principled way of uncertainty quantification, exact inference
of parameter posteriors is often intractable. Moreover, specifying parameter priors for BNNs is challenging because the
parameters of DNNs are huge in size and uninterpretable.
Along another line, several non-Bayesian approaches have
been proposed for uncertainty quantification. The most
prominent idea in this line is model ensembling (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017), which trains multiple DNNs with
different initializations and uses their predictions for uncertainty estimation. However, training an ensemble of
DNNs can be prohibitively expensive in practice. Other
non-Bayesian methods (Geifman et al., 2019) suffer from
the drawback of conflating aleatoric uncertainty—the natural randomness inherent in the task, with epistemic uncertainty—the model uncertainty caused by lack of observation
data. In many tasks, it is important to separate these two
sources of uncertainties. Taking active learning as an example, one would prefer to collect data from regions with high
epistemic uncertainty but low aleatoric uncertainty (Hafner
et al., 2018).
We propose a deep neural net model for uncertainty quantification based on neural stochastic differential equation.
Our model, named SDE-Net, enjoys a number of benefits
compared with existing methods: (1) It explicitly models
aleatoric uncertainty and epistemic uncertainty and is able
to separate the two sources of uncertainties in its predictions; (2) It is efficient and straightforward to implement,
avoiding the need of specifying model prior distributions
and inferring posterior distributions as in BNNs; and (3) It

