Disentangling Trainability and Generalization in Deep Neural Networks
Lechao Xiao 1 Jeffrey Pennington 1 Samuel S. Schoenholz 1

Abstract
A longstanding goal in the theory of deep learning is to characterize the conditions under which
a given neural network architecture will be trainable, and if so, how well it might generalize to
unseen data. In this work, we provide such a characterization in the limit of very wide and very
deep networks, for which the analysis simplifies
considerably. For wide networks, the trajectory
under gradient descent is governed by the Neural
Tangent Kernel (NTK), and for deep networks the
NTK itself maintains only weak data dependence.
By analyzing the spectrum of the NTK, we formulate necessary conditions for trainability and generalization across a range of architectures, including Fully Connected Networks (FCNs) and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). We identify
large regions of hyperparameter space for which
networks can memorize the training set but completely fail to generalize. We find that CNNs without global average pooling behave almost identically to FCNs, but that CNNs with pooling have
markedly different and often better generalization
performance. These theoretical results are corroborated experimentally on CIFAR10 for a variety
of network architectures and we include a colab1
notebook that reproduces the essential results of
the paper.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models based on deep neural networks
have attained state-of-the-art performance across a dizzying
array of tasks including vision (Cubuk et al., 2019), speech
recognition (Park et al., 2019), machine translation (Bahdanau et al., 2014), chemical property prediction (Gilmer
et al., 2017), diagnosing medical conditions (Raghu et al.,
1
Google Research, Brain Team.
Correspondence to:
Lechao Xiao <xlc@google.com>, Samuel S. Schoenholz
<schsam@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
1
Available at: https://tinyurl.com/ybsfxk5y.

2019), and playing games (Silver et al., 2018). Historically, the rampant success of deep learning models has
lacked a sturdy theoretical foundation: architectures, hyperparameters, and learning algorithms are often selected
by brute force search (Bergstra & Bengio, 2012) and heuristics (Glorot & Bengio, 2010). Recently, significant theoretical progress has been made on several fronts that have
shown promise in making neural network design more systematic. In particular, in the infinite width (or channel)
limit, the distribution of functions induced by neural networks with random weights and biases has been precisely
characterized before, during, and after training.
The study of infinite networks dates back to seminal work
by Neal (1994) who showed that the distribution of functions
given by single hidden-layer networks with random weights
and biases in the infinite-width limit are Gaussian Processes
(GPs). Recently, there has been renewed interest in studying
random, infinite, networks starting with concurrent work on
“conjugate kernels” (Daniely et al., 2016; Daniely, 2017) and
“mean-field theory” (Poole et al., 2016; Schoenholz et al.,
2017). Among numerous contributions, the pair of papers by
Daniely et al. argued that the empirical covariance matrix of
pre-activations becomes deterministic in the infinite-width
limit and called this the conjugate kernel of the network.
Meanwhile, from a mean-field perspective, the latter two
papers studied the properties of these limiting kernels. In
particular, the spectrum of the conjugate kernel of wide,
fully-connected, networks approaches a well-defined and
data-independent limit when the depth exceeds a certain
scale, ⇠. Networks with tanh-nonlinearities (among other
bounded activations) exhibit a phase transition between two
limiting spectral distributions of the conjugate kernel as a
function of their hyperparameters with ⇠ diverging at the
transition. It was additionally hypothesized that networks
were un-trainable when the conjugate kernel was sufficiently
close to its limit.
Since then this analysis has been extended to include a wide
range for architectures such as convolutions (Xiao et al.,
2018), recurrent networks (Chen et al., 2018; Gilboa et al.,
2019), networks with residual connections (Yang & Schoenholz, 2017), networks with quantized activations (Blumenfeld et al., 2019), the spectrum of the fisher (Karakida et al.,
2018), a range of activation functions (Hayou et al., 2018),
and batch normalization (Yang et al., 2019). In each case,

