Meta-learning for Mixed Linear Regression

Weihao Kong 1 Raghav Somani 1 Zhao Song 2 Sham Kakade 1 Sewoong Oh 1

Abstract
In modern supervised learning, there are a large
number of tasks, but many of them are associated
with only a small amount of labelled data. These
include data from medical image processing and
robotic interaction. Even though each individual
task cannot be meaningfully trained in isolation,
one seeks to meta-learn across the tasks from past
experiences by exploiting some similarities. We
study a fundamental question of interest: When
can abundant tasks with small data compensate
for lack of tasks with big data? We focus on a
canonical scenario where each task is drawn from
a mixture of k linear regressions, and identify
sufficient conditions for such a graceful exchange
to hold; there is little loss in sample complexity
even when we only have access to small data
tasks. To this end, we introduce a novel spectral
approach and show that we can efficiently utilize
e 3/2 ) medium
small data tasks with the help of Ω(k
1/2
data tasks each with e
Ω(k ) examples.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in machine learning highlight successes on
a small set of tasks where a large number of labeled examples have been collected and exploited. These include image
classification with 1.2 million labeled examples (Deng et al.,
2009) and French-English machine translation with 40 million paired sentences (Bojar et al., 2014). For common tasks,
however, collecting clean labels is costly, as they require
human expertise (as in medical imaging) or physical interactions (as in robotics), for example. Thus collected realworld datasets follow a long-tailed distribution, in which a
dominant set of tasks only have a small number of training
1
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA
Princeton University/Institute for Advanced Study. Correspondence to: Weihao Kong <kweihao@gmail.com>, Raghav Somani
<raghavs@cs.washington.edu>, Zhao Song <zhaos@ias.edu>,
Sham Kakade <sham@cs.washington.edu>, Sewoong Oh <sewoong@cs.washington.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

examples (Wang et al., 2017).
Inspired by human ingenuity in quickly solving novel problems by leveraging prior experience, meta-learning approaches aim to jointly learn from past experience to quickly
adapt to new tasks with little available data (Schmidhuber,
1987; Thrun & Pratt, 2012). This has had a significant impact in few-shot supervised learning, where each task is
associated with only a few training examples. By leveraging
structural similarities among those tasks, one can achieve
accuracy far greater than what can be achieved for each task
in isolation (Finn et al., 2017; Ravi & Larochelle, 2017;
Koch et al., 2015; Oreshkin et al., 2018; Triantafillou et al.,
2019; Rusu et al., 2018). The success of such approaches
hinges on the following fundamental question: When can
we jointly train small data tasks to achieve the accuracy of
large data tasks?
We investigate this trade-off under a canonical scenario
where the tasks are linear regressions in d-dimensions and
the regression parameters are drawn i.i.d. from a discrete set
of a support size k. Although widely studied, existing literature addresses the scenario where all tasks have the same
fixed number of examples. We defer formal comparisons to
Section 6.
On one extreme, when large training data of sample size
Ω(d) is available, each task can easily be learned in isolation; here, Ω(k log k) such tasks are sufficient to learn all k
regression parameters. This is illustrated by a solid circle in
Figure 1. On the other extreme, when each task has only one
example, existing approaches require exponentially many
tasks (see Table 1). This is illustrated by a solid square.
Several aspects of few-shot supervised learning makes training linear models challenging. The number of training examples varies significantly across tasks, all of which are
significantly smaller than the dimension of the data d. The
number of tasks are also limited, which restricts any algorithm with exponential sample complexity. An example
distribution of such heterogeneous tasks is illustrated in Figure 1 with a bar graph in blue, where both the solid circle
and square are far outside of the regime covered by the
typical distribution of tasks.
In this data scarce regime, we show that we can still efficiently achieve any desired accuracy in estimating the

