Optimal transport mapping via input convex neural networks

Ashok Vardhan Makkuva * 1 Amirhossein Taghvaei * 2 Jason D. Lee 3 Sewoong Oh 4

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel and principled
approach to learn the optimal transport between
two distributions, from samples. Guided by the
optimal transport theory, we learn the optimal
Kantorovich potential which induces the optimal
transport map. This involves learning two convex
functions, by solving a novel minimax optimization. Building upon recent advances in the field
of input convex neural networks, we propose a
new framework to estimate the optimal transport
mapping as the gradient of a convex function that
is trained via minimax optimization. Numerical
experiments confirm the accuracy of the learned
transport map. Our approach can be readily used
to train a deep generative model. When trained between a simple distribution in the latent space and
a target distribution, the learned optimal transport
map acts as a deep generative model. Although
scaling this to a large dataset is challenging, we
demonstrate two important strengths over standard adversarial training: robustness and discontinuity. As we seek the optimal transport, the
learned generative model provides the same mapping regardless of how we initialize the neural
networks. Further, a gradient of a neural network
can easily represent discontinuous mappings, unlike standard neural networks that are constrained
to be continuous. This allows the learned transport map to match any target distribution with
many discontinuous supports and achieve sharp
boundaries.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
2
Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, University of California, Irvine. 3 Department of Electrical Engineering,
Princeton University, 4 Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington. Correspondence to: Ashok
<makkuva2@illinois.edu>, Amir <amirhoseintghv@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Finding a mapping that transports mass from one distribution Q to another distribution P is an important task in
various machine learning applications, such as deep generative models (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Kingma & Welling,
2013) and domain adaptation (Gopalan et al., 2011; BenDavid et al., 2010). Among infinitely many transport maps
T that can map a random variable X from Q such that T (X)
is distributed as P , several recent advances focus on discovering some inductive bias to find a transport map with
desirable properties. Research in optimal transport has been
leading such efforts, in applications such as color transfer
(Ferradans et al., 2014), shape matching (Su et al., 2015),
data assimilation (Reich, 2013), and Bayesian inference
(El Moselhy & Marzouk, 2012). Searching for an optimal
transport encourages a mapping that minimizes the total cost
of transporting mass from Q to P , as originally formulated
in Monge (1781), and provides the inductive bias needed
in many such applications. However, finding the optimal
transport map in general is a challenging task, especially in
high dimensions where efficient approaches are critical.
Algorithmic solutions are well-established for discrete variables; the optimal transport can be found as a solution to
linear program. Building upon this mature area, typical
approaches for general distributions use quantization of the
space, which becomes computationally intensive for highdimensional variables we encounter in modern applications
(Evans & Gangbo, 1999; Benamou & Brenier, 2000; Papadakis et al., 2014).
There has been a vast amount of works to extend the computation of the optimal transport map to high-dimensional
setting (Seguy et al., 2017; Genevay et al., 2016; Xie et al.,
2019; Liu et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2019). In this paper, we
propose a novel minimax optimization approach to search
for the optimal transport under the quadratic distance (i.e. 2Wassertstein metric). A major challenge in a minimax formulation of optimal transport is that the constraints in the
Kantorovich dual formulation (3) are notoriously challenging. They require the evaluation of the functions at every
point in the domain, which is not tractable. A common
straightforward heuristics sample some points and add those
sampled constraints as regularizers. Such regularizations
create biases that hinder learning the true optimal transport.

