Test-Time Training with Self-Supervision
for Generalization under Distribution Shifts
Yu Sun 1 Xiaolong Wang 1 2 Zhuang Liu 1 John Miller 1 Alexei A. Efros 1 Moritz Hardt 1 3

Abstract

that we only begin to address here.

In this paper, we propose Test-Time Training, a
general approach for improving the performance
of predictive models when training and test data
come from different distributions. We turn a single unlabeled test sample into a self-supervised
learning problem, on which we update the model
parameters before making a prediction. This also
extends naturally to data in an online stream. Our
simple approach leads to improvements on diverse image classification benchmarks aimed at
evaluating robustness to distribution shifts.

1. Introduction
Supervised learning remains notoriously weak at generalization under distribution shifts. Unless training and test data
are drawn from the same distribution, even seemingly minor
differences turn out to defeat state-of-the-art models (Recht
et al., 2018). Adversarial robustness and domain adaptation are but a few existing paradigms that try to anticipate
differences between the training and test distribution with
either topological structure or data from the test distribution
available during training. We explore a new take on generalization that does not anticipate the distribution shifts, but
instead learns from them at test time.
We start from a simple observation. The unlabeled test
sample x presented at test time gives us a hint about the
distribution from which it was drawn. We propose to take
advantage of this hint on the test distribution by allowing
the model parameters θ to depend on the test sample x, but
not its unknown label y. The concept of a variable decision
boundary θ(x) is powerful in theory since it breaks away
from the limitation of fixed model capacity (see additional
discussion in Section A1), but the design of a feedback
mechanism from x to θ(x) raises new challenges in practice
1

2

University of California, Berkeley University of California,
San Diego 3 MH is a paid consultant for Twitter. Correspondence
to: Yu Sun <yusun@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Our proposed test-time training method creates a selfsupervised learning problem based on this single test sample
x, updating θ at test time before making a prediction. Selfsupervised learning uses an auxiliary task that automatically
creates labels from unlabeled inputs. In our experiments,
we use the task of rotating each input image by a multiple
of 90 degrees and predicting its angle (Gidaris et al., 2018).
This approach can also be easily modified to work outside
the standard supervised learning setting. If several test
samples arrive in a batch, we can use the entire batch for
test-time training. If samples arrive in an online stream,
we obtain further improvements by keeping the state of the
parameters. After all, prediction is rarely a single event. The
online version can be the natural mode of deployment under
the additional assumption that test samples are produced by
the same or smoothly changing distribution shifts.
We experimentally validate our method in the context of
object recognition on several standard benchmarks. These
include images with diverse types of corruption at various
levels (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019), video frames of
moving objects (Shankar et al., 2019), and a new test set
of unknown shifts collected by (Recht et al., 2018). Our
algorithm makes substantial improvements under distribution shifts, while maintaining the same performance on the
original distribution.
In our experiments, we compare with a strong baseline
(labeled joint training) that uses both supervised and selfsupervised learning at training-time, but keeps the model
fixed at test time. Recent work shows that training-time selfsupervision improves robustness (Hendrycks et al., 2019a);
our joint training baseline corresponds to an improved implementation of this work. A comprehensive review of related
work follows in Section 5.
We complement the empirical results with theoretical investigations in Section 4, and establish an intuitive sufficient
condition on a convex model of when Test-Time Training
helps; this condition, roughly speaking, is to have correlated
gradients between the loss functions of the two tasks.
Project website: https://test-time-training.github.io/.

