Constructive Universal High-Dimensional Distribution Generation through
Deep ReLU Networks

Dmytro Perekrestenko 1 Stephan Müller 1 Helmut Bölcskei 1 2

Abstract
We present an explicit deep neural network
construction that transforms uniformly distributed one-dimensional noise into an arbitrarily close approximation of any two-dimensional
Lipschitz-continuous target distribution. The key
ingredient of our design is a generalization of
the “space-filling” property of sawtooth functions discovered in (Bailey & Telgarsky, 2018).
We elicit the importance of depth—in our neural network construction—in driving the Wasserstein distance between the target distribution and
the approximation realized by the network to
zero. An extension to output distributions of arbitrary dimension is outlined. Finally, we show
that the proposed construction does not incur a
cost—in terms of error measured in Wassersteindistance—relative to generating d-dimensional
target distributions from d independent random
variables.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have been used very successfully as
generative models for complex natural data such as images (Radford et al., 2016; Karras et al., 2019) and natural
language (Bowman et al., 2016; Xu et al., 2018). Specifically, the idea is to learn the parameters of deep networks
(Kingma & Welling, 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2014) so that
they realize complex high-dimensional probability distributions by transforming samples taken from simple lowdimensional distributions such as uniform or Gaussian.
Generative networks with higher output than input dimension occur, for instance, in language modelling where deep
networks are used to predict the next word in a text se1
Department of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland 2 Department of Mathematics, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. Correspondence to:
Dmytro Perekrestenko <pdmytro@mins.ee.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

quence. Here, the input layer size is determined by the
dimension of the word embedding (typically ∼ 100) and
the output layer, representing a vector of probabilities for
each of the words in the vocabulary, is of the size of the
vocabulary (typically ∼ 100k). Another example where
the dimensionality of the input distribution is mandated to
be lower than that of the output distribution is given by
the variational inference methods according to (Kingma &
Welling, 2014; Tolstikhin et al., 2018).
Notwithstanding the practical success of deep generative
networks, a profound theoretical understanding of their
representational capabilities is still lacking. First results
along those lines appear in (Lee et al., 2017), which establishes that generative networks can approximate distributions arising from the composition of Barron functions
(Barron, 1993).
Bailey and Telgarsky (Bailey & Telgarsky, 2018) show how
deep ReLU networks can be used to increase the dimensionality of uniform distributions and how a univariate uniform distribution can be turned into a univariate Gaussian
distribution and vice versa. Finally, (Lu & Lu, 2020) shows
that neural networks constitute universal approximators for
continuous probability distributions when source and target
distribution are of the same dimension.
Classical approaches for generating multi-dimensional random variables of a given distribution such as the BoxMuller method (Box & Muller, 1958) or conditional distribution, rejection, and composition methods (Devroye,
1986) are all based on transforming initial distributions
of the same dimensionality as the target distribution. We
are not aware of methods that map one-dimensional inputs
to prescribed d-dimensional outputs. The purpose of the
present paper is to show that deep generative networks are
capable of doing exactly that and moreover are also universal generators, in contrast to, e.g., the Box-Muller method
(Box & Muller, 1958), which maps uniform distributions
to Gaussian distributions, albeit with zero error. We also
quantify how the connectivity of the resulting networks
scales with the approximation error measured in Wasserstein distance.
The problem is approached in two steps.

Specifically,

