State Space Expectation Propagation:
Efficient Inference Schemes for Temporal Gaussian Processes

William J. Wilkinson 1 Paul E. Chang 1 Michael Riis Andersen 2 Arno Solin 1

Abstract
We formulate approximate Bayesian inference
in non-conjugate temporal and spatio-temporal
Gaussian process models as a simple parameter update rule applied during Kalman smoothing. This viewpoint encompasses most inference
schemes, including expectation propagation (EP),
the classical (Extended, Unscented, etc.) Kalman
smoothers, and variational inference. We provide a unifying perspective on these algorithms,
showing how replacing the power EP moment
matching step with linearisation recovers the classical smoothers. EP provides some benefits over
the traditional methods via introduction of the socalled cavity distribution, and we combine these
benefits with the computational efficiency of linearisation, providing extensive empirical analysis
demonstrating the efficacy of various algorithms
under this unifying framework. We provide a fast
implementation of all methods in JAX.

Filtering / Forward pass → ← Smoothing / Backward pass
(a) EKF forward and RTS backward pass

Filtering / Forward pass →

← Smoothing / Backward pass

(b) Extended Expectation Propagation (EEP)

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes (GPs, Rasmussen & Williams, 2006)
are a nonlinear probabilistic modelling tool that combine
well calibrated uncertainty estimates with the ability to encode prior information, and as such they are an increasingly
effective method for many difficult machine learning tasks.
The well known limitations of GPs are (i) their cubic scaling
in the number of data, and (ii) their intractability when the
observation model is non-Gaussian.
For (i), a wide variety of methods have been proposed (e.g.
Hensman et al., 2013; Salimbeni & Deisenroth, 2017; Wang
et al., 2019), with perhaps the most common being the
1
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Technical University of Denmark, Denmark. Correspondence
to: William J. Wilkinson <william.wilkinson@aalto.fi>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Filtering and smoothing in the Banana classification task.
Training data represented by coloured points, the decision boundaries by black lines, and the predictive mean for the class label by
colour map
. The vertical dimension is treated as the ‘spatial’
input and the horizontal as the sequential (‘temporal’) dimension.
Forward sweep on the left, backward sweep on the right. Top
panels (a) show the EKF; bottom (b) is the 2nd iteration of EEP.

˜
sparse-GP approach
(Quinonero-Candela & Rasmussen,
2005) which summarises the GP posterior through a subset
of ‘inducing’ points. However, when the data exhibits a
natural ordering—as in temporal or spatio-temporal tasks—
many GP priors can be rewritten in closed-form in terms
of stochastic differential equations (SDEs, ¨
Sarkkä & Solin,
2019), allowing for linear-time exact inference via Kalman
filtering (Hartikainen & ¨
Sarkkä, 2010; Reece & Roberts,
2010). This link is beneficial in scenarios such as climate
modelling, or audio signal analysis, which exhibit both high
and low-frequency behaviour. A sparse-GP analogy to the
Shannon–Nyquist theorem (Tobar, 2019) tells us that audio
signals, for example, necessarily require tens of thousands
of inducing points per second of data, rendering sparse ap-

