Multi-Objective Molecule Generation using Interpretable Substructures

Wengong Jin 1 Regina Barzilay 1 Tommi Jaakkola 1

Abstract
Drug discovery aims to find novel compounds
with specified chemical property profiles. In terms
of generative modeling, the goal is to learn to
sample molecules in the intersection of multiple
property constraints. This task becomes increasingly challenging when there are many property
constraints. We propose to offset this complexity by composing molecules from a vocabulary
of substructures that we call molecular rationales.
These rationales are identified from molecules as
substructures that are likely responsible for each
property of interest. We then learn to expand rationales into a full molecule using graph generative
models. Our final generative model composes
molecules as mixtures of multiple rationale completions, and this mixture is fine-tuned to preserve
the properties of interest. We evaluate our model
on various drug design tasks and demonstrate significant improvements over state-of-the-art baselines in terms of accuracy, diversity, and novelty
of generated compounds.

1. Introduction
The key challenge in drug discovery is to find molecules
that satisfy multiple constraints, from potency, safety, to
desired metabolic profiles. Optimizing these constraints
simultaneously is challenging for existing computational
models. The primary difficulty lies in the lack of training
instances of molecules that conform to all the constraints.
For example, for this reason, Jin et al. (2019a) reports over
60% performance loss when moving beyond the singleconstraint setting.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach to multiproperty molecular optimization. Our strategy is inspired
by fragment-based drug discovery (Murray & Rees, 2009)
often followed by medicinal chemists. The idea is to start
1
MIT CSAIL. Correspondence to: Wengong Jin <wengong@casil.mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

with substructures (e.g., functional groups or later pieces)
that drive specific properties of interest, and then combine
these building blocks into a target molecule. To automate
this process, our model has to learn two complementary
tasks: (1) identification of the building blocks that we call
rationales, and (2) assembling multiple rationales together
into a fully formed target molecule. In contrast to competing
methods, our generative model does not build molecules
from scratch, but instead assembles them from automatically extracted rationales already implicated for specific
properties (see Figure 1).
We implement this idea using a generative model of
molecules where the rationale choices play the role of latent
variables. Specifically, a molecular graph G is generated
from underlying rationale sets S according to:
X
P (G) =
P (G|S)P (S)
(1)
S

As ground truth rationales (e.g., functional groups or subgraphs) are not provided, the model has to extract candidate
rationales from molecules with the help of a property predictor. We formulate this task as a discrete optimization
problem efficiently solved by Monte Carlo tree search. Our
rationale conditioned graph generator, P (G|S), is initially
trained on a large collection of real molecules so that it is
capable of expanding any subgraph into a full molecule.
The mixture model is then fine-tuned using reinforcement
learning to ensure that the generated molecules preserve all
the properties of interest. This training paradigm enables us
to realize molecules that satisfy multiple constraints without
observing any such instances in the training set.
The proposed model is evaluated on molecule design tasks
under different combinations of property constraints.1 Our
baselines include state-of-the-art molecule generation methods (Olivecrona et al., 2017; You et al., 2018a). Across all
tasks, our model achieve state-of-the art results in terms of
accuracy, novelty and diversity of generated compounds. In
particular, we outperform the best baseline with 38% absolute improvement in the task with three property constraints.
We further provide ablation studies to validate the benefit
of our architecture in the low-resource scenario. Finally, we
show that identified rationales are chemically meaningful in
a toxicity prediction task (Sushko et al., 2012).
1

https://github.com/wengong-jin/multiobj-rationale

