Scalable Differential Privacy with Certified Robustness in Adversarial Learning

NhatHai Phan 1 My T. Thai 2 Han Hu 1 Ruoming Jin 3 Tong Sun 4 Dejing Dou 5 6

Abstract
In this paper, we aim to develop a scalable algorithm to preserve differential privacy (DP) in
adversarial learning for deep neural networks
(DNNs), with certified robustness to adversarial
examples. By leveraging the sequential composition theory in DP, we randomize both input and
latent spaces to strengthen our certified robustness
bounds. To address the trade-off among model
utility, privacy loss, and robustness, we design an
original adversarial objective function, based on
the post-processing property in DP, to tighten the
sensitivity of our model. A new stochastic batch
training is proposed to apply our mechanism on
large DNNs and datasets, by bypassing the vanilla
iterative batch-by-batch training in DP DNNs. An
end-to-end theoretical analysis and evaluations
show that our mechanism notably improves the
robustness and scalability of DP DNNs.

1. Introduction
The pervasiveness of machine learning exposes new vulnerabilities in software systems, in which deployed machine
learning models can be used (a) to reveal sensitive information in private training data (Fredrikson et al., 2015),
and/or (b) to make the models misclassify, such as adversarial examples (Carlini & Wagner, 2017). Efforts to prevent
such attacks typically seek one of three solutions: (1) Models which preserve differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al.,
2006), a rigorous formulation of privacy in probabilistic
terms; (2) Adversarial training algorithms, which augment
1

Ying Wu College of Computing, New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, New Jersey, USA 2 Department of Computer
& Information Sciences & Engineering, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida, USA 3 Computer Science Department, Kent
State University, Kent, Ohio, USA 4 Adobe Research, San Jose,
California, USA 5 Computer and Information Science Department,
University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon, USA 6 (Sabbatical leave
from University of Oregon to) Baidu Research, Beijing, China.
Correspondence to: NhatHai Phan <phan@njit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

training data to consist of benign examples and adversarial examples crafted during the training process, thereby
empirically increasing the classification accuracy given adversarial examples (Kardan & Stanley, 2017; Matyasko &
Chau, 2017); and (3) Certified robustness, in which the
model classification given adversarial examples is theoretically guaranteed to be consistent, i.e., a small perturbation
in the input does not change the predicted label (Cisse et al.,
2017; Kolter & Wong, 2017; Salman et al., 2019).
On the one hand, private models, trained with existing
privacy-preserving mechanisms (Abadi et al., 2016; Shokri
& Shmatikov, 2015; Phan et al., 2016; 2017a;b; Yu et al.,
2019; Lee & Kifer, 2018), are unshielded under adversarial
examples. On the other hand, robust models, trained with
adversarial learning (with or without certified robustness to
adversarial examples), do not offer privacy protections to the
training data (Song et al., 2019). That one-sided approach
poses serious risks to machine learning-based systems; since
adversaries can attack a deployed model by using both privacy inference attacks and adversarial examples. To be safe,
a model must be i) private to protect the training data, and
ii) robust to adversarial examples. Unfortunately, there still
lacks of study on how to develop such a model, which thus
remains a largely open challenge (Phan et al., 2019).
Simply combining existing DP-preserving mechanisms and
certified robustness conditions (Cisse et al., 2017; Kolter
& Wong, 2017; Raghunathan et al., 2018) cannot solve the
problem, for many reasons. (a) Existing sensitivity bounds
(Phan et al., 2016; 2017a;b) and designs (Yu et al., 2019;
Lee & Kifer, 2018; Phan et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2019; Xu
et al., 2020) have not been developed to protect the training
data in adversarial training. It is obvious that using adversarial examples crafted from the private training data to train
our models introduces a previously unknown privacy risk,
disclosing the participation of the benign examples (Song
et al., 2019). (b) There is an unrevealed interplay among DP
preservation, adversarial learning, and robustness bounds.
(c) Existing algorithms cannot be readily applied to address
the trade-off among model utility, privacy loss, and robustness. (d) It is challenging in applying existing algorithms to
train large DNNs given large data (i.e., scalability); since,
they employ the vanilla iterative batch-by-batch training,
in which only a single batch of data instances can be used
at each training step, such that the privacy loss can be es-

