Private Counting from Anonymous Messages:
Near-Optimal Accuracy with Vanishing Communication Overhead

Badih Ghazi 1 Ravi Kumar 1 Pasin Manurangsi 1 Rasmus Pagh 2 1

Abstract
Differential privacy (DP) is a formal notion for
quantifying the privacy loss of algorithms. Algorithms in the central model of DP achieve high
accuracy but make the strongest trust assumptions
whereas those in the local DP model make the
weakest trust assumptions but incur substantial
accuracy loss. The shuffled DP model (Bittau
et al., 2017; Erlingsson et al., 2019; Cheu et al.,
2019) has recently emerged as a feasible middle ground between the central and local models, providing stronger trust assumptions than
the former while promising higher accuracies
than the latter. In this paper, we obtain practical
communication-efficient algorithms in the shuffled DP model for two basic aggregation primitives used in machine learning: 1) binary summation, and 2) histograms over a moderate number of buckets. Our algorithms achieve accuracy
that is arbitrarily close to that of central DP algorithms with an expected communication per user
essentially matching what is needed without any
privacy constraints! We demonstrate the practicality of our algorithms by experimentally comparing their performance to several widely-used
protocols such as Randomized Response (Warner,
1965) and RAPPOR (Erlingsson et al., 2014).

1. Introduction
Motivated by the need for scalable, distributed privacypreserving machine learning, there has been an intense interest, both in academia and industry, on designing algorithms
with low communication overhead and high accuracy while
*

Equal contribution 1 Google Research, Mountain View 2 IT University of Copenhagen. Correspondence to: Badih Ghazi <badihghazi@gmail.com>, Ravi Kumar <ravi.k53@gmail.com>,
Pasin Manurangsi <pasin@google.com>, Rasmus Pagh
<pagh@itu.dk>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

protecting potentially sensitive, user-specific information.
While many notions of privacy have been proposed, differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006b;a) has become
by far the most popular and well-studied candidate, leading to several real-world deployments at companies such
as Google (Erlingsson et al., 2014; Shankland, 2014), Apple (Greenberg, 2016; Apple Differential Privacy Team,
2017), and Microsoft (Ding et al., 2017), and in government agencies such as the U.S. Census Bureau (Abowd,
2018). Most research has focused on the central model of
DP where a curator, who sees the raw user data, is required
to release a private data structure. While many accurate
DP algorithms have been discovered in this framework, the
requirement that the curator observes the raw data constitutes a significant obstacle to deployment in many industrial
settings where the users do not necessarily trust the central authority. To circumvent this limitation, several works
have studied the local model of DP (Kasiviswanathan et al.,
2008) (also (Warner, 1965)), which enforces the more stringent constraint that each message sent from a user device
to the server is private. While requiring near-minimal trust
assumptions, the local model turns out to inherently suffer
from large estimation errors. For numerous basic tasks, including binary summation and histograms that
√ we study in
this work, errors are at least on the order of n, where n is
the number of users (Beimel et al., 2008; Chan et al., 2012).
Shuffled Privacy Model. The shuffled (aka. anonymous)
model of privacy has recently generated significant interest
as a potential compromise between the central and local
frameworks: having trust assumptions better than the former but enabling estimation accuracies higher than the latter.
While the shuffled model was originally studied in the field
of cryptography by Ishai et al. (2006) in their work on
cryptography from anonymity, it was first suggested as a
framework for privacy-preserving computations by Bittau
et al. (2017) in their Encode-Shuffle-Analyze architecture.
This setting only requires the multiset of anonymized messages that are transmitted by the different users to be private.
Equivalently, this corresponds to the setup where a trusted
shuffler randomly permutes all incoming messages from the
users before passing them to the analyzer. This is illustrated
in Figure 1. We point out that several efficient cryptographic
implementations of the shuffler have been considered includ-

