The Effect of Natural Distribution Shift on Question Answering Models

John Miller 1 Karl Krauth 1 Benjamin Recht 1 Ludwig Schmidt 1

Abstract
We build four new test sets for the Stanford Question Answering Dataset (SQuAD) and evaluate
the ability of question-answering systems to generalize to new data. Our first test set is from the
original Wikipedia domain and measures the extent to which existing systems overfit the original
test set. Despite several years of heavy test set
re-use, we find no evidence of adaptive overfitting.
The remaining three test sets are constructed from
New York Times articles, Reddit posts, and Amazon product reviews and measure robustness to
natural distribution shifts. Across a broad range
of models, we observe average performance drops
of 3.8, 14.0, and 17.4 F1 points, respectively. In
contrast, a strong human baseline matches or exceeds the performance of SQuAD models on the
original domain and exhibits little to no drop in
new domains. Taken together, our results confirm
the surprising resilience of the holdout method
and emphasize the need to move towards evaluation metrics that incorporate robustness to natural
distribution shifts.

1. Introduction
Since its release in 2016, the Stanford Question Answering Dataset (SQuAD) (Rajpurkar et al., 2016) has generated intense interest from the natural language processing
community. At first glance, this intense interest has lead to
impressive results. The best performing models in 2020 (Devlin et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019) have F1 scores more than
40 points higher than the baseline presented by Rajpurkar
et al. (2016). At the same time, it remains unclear to what
extent progress on these benchmark numbers is a reliable
indicator of progress more broadly.
The goal of building question answering systems is not
1

Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Berkeley, Berkeley, California, USA. Correspondence to: John
Miller <miller john@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

merely to obtain high scores on the SQuAD leaderboard, but
rather to generalize to new examples beyond the SQuAD test
set. However, the competition format of SQuAD puts pressure on the validity of leaderboard scores. It is well-known
that repeatedly evaluating models on a held-out test set can
give overly optimistic estimates of model performance, a
phenomenon known as adaptive overfitting (Dwork et al.,
2015). Moreover, the standard SQuAD evaluation only measures model performance on new examples from a single
distribution, i.e., paragraphs derived from Wikipedia articles. Nevertheless, we often use models in settings different
from the one in which they were trained. While Jia & Liang
(2017) demonstrated that SQuAD models are not robust to
adversarial distribution shifts, one might still hope that the
models are more robust to natural distribution shifts, for
instance changing from Wikipedia to newspaper articles.
This state of affairs raises two important questions:
Are SQuAD models overfit to the SQuAD test set?
Are SQuAD models robust to natural distribution shifts?
In this work, we address both questions by replicating the
SQuAD dataset creation process and generating four new
SQuAD test sets on both the original Wikipedia domain, as
well as three new domains: New York Times articles, Reddit
posts, and Amazon product reviews.
We first show that there is no evidence of adaptive overfitting
on SQuAD. Across a large collection of SQuAD models,
there is little to no difference between the F1 scores from
the original SQuAD test set and our replication. This even
holds when comparing scores from the SQuAD development set (which was publicly released with answers) to our
new test set. The lack of adaptive overfitting is consistent
with recent replication studies in the context of image classification (Recht et al., 2019; Yadav & Bottou, 2019). These
studies leave open the possibility that this phenomenon is
specific to the data or models typical in computer vision
research. Our result demonstrates this same phenomenon
also holds for natural language processing.
Beyond adaptive overfitting, we also demonstrate that
SQuAD models exhibit robustness to some of our natural
distribution shifts, though they still suffer substantial performance degradation on others. On the New York Times
dataset, models in our testbed on average drop 3.8 F1 points.

