Deep Molecular Programming:
A Natural Implementation of Binary-Weight ReLU Neural Networks

Marko Vasic 1 Cameron Chalk 1 Sarfraz Khurshid 1 David Soloveichik 1

Abstract
Embedding computation in molecular contexts
incompatible with traditional electronics is expected to have wide ranging impact in synthetic
biology, medicine, nanofabrication and other
fields. A key remaining challenge lies in developing programming paradigms for molecular
computation that are well-aligned with the underlying chemical hardware and do not attempt
to shoehorn ill-fitting electronics paradigms. We
discover a surprisingly tight connection between
a popular class of neural networks (binaryweight ReLU aka BinaryConnect) and a class
of coupled chemical reactions that are absolutely
robust to reaction rates. The robustness of rateindependent chemical computation makes it a
promising target for bioengineering implementation. We show how a BinaryConnect neural network trained in silico using well-founded
deep learning optimization techniques, can be
compiled to an equivalent chemical reaction network, providing a novel molecular programming
paradigm. We illustrate such translation on the
paradigmatic IRIS and MNIST datasets. Toward
intended applications of chemical computation,
we further use our method to generate a chemical
reaction network that can discriminate between
different virus types based on gene expression
levels. Our work sets the stage for rich knowledge transfer between neural network and molecular programming communities.

1. Introduction
Although molecular computation cannot compete with
electronics based on speed, the goal is to enable computation in contexts where traditional electronics cannot go.
1
The University of Texas at Austin, USA. Correspondence to:
Marko Vasic <vasic@utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Chemical control modules compatible with the chemical
environments within natural or synthetic cells, bioreactors,
and in-the-field diagnostics, are all envisioned applications
for such technology. Such computation could, for example,
recognize disease state based on chemical inputs and actuate drug delivery to the affected cell. The extensive information processing that occurs in natural cellular regulatory
networks underlying all complex life, is a strong proof-ofprinciple that chemical computation is possible and useful.
Networks of coupled chemical reactions (chemical reaction
networks, CRNs) are known to be Turing universal (Fages
et al., 2017; Soloveichik et al., 2008), but the resulting systematic ways of programming their behavior can result in
extremely large reaction networks and exceedingly inefficient computation. Reasoning in chemical reaction space
is difficult: even a very small CRN can be hard to analyze. Thus, there were many previous attempts to build
intuitive, yet more efficient programming approaches for
CRNs. For example, (Senum & Riedel, 2011) describe
a number of computational modules including arithmetic
modules and control flow. Another example is CRN++ (Vasic et al., 2018), an imperative programming language that
compiles to CRNs. Here, we present a different programming paradigm, one that allows translation of neural networks into chemical reactions. In a similar way that writing an image classifier in an imperative language is prohibitively complex, writing a classifier in a molecular programming language such as CRN++ is practically impossible. However, the technique of programming using neural
networks opens doors for such applications in the molecular programming community.
We focus on a class of neural networks called binaryweight ReLU neural networks. These networks have binarized weights {+1, −1}, and were originally popularized
due to their computational efficiency in electronics hardware (Courbariaux et al., 2015). We show that binaryweight ReLU networks have a tight correspondence to a
class of rate-independent CRNs (Chen et al., 2014a;b). In
rate-independent CRNs, computation arises solely from the
stoichiometric exchange of reactants for products and the
equilibrium is independent of reaction rates. The absolute
robustness to reaction rates makes rate-independent CRNs

