Random Matrix Theory Proves that Deep Learning Representations of
GAN-data Behave as Gaussian Mixtures
Mohamed El Amine Seddik 1 2 Cosme Louart 1 3 Mohamed Tamaazousti 1 Romain Couillet 2 3

Abstract
This paper shows that deep learning (DL) representations of data produced by generative adversarial nets (GANs) are random vectors which
fall within the class of so-called concentrated
random vectors. Further exploiting the fact that
Gram matrices, of the type G = X | X with
X = [x1 , . . . , xn ] ∈ Rp×n and xi independent concentrated random vectors from a mixture
model, behave asymptotically (as n, p → ∞) as
if the xi were drawn from a Gaussian mixture,
suggests that DL representations of GAN-data
can be fully described by their first two statistical
moments for a wide range of standard classifiers.
Our theoretical findings are validated by generating images with the BigGAN model and across
different popular deep representation networks.

1. Introduction
The performance of machine learning methods depends
strongly on the choice of the data representation (or features) on which they are applied. This data representation
should ideally contain relevant information about the learning task in order to achieve learning with simple models and
small amount of samples. Deep neural networks (Rumelhart
et al., 1988) have particularly shown impressive results by
automatically learning representations from raw data (e.g.,
images). However, due to the complex structure of deep
learning models, the characterization of their hidden representations is still an open problem (Bengio et al., 2009).
Specifically, quantifying what makes a given deep learning
representation better than another is a fundamental question
in the field of Representation Learning (Bengio et al., 2013).
Relying on (Montavon et al., 2011) a data representation is
said to be good when it is possible to build simple models
1

CEA List, Palaiseau, France 2 Centralesupélec, Gif-sur-Yvette,
France 3 University Grenoble-Alpes, Grenoble, France. Correspondence to: MEA.Seddik <mohamedelamine.seddik@cea.fr>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

on top of it that are accurate for the given learning problem.
(Montavon et al., 2011) have notably quantified the layerwise evolution of the representation in deep networks by
computing the principal components of the Gram matrix
G` = {φ` (xi )| φ` (xj )}ni,j=1 at each layer for n input data
x1 , . . . , xn , where φ` (x) is the representation of x at layer
` of the given DL model, and the number of components
controls the model simplicity. In their study, the impact of
the representation at each layer is quantified through the
prediction error of a linear predictor trained on the principal
subspace of G` .
Pursuing on this idea, given a certain representation model
x 7→ φ(x), we aim in this article at theoretically studying the large dimensional behavior, and in particular
the spectral information (i.e., eigenvalues and dominant
eigenvectors), of the corresponding Gram matrix G =
{φ(xi )| φ(xj )}ni,j=1 in order to determine the information
encoded (i.e., the sufficient statistics) by the representation
model on a set of real data x1 , . . . , xn . Indeed, standard
classification and regression algorithms –along with the last
layer of a neural network (Yeh et al., 2018)– retrieve the
data information directly from functionals or the eigenspectrum of G1 . To this end, though, one needs a statistical
model for the representations given the distribution of the
raw data (e.g., images) which is generally unknown. Yet,
due to recent advances in generative models since the advent
of Generative Adversarial Nets (Goodfellow et al., 2014), it
is now possible to generate complex data structures by applying successive Lipschitz operations to Gaussian random
vectors. In particular, GAN-data are used in practice as substitutes of real data for data augmentation (Antoniou et al.,
2017). On the other hand, the fundamental concentration of
measure phenomenon (Ledoux, 2005) tells us that Lipschitzally transformed Gaussian vectors satisfy a concentration
property. Precisely, defining the class of concentrated vectors x ∈ E through concentration inequalities of f (x), for
any real Lipschitz observation f : E → R, implies that
deep learning representations of GAN-data fall within this
class of random vectors, since the mapping x 7→ φ(x) is
Lipschitz. Thus, GAN-data are concentrated random vec1
For instance, spectral clustering uses the dominant eigenvectors of G, while support vector machines use functionals (quadratic
forms) involving G.

