Stabilizing Transformers for Reinforcement Learning

Emilio Parisotto 1 H. Francis Song 2 Jack W. Rae 2 Razvan Pascanu 2 Caglar Gulcehre 2
Siddhant M. Jayakumar 2 Max Jaderberg 2 Raphaël Lopez Kaufman 2 Aidan Clark 2 Seb Noury 2
Matthew M. Botvinick 2 Nicolas Heess 2 Raia Hadsell 2

Abstract
Owing to their ability to both effectively integrate
information over long time horizons and scale to
massive amounts of data, self-attention architectures have recently shown breakthrough success
in natural language processing (NLP). Harnessing the transformer’s ability to process long time
horizons of information could provide a similar
performance boost in partially observable reinforcement learning (RL) domains, but the largescale transformers used in NLP have yet to be successfully applied to the RL setting. In this work
we demonstrate that the standard transformer architecture is difficult to optimize, which was previously observed in the supervised learning setting but becomes especially pronounced with RL
objectives. We propose architectural modifications that substantially improve the stability and
learning speed of the original Transformer and
XL variant. The proposed architecture, the Gated
Transformer-XL (GTrXL), surpasses LSTMs on
challenging memory environments and achieves
state-of-the-art results on the multi-task DMLab30 benchmark suite, exceeding the performance
of an external memory architecture. We show that
the GTrXL has stability and performance that consistently matches or exceeds a competitive LSTM
baseline, including on more reactive tasks where
memory is less critical.

Figure 1. Transformer variants, showing just a single layer block
(there are L layers total). Left: Canonical Transformer(-XL) block
with multi-head attention and position-wise MLP submodules and
the standard layer normalization (Ba et al., 2016) placement with
respect to the residual connection (He et al., 2016a). Center:
TrXL-I moves the layer normalization to the input stream of the
submodules. Coupled with the residual connections, there is a
gradient path that flows from output to input without any transformations. Right: The GTrXL block, which additionally adds a
gating layer in place of the residual connection of the TrXL-I.

Department of Machine Learning, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, USA 2 Google DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to: Emilio Parisotto <eparisot@cs.cmu.edu>.

state and they do not suffer from vanishing or exploding
gradients in the same way as RNNs. Recent work has empirically validated these claims, demonstrating that selfattention architectures can provide significant gains in performance over the more traditional recurrent architectures
such as the LSTM (Dai et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2019; Devlin et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019). In particular, the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) has had breakthrough success in a wide variety of domains: language
modeling (Dai et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2019; Yang et al.,
2019), machine translation (Vaswani et al., 2017; Edunov
et al., 2018), summarization (Liu & Lapata, 2019), question
answering (Dehghani et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2019), multitask representation learning for NLP (Devlin et al., 2019;
Radford et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019), and algorithmic
tasks (Dehghani et al., 2018).

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

The repeated success of the transformer architecture in domains where sequential information processing is critical to
performance makes it an ideal candidate for partially observ-

1. Introduction
It has been argued that self-attention architectures (Vaswani
et al., 2017) deal better with longer temporal horizons than
recurrent neural networks (RNNs): by construction, they
avoid compressing the whole past into a fixed-size hidden
1

