On the Convergence of Nesterov’s Accelerated Gradient Method
in Stochastic Settings
Mahmoud Assran 1 2 3 Michael Rabbat 2 3

Abstract

However, the theoretical understanding of accelerated methods remains limited when used with stochastic gradients.

We study Nesterov’s accelerated gradient method
with constant step-size and momentum parameters in the stochastic approximation setting (unbiased gradients with bounded variance) and the
finite-sum setting (where randomness is due to
sampling mini-batches). To build better insight
into the behavior of Nesterov’s method in stochastic settings, we focus throughout on objectives
that are smooth, strongly-convex, and twice continuously differentiable. In the stochastic approximation setting, Nesterov’s method converges to
a neighborhood of the optimal point at the same
accelerated rate as in the deterministic setting.
Perhaps surprisingly, in the finite-sum setting,
we prove that Nesterov’s method may diverge
with the usual choice of step-size and momentum, unless additional conditions on the problem
related to conditioning and data coherence are
satisfied. Our results shed light as to why Nesterov’s method may fail to converge or achieve
acceleration in the finite-sum setting.

This paper studies the accelerated gradient (AG) method
of Nesterov (1983) with constant step-size and momentum
parameters. Given an initial point x0 , and with x−1 = x0 ,
the AG method repeats, for k ≥ 0,

where α and β are the step-size and momentum parameters, respectively, and in the deterministic setting, gk+1 =
∇f (yk+1 ). When the momentum parameter β is 0, AG simplifies to standard gradient descent (GD). When β > 0 it
is possible to achieve accelerated rates of convergence for
certain combinations of α and β in the deterministic setting.
1.1. Previous Work with Deterministic Gradients
Suppose that the objective function in (1) is L-smooth and µstrongly-convex. Then f is minimized at a unique point x? ,
and we denote its minimum by f ? = f (x? ). Let Q := L/µ
denote the condition number of f . In the deterministic
setting, where gk = ∇f (yk ) for all k, GD with constant
step-size α = 2/(L+µ) converges at the rate (Polyak, 1987)

First-order stochastic methods have become the workhorse
of machine learning, where many tasks can be cast as optimization problems,
x∈Rd

(3)

xk+1 = yk+1 − αgk+1 ,

1. Introduction

minimize f (x).

(2)

yk+1 = xk + β(xk − xk−1 )

(1)

Methods incorporating momentum and acceleration play
an important role in the current practice of machine learning (Sutskever et al., 2013; Bottou et al., 2018), where they
are commonly used in conjunction with stochastic gradients.
1

Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, McGill
University, Montreal, QC, Canada 2 Facebook AI Research, Montreal, QC, Canada 3 Mila – Quebec Artificial Intelligence Institute,
Montreal, QC, Canada. Correspondence to: Mahmoud Assran
<massran@fb.com>, Michael Rabbat <mikerabbat@fb.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

L
f (xk ) − f ≤
2
?



Q−1
Q+1

2k

2

kx0 − x? k .

(4)

The AG method with √
constant step-size α = 1/L and momentum parameter β = √Q−1
converges at the rate (Nesterov,
Q+1
2004)
f (xk ) − f ? ≤ L

√

Q−1
√
Q

k

2

kx0 − x? k .

(5)

The rate in (5) matches (up to constants) the tightest-known
worst-case lower bound achievable by any first-order blackbox method for µ-strongly-convex and L-smooth objectives:
µ
f (xk ) − f ≥
2
?

√
2k
Q−1
2
√
kx0 − x? k .
Q+1

(6)

The lower bound (6) is proved in Nesterov (2004) in the
infinite dimensional setting under the assumption Q > 1.

