Fast and Three-rious: Speeding Up Weak Supervision with Triplet Methods

Daniel Y. Fu * 1 Mayee F. Chen * 1 Frederic Sala 1 Sarah M. Hooper 2 Kayvon Fatahalian 1 Christopher Ré 1

Abstract
Weak supervision is a popular method for building machine learning models without relying on
ground truth annotations. Instead, it generates
probabilistic training labels by estimating the accuracies of multiple noisy labeling sources (e.g.,
heuristics, crowd workers). Existing approaches
use latent variable estimation to model the noisy
sources, but these methods can be computationally expensive, scaling superlinearly in the data.
In this work, we show that, for a class of latent
variable models highly applicable to weak supervision, we can find a closed-form solution to model
parameters, obviating the need for iterative solutions like stochastic gradient descent (SGD). We
use this insight to build F LYING S QUID, a weak
supervision framework that runs orders of magnitude faster than previous weak supervision approaches and requires fewer assumptions. In particular, we prove bounds on generalization error
without assuming that the latent variable model
can exactly parameterize the underlying data distribution. Empirically, we validate F LYING S QUID
on benchmark weak supervision datasets and find
that it achieves the same or higher quality compared to previous approaches without the need to
tune an SGD procedure, recovers model parameters 170 times faster on average, and enables new
video analysis and online learning applications.

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning systems require large amounts
of labeled training data to be successful. Weak supervision
is a class of popular methods for building models without
resorting to manually labeling training data (Dehghani et al.,
2017b;a; Jia et al., 2017; Mahajan et al., 2018; Niu et al.,
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Stanford University 2 Department of Electrical Engineering,
Stanford University.
Correspondence to: Daniel Y. Fu
<danfu@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

2012); it drives applications used by billions of people every
day, ranging from Gmail (Sheng et al., 2020) to AI products at Apple (Ré et al., 2020) and search products (Bach
et al., 2019). These approaches use noisy sources, such as
heuristics, crowd workers, external knowledge bases, and
user-defined functions (Gupta & Manning, 2014; Ratner
et al., 2019; Karger et al., 2011; Dawid & Skene, 1979;
Mintz et al., 2009; Zhang et al., 2017; Hearst, 1992) to
generate probabilistic training labels without hand-labeling.
The major technical challenge in weak supervision is to
efficiently estimate the accuracies of—and potentially the
correlations among—the noisy sources without any labeled
data (Guan et al., 2018; Takamatsu et al., 2012; Xiao et al.,
2015; Ratner et al., 2018). Standard approaches to this problem, from classical crowdsourcing to more recent methods,
use latent variable probabilistic graphical models (PGMs)
to model the primary sources of signal—the agreements
and disagreements between sources, along with known or
estimated source independencies (Dawid & Skene, 1979;
Karger et al., 2011; Ratner et al., 2016).
However, latent variable estimation is challenging, and the
techniques are often sample- and computationally-complex.
For example, Bach et al. (2019) required multiple iterations
of a Gibbs-based algorithm, and Ratner et al. (2019) required estimating the full inverse covariance matrix among
the sources, while Sala et al. (2019) and Zhan et al. (2019)
required the use of multiple iterations of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) to learn accuracy parameters. These
limitations make it difficult to use weak supervision in applications that require modeling complex temporal or spatial dependencies, such as video and image analysis, or in
streaming applications that have strict latency requirements.
In contrast, our solution is motivated by a key observation:
that by breaking the problem into minimal subproblems—
solving parameters for triplets of sources at a time, similar
to Joglekar et al. (2013) and Chaganty & Liang (2014)—we
can reduce parameter estimation into solving systems of
equations that have simple, closed-form solutions.
Concretely, we show that, for a class of binary Ising models, we can reduce the problem of accuracy and correlation
estimation to solving a set of systems of equations whose
size is linear in the number of sources. These systems admit a closed-form solution, so we can estimate the model

