Inter-domain Deep Gaussian Processes
Tim G. J. Rudner 1 Dino Sejdinovic 2 Yarin Gal 1

Abstract
Inter-domain Gaussian processes (GPs) allow for
high flexibility and low computational cost when
performing approximate inference in GP models. They are particularly suitable for modeling
data exhibiting global structure but are limited to
stationary covariance functions and thus fail to
model non-stationary data effectively. We propose Inter-domain Deep Gaussian Processes, an
extension of inter-domain shallow GPs that combines the advantages of inter-domain and deep
Gaussian processes (DGPs), and demonstrate how
to leverage existing approximate inference methods to perform simple and scalable approximate
inference using inter-domain features in DGPs.
We assess the performance of our method on a
range of regression tasks and demonstrate that it
outperforms inter-domain shallow GPs and conventional DGPs on challenging large-scale realworld datasets exhibiting both global structure as
well as a high-degree of non-stationarity.

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes (GPs) are a powerful tool for function approximation. They are Bayesian non-parametric models and
as such they are flexible, robust to overfitting, and provide
well-calibrated predictive uncertainty estimates (Rasmussen
& Williams, 2005; Bui et al., 2016). Deep Gaussian processes (DGPs) are layer-wise compositions of GPs designed
to model a larger class of functions than shallow GPs.
To scale GP and DGP models to large datasets, a wide array
of approximate inference methods has been developed, with
inducing points-based variational inference being the most
widely used (Snelson & Ghahramani, 2006; Titsias, 2009;
Wilson & Nickisch, 2015). However, conventional inducing
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom 2 Department of Statistics, University of
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Tim G. J.
Rudner <tim.rudner@cs.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

points-based inference for GPs relies on point evaluations
and thus, by construction, creates local approximations to
the target function. As a result, the approximate posterior
predictive distribution may fail to capture complex global
structure in the data, severely limiting the usefulness and
computational efficiency of local inducing points-based approximations.
Inter-domain GPs were designed to overcome this limitation. In order to capture global structure in the underlying
data-generating process, inter-domain GPs define inducing
variables as projections of the target function over the entire input space and not as mere point evaluations (LázaroGredilla & Figueiras-Vidal, 2009; Rahimi & Recht, 2008;
Gal & Turner, 2015). The resulting posterior predictive
distribution is able to represent complex data with global
structure with higher accuracy as local approximations but
at the same computational cost. Unfortunately, inter-domain
projections most suitable for capturing global structure (e.g.,
spectral transforms) are limited by the fact that they can only
be used with stationary covariance functions, making them
ill-suited for modeling non-stationary data and limiting their
usefulness in practice.
We propose Inter-domain Deep Gaussian Processes to overcome this limitation while retaining the benefits of interdomain methods.1 Specifically, we define an augmented
DGP model, in which we replace local inducing variables by
reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) Fourier features,
and exploit the compositional structure of the variational
distribution in doubly stochastic variational inference (DSVI)
for DGPs. This way, we achieve simple and scalable approximate inference while efficiently capturing global structure
in the underlying data-generating process. The resulting
inter-domain DGP is composed of a composition of interdomain GPs, which makes it possible to efficiently model
complex, non-stationary data despite each inter-domain GP
in the hierarchy being restricted to stationary covariance
functions.
We establish that our method performs well on several complex real-world datasets exhibiting global structure and nonstationarity and demonstrate that inter-domain DGPs are
more computationally efficient than DGPs with local approx1
For source code and additional results, see https://
bit.ly/inter-domain-dgps.

