Retro*: Learning Retrosynthetic Planning with Neural Guided A* Search

Binghong Chen 1 Chengtao Li 2 Hanjun Dai 3 Le Song 1 4

Abstract
Retrosynthetic planning is a critical task in organic chemistry which identifies a series of reactions that can lead to the synthesis of a target
product. The vast number of possible chemical
transformations makes the size of the search space
very big, and retrosynthetic planning is challenging even for experienced chemists. However, existing methods either require expensive return estimation by rollout with high variance, or optimize
for search speed rather than the quality. In this
paper, we propose Retro*, a neural-based A*-like
algorithm that finds high-quality synthetic routes
efficiently. It maintains the search as an ANDOR tree, and learns a neural search bias with offpolicy data. Then guided by this neural network,
it performs best-first search efficiently during new
planning episodes. Experiments on benchmark
USPTO datasets show that, our proposed method
outperforms existing state-of-the-art with respect
to both the success rate and solution quality, while
being more efficient at the same time.

1. Introduction
Retrosynthetic planning is one of the fundamental problems
in organic chemistry. Given a target product, the goal of
retrosynthesis is to identify a series of reactions that can lead
to the synthesis of the product, by searching backwards and
iteratively applying chemical transformations to unavailable
molecules. As thousands of theoretically-possible transformations can all be applied during each step of reactions,
the search space of planning will be huge and makes the
problem challenging even for experienced chemists.
The one-step retrosynthesis prediction, which predicts a list
of possible direct reactants given product, serves as the foundation for realizing the multistep retrosynthetic planning.
1

College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
Galixir 3 Google Research, Brain Team 4 Ant Financial. Correspondence to: Binghong Chen <binghong@gatech.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Existing methods roughly fall into two categories, either
template-based or template-free. Each chemical reaction is
associated with a reaction template that encodes how atoms
and bonds change during the reaction. Given a target product, template-based methods predict the possible reaction
templates, and subsequently apply the predicted reaction
templates to target molecule to get corresponding reactants.
Existing methods include retrosim (Coley et al., 2017), neuralsym (Segler & Waller, 2017) and GLN (Dai et al., 2019).
Though conceptually straightforward, template-based methods need to deal with tens or even hundreds of thousands of
possible reaction templates, making the classification task
hard. Besides, templates are not always available for chemical reactions. Due to these reasons, people have also been
developing template-free methods that could directly predict
reactants. Most of existing methods employ seq2seq models
like LSTM (Liu et al., 2017) or Transformer (Karpov et al.,
2019) from neural machine translation literature.
While one-step methods are continuously being improved,
most molecules in real world cannot be synthesized within
one step. Possible number of synthesis steps could go up to
60 or even more. Since each molecule could be synthesized
by hundreds of different possible reactants, the possible
synthesis routes becomes countless for a single product.
Such huge space poses challenges for efficient searching
and planning, even with advanced one-step approaches.
Besides the huge search space, another challenge is the ambiguity in performance measure and benchmarking. It has
been extremely hard to quantitatively analyze the performance of any multi-step retrosynthesis algorithms due to
the ambiguous definition of ‘good synthesis routes’, nor
are there any benchmark datasets for analyzing designed
algorithms. Most common ways for quantitative analysis
is to employ domain experts and let them judge if one synthesis route is better than the other based solely on their
experiences, which is both time-consuming and costly.
Due to aforementioned challenges, there are less work proposed in the field of multi-step retrosynthetic planning. Previous works using Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) (Segler
et al., 2018; 2017) have achieved superior results over neuralor heuristic-based Breadth First Search (BFS). However,
MCTS-based methods has several limitations in this setting:
• Each tree node corresponds to a set of molecules instead

