Improving Molecular Design by Stochastic Iterative Target Augmentation

Kevin Yang 1 Wengong Jin 2 Kyle Swanson 3 Regina Barzilay 2 Tommi Jaakkola 2

Abstract
Generative models in molecular design tend to be
richly parameterized, data-hungry neural models,
as they must create complex structured objects as
outputs. Estimating such models from data may
be challenging due to the lack of sufficient training data. In this paper, we propose a surprisingly
effective self-training approach for iteratively creating additional molecular targets. We first pretrain the generative model together with a simple
property predictor. The property predictor is then
used as a likelihood model for filtering candidate
structures from the generative model. Additional
targets are iteratively produced and used in the
course of stochastic EM iterations to maximize
the log-likelihood that the candidate structures
are accepted. A simple rejection (re-weighting)
sampler suffices to draw posterior samples since
the generative model is already reasonable after
pre-training. We demonstrate significant gains
over strong baselines for both unconditional and
conditional molecular design. In particular, our
approach outperforms the previous state-of-theart in conditional molecular design by over 10%
in absolute gain. Finally, we show that our approach is useful in other domains as well, such as
program synthesis.

1. Introduction
The goal of molecular generation is to create molecules
with the desired property profile. This task is a key component of pharmaceutical drug discovery, and has received
intense attention in recent years, yielding a wide range of
proposed architectures (You et al., 2018; Olivecrona et al.,
2017; Popova et al., 2018; Jin et al., 2019a). A common
feature of these architectures is reliance on a large number
of parameters to generate molecules, which are represented
1
UC Berkeley 2 MIT 3 University of Cambridge. Correspondence to: Kevin Yang <yangk@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

as complex graph-structured objects. As a result, these models require copious amounts of training data, consisting of
molecules with their target properties. Collecting such property data is often slow and expensive due to the required
empirical measurements.
Our challenge is to achieve high-quality molecular generation in data-sparse regimes. While semi-supervised methods
for representation learning have demonstrated significant
benefits in natural language processing and computer vision (Edunov et al., 2018; Lee, 2013), they are relatively
under-explored in chemistry. In this paper, we propose a
simple and surprisingly effective self-training approach for
iteratively creating additional molecular targets. This approach can be broadly applied to any generative architecture,
without any modifications.
Our stochastic iterative target augmentation approach,
shown in Figure 2, builds on the idea that it is easier to
evaluate the properties of candidate molecules than to generate those molecules. Thus a learned property predictor can
be used to effectively guide the generation process. To realize this idea, our method starts by pre-training the generative
model on a small supervised dataset along with the property
predictor. The property predictor then serves as a likelihood
model for filtering candidate molecules from the generative model. Candidate generations that pass this filtering
become part of the training data for the next training epoch.
Theoretically, this procedure can be viewed as one iteration
of stochastic EM, maximizing the log-likelihood that the
candidate structures are accepted. As the generative model
already produces reasonable samples after pre-training, a
simple rejection (re-weighting) sampler suffices to draw posterior samples. For this reason, it is helpful to apply the filter
at test time as well, or to use the approach transductively1
to further adapt the generation process to novel test cases.
The approach is reminiscent of self-training or reranking
approaches employed with some success for parsing (McClosky et al., 2006; Charniak et al., 2016). However, in
our case, it is the candidate generator that is complex while
the filter is relatively simple and remains fixed during the
iterative process.
We demonstrate that our target augmentation algorithm is
1
Allowing the model to access test set inputs (but not targets)
during training.

