Involutive MCMC: a Unifying Framework

Kirill Neklyudov 1 2 Max Welling 3 4 Evgenii Egorov 5 Dmitry Vetrov 1 2

Abstract
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) is a computational approach to fundamental problems such
as inference, integration, optimization, and simulation. The field has developed a broad spectrum
of algorithms, varying in the way they are motivated, the way they are applied and how efficiently
they sample. Despite all the differences, many of
them share the same core principle, which we
unify as the Involutive MCMC (iMCMC) framework. Building upon this, we describe a wide
range of MCMC algorithms in terms of iMCMC,
and formulate a number of “tricks” which one
can use as design principles for developing new
MCMC algorithms. Thus, iMCMC provides a
unified view of many known MCMC algorithms,
which facilitates the derivation of powerful extensions. We demonstrate the latter with two
examples where we transform known reversible
MCMC algorithms into more efficient irreversible
ones.

1. Introduction
Machine learning algorithms with stochastic latent variables or parameters (a.k.a. Bayesian models) require often
intractable posterior inference over these unobserved random variables. The most popular approach these days are
variational approximations where possibly complex and/or
amortized posterior distributions are optimized and used
for inference: e.g. q(z|x) for latent variables or q(θ) for
parameters. However, these distributions are usually biased
and may not be easy to optimize.
A completely different class of algorithms is given by
MCMC algorithms. Here we design a stochastic process
1

Samsung AI Center Moscow 2 Samsung-HSE Laboratory,
National Research University Higher School of Economics
3
University of Amsterdam 4 Canadian Institute for Advanced Research 5 Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology. Correspondence to: Kirill Neklyudov <k.necludov@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Name & Citation
Metropolis-Hastings (Hastings, 1970)
Mixture Proposal (Habib & Barber, 2018)
Multiple-Try Metropolis (Liu et al., 2000)
Sample-Adaptive MCMC (Zhu, 2019)
Reversible-Jump MCMC (Green, 1995)
Hybrid Monte Carlo (Duane et al., 1987)
RMHMC (Girolami & Calderhead, 2011)
NeuTra (Hoffman et al., 2019)
A-NICE-MC (Song et al., 2017)
L2HMC (Levy et al., 2017)
Persistent HMC (Horowitz, 1991)
Gibbs (Geman & Geman, 1984)
Look Ahead (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2014)
NRJ (Gagnon & Doucet, 2019)
Lifted MH (Turitsyn et al., 2011)

Appendix
B.1
B.2
B.3
B.4
B.5
B.6
B.7
B.8
B.9
B.10
B.11
B.12
B.13
B.14
B.15

Table 1: List of algorithms that we describe by the Involutive
MCMC framework. See their descriptions and formulations
in terms of iMCMC in corresponding appendices.
that eventually samples from the correct (i.e. target) distribution. This has the advantage that we are guaranteed to
obtain unbiased samples at the cost of possibly slow mixing and long burn-in times. There is a huge literature on
MCMC algorithms across many different scientific fields
such as statistics, bio-informatics, physics, chemistry, machine learning etc.
More recently, researchers have started to design MCMC
kernels by using learnable components, in particular flows
which are also often used in variational approaches (Song
et al., 2017; Hoffman et al., 2019). We anticipate these
hybrid approaches will become an important family of inference methods for approximate inference.
In this paper we provide a unifying framework for MCMC
algorithms, including the hybrid approaches mentioned
above. We call this Involutive MCMC (iMCMC). We provide an overview of many existing MCMC methods reformulated as iMCMC algorithms. See table 1 for the list. The
power of our framework is the ease with which one can
now start to combine and improve these algorithms using a
number of “tricks” that we discuss extensively. We provide
two examples for how this generalization might work in
the experiments section. We hope our work might spur the

