Learning Compound Tasks without Task-speciﬁc Knowledge via
Imitation and Self-supervised Learning

Sang-Hyun Lee 1 2 Seung-Woo Seo 2

Abstract
Most real-world tasks are compound tasks that
consist of multiple simpler sub-tasks. The main
challenge of learning compound tasks is that we
have no explicit supervision to learn the hierarchical structure of compound tasks. To address
this challenge, previous imitation learning methods exploit task-speciﬁc knowledge, e.g., labeling
demonstrations manually or specifying termination conditions for each sub-task. However, the
need for task-speciﬁc knowledge makes it difﬁcult to scale imitation learning to real-world tasks.
In this paper, we propose an imitation learning
method that can learn compound tasks without
task-speciﬁc knowledge. The key idea behind our
method is to leverage a self-supervised learning
framework to learn the hierarchical structure of
compound tasks. Our work also proposes a taskagnostic regularization technique to prevent unstable switching between sub-tasks, which has been
a common degenerate case in previous works.
We evaluate our method against several baselines
on compound tasks. The results show that our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance on
compound tasks, outperforming prior imitation
learning methods.

1. Introduction
Learning from demonstration (LfD) has been widely researched for decades, which has led to remarkable achievements (Ziebart et al., 2008; Wulfmeier et al., 2016; Finn
et al., 2016; Ho & Ermon, 2016). However, we still cannot apply existing LfD algorithms to learn real-world tasks.
One of the main reasons is that most real-world tasks are
compound tasks that consist of a set of simpler sub-tasks.
1

ThorDrive, Seoul, South Korea 2 Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, South
Korea. Correspondence to: Sang-Hyun Lee <slee01@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Compound Task
Continuous Latent Variable

sub-task3

sub-task2

sub-task1

sub-task1

1

T

𝑎&

𝑠&

Policy

𝜋 𝑎& 𝑠&, 𝑐& )

𝑐&()
Task Transition Model

𝑇(𝑐&|𝑐&(), 𝑠&)

𝑐)

𝑆 )"

𝑐"
𝑐#

𝑐&

Agent

𝑐"

𝑐)
𝑆 )#
𝑆 #"

𝑆 #)

𝑐#

𝑐&

Figure 1. Overview of proposed method. Our work introduces the
task transition model, which describes the hierarchical structure of
compound tasks. The policies for each sub-task take the current
sub-task as additional input where sub-tasks are encoded as continuous latent variables. S ij represents a set of states relevant to
the transition from sub-task ci to sub-task cj .

Compound tasks require an agent to learn their hierarchical structure and policies for each sub-task, but standard
LfD algorithms cannot infer their hierarchical structure. To
understand the hierarchical structure of compound tasks,
we should identify sub-tasks and learn the relationships
between them.
The main challenge of learning compound tasks is that we
have no explicit supervisory signals to learn their hierarchical structure. Previous works have tried to overcome the
challenge by leveraging task-speciﬁc knowledge in a variety
of ways. One traditional approach is to manually label or
segment demonstrations into sub-tasks (Manschitz et al.,
2015; Li et al., 2017). However, this approach requires laborious and time-consuming processes, as raw demonstrations
are unlabeled and unsegmented. Although several recent
works have introduced approaches that allow compound
tasks to be learned with weak supervision, e.g., desired subtask orders or the total number of sub-tasks (Fox et al., 2017;

