Population-Based Black-Box Optimization for Biological Sequence Design

Christof Angermueller 1 David Belanger 1 Andreea Gane 1 Zelda Mariet 1 David Dohan 1 Kevin Murphy 1
Lucy Colwell 1 2 D Sculley 1

Abstract
The use of black-box optimization for the design
of new biological sequences is an emerging research area with potentially revolutionary impact.
The cost and latency of wet-lab experiments requires methods that find good sequences in few
experimental rounds of large batches of sequences
— a setting that off-the-shelf black-box optimization methods are ill-equipped to handle. We find
that the performance of existing methods varies
drastically across optimization tasks, posing a significant obstacle to real-world applications. To improve robustness, we propose Population-Based
Black-Box Optimization (P3BO), which generates batches of sequences by sampling from an
ensemble of methods. The number of sequences
sampled from any method is proportional to the
quality of sequences it previously proposed, allowing P3BO to combine the strengths of individual
methods while hedging against their innate brittleness. Adapting the hyper-parameters of each
of the methods online using evolutionary optimization further improves performance. Through
extensive experiments on in-silico optimization
tasks, we show that P3BO outperforms any single
method in its population, proposing higher quality
sequences as well as more diverse batches. As
such, P3BO and Adaptive-P3BO are a crucial step
towards deploying ML to real-world sequence design.

1. Introduction
The ability to design new protein or DNA sequences with desired properties would revolutionize drug discovery, healthcare, and agriculture. However, this is a particularly challenging optimization problem: the space of sequences is
discrete and exponentially large; evaluating the fitness of
1
Google Research 2 University of Cambridge. Correspondence
to: Christof Angermueller <christofa@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

proposed sequences requires costly wet-lab experiments;
and not just one but a diverse set of high-quality sequences
must be discovered to improve the chance of a candidate
surviving downstream screening (e.g., for toxicity).
The problem is not insurmountable, however, due to modern experimental technology, where hundreds to thousands
of sequences can be evaluated in parallel. This forms the
basis for directed evolution, a form of human-guided local
evolutionary search (Arnold, 1998), and several ML-based
methods (Section 4). Additionally, development of ML
methods suitable to guide sequence design can be aided by
working in-silico, instead of relying on wet-lab processes
during algorithmic development.
In this paper, we introduce several in-silico design problems
upon which we evaluate such ML methods. Unfortunately,
we find that popular optimization methods are particularly
sensitive to hyper-parameter choice and can have strong
inductive biases that allow them to excel at some problems
but perform poorly on others (Figure 1). This lack of robustness is a serious concern for practical application of these
methods, which could cause wet-lab experiments to fail. We
further find that several existing methods are ill-suited to
generating diverse batches of sequences. Instead of using
the batch size efficiently, methods tend to generate very
similar sequences.
To improve robustness and sequence diversity, we introduce
Population-Based Black-box Optimization (P3BO). P3BO
draws inspiration from portfolio algorithms (Leyton-Brown
et al., 2003; Tang et al., 2014) for numerical optimization:
instead of generating a batch of sequences using a single potentially brittle algorithm, P3BO samples sequences from a
portfolio of algorithms, allocating budget to each algorithm
based on the quality of its past proposed sequences.
To our knowledge, P3BO is the first approach to leverage an
ensemble of optimizers for batched optimization, a crucial
characteristic of wet-lab optimization loops. We show that
batching offers a dimension along which ensembling yields
significant gains.
Notably, samples acquired by one algorithm are shared with
all other algorithms, allowing each of them to learn from
data acquired by all. By combining the strengths of multiple

