Closed Loop Neural-Symbolic Learning via
Integrating Neural Perception, Grammar Parsing, and Symbolic Reasoning

Qing Li 1 Siyuan Huang 1 Yining Hong 1 Yixin Chen 1 Ying Nian Wu 1 Song-Chun Zhu 1

Abstract
The goal of neural-symbolic computation is to integrate the connectionist and symbolist paradigms.
Prior methods learn the neural-symbolic models
using reinforcement learning (RL) approaches,
which ignore the error propagation in the symbolic reasoning module and thus converge slowly
with sparse rewards. In this paper, we address
these issues and close the loop of neural-symbolic
learning by (1) introducing the grammar model
as a symbolic prior to bridge neural perception
and symbolic reasoning, and (2) proposing a novel
back-search algorithm which mimics the topdown human-like learning procedure to propagate the error through the symbolic reasoning
module efficiently. We further interpret the proposed learning framework as maximum likelihood estimation using Markov chain Monte Carlo
sampling and the back-search algorithm as a
Metropolis-Hastings sampler. The experiments
are conducted on two weakly-supervised neuralsymbolic tasks: (1) handwritten formula recognition on the newly introduced HWF dataset;
(2) visual question answering on the CLEVR
dataset. The results show that our approach significantly outperforms the RL methods in terms
of performance, converging speed, and data efficiency. Our code and data are released at
https://liqing-ustc.github.io/NGS.

1. Introduction
Integrating robust connectionist learning and sound symbolic reasoning is a key challenge in modern Artificial Intelligence. Deep neural networks (LeCun et al., 2015a; 1995;
Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) provide us powerful and
flexible representation learning that has achieved state-of1
University of California, Los Angeles, USA. Correspondence
to: Qing Li <liqing@ucla.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Comparison between the original neural-symbolic model
learned by REINFORCE (NS-RL) and the proposed neuralgrammar-symbolic model learned by back-search (NGS-BS). In
NS-RL, the neural network predicts an invalid formula, causing a
failure in the symbolic reasoning module. There is no backward
pass in this example since it generates zero reward. In contrast,
NGS-BS predicts a valid formula and searches a correction for its
prediction. The neural network is updated using this correction as
the pseudo label.

the-art performances across a variety of AI tasks such as
image classification (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Szegedy et al.,
2015; He et al., 2016), machine translation (Sutskever et al.,
2014), and speech recognition (Graves et al., 2013). However, it turns out that many aspects of human cognition, such
as systematic compositionality and generalization (Fodor
et al., 1988; Marcus, 1998; Fodor & Lepore, 2002; Calvo
& Symons, 2014; Marcus, 2018; Lake & Baroni, 2018),
cannot be captured by neural networks. On the other hand,
symbolic reasoning supports strong abstraction and generalization but is fragile and inflexible. Consequently, many
methods have focused on building neural-symbolic models
to combine the best of deep representation learning and
symbolic reasoning (Sun, 1994; Garcez et al., 2008; Bader
et al., 2009; Besold et al., 2017; Yi et al., 2018).
Recently, this neural-symbolic paradigm has been extensively explored in the tasks of the visual question answering (VQA) (Yi et al., 2018; Vedantam et al., 2019; Mao
et al., 2019), vision-language navigation (Anderson et al.,

