DessiLBI: Exploring Structural Sparsity of Deep Networks
via Differential Inclusion Paths
Yanwei Fu 1 Chen Liu 1 Donghao Li 1 2 Xinwei Sun 3 Jinshan Zeng 4 2 Yuan Yao 2

Abstract
Over-parameterization is ubiquitous nowadays in
training neural networks to benefit both optimization in seeking global optima and generalization
in reducing prediction error. However, compressive networks are desired in many real world applications and direct training of small networks
may be trapped in local optima. In this paper, instead of pruning or distilling over-parameterized
models to compressive ones, we propose a new
approach based on differential inclusions of inverse scale spaces. Specifically, it generates a
family of models from simple to complex ones
that couples a pair of parameters to simultaneously train over-parameterized deep models and
structural sparsity on weights of fully connected
and convolutional layers. Such a differential inclusion scheme has a simple discretization, proposed as Deep structurally splitting Linearized
Bregman Iteration (DessiLBI), whose global convergence analysis in deep learning is established
that from any initializations, algorithmic iterations
converge to a critical point of empirical risks. Experimental evidence shows that DessiLBI achieve
comparable and even better performance than
the competitive optimizers in exploring the structural sparsity of several widely used backbones on
the benchmark datasets. Remarkably, with early
stopping, DessiLBI unveils “winning tickets” in
early epochs: the effective sparse structure with
comparable test accuracy to fully trained overparameterized models.
1
School of Data Science, and MOE Frontiers Center for Brain
Science, Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing Fudan University. yanweifu@fudan.edu.cn 2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 3 Microsoft Research-Asia
4
Jiangxi Normal University,. Correspondence to: Yuan Yao
<yuany@ust.hk>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1

Introduction

The expressive power of deep neural networks comes from
the millions of parameters, which are optimized by Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) (Bottou, 2010) and variants
like Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015). Remarkably, model overparameterization helps both optimization and generalization. For optimization, over-parameterization may simplify
the landscape of empirical risks toward locating global optima efficiently by gradient descent method (Mei et al.,
2018; 2019; Venturi et al., 2018; Allen-Zhu et al., 2018;
Du et al., 2018). On the other hand, over-parameterization
does not necessarily result in a bad generalization or overfitting (Zhang et al., 2017), especially when some weightsize dependent complexities are controlled (Bartlett, 1997;
Bartlett et al., 2017; Golowich et al., 2018; Zhu et al., 2018;
Neyshabur et al., 2019).
However, compressive networks are desired in many real
world applications, e.g. robotics, self-driving cars, and augmented reality. Despite that `1 regularization has been applied to deep learning to enforce the sparsity on weights
toward compact, memory efficient networks, it sacrifices
some prediction performance (Collins & Kohli, 2014). This
is because that the weights learned in neural networks are
highly correlated, and `1 regularization on such weights violates the incoherence or irrepresentable conditions needed
for sparse model selection (Donoho & Huo, 2001; Tropp,
2004; Zhao & Yu, 2006), leading to spurious selections with
poor generalization. On the other hand, `2 regularization is
often utilized for correlated weights as some low-pass filtering, sometimes in the form of weight decay (Loshchilov &
Hutter, 2019) or early stopping (Yao et al., 2007; Wei et al.,
2017). Furthermore, group sparsity regularization (Yuan &
Lin, 2006) has also been applied to neural networks, such
as finding optimal number of neuron groups (Wen et al.,
2016) and exerting good data locality with structured sparsity (Wen et al., 2016; Yoon & Hwang, 2017).
Yet, without the aid of over-parameterization, directly training a compressive model architecture may meet the obstacle
of being trapped in local optima in contemporary experience. Alternatively, researchers in practice typically start
from training a big model using common task datasets like
ImageNet, and then prune or distill such big models to

