Meta-Learning with Shared Amortized Variational Inference

Ekaterina Iakovleva 1 Jakob Verbeek 2 Karteek Alahari 1

Abstract
We propose a novel amortized variational inference scheme for an empirical Bayes meta-learning
model, where model parameters are treated as latent variables. We learn the prior distribution over
model parameters conditioned on limited training data using a variational autoencoder approach.
Our framework proposes sharing the same amortized inference network between the conditional
prior and variational posterior distributions over
the model parameters. While the posterior leverages both the labeled support and query data, the
conditional prior is based only on the labeled support data. We show that in earlier work, relying on
Monte-Carlo approximation, the conditional prior
collapses to a Dirac delta function. In contrast, our
variational approach prevents this collapse and
preserves uncertainty over the model parameters.
We evaluate our approach on the miniImageNet,
CIFAR-FS and FC100 datasets, and present results demonstrating its advantages over previous
work.

1. Introduction
While people have an outstanding ability to learn from just
a few examples, generalization from small sample sizes has
been one of the long-standing goals of machine learning.
Meta-learning, or “learning to learn” (Schmidhuber, 1999),
aims to improve generalization in small sample-size settings
by leveraging the experience of having learned to solve
related tasks in the past. The core idea is to learn a meta
model that, for any given task, maps a small set of training
samples for a new task to a model that generalizes well.
A recent surge of interest in meta-learning has explored a
wide spectrum of approaches. This includes nearest neigh1
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK,
38000 Grenoble, France. 2 Facebook Artificial Intelligence Research, Work done while Jakob Verbeek was at Inria. Correspondence to: Ekaterina Iakovleva <ekaterina.iakovleva@inria.fr>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

bor based methods (Guillaumin et al., 2009; Vinyals et al.,
2016), nearest class-mean approaches (Dvornik et al., 2019;
Mensink et al., 2012; Ren et al., 2018; Snell et al., 2017),
optimization based methods (Finn et al., 2017; Ravi &
Larochelle, 2017), adversarial approaches (Zhang et al.,
2018), and Bayesian models (Gordon et al., 2019; Grant
et al., 2018). The Bayesian approach is particularly interesting, since it provides a coherent framework to reason about
model uncertainty, not only in small sample-size settings,
but also others such as incremental learning (Kochurov et al.,
2018), and ensemble learning (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016).
Despite its attractive properties, intractable integrals over
model parameters or other latent variables, which are at the
heart of the Bayesian framework, make it often necessary to
turn to stochastic Monte Carlo or analytic approximations
for practical implementations.
In our work, we follow the Bayesian latent variable approach, and learn a prior on the parameters of the classification model conditioned on a small training sample set
for the task. We use a variational inference framework to
approximate the intractable marginal likelihood function
during training. The variational distribution approximates
the posterior on the parameters of the classification model,
given training and test data. Both the prior and posterior
are parameterized as deep neural networks that take a set of
labeled data points as input. By sharing the inference network across these two distributions, we leverage more data
to learn these conditionals and avoid overfitting. Figure 1
illustrates the overall structure of our model, SAMOVAR.
We compare the variational training approach with the
Monte Carlo approach followed by Gordon et al. (2019)
on synthetic data. We find that when using a small number
of samples for stochastic back-propagation in the Monte
Carlo approach, which results in faster training, the prior
collapses to a Dirac delta, and the model degenerates to
a deterministic parameter generating network. In contrast,
our variational training approach does not suffer from this
deficiency, and leads to an accurate estimation of the variance. Experiments on few-shot image classification using
the miniImageNet, CIFAR-FS and FC100 datasets confirm
these findings, and we observe improved accuracy using the
variational approach to train the VERSA model (Gordon
et al., 2019). Moreover, we use the same variational framework to train a stochastic version of the TADAM few-shot

