PoWER-BERT: Accelerating BERT Inference via
Progressive Word-vector Elimination

Saurabh Goyal 1 Anamitra Roy Choudhury 1 Saurabh M. Raje 1 Venkatesan T. Chakaravarthy 1
Yogish Sabharwal 1 Ashish Verma 2

Abstract
We develop a novel method, called PoWER-BERT,
for improving the inference time of the popular BERT model, while maintaining the accuracy. It works by: a) exploiting redundancy
pertaining to word-vectors (intermediate transformer block outputs) and eliminating the redundant vectors. b) determining which wordvectors to eliminate by developing a strategy for
measuring their significance, based on the selfattention mechanism. c) learning how many
word-vectors to eliminate by augmenting the
BERT model and the loss function. Experiments
on the standard GLUE benchmark shows that
PoWER-BERT achieves up to 4.5x reduction in
inference time over BERT with < 1% loss in
accuracy. We show that PoWER-BERT offers
significantly better trade-off between accuracy
and inference time compared to prior methods.
We demonstrate that our method attains up to
6.8x reduction in inference time with < 1%
loss in accuracy when applied over ALBERT, a
highly compressed version of BERT. The code
for PoWER-BERT is publicly available at https:
//github.com/IBM/PoWER-BERT.

1. Introduction
The BERT model (Devlin et al., 2019) has gained popularity as an effective approach for natural language processing. It has achieved significant success on standard benchmarks such as GLUE (Wang et al., 2019a) and SQuAD
(Rajpurkar et al., 2016), dealing with sentiment classification, question-answering, natural language inference and
1

IBM Research, New Delhi, India 2 IBM Research, Yorktown, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Saurabh Goyal
<saurago1@in.ibm.com, saurabhiit2007@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

language acceptability tasks. The model has been used in
applications ranging from text summarization (Liu & Lapata, 2019) to biomedical/insight text mining (Palakodety
et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2019).
The BERT model consists of an embedding layer, a chain
of transformer blocks and an output layer. The input words
are first embedded as vectors, which are then processed by
the pipeline of transformer blocks and the final prediction
is derived at the output layer (see Figure 1). The model
is known to be compute intensive, resulting in high infrastructure demands and latency, whereas low latency is vital
for a good customer experience. Therefore, it is crucial to
design methods that reduce the computational demands of
BERT in order to successfully meet the latency and resource
requirements of a production environment.
Consequently, recent studies have focused on optimizing
two fundamental metrics: model size and inference time.
The recently proposed ALBERT (Lan et al., 2019) achieves
significant compression over BERT by sharing parameters
across the transformer blocks and decomposing the embedding layer. However, there is almost no impact on the inference time, since the amount of computation remains the
same during inference (even though training is faster).
Other studies have aimed for optimizing both the metrics simultaneously. Here, a natural strategy is to reduce the number of transformer blocks and the idea has
been employed by DistilBERT (Sanh et al., 2019b) and
BERT-PKD (Sun et al., 2019b) within the knowledge distillation paradigm. An alternative approach is to shrink the individual transformer blocks. Each transformer block comprises of multiple self-attention heads and the Head-Prune
strategy (Michel et al., 2019b) removes a fraction of the
heads by measuring their significance. In order to achieve
considerable reduction in the two metrics, commensurate
number of transformer blocks/heads have to be pruned, and
the process leads to noticeable loss in accuracy. The above
approaches operate by removing the redundant model parameters using strategies such as parameter sharing and
transformer block/attention-head removal.

