Constrained Markov Decision Processes via Backward Value Functions
Harsh Satija 1 2 3 Philip Amortila 1 2 Joelle Pineau 1 2 3

Abstract
Although Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms have found tremendous success in simulated domains, they often cannot directly be
applied to physical systems, especially in cases
where there are hard constraints to satisfy (e.g. on
safety or resources). In standard RL, the agent
is incentivized to explore any behavior as long
as it maximizes rewards, but in the real world,
undesired behavior can damage either the system
or the agent in a way that breaks the learning process itself. In this work, we model the problem of
learning with constraints as a Constrained Markov
Decision Process and provide a new on-policy
formulation for solving it. A key contribution
of our approach is to translate cumulative cost
constraints into state-based constraints. Through
this, we define a safe policy improvement method
which maximizes returns while ensuring that the
constraints are satisfied at every step. We provide theoretical guarantees under which the agent
converges while ensuring safety over the course
of training. We also highlight the computational
advantages of this approach. The effectiveness of
our approach is demonstrated on safe navigation
tasks and in safety-constrained versions of MuJoCo environments, with deep neural networks.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) provides a sound decisiontheoretic framework to optimize the behavior of learning
agents in an interactive setting (Sutton & Barto, 2018). Recently, the field of RL has found success in many highdimensional domains, like video games, Go, robot locomotion and navigation. However, most of the success of RL
Work partly done while HS was an intern at Facebook. 1 Department of Computer Science, McGill University, Montreal, Canada 2 Mila Québec AI Institute 3 Facebook
AI Research, Montreal. Correspondence to: Harsh Satija
<harsh.satija@mail.mcgill.ca>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

algorithms has been limited to simulators, where the learning algorithm has the ability to reset the simulator. In the
physical world, an agent will need to avoid harmful behavior
(e.g. damaging the environment or the agent’s hardware)
while learning to explore behaviors that maximize the reward.
A few popular approaches for avoiding undesired behaviors for high-dimensional systems include reward-shaping
(Moldovan & Abbeel, 2012), reachability-preserving algorithms (Mitchell, 2003; Eysenbach et al., 2017), statelevel surrogate constraint satisfaction algorithms (Dalal
et al., 2018), risk-sensitive algorithms (Tamar et al., 2013;
Chow et al., 2015), apprenticeship learning (Abbeel &
Ng, 2004) and high probability constraint satisfaction algorithms (Thomas et al., 2019). There also exists model-based
Bayesian approaches that are focused on imposing the constraints via the dynamics (such as classifying parts of state
space as unsafe) and then using model predictive control to
incorporate the constraints in the policy optimization and
planning (Turchetta et al., 2016; Berkenkamp et al., 2017;
Wachi et al., 2018; Koller et al., 2018). An alternate way
to model safety is via constraint satisfaction. A standard
formulation for adding constraints to RL problems is the
Constrained Markov Decision Process (CMDP) framework
(Altman, 1999), wherein the environment is extended to
also provide feedback on constraint costs. The agent must
then attempt to maximize its expected cumulative rewards
while also ensuring its expected cumulative constraint cost
is less than or equal to some threshold.
A few algorithms have been proposed to solve CMDPs for
high-dimensional domains with continuous action spaces however they come with their own caveats. Reward Constrained Policy Optimization (Tessler et al., 2018) and Primal Dual Policy Optimization (Chow et al., 2015) do not provide any means to guarantee constraint satisfaction during
the learning procedure, only on the final policy. Constrained
Policy Optimization (Achiam et al., 2017) provides monotonic policy improvement but is computationally expensive
due to requiring a backtracking line-search procedure and
conjugate gradient algorithm for approximating the Fisher
Information Matrix. Lyapunov-based Safe Policy Optimization (Chow et al., 2019) requires solving a Linear Program
(LP) at every step of policy evaluation, although they show
that there exists heuristics which can be substituted for the

