Graph Random Neural Features
for Distance-Preserving Graph Representations

Daniele Zambon 1 Cesare Alippi 1 2 Lorenzo Livi 3 4

Abstract
We present Graph Random Neural Features
(GRNF), a novel embedding method from graphstructured data to real vectors based on a family of
graph neural networks. The embedding naturally
deals with graph isomorphism and preserves the
metric structure of the graph domain, in probability. In addition to being an explicit embedding
method, it also allows us to efficiently and effectively approximate graph metric distances (as
well as complete kernel functions); a criterion to
select the embedding dimension trading off the approximation accuracy with the computational cost
is also provided. GRNF can be used within traditional processing methods or as a training-free
input layer of a graph neural network. The theoretical guarantees that accompany GRNF ensure that
the considered graph distance is metric, hence allowing to distinguish any pair of non-isomorphic
graphs.

1. Introduction
Inference on graph-structured data is one of the hottest topics in machine learning, thanks to successes achieved in
several scientific fields, like neurosciences, chemistry, computational biology and social sciences (Elton et al., 2019;
Battaglia et al., 2018; Li et al., 2017). One of the major
research challenges there consists of building a practical
solution able to process graphs, yet managing the graph
isomorphism problem. A way to address this latter problem
passes through metric distances and complete kernels; however, it has been shown to be at least as hard as deciding
whether two graphs are isomorphic or not (Gärtner et al.,
2003).
1
Universitá della Svizzera italiana, Lugano, Switzerland
Politecnico di Milano, Milano, Italy 3 University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Canada 4 University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom.
Correspondence to: Daniele Zambon <daniele.zambon@usi.ch>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

When data come as real vectors, the seminal paper by
Rahimi & Recht (2008a) provides an efficient method to approximate radial basis kernels, exposing a parameter —the
embedding dimension— trading off computational complexity with approximation accuracy. The Random Kitchen
Sinks (Rahimi & Recht, 2009) technique builds on (Rahimi
& Recht, 2008a) by adding a linear trainable layer and
achieves, via convex optimization, an optimal estimation
error on regression tasks (Rahimi & Recht, 2008b); see also
(Principe & Chen, 2015; Rudi & Rosasco, 2017) for discussions. More recently, significant efforts aim at moving
the research to the graph domain (Oneto et al., 2017), with
most contributions focusing on graph neural network properties, especially on their ability to discriminate between
non-isomorphic graphs (Chen et al., 2019; Maron et al.,
2019a; Xu et al., 2019). Recent research also provided
neural architectures granting the universal approximation
property for functions on the graph domain (Maron et al.,
2019c; Keriven & Peyré, 2019); the property holds asymptotically with the number of neurons.
Here, we propose Graph Random Neural Features (GRNF),
a training-free embedding method that provides a map
z : G → RM from attributed graphs to numeric vectors
and manages the graph isomorphism problem. We prove
that GRNF is able to discriminate between any pair of
non-isomorphic graphs in probability and approximately
preserves the metric structure of the graph domain in the
embedding space. Notably, GRNF can also be employed
as the first layer of a graph neural network architecture.
The main idea is to construct the map z from a family
F = {ψ( · ; w) | w ∈ W} of graph neural feature maps
ψ( · ; w) : G → R, which are node-permutation-invariant
graph neural networks with a single hidden-layer and a
scalar output (Maron et al., 2019b), separating1 graphs in G.
Parameter vector w ∈ W is randomly sampled from a suitable distribution P and encodes the parameters associated
with each neuron; as such, no training is requested. Figure 1
provides a visual description.
The major –novel– theoretical contributions provided here
1
Family F is said to separate graphs of G when for any pair
of distinct (non-isomorphic) graphs g1 , g2 ∈ G, there exists a
parameter vector w ∈ W so that ψ(g1 ; w) 6= ψ(g2 ; w).

