No-Regret and Incentive-Compatible Online Learning

Rupert Freeman 1 David M. Pennock 2 Chara Podimata 3 Jennifer Wortman Vaughan 4

Abstract
We study online learning settings in which experts
act strategically to maximize their influence on
the learning algorithm’s predictions by potentially
misreporting their beliefs about a sequence of binary events. Our goal is twofold. First, we want
the learning algorithm to be no-regret with respect
to the best fixed expert in hindsight. Second, we
want incentive compatibility, a guarantee that each
expert’s best strategy is to report his true beliefs
about the realization of each event. To achieve this
goal, we build on the literature on wagering mechanisms, a type of multi-agent scoring rule. We
provide algorithms that achieve no regret and incentive compatibility for myopic experts for both
the full and partial information settings. In experiments on datasets from FiveThirtyEight, our algorithms have regret comparable to classic no-regret
algorithms, which are not incentive-compatible.
Finally, we identify an incentive-compatible algorithm for forward-looking strategic agents that
exhibits diminishing regret in practice.

1. Introduction
We study an online learning setting in which a learner makes
predictions about a sequence of T binary events (Vovk,
1990; Littlestone & Warmuth, 1994; Cesa-Bianchi et al.,
1997; Freund & Schapire, 1997; Vovk, 1998; Auer et al.,
2002). The learner has access to a pool of K experts, each
with beliefs about the likelihood of each event occurring.
The standard goal of the learner is to output a sequence
of predictions almost as accurate as those of the best fixed
expert in hindsight. Such a learner is said to have no regret.
1

Darden School of Business, University of Virginia.
DIMACS, Rutgers University. 3 Harvard University. 4 Microsoft
Research NYC. Correspondence to:
Rupert Freeman
<freemanr@darden.virginia.edu>, David M. Pennock
<dpennock@dimacs.rutgers.edu>, Chara Podimata
<podimata@g.harvard.edu>, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan
<jenn@microsoft.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

But what if the experts that the learner consults are strategic
agents, capable of reporting predictions that do not represent
their true beliefs? As pointed out by Roughgarden & Schrijvers (2017), when the learner is not only making predictions but also (implicitly or explicitly) evaluating the experts,
experts might have incentive to misreport. The Good Judgment Project,1 a competitor in IARPA’s Aggregative Contingent Estimation geopolitical forecasting contest, scored
individual forecasters and rewarded the top 2%—dubbed
“Superforecasters” (Tetlock & Gardner, 2015)—with perks
such as paid conference travel; some are now employed by
a spinoff company. Similarly, the website FiveThirtyEight2
not only predicts election results by aggregating different
pollsters, but also publicly scores the pollsters, in a way that
correlates with the amount of influence that the pollsters
have over the FiveThirtyEight aggregate. It is natural to
expect that forecasters might respond to the competitive
incentive structure in these settings by seeking to maximize
the influence that they exert on the learner’s prediction.
When an online learning algorithm is designed in such a
way that experts are motivated to report their true beliefs,
we say it is incentive-compatible. Incentive compatibility
is desirable for several reasons. First, when experts do not
report truthfully, the learner’s prediction may be harmed.
Second, learning algorithms that fail incentive compatibility
place an additional layer of cognitive burden on the experts,
who must now reason about the details of the algorithm and
other experts’ reports and beliefs in order to decide how to
act optimally. To our knowledge, the standard multiplicativeweights-type algorithms fail incentive compatibility, in the
sense that experts can sometimes achieve a greater influence
on the algorithm’s prediction by misreporting their beliefs;
we illustrate this explicitly through manipulation examples.
Our goal in this work is to design incentive-compatible
online learning algorithms without compromising on the
quality of the algorithm’s predictions. That is, we seek
algorithms that are both incentive-compatible and no-regret,
for both the full and partial (bandit) information settings.
Towards this goal, we show a novel connection between
online learning and wagering mechanisms (Lambert et al.,
2008; 2015), a type of multi-agent scoring rule that allows
1
2

https://goodjudgment.com
https://fivethirtyeight.com/

