Adversarial Attacks on Copyright Detection Systems

Parsa Saadatpanah 1 Ali Shafahi 1 Tom Goldstein 1

Abstract
It is well-known that many machine learning models are susceptible to adversarial attacks, in which
an attacker evades a classifier by making small
perturbations to inputs. This paper discusses how
industrial copyright detection tools, which serve
a central role on the web, are susceptible to adversarial attacks. As proof of concept, we describe a
well-known music identification method and implement this system in the form of a neural net.
We then attack this system using simple gradient
methods and show that it is easily broken with
white-box attacks. By scaling these perturbations
up, we can create transfer attacks on industrial
systems, such as the AudioTag copyright detector
and YouTube’s Content ID system, using perturbations that are audible but significantly smaller
than a random baseline. Our goal is to raise awareness of the threats posed by adversarial examples
in this space and to highlight the importance of
hardening copyright detection systems to attacks.

1. Introduction
Machine learning systems are easily manipulated by adversarial attacks, in which small perturbations to input data
cause large changes to the output of a model. Such attacks
have been demonstrated on a number of potentially sensitive
systems, largely in an idealized academic context, and occasionally in the real-world (Tencent, 2019; Kurakin et al.,
2016; Athalye et al., 2017; Eykholt et al., 2017; Yakura &
Sakuma, 2018; Qin et al., 2019).
Copyright detection systems are among the most widely
used machine learning systems in the industry, and the security of these systems is of foundational importance to some
of the largest companies in the world. Despite their importance, copyright systems have gone largely unstudied by the
ML security community. Common approaches to copyright
1
University of Maryland, College Park. Correspondence to:
Parsa Saadatpanah <parsa@cs.umd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

detection extract features, called fingerprints, from sampled video or audio, and then match these features with a
library of known fingerprints. Examples include YouTube’s
Content ID, which flags copyrighted material on YouTube
and enables copyright owners to monetize and control their
content. At the time of writing this paper, more than 100
million dollars have been spent on Content ID, which has
resulted in more than 3 billion dollars in revenue for copyright holders (Manara, 2018). Closely related tools such
as Google Jigsaw detect and remove videos that promote
terrorism or jeopardized national security. There is also a
regulatory push for the use of copyright detection systems;
the recent EU Copyright Directive requires any service that
allows users to post text, sound, or video to implement a
copyright filter.
A wide range of copyright detection systems exist, most of
which are proprietary. It is not possible to demonstrate attacks against all systems, and this is not our goal. Rather, the
purpose of this paper is to discuss why copyright detectors
are especially vulnerable to adversarial attacks and establish
how existing attacks in the literature can potentially exploit
audio and video copyright systems.
As proof of concept, we demonstrate an attack against realworld copyright detection systems for music. To do this,
we reinterpret a simple version of the well-known “Shazam”
algorithm for music fingerprinting as a neural network and
build a differentiable implementation of it in TensorFlow
(Abadi et al., 2016). By using a gradient-based attack and
an objective that is designed to achieve good transferability
to black-box models, we create adversarial music that is
easily recognizable to a human, while evading detection by
a machine. With sufficient perturbations, our adversarial
music successfully fools industrial systems, 1 including the
AudioTag music recognition service (AudioTag, 2009), and
YouTube’s Content ID system(Google, 2019). Sample audio
can be found here2 .
1
Affected parties were notified before the publication of this
article.
2
https://www.cs.umd.edu/ tomg/projects/copyrightattack/

