The Performance Analysis of Generalized Margin
Maximizer (GMM) on Separable Data

Fariborz Salehi, Ehsan Abbasi, Babak Hassibi 1

Abstract
Logistic models are commonly used for binary
classification tasks. The success of such models has often been attributed to their connection
to maximum-likelihood estimators. It has been
shown that gradient descent algorithm, when applied on the logistic loss, converges to the maxmargin classifier (a.k.a. hard-margin SVM). The
performance of the max-margin classifier has
been recently analyzed in (Montanari et al., 2019;
Deng et al., 2019). Inspired by these results, in
this paper, we present and study a more general
setting, where the underlying parameters of the logistic model possess certain structures (sparse,
block-sparse, low-rank, etc.) and introduce a
more general framework (which is referred to as
“Generalized Margin Maximizer”, GMM). While
classical max-margin classifiers minimize the 2norm of the parameter vector subject to linearly
separating the data, GMM minimizes any arbitrary convex function of the parameter vector. We
provide a precise analysis of the performance of
GMM via the solution of a system of nonlinear
equations. We also provide a detailed study for
three special cases: (1) `2 -GMM that is the maxmargin classifier, (2) `1 -GMM which encourages
sparsity, and (3) `∞ -GMM which is often used
when the parameter vector has binary entries. Our
theoretical results are validated by extensive simulation results across a range of parameter values,
problem instances, and model structures.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models have been very successful in many
applications, ranging from spam detection, face and pattern
1

Department of Electrical Engineering, California Institute
of Technology, Pasadena, California, USA. Correspondence to:
Fariborz Salehi <fsalehi@caltech.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

recognition, to the analysis of genome sequencing and financial markets. However, despite this indisputable success,
our knowledge on why the various machine learning methods exhibit the performances they do is still at a very early
stage. To make this gap between the theory and the practice
narrower, researchers have recently begun to revisit simple
machine learning models with the hope that understanding
their performance will lead the way to understanding the
performance of more complex machine learning methods.
More specifically, studies on the performance of diffrent
classifiers for binary classification dates back to the seminal
work of Vapnik in the 1980’s (Vapnik, 1982). In an effort
to find the ”optimal” hyperplane that separates the data, he
presented an upper bound on the test error which is inversely
proportional to the margin (minimum distance of the datapoints to the separating hyperplane), and concluded that
the max-margin classifier is indeed the desired classifier. It
has also been observed that to construct such optimal hyperplanes one only has to take into acconnt a small amount
of the training data, the so-called support vectors (Cortes &
Vapnik, 1995).
In this paper, we challenge the conventional wisdom by
showing that when the underlying parameter has certain
structure one can come up with classifiers that outperform
the max-margin classifier. We introduce the Generalized
Margin Maximizer (GMM) which takes into account the
structure of the underlying parameter as well as the minimimum distance of the datapoints to the separating hyperplane.
We provide sharp asymptotic results on various performance
measures (such as the generalization error) of GMM and
show that an appropriate choice of the potential function
can in fact improve the resulting estimator.
1.1. Prior work
There have been many recent attempts to understand the
generalization behavior of simple machine learning models (Bartlett et al., 2019; Mei & Montanari, 2019; Xu &
Hsu, 2019; Belkin et al., 2018; Hastie et al., 2019). Most
of these studies focus on the least-squares/ridge regression,
where the loss function is the squarred `2 -norm, and derive
sharp asymptotics on the performance of the estimator. In
particular, in (Hastie et al., 2019; Kini & Thrampoulidis,
2020) the authors have shown that the minimum-norm least

