Learnable Group Transform For Time-Series

Romain Cosentino 1 Behnaam Aazhang 1

Abstract
We propose a novel approach to filter bank learning for time-series by considering spectral decompositions of signals defined as a Group Transform.
This framework allows us to generalize classical time-frequency transformations such as the
Wavelet Transform, and to efficiently learn the
representation of signals. While the creation of
the wavelet transform filter-bank relies on affine
transformations of a mother filter, our approach
allows for non-linear transformations. The transformations induced by such maps enable us to
span a larger class of signal representations, from
wavelet to chirplet-like filters. We propose a parameterization of such a non-linear map such that
its sampling can be optimized for a specific task
and signal. The Learnable Group Transform can
be cast into a Deep Neural Network. The experiments on diverse time-series datasets demonstrate
the expressivity of this framework, which competes with state-of-the-art performances.

1. Introduction
To this day, the front-end processing of time-series
remains a keystone toward the improvement of a wealth
of applications such as health-care (Saritha et al., 2008),
environmental sound (Balestriero et al., 2018; Lelandais &
Glotin, 2008), and seismic data analysis (Seydoux et al.,
2016). The common denominator of the recorded signals
in these fields is their undulatory behavior. While these
signals share this common behavior, two significant factors
imply the need of learning the representation: 1) time-series
are intrinsically different because of their physical nature,
2) the machine learning task can be different even within
the same type of data. Therefore, the representation should
be induced by both the signal and the task at hand.
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice
University, USA. Correspondence to: Romain Cosentino
<rom.cosentino@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

A common approach to performing inference on time-series
consists of building a Deep Neural Network (DNN) that
operates on a spectral decomposition of the time-series
such as wavelet transform (WT) or Mel Frequency Spectral
Coefficients (MFSC). These decompositions represent the
signal. While the use of these decompositions is extensive,
we show in Section 2 their inherent biases and motivate the
development of a generalized framework. The selection of
the judicious transform is either performed by an expert
on the signal at hand, or by considering filter selection
methods (Coifman & Wickerhauser, 1992; Mallat & Zhang,
1993; Gribonval & Bacry, 2003). However, an inherent
drawback is that the selection of the filters decomposing
the signals is often achieved with criteria that do not align
with the task. For instance, a selection based on the sparsity
of the representation while the task is the classification
of the signals. Besides, these selection methods and
transformations require substantial cross-validations of
a large number of hyperparameters such as mother filter
family, number of octaves, number of wavelets per octave,
size of the window (Le & Argoul, 2004; Cosentino et al.,
2017).
In this work, we alleviate these drawbacks by proposing
a simple and efficient approach by considering the generalization of these spectral decompositions. They consist
of taking the inner product between filters and the signals.
From one decomposition to the other, only the filter bank
differs. The filters of well-known spectral decompositions,
such as the short-time Fourier transform (STFT) and the
continuous wavelet transform (CWT) are built following
a particular scheme. Each filter is the result of the action
of a transformation map on a selected mother filter, e.g.,
a Gabor filter. If the transformation map is induced by a
Group, the representation is called a Group Transform (GT),
and both the group with the mother filter characterize the
decomposition.
We propose to enable the learnability of such a scheme.
More precisely, our contributions are: 1) we generalize
common Group Transforms by proposing the utilization of
strictly increasing and nonlinear transformations, 2) draw
the connection between filters that can be learned by our
framework and commonly observed filters in biological
time-series 3) we show how the equivariance properties of
the representation differs from traditional affine transforma-

