Hierarchical Verification for Adversarial Robustness
Cong Han Lim 1 Raquel Urtasun 1 2 Ersin Yumer 1

Abstract
We introduce a new framework for the exact pointwise `p robustness verification problem that exploits the layer-wise geometric structure of deep
feed-forward networks with rectified linear activations (ReLU networks). The activation regions
of the network partition the input space, and one
can verify the `p robustness around a point by
checking all the activation regions within the desired radius. The GeoCert algorithm (Jordan et al.,
2019) treats this partition as a generic polyhedral
complex in order to detect which region to check
next. In contrast, our LayerCert framework considers the nested hyperplane arrangement structure induced by the layers of the ReLU network
and explores regions in a hierarchical manner.
We show that, under certain conditions on the algorithm parameters, LayerCert provably reduces
the number and size of the convex programs that
one needs to solve compared to GeoCert. Furthermore, our LayerCert framework allows the
incorporation of lower bounding routines based
on convex relaxations to further improve performance. Experimental results demonstrate that
LayerCert can significantly reduce both the number of convex programs solved and the running
time over the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have been demonstrated to be susceptible to adversarial perturbations of the inputs (e.g.,
Szegedy et al. (2013); Biggio et al. (2013); Goodfellow
et al. (2014)). Hence, it is important to be able to measure how vulnerable a neural network may be to such noise,
especially for safety-critical applications. We study the
problem of pointwise exact verification for `p -norm adverWork done as part of first author’s AI Residency Program. 1 Uber
Advanced Technologies Group, Toronto ON, Canada 2 Department
of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto ON, Canada.
Correspondence to: Cong Han Lim <conghan@uber.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

sarial robustness for trained deep feed-forward networks
with ReLU activation functions. The point-wise `p robustness with respect to an input x ∈ Rn and a classifier
c : Rn → [C] := {1, 2, 3, . . . , C} is defined as
∗ (x; c) := min  s.t. c(x + v) 6= c(x).
kvkp ≤

(1)

The goal of exact or complete robustness verification is to
check if  > r for some desired radius r. The choices of p
studied in the literature are typically 1, 2, and ∞; our work
applies to all p ≥ 1. Solving Problem (1) exactly (or within
a factor of 1−o(1) ln n) is known to be NP-hard (Weng et al.,
2018). Developing methods that perform well in practice
would require a better understanding of the mathematical
structure of neural networks.
In this work, we approach the problem from the angle of
how to directly exploit the geometry induced in input space
by the neural network. Each activation pattern (i.e., whether
each neuron is on or off) corresponds to a polyhedral region
in the input space, and the decision boundary within each
region is linear. A natural geometric approach to the verification problem is then to check regions in order of their
distance. We illustrate this in Figure 1. We can terminate
this process either when we have reached the desired verification radius or when we have exceeded the distance to
the closest decision boundary found. In the latter case the
distance to that boundary is the solution to Problem (1).
Jordan et al. (2019) proposed the first algorithm for this
distance-based exploration of the regions. Their GeoCert
algorithm navigates the regions in order of distance by maintaining a priority queue containing all the polyhedral faces
that make up the frontier of all regions that have been visited. The priority associated with each face is computed
via an optimization problem that can be solved by a generic
convex programming solver. Under a limited time budget,
GeoCert finds a stronger computational lower bound for
∗ (x; c) compared to a complete method that directly uses
mixed-integer programming (Tjeng et al., 2019).
In this paper we introduce the LayerCert framework that
makes use of the layer-wise structure of neural networks.
The first layer of ReLUs induce a hyperplane arrangement
structure, and each subsequent layer induces one within
each region of the hyperplane arrangement from the previous layer. This forms a nested hyperplane pattern and a

