Randomization matters
How to defend against strong adversarial attacks

Rafael Pinot * 1 2 Raphael Ettedgui * 1 Geovani Rizk 1 Yann Chevaleyre 1 Jamal Atif 1

Abstract
Is there a classifier that ensures optimal robustness against all adversarial attacks? This paper
tackles this question by adopting a game-theoretic
point of view. We present the adversarial attacks
and defenses problem as an infinite zero-sum
game where classical results (e.g. Nash or Sion
theorems) do not apply. We demonstrate the nonexistence of a Nash equilibrium in our game when
the classifier and the Adversary are both deterministic, hence giving a negative answer to the above
question in the deterministic regime. Nonetheless, the question remains open in the randomized
regime. We tackle this problem by showing that
any deterministic classifier can be outperformed
by a randomized one. This gives arguments for
using randomization, and leads us to a simple
method for building randomized classifiers that
are robust to state-or-the-art adversarial attacks.
Empirical results validate our theoretical analysis,
and show that our defense method considerably
outperforms Adversarial Training against strong
adaptive attacks, by achieving 0.55 accuracy under adaptive PGD-attack on CIFAR10, compared
to 0.42 for Adversarial training.

1. Introduction
Adversarial example attacks recently became a major concern in the machine learning community. An adversarial
attack refers to a small, imperceptible change of an input
that is maliciously designed to fool a machine learning algorithm. Since the seminal work of (Biggio et al., 2013)
and (Szegedy et al., 2014) it became increasingly important
*

Equal contribution 1 Université Paris-Dauphine, PSL Research University, CNRS, LAMSADE, Paris, France 2 Institut
LIST, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay, France. Correspondence
to: Rafael Pinot <rafael.pinot@dauphine.fr>, Raphael Ettedgui
<raphael.ettedgui@dauphine.eu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

to understand the very nature of this phenomenon (Fawzi
et al., 2016; 2018; Bubeck et al., 2019; Ilyas et al., 2019;
Gourdeau et al., 2019). Furthermore, a large body of work
has been published on designing attacks (Goodfellow et al.,
2015; Papernot et al., 2016a; Madry et al., 2018; Carlini &
Wagner, 2017; Athalye et al., 2018) and defenses (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Papernot et al., 2016b; Madry et al., 2018;
Cohen et al., 2019).
Besides, in real-life scenarios such as for an autonomous
car, errors can be very costly. It is not enough to just defend
against new attacks as they are published. We would need an
algorithm that behaves optimally against every single attack.
However, it remains unknown whether such a defense exists.
This leads to the following questions, for which we provide
principled and theoretically-grounded answers.
Q1: Is there a deterministic classifier that ensures optimal
robustness against any adversarial attack?
A1: To answer this question, in Section 3.1, we cast the
adversarial examples problem as an infinite zero-sum game
between a Defender (the classifier) and an Adversary that
produces adversarial examples. Then we demonstrate, in
Section 4, the non-existence of a Nash equilibrium in the
deterministic setting of this game. This entails that no deterministic classifier can claim to be more robust than all other
classifiers against any possible adversarial attack. Another
consequence of our analysis is that there is no free lunch for
transferable attacks: an attack that works on all classifiers
will never be optimal against any of them.
Q2: Would randomized defense strategies be a suitable
alternative to defend against strong adversarial attacks?
A2: We tackle this problem both theoretically and empirically. In Section 5, we demonstrate that for any deterministic
defense there exists a mixture of classifiers that offers better
worst-case theoretical guarantees. Building upon this, we
devise a method that generates a robust randomized classifier with a one step boosting method. We evaluate this
method, in Section 6, against strong adaptive attacks on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 datasets. It outperforms Adversarial
Training against both `∞ -PGD (Madry et al., 2018), and `2 C&W (Carlini & Wagner, 2017) attacks. More precisely, on
CIFAR10, our algorithm achieves 0.55 (resp. 0.53) accuracy

