Structure Adaptive Algorithms for Stochastic Bandits

Rémy Degenne 1 Han Shao 2 Wouter M. Koolen 3

Abstract
We study reward maximisation in a wide class
of structured stochastic multi-armed bandit problems, where the mean rewards of arms satisfy
some given structural constraints, e.g. linear, unimodal, sparse, etc. Our aim is to develop methods
that are flexible (in that they easily adapt to different structures), powerful (in that they perform
well empirically and/or provably match instancedependent lower bounds) and efficient in that the
per-round computational burden is small. We
develop asymptotically optimal algorithms from
instance-dependent lower-bounds using iterative
saddle-point solvers. Our approach generalises
recent iterative methods for pure exploration to
reward maximisation, where a major challenge
arises from the estimation of the sub-optimality
gaps and their reciprocals. Still we manage to
achieve all the above desiderata. Notably, our
technique avoids the computational cost of the
full-blown saddle point oracle employed by previous work, while at the same time enabling finitetime regret bounds. Our experiments reveal that
our method successfully leverages the structural
assumptions, while its regret is at worst comparable to that of vanilla UCB.

nite time analysis of algorithms since the beginning of the
new millennium, notably with the introduction of strategies
based on the Optimism in Face of Uncertainty principle
(Agrawal, 1995; Auer et al., 2002). For an overview of the
field, we point the reader to (Bubeck & Cesa-Bianchi, 2012;
Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2019).
Recently many studies focused on problems inspired from
practical applications, in which additional prior information
is available. For example the means of the arms might be
known to be sparse (Kwon et al., 2017), to form a Lipschitz
function (Magureanu et al., 2014) or have a linear structure
(Dani et al., 2008; Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011), or a combinatorial one (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2012; Kveton et al.,
2015). All these assumptions have been regrouped under
the name “structured bandit” (Combes et al., 2017). As was
the case in that last work, we aim at providing a family of
algorithms that adapt to the known structure.
Bandit strategies realize a trade-off between exploitation
(pulling the apparently best arm) and exploration. In the related problem of bandit pure exploration, in which no reward
is gained but the goal is to answer a query, algorithms that
adapt to any structure (and query) have been recently developed, first with asymptotic (Garivier & Kaufmann, 2016a),
then with non-asymptotic guarantees (Degenne et al., 2019).
Our approach here will be to develop these techniques further, and obtain results for reward maximisation.

1. Introduction

1.1. Structured stochastic bandits

Stochastic multi-armed bandits are online learning problems
in which an algorithm sequentially chooses among a finite
set of actions (it “pulls an arm”) and receives a stochastic reward in return. The goal is to obtain the maximal cumulative
reward over time. Introduced by Thompson (1933), bandits
have been the subject of intense study for many years now,
starting with asymptotic results in the 80s and 90s (Lai &
Robbins, 1985; Graves & Lai, 1997) and moving to the fi-

A finite number K of arms have reward distributions
(νk )k∈[K] in a known sub-Gaussian canonical exponential
family with one parameter (the mean of the distribution)
in an open interval Θ ⊆ R. The vector of means of these
distributions is denoted by µ ∈ RK . The arm with highest mean for vector µ is denoted by i∗ (µ) and we suppose
that it is unique. We write µ∗ for the value of that highest
mean. An arm with mean below µ∗ is called sub-optimal.
For x, y ∈ Θ, we denote by d(x, y) the Kullback-Leibler
divergence from the distribution parametrised by x to that
parametrised by y.

1
INRIA - DIENS - PSL Research University, Paris,
France 2 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago 3 Centrum
Wiskunde & Informatica. Correspondence to: Rémy Degenne
<remydegenne@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

The mean vector µ is known to belong to a set M ⊆ ΘK ,
which represents the structure of the problem: the structural
knowledge restricts the set of admissible mean parameters.
For example, Lipschitz bandits prescribe that the means

