Fractal Gaussian Networks: A sparse random graph model
based on Gaussian Multiplicative Chaos
Subhroshekhar Ghosh 1 Krishnakumar Balasubramanian 2 Xiaochuan Yang 3

Abstract
We propose a novel stochastic network model,
called Fractal Gaussian Network (FGN), that
embodies well-defined and analytically tractable
fractal structures. Such fractal structures have
been empirically observed in diverse applications.
FGNs interpolate continuously between the popular purely random geometric graphs (a.k.a. the
Poisson Boolean network), and random graphs
with increasingly fractal behavior. In fact, they
form a parametric family of sparse random geometric graphs that are parametrized by a fractality parameter ⌫ which governs the strength of
the fractal structure. FGNs are driven by the latent spatial geometry of Gaussian Multiplicative
Chaos (GMC), a canonical model of fractality
in its own right. We explore the natural question of detecting the presence of fractality and
the problem of parameter estimation based on observed network data. Finally, we explore fractality in community structures by unveiling a natural
stochastic block model in the setting of FGNs.

1. Stochastic Networks and Fractality
The unreasonable effectiveness of stochastic networks.
Stochastic networks have emerged as one of the fundamental modelling paradigms in the last few decades in our efforts to effectively understand the structures underlying vast
amounts of data with increasing complexity, in order to
capture the effects of latent factors and their mutual interactions. At a broad level of abstraction, this involves nodes
representing agents, and edges (weighted or otherwise) that
embody the interactions between these agents. Indeed, the
1

Department of Mathematics, National Uuniversity of Singapore. 2 Department of Statistics, University of California, Davis.
3
Department of Mathematics, University of Luxemborg. Correspondence to: Subhroshekhar Ghosh <subhrowork@gmail.com>,
Krishnakumar Balasubramanian <kbala@ucdavis.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

ubiquity of statistical network models in the modern applied sciences may justifiably remind one of the famous
article of E.P. Wigner on the unreasonable effectiveness of
mathematics in the natural sciences (c.f. (Wigner, 1990)).
Within the domain of statistical networks, many popular
modelling formulations have been proposed and investigated, in order to understand different types of phenomena
in large complex systems. These include the fundamental Erdős-Rényi random graph model, the preferential attachment model and its variants, random geometric graphs,
graphons, the stochastic block model and its various avatars,
small world networks like the Watts-Strogatz model, models of scale-free networks, to provide a partial list of examples (see, e.g., (Albert & Barabási, 2002),(Strogatz, 2001),
(Lovász, 2012), (Erdös et al., 1959), (Penrose et al., 2003),
(Holland et al., 1983), (Orbanz & Roy, 2014)). As a preview
to connect our present contribution to this classical literature, here we aim to propose a novel paradigm of statistical
networks with a view to capturing fractal phenomena.
The application domains for stochastic network models are
diverse, ranging from the world-wide web and inter/intranets, collaboration networks in academia, and social and
communication networks. Indeed, modern day network science has developed into a unique discipline of its own, for an
overview of which we refer the reader to any amongst a multitude of excellent texts - at this point we mention (Barabási
et al., 2016), (Lewis, 2011), (Mezard et al., 2009), (Crane,
2018), (Watts, 2004), (Bickel & Chen, 2009), (Chung et al.,
2006) , (Bollobás et al., 2010), (Van Der Hofstad, 2016),
(Spielman, 2010), (Caldarelli, 2007), (Jackson, 2010), only
to provide a partial list.
Fractal structures in large scale networks. An important
feature which has come to the fore in recent investigations
of networks is the emergence of inherent fractal structures
in diverse application domains. Heuristically, fractal structures are often characterized by non-standard and anomalous
behavior of various scaling and growth exponents, and (truncated) power law tails for naturally associated statistics (c.f.,
(Falconer, 2004), (Mandelbrot, 1983), (Avnir et al., 1998)).
There are many instances of emergence of fractality in networks. To provide a detailed example, in human mobility

