Accountable Off-Policy Evaluation With Kernel Bellman Statistics

Yihao Feng 1 Tongzheng Ren * 1 Ziyang Tang * 1 Qiang Liu 1

Abstract
We consider off-policy evaluation (OPE), which
evaluates the performance of a new policy from
observed data collected from previous experiments, without requiring the execution of the new
policy. This finds important applications in areas
with high execution cost or safety concerns, such
as medical diagnosis, recommendation systems
and robotics. In practice, due to the limited information from off-policy data, it is highly desirable
to construct rigorous confidence intervals, not just
point estimation, for the policy performance. In
this work, we propose a new variational framework which reduces the problem of calculating
tight confidence bounds in OPE into an optimization problem on a feasible set that catches the true
state-action value function with high probability.
The feasible set is constructed by leveraging statistical properties of a recently proposed kernel
Bellman loss (Feng et al., 2019). We design an
efficient computational approach for calculating
our bounds, and extend it to perform post-hoc
diagnosis and correction for existing estimators.
Empirical results show that our method yields
tight confidence intervals in different settings.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (Sutton & Barto, 1998) has achieved
remarkable successes recently, but is still highly data demanding. An essential approach to improve data efficiency
is to use off-policy methods, which leverage historical data
collected from different behavior policies (a.k.a. off-policy
data) to evaluate and optimize the target policies of interest. Using off-policy data is of critical importance in many
real-world applications (e.g., Murphy et al., 2001; Li et al.,
2011; Bottou et al., 2013; Thomas et al., 2017), especially
in cases when it is infeasible or even risky to collect online
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, The
University of Texas at Austin. Correspondence to: Yihao Feng <yihao@cs.utexas.edu>, Tongzheng Ren <tzren@cs.utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

experimental data or build high-quality simulators, such
as robotics, advertisement, online education, and medical
treatment (e.g., Murphy et al., 2001; Li et al., 2011; Hirano
et al., 2003; Liao et al., 2019).
This work concerns the problem of off-policy evaluation
(OPE), which estimates the expected reward of a given target policy from off-policy data. Because the information
in off-policy data is often limited, typical point estimation
may suffer from large error in difficult cases. Therefore, for
making high-stakes decisions in areas such as medical treatment, it is crucially important to provide reliable confidence
bounds for quantifying the uncertainties in the estimation.
Importance sampling (IS) provides a basic principle for
developing OPE methods (e.g., Dudı́k et al., 2011; Jiang
& Li, 2016; Thomas & Brunskill, 2016; Liu et al., 2018;
Nachum et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020), as well as doubly
robust estimators (Dudı́k et al., 2011; Jiang & Li, 2016;
Farajtabar et al., 2018; Kallus & Uehara, 2020; Tang et al.,
2020), as well as constructing confidence bounds for OPE
(e.g., Thomas et al., 2015a; Hanna et al., 2017). However,
the typical IS-based methods suffer from a number of critical
disadvantages:
• Requiring known behavior policies: The typical IS estimators require the observed data to be drawn from a known
behavior policy. However, this is often not the case in practice. In practice, the policies from which the observed data
is collected may be unknown, or even not exist (e.g., when
the data is drawn from a mix of different policies).
• High variance and loose bounds: The variance of ISbased estimators can be excessively high when the target
and behavior policies are very different from each other. As
a consequence, concentration confidence bounds based on
IS (e.g., Thomas et al., 2015a;b) could be very loose.
• Curse of long horizon: The variance of IS estimators are
known to deteriorate quickly when the horizon the Markov
decision processes becomes large. Although there are recent
improved methods for long horizon problems (Liu et al.,
2018; Tang et al., 2020; Mousavi et al., 2020), they introduce
additional biases due to the estimation of the density ratios.
Our Method We propose a variational framework for constructing tight, provable confidence bounds which avoids
both the requirement on known behavior policies and the

