Likelihood-free MCMC with Amortized Approximate Ratio Estimators

Joeri Hermans 1 Volodimir Begy 2 Gilles Louppe 1

Abstract

ratio of posterior densities between consecutive states in the
Markov chain. This allows the posterior to be approximated
numerically, provided that the likelihood p(x | θ) and the
prior p(θ) are tractable. We consider the equally common
and more challenging setting, the so-called likelihood-free
setup, in which the likelihood cannot be evaluated in a
reasonable amount of time or has no tractable closed-form
expression. However, drawing samples from the forward
model is possible.

Posterior inference with an intractable likelihood
is becoming an increasingly common task in scientific domains which rely on sophisticated computer simulations. Typically, these forward models do not admit tractable densities forcing practitioners to make use of approximations. This
work introduces a novel approach to address the
intractability of the likelihood and the marginal
model. We achieve this by learning a flexible amortized estimator which approximates the
likelihood-to-evidence ratio. We demonstrate that
the learned ratio estimator can be embedded in
MCMC samplers to approximate likelihood-ratios
between consecutive states in the Markov chain,
allowing us to draw samples from the intractable
posterior. Techniques are presented to improve
the numerical stability and to measure the quality of an approximation. The accuracy of our
approach is demonstrated on a variety of benchmarks against well-established techniques. Scientific applications in physics show its applicability.

Contributions We introduce a Bayesian inference algorithm for scientific applications where (i) a forward model
is available, (ii) the likelihood is intractable, and (iii) accurate approximations are important to do science. Central
to this work is a novel amortized likelihood-to-evidence
ratio estimator which allows for the direct estimation of the
posterior density function for arbitrary model parameters
θ ∼ p(θ) and observations x ∼ p(x | θ). We exploit this
ability to amortize the estimation of acceptance ratios in
MCMC , enabling us to draw posterior samples. Finally, we
develop a necessary diagnostic to probe the quality of the
approximations in intractable settings.

2. Background
1. Introduction

2.1. Markov chain Monte Carlo

Domain scientists are generally interested in the posterior
p(θ | x) =

p(θ)p(x | θ)
p(x)

(1)

which relates the parameters θ of a model or theory to
observations x. Although Bayesian inference is an ideal
tool for such settings, the implied computation
is generally
R
not. Often the marginal model p(x) = p(θ)p(x | θ)d θ is
intractable, making posterior inference using Bayes’ rule
impractical. Methods such as Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) (Metropolis et al., 1953; Hastings, 1970) bypass
the dependency on the marginal model by evaluating the
1

University of Liège, Belgium 2 University of Vienna, Austria.
Correspondence to: Joeri Hermans <joeri.hermans@doct.uliege.be>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

MCMC methods are generally applied to sample from a posterior probability distribution with an intractable marginal
model, but for which point-wise evaluations of the likelihood are possible (Metropolis et al., 1953; Hastings, 1970;
MacKay, 2003). Posterior samples are drawn from the target
distribution by collecting dependent states θ 0:T of a Markov
chain. The mechanism for transitioning from θ t to the next
state θ 0 depends on the algorithm at hand. However, the
acceptance of a transition θ t −
→ θ 0 , for θ 0 sampled from
0
a proposal mechanism q(θ | θ t ), is usually determined by
evaluating some form of the posterior ratio

p(θ 0 | x)
p(θ 0 )p(x | θ 0 ) / p(x)
p(θ 0 )p(x | θ 0 )
=
=
. (2)
p(θ t | x)
p(θ t )p(x | θ t ) / p(x)
p(θ t )p(x | θ t )
We observe that (i) the normalizing constant p(x) cancels
out within the ratio, thereby bypassing its intractable evaluation, and (ii) how the likelihood ratio is central in assessing
the quality of a candidate state θ 0 against state θ t .

