A Tree-Structured Decoder for Image-to-Markup Generation

Jianshu Zhang 1 2 Jun Du 1 Yongxin Yang 3 Yi-Zhe Song 3 Si Wei 2 Lirong Dai 1

Abstract
Recent encoder-decoder approaches typically employ string decoders to convert images into serialized strings for image-to-markup. However,
for tree-structured representational markup, string
representations can hardly cope with the structural complexity. In this work, we first show
via a set of toy problems that string decoders
struggle to decode tree structures, especially as
structural complexity increases, we then propose
a tree-structured decoder that specifically aims
at generating a tree-structured markup. Our decoders works sequentially, where at each step a
child node and its parent node are simultaneously
generated to form a sub-tree. This sub-tree is consequently used to construct the final tree structure
in a recurrent manner. Key to the success of our
tree decoder is twofold, (i) it strictly respects the
parent-child relationship of trees, and (ii) it explicitly outputs trees as oppose to a linear string.
Evaluated on both math formula recognition and
chemical formula recognition, the proposed tree
decoder is shown to greatly outperform strong
string decoder baselines.

1. Introduction
Attention-based encoder-decoder models have been proven
to be effective in sequence-to-sequence learning tasks such
as speech recognition (Bahdanau et al., 2016), machine
translation (Bahdanau et al., 2015), and image-to-sequence
learning tasks like scene text recognition (Cheng et al.,
2017), image captioning (Xu et al., 2015). These encoderdecoder models typically employ an RNN-based string decoder to generate the target sequence using features extracted by an upstream encoder. This choice is intuitive
1

NEL-SLIP Lab, University of Science and Technology
of China, Hefei, Anhui, China 2 iFLYTEK Research, Hefei,
Anhui, China 3 SketchX Lab, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Jun Du
<jundu@ustc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

A

B

C

A

B

E

D

C

E

D

F

G

Figure 1. Full arrow indicates the decoding way of tree decoder
and dotted arrow indicates the decoding way of string decoder for
generating node “E”. Left tree has string markup as “A ( B ( C D )
E )” and sub-trees (child node - parent node) as “A-Root B-A C-B
D-B E-A”, right tree has string markup as “A ( B ( C D ( F G ) ) E
)” and sub-trees as “A-Root B-A C-B D-B F-D G-D E-A”.

since target sequences in these tasks exhibit no internal
structure – they are essentially one-dimensional linear text.
Nonetheless, many research problems naturally dictate the
generation of both the text itself and the inherent structural
relationships directly from images (Zanibbi et al., 2002;
Harada et al., 2011; Xu et al., 2017; Sharma et al., 2018).
These problems are typically referred to as image-to-markup
generation (Deng et al., 2017): given an image x, the task
is to generate a set of markups M = {T , S}, where T is
the text description and S is the associated structure. The
underlying structural complexity of image markups is application dependent, yet trees have been commonly identified
as a flexible representation – trees with branching factor of
1 is sufficient to tackle one-dimensional text sequence learning (Shi et al., 2018), whereas trees with larger branching
factor and depth are typically required for problems such
as math formula and chemical formula recognition (Staker
et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2020).
Although string decoders can be used to tackle different
structures by generating serialized sequences of target trees,
by default they do not respect the structural integrity of trees.
This is because string decoders typically work by serializing
the structure by traversing in a depth-first order, yet with no
specific design considerations to ensure the inherent parentchild relationships during traversal. This is best explained in

