Momentum Improves Normalized SGD

Ashok Cutkosky 1 2 Harsh Mehta 1

Abstract
We provide an improved analysis of normalized
SGD showing that adding momentum provably
removes the need for large batch sizes on nonconvex objectives. Then, we consider the case
of objectives with bounded second derivative and
show that in this case a small tweak to the momentum formula allows normalized SGD with
momentum to find an -critical point in O(1/3.5 )
iterations, matching the best-known rates without accruing any logarithmic factors or dependence on dimension. We also provide an adaptive method that automatically improves convergence rates when the variance in the gradients is
small. Finally, we show that our method is effective when employed on popular large scale tasks
such as ResNet-50 and BERT pretraining, matching the performance of the disparate methods used
to get state-of-the-art results on both tasks.

1. Non-Convex Stochastic Optimization
The rise of deep learning has focused research attention on
the problem of solving optimization problems that are highdimensional, large-scale, and non-convex. Modern neural
networks can have billions of parameters (high-dimensional)
(Raffel et al., 2019; Shazeer et al., 2017), are trained using
datasets containing millions of examples (large scale) (Deng
et al., 2009) on objective functions that are non-convex. Because of these considerations, stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) has emerged as the de-facto method-of-choice for
training deep models. SGD has several properties that make
it attractive for this setting. First, it can operate in a streaming manner by running over the large dataset while only
keeping a few examples in memory at any one time. Second, SGD has a dimension-free convergence guarantee for
finding critical points on non-convex objectives. This means
1

Google Research, California, USA 2 Boston University,
Massachusetts, USA. Correspondence to: Ashok Cutkosky
<ashok@cutkosky.com>, Harsh Mehta <harshm@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

that SGD’s convergence rate is independent of the dimension of the problem, allowing it to scale more easily to
massive neural networks. In this paper we will investigate
a variant of SGD that incorporates gradient normalization
and momentum, which are both commonly used empirical
modifications to SGD that are poorly understood in the
non-convex setting.
A common way to analyze algorithms for training neural
nets is through the lens of stochastic optimization. In this
setting, we are interested in minimizing a function:
F(~
w) = E [f ( ~
w, ξ)]
ξ∼D

Where here w
~ ∈ Rd and D is a distribution over an arbitrary
space Ξ. This general formulation allows for cleaner analysis, but for a more concrete intuition, w
~ may represent the
weights of a neural network, ξ may represent an individual
training example, and D is the distribution over training
examples. We do not know the entire function F , but we are
allowed to access F through a stochastic gradient oracle.
That is, given any ~
w, we may compute ∇f ( ~
w, ξ) for some
ξ drawn i.i.d. from D. Under this formulation, the SGD
algorithm employs the simple iterative update:
w
~ t+1 = w
~ t − ηt ∇f (w
~ t , ξt )
where ξ1 , . . . , ξT are i.i.d. examples from the distribution
D, and ηt ∈ R is a a scalar called the learning rate. Since
our objective F is non-convex, it may be computationally
intractable to find a true minimizer. Instead, we will look for
an -critical point. That is, we would like our optimization
algorithm to output a point w
~ such that
w)k] ≤ 
E[k∇F ( ~
where k · k indicates the standard 2-norm. The expectation is
taken over the randomness of the stochastic gradient oracle
and any randomness inherent in the algorithm itself. In order
to make the problem tractable, we make three structural
assumptions. First, we assume that F is L-smooth, which
means that for all w
~ and ~x,
k∇F ( ~
w) − ∇F (~x)k ≤ Lkw
~ − ~xk

(A1)

Second, we assume that the objective F is bounded from
below, and without loss of generality (since our algorithms

