DeepMatch: Balancing Deep Covariate Representations
for Causal Inference Using Adversarial Training

Nathan Kallus 1

Abstract
We study optimal covariate balance for causal inferences from observational data when rich covariates and complex relationships necessitate flexible modeling with neural networks. Standard approaches such as propensity weighting and matching/balancing fail in such settings due to miscalibrated propensity nets and inappropriate covariate
representations, respectively. We propose a new
method based on adversarial training of a weighting and a discriminator network that effectively
addresses this methodological gap. This is demonstrated through new theoretical characterizations
and empirical results on both synthetic and clinical data showing how causal analyses can be
salvaged in such challenging settings.

1. Introduction
Drawing causal inferences from observational data often
relies on a careful accounting of relevant and systematic
differences between treatment and control groups, or else
any observed variation in response can be dismissed as
spurious correlation rather than a bona-fide causal relationship. For example, hypothetically, differences in lung cancer
incidence in coffee drinkers and non-drinkers might be explained away by differing rates of cigarette smoking. To
eliminate that possibility, we must contrast groups that are
comparable in their smoking rates, i.e., control for that variable. The approach of controlling for confounders relies
of course on the assumption that no other unobserved confounders exist, or, more generally and in terms of a causal
diagram, that these covariates satisfy the back door criterion
(Pearl, 2009).
But controlling for confounders also requires that we understand the way in which they affect treatment, outcome, or
both. The rapid development in training neural networks
1
Cornell Tech, Cornell University, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Nathan Kallus <kallus@cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

(NNs) holds promise in enabling us to control for potentially
complex relationships and rich covariates. Standard ways of
finding weights that balance covariates for causal inferences
rely either on estimating propensity scores (Rosenbaum &
Rubin, 1983) or on directly minimizing imbalance metrics,
such as kernel maximum mean discrepancy (MMD, Gretton et al., 2009; Kallus, 2016; 2017). But both of these
approaches break down when dealing with rich covariates
and complex relationships that necessitate flexible modeling
with NNs. Propensity scores estimated by deep NNs tend
to be highly volatile and often miscalibrated as probability
estimates. This issue similarly plagues doubly robust approaches (Kang & Schafer, 2007; Robins et al., 1994). At
the same time, optimal balancing weights rely very crucially
on already having an appropriate representation of the data
to balance.
In this paper, we develop a new approach to the problem
of balancing covariates in such situations. The approach,
termed DeepMatch, solves a game between a weighting and
a discriminator network using adversarial training. Underlying this is a new discriminative discrepancy metric that we
theoretically characterize and relate to existing metrics used
for causal inference. To use it in the context of NNs requires
a few further developments that in the end enable the use of
alternating gradient approaches similar to Goodfellow et al.
(2016). The method is shown to be statistically consistent in
estimating both average and conditional effects. Studying a
case using fully connected networks to learn complex relationships, a case using convolutional networks to deal with
image confounders, as well as a case with real clinical outcomes, we demonstrate how DeepMatch can enable strong
causal analyses in these challenging settings.
1.1. Related Literature
There has been intense interest in using machine learning,
and NNs in particular, to estimate causal effects. For the
problem of directly regressing individual effects under unconfoundedness, Athey & Imbens (2016); Wager & Athey
(2017) study adapting tree-based methods and Johansson
et al. (2016); Shalit et al. (2017) study more effective regularization techniques for NNs. These refine regression-based
approaches that would ignore covariate shifts. They do not

