Learning for Dose Allocation in Adaptive Clinical Trials with Safety
Constraints
Cong Shen 1 Zhiyang Wang 2 Sofía S. Villar 3 Mihaela van der Schaar 3 4

Abstract
Phase I dose-finding trials are increasingly challenging as the relationship between efficacy and
toxicity of new compounds (or combination of
them) becomes more complex. Despite this,
most commonly used methods in practice focus on identifying a Maximum Tolerated Dose
(MTD) by learning only from toxicity events. We
present a novel adaptive clinical trial methodology, called Safe Efficacy Exploration Dose Allocation (SEEDA), that aims at maximizing the
cumulative efficacies while satisfying the toxicity
safety constraint with high probability. We evaluate performance objectives that have operational
meanings in practical clinical trials, including
cumulative efficacy, recommendation/allocation
success probabilities, toxicity violation probability, and sample efficiency. An extended SEEDAPlateau algorithm that is tailored for the increasethen-plateau efficacy behavior of molecularly targeted agents (MTA) is also presented. Through
numerical experiments using both synthetic and
real-world datasets, we show that SEEDA outperforms state-of-the-art clinical trial designs by
finding the optimal dose with higher success rate
and fewer patients.

1. Introduction
An adaptive clinical trial utilizes the accumulated results to
dynamically modify its future trajectory for better efficiency
and ethics, while preserving the integrity and validity of the
study. Studies such as the phase I trial in Acute Myeloid
Leukaemia in (Yap et al., 2013) and Cancer Research UK
study CR0720-11 in (Whitehead et al., 2012) have suggested
1
University of Virginia, USA 2 University of Pennsylvania,
USA 3 University of Cambridge, United Kingdom 4 University of
California, Los Angeles, USA. Correspondence to: Cong Shen
<cong@virginia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

that even some simple forms of adaptive design lead to better
usage of resources and require fewer participants. These
promising results have spawned the interest in developing
adaptive clinical trial methodologies in recent years (Villar
et al., 2015a; Pallmann et al., 2018; Atan et al., 2019; Lee
et al., 2020), which is of great importance because running
an actual clinical trial on human subjects is expensive and
ethically sensitive. A well-designed trial methodology with
thorough theoretical and simulated investigation is widely
acknowledged as a crucial first step.
Traditionally, the goal of phase I clinical trials is to identify the Maximum Tolerated Dose (MTD) of a cytotoxic
(CTX) or therapeutic agent, which is then used for subsequent studies (Storer, 1989). However, modern cancer phase
I trials test antineoplastic agents in patients with advanced
cancer stages, who have often exhausted all other available
treatment options (Roberts et al., 2004). These participants
usually expect therapeutic benefit from participating in the
trial, which has motivated the trial design to include efficacy as a co-primary end point of phase I dose-finding
studies (Yan et al., 2017; Paoletti & Postel-Vinay, 2018). In
addition, the monotonic assumption for the dose-efficacy
relationship is widely adopted in state of the art designs,
which is reasonable for cytotoxic agents but may not apply to the new molecularly targeted agents (MTA) such as
monoclonal antibodies (see (Postel-Vinay et al., 2009) for
an exemplary trial that illustrates this issue). Designing
adaptive clinical trials that can properly address the intrinsic
conflict between learning and treatment effectiveness for
general dose-response models has become an important task
for phase I clinical trials.
In addition to the well-known 3+3 design (Storer, 1989) and
continual reassessment method (CRM) (O’Quigley et al.,
1990) (and its many variants), Bayesian approaches such
as Thompson Sampling (TS) (Aziz et al., 2019) and Gittins
index (Villar et al., 2015a;b) have been proposed in the literature for dose-finding studies. However, these methods were
originally designed for simplified models that do not capture
some of the unique characteristics of clinical trials, often
leading to lack of randomization (Villar et al., 2015b), inefficient use of side information (Villar & Rosenberger, 2018),
and reduced power levels and estimation issues. Notably,
for cases where the best dose for combination therapies

