Collaborative Machine Learning with Incentive-Aware Model Rewards

Rachael Hwee Ling Sim 1 Yehong Zhang 1 Mun Choon Chan 1 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low 1

Abstract
Collaborative machine learning (ML) is an appealing paradigm to build high-quality ML models by
training on the aggregated data from many parties.
However, these parties are only willing to share
their data when given enough incentives, such as
a guaranteed fair reward based on their contributions. This motivates the need for measuring a
party’s contribution and designing an incentiveaware reward scheme accordingly. This paper proposes to value a party’s reward based on Shapley
value and information gain on model parameters
given its data. Subsequently, we give each party
a model as a reward. To formally incentivize the
collaboration, we define some desirable properties (e.g., fairness and stability) which are inspired
by cooperative game theory but adapted for our
model reward that is uniquely freely replicable.
Then, we propose a novel model reward scheme
to satisfy fairness and trade off between the desirable properties via an adjustable parameter. The
value of each party’s model reward determined by
our scheme is attained by injecting Gaussian noise
to the aggregated training data with an optimized
noise variance. We empirically demonstrate interesting properties of our scheme and evaluate
its performance using synthetic and real-world
datasets.

1. Introduction
Collaborative machine learning (ML) is an appealing
paradigm to build high-quality ML models. While an individual party may have limited data, it is possible to build
improved, high-quality ML models by training on the aggregated data from many parties. For example, in healthcare, a
hospital or healthcare firm whose data diversity and quantity
are limited due to its small patient base can draw on data
1

Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore. Correspondence to: Bryan Kian
Hsiang Low <lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

from other hospitals and firms to improve the prediction of
some disease progression (e.g., diabetes) (Center for Open
Data Enterprise, 2019). This collaboration can be encouraged by a government agency, such as the National Institute
of Health in the United States. In precision agriculture, a
farmer with limited land area and sensors can combine his
collected data with the other farmers to improve the modeling of the effect of various influences (e.g., weather, pest)
on his crop yield (Claver, 2019). Such data sharing also
benefits other application domains, including real estate in
which a property agency can pool together its limited transactional data with that of the other agencies to improve the
prediction of property prices (Conway, 2018).
However, any party would have incurred some nontrivial
cost to collect its data. So, they would not altruistically donate their data and risk losing their competitive edge. These
parties will be motivated to share their data when given
enough incentives, such as a guaranteed benefit from the
collaboration and a fair higher reward from contributing
more valuable data. To this end, we propose to value each
party’s contributed data and design an incentive-aware reward scheme to give each party a separate ML model as a
reward (in short, model reward) accordingly. We use only
model rewards and exclude monetary compensations as (a)
in the above-mentioned applications, every party such as
a hospital is mainly interested in improving model quality
for unlimited future test predictions; (b) there may not be a
feasible and clear source of monetary revenue to compensate participants (e.g., due to restrictions, the government
may not be able to pay firms using tax revenues); and (c) if
parties have to pay to participate in the collaboration, then
the total payment is debatable and many may lack funding
while still having valuable data.
How then should we value a party’s data and its effect on
model quality? To answer this first question, we propose a
valuation method based on the informativeness of data. In
particular, more informative data induces a greater reduction
in the uncertainty of the model parameters, hence improving
model quality. In contrast, existing data valuation methods
(Ghorbani & Zou, 2019; Ghorbani et al., 2020; Jia et al.,
2019a;b; Yoon et al., 2020) measure model quality via its
validation accuracy, which calls for a tedious or even impossible process of needing all parties to agree on a common
validation dataset. Inaccurate valuation can also arise due to

