Generative Teaching Networks: Accelerating Neural Architecture Search by
Learning to Generate Synthetic Training Data
Felipe Petroski Such 1 Aditya Rawal 1 Joel Lehman 1 Kenneth O. Stanley 1 Jeff Clune 1 2

Abstract
This paper investigates the intriguing question of
whether we can create learning algorithms that
automatically generate training data, learning environments, and curricula in order to help AI
agents rapidly learn. We show that such algorithms are possible via Generative Teaching Networks (GTNs), a general approach that is, in theory, applicable to supervised, unsupervised, and
reinforcement learning, although our experiments
only focus on the supervised case. GTNs are deep
neural networks that generate data and/or training
environments that a learner (e.g. a freshly initialized neural network) trains on for a few SGD
steps before being tested on a target task. We then
differentiate through the entire learning process
via meta-gradients to update the GTN parameters
to improve performance on the target task. This
paper introduces GTNs, discusses their potential,
and showcases that they can substantially accelerate learning. We also demonstrate a practical and
exciting application of GTNs: accelerating the
evaluation of candidate architectures for neural
architecture search (NAS). GTN-NAS improves
the NAS state of the art, finding higher performing architectures when controlling for the search
proposal mechanism. GTN-NAS also is competitive with the overall state of the art approaches,
which achieve top performance while using orders of magnitude less computation than typical
NAS methods. Speculating forward, GTNs may
represent a first step toward the ambitious goal of
algorithms that generate their own training data
and, in doing so, open a variety of interesting new
research questions and directions.
*

Equal contribution 1 Uber AI, San Francisco USA 2 OpenAI,
San Francisco USA. Correspondence to: Felipe Petroski Such <felipe.such@gmail.com>, Jeff Clune <jeffclune@openai.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

1. Introduction and Related Work
Access to vast training data is now common in machine
learning. However, to effectively train neural networks
(NNs) does not require using all available data. For example, recent work in curriculum learning (Graves et al., 2017),
active learning (Konyushkova et al., 2017; Settles, 2010)
and core-set selection (Sener & Savarese, 2018; Tsang et al.,
2005) demonstrates that a surrogate dataset can be created
by intelligently sampling a subset of training data, and that
such surrogates enable competitive test performance with
less training effort. Being able to more rapidly determine
the performance of an architecture in this way could particularly benefit architecture search, where training thousands
or millions of candidate NN architectures on full datasets
can become prohibitively expensive. From this lens, related
work in learning-to-teach has shown promise. For example,
the learning to teach (L2T) (Fan et al., 2018) method accelerates learning for a NN learner (hereafter, just learner)
through reinforcement learning, by learning how to subsample mini-batches of data.
A key insight in this paper is that the surrogate data need
not be drawn from the original data distribution (i.e. they
may not need to resemble the original data). For example,
humans can learn new skills from reading a book or can
prepare for a team game like soccer by practicing skills,
such as passing, dribbling, juggling, and shooting. This
paper investigates the question of whether we can train a
data-generating network that can produce synthetic data
that effectively and efficiently teaches a target task to a
learner. Related to the idea of generating data, Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) can produce impressive highresolution images (Brock et al., 2018; Goodfellow et al.,
2014), but they are incentivized to mimic real data (Goodfellow et al., 2014), instead of being optimized to teach
learners more efficiently than real data.
Another approach for creating surrogate training data is
to treat the training data itself as a hyper-parameter of the
training process and learn it directly. Such learning can be
done through meta-gradients (also called hyper-gradients),
i.e. differentiating through the training process to optimize
a meta-objective. This approach was described in Maclaurin et al. (2015), where 10 synthetic training images were

