On Efficient Constructions of Checkpoints

Yu Chen 1 Zhenming Liu 1 Bin Ren 1 Xin Jin 2

Abstract
Efficient construction of checkpoints/snapshots
is a critical tool for training and diagnosing deep
learning models. In this paper, we propose a lossy
compression scheme for checkpoint constructions
(called LC-Checkpoint). LC-Checkpoint simultaneously maximizes the compression rate and
optimizes the recovery speed, under the assumption that SGD is used to train the model. LCCheckpoint uses quantization and priority promotion to store the most crucial information for SGD
to recover, and then uses a Huffman coding to
leverage the non-uniform distribution of the gradient scales. Our extensive experiments show that
LC-Checkpoint achieves a compression rate up
to 28× and recovery speedup up to 5.77× over a
state-of-the-art algorithm (SCAR).

1. Introduction
Efficient construction of checkpoints (snapshots) has been
increasingly important to deep learning research. In the
arms race of developing more accurate models, researchers
utilize heavier computing infrastructure and develop deeper
and larger models. Without proper infrastructure support,
the research process inevitably becomes fragile. For example, distributed computation fails from time to time, leading
to the excessive need to re-train models (Qiao et al., 2018b).
Diagnosing deep learning models also evolves to a complex
procedure partly because that the community has a better
understanding of deep learning models and produces more
rules for “debugging” them. Some common errors include
gradient explosion (Goodfellow et al., 2016), “divide by
zero” (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015), and dead activation. This
calls for the need to construct “breakpoints,” resembling
those used in debugging computer programs, so that researchers can conveniently jump to the state right before the
model “crashes” in the training.
1

William & Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia, USA 2 Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. Correspondence to:
Yu Chen <ychen39@email.wm.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Producing checkpoints frequently enables failed training
process to restart with minimum wasted time, and serves
as breakpoints for debugging models. So far the standard
practice of constructing checkpoints is primitive. The most
common practice is to save the model state directly, counting
on that the backend system is sufficiently robust so that
this operation does not become a bottleneck (Baylor et al.,
2017). Attempts of partially storing model states are also
examined (Qiao et al., 2018b) but these works usually focus
on recovery speed, instead of directly tackling system issues.
The most pronounced technical challenge here is that deep
models are usually large, so producing frequent checkpoints
creates unmanageable burdens to both I/O and storage, even
under modern distributed platforms (Abadi et al., 2016; Li
et al., 2014; Low et al., 2012). Therefore, this leads to our
question:
Research Q: How can we compress model checkpoints?
We specifically aim to design a lossy compressing scheme,
addressing two criteria simultaneously. First, like standard
compression problems, we need to maximize the compression rate. Second, the scheme needs to be optimized for the
downstream application of training. When a model restarts
from our lossy checkpoints, it needs to efficiently resume to
the most recent state (e.g., restart from a failed process or
reach the state preceding the crash).
Compression of model states is a new technical problem that
requires addressing cross-cutting constraints from information theory, learning algorithm, and system design. We need
to leverage statistical patterns encoded in the model state and
factor in how the model states interact with a learning algorithm (more specifically, stochastic gradient type algorithms
in the deep learning setting). This means neither standard
lossy compression algorithms nor recently developed model
compression algorithms (Han et al., 2015a; Courbariaux
et al., 2015; Hong et al., 2016; Leng et al., 2018; Lin et al.,
2016) directly work in our setting. Standard lossy compression algorithms aim to minimize reconstruction error but
our end goal is to enable a learning algorithm to “quickly
recover.” Model compression techniques aim to transform
a (static) model into a simpler one while ensuring the forecasts are not perturbed much whereas in our setting we need
a reliable coding scheme that functions well throughout the

