Relaxing Bijectivity Constraints with Continuously Indexed Normalising Flows

Rob Cornish 1 Anthony Caterini 1 George Deligiannidis 1 2 Arnaud Doucet 1

Abstract
We show that normalising flows become pathological when used to model targets whose supports
have complicated topologies. In this scenario, we
prove that a flow must become arbitrarily numerically noninvertible in order to approximate the
target closely. This result has implications for all
flow-based models, and especially residual flows
(ResFlows), which explicitly control the Lipschitz
constant of the bijection used. To address this, we
propose continuously indexed flows (CIFs), which
replace the single bijection used by normalising
flows with a continuously indexed family of bijections, and which can intuitively “clean up” mass
that would otherwise be misplaced by a single
bijection. We show theoretically that CIFs are
not subject to the same topological limitations as
normalising flows, and obtain better empirical performance on a variety of models and benchmarks.

1

Figure 1: Densities learned by a 10-layer ResFlow (left),
100-layer ResFlow (middle), and 10-layer CIF-ResFlow
(right) for two datasets (samples shown in black) that are
not homeomorphic to the Gaussian prior. The 10-layer
ResFlow visibly leaks mass outside of the support of the
target due to its small bi-Lipschitz constant. The larger
ResFlow improves on this, but still achieves smaller average
log probability than the CIF-ResFlow, as is apparent from
the greater homogeneity of the right-hand densities.

Introduction

Normalising flows (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015) have become popular methods for density estimation (Dinh et al.,
2017; Papamakarios et al., 2017; Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018;
Chen et al., 2019). These methods model an unknown target
?
distribution PX
on a data space X ⊆ Rd as the marginal of
X obtained by the generative process
Z ∼ PZ ,

X := f (Z),

(1)

where PZ is a prior distribution on a space Z ⊆ Rd , and
f : X → Z is a bijection. The use of a bijection means the
density of X can be computed analytically by the changeof-variables formula, and the parameters of f can be learned
?
by maximum likelihood using i.i.d. samples from PX
.
To be effective, a normalising flow model must specify
an expressive family of bijections with tractable Jacobians.
1

University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom 2 The Alan
Turing Institute, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Rob Cornish <rcornish@robots.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Affine coupling layers (Dinh et al., 2015; 2017), autoregressive maps (Germain et al., 2015; Papamakarios et al.,
2017), invertible linear transformations (Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018), ODE-based maps (Grathwohl et al., 2019), and
invertible ResNet blocks (Behrmann et al., 2019; Chen et al.,
2019) are all examples of such bijections that can be composed to produce expressive flows. These models have
demonstrated significant promise in their ability to model
complex datasets and to synthesise realistic data.
In all these cases, f and f −1 are both continuous. It follows that f is a homeomorphism, and therefore preserves
the topology of its domain (Runde, 2007, Definition 3.3.10).
As Dupont et al. (2019) and Dinh et al. (2019) mention, this
?
seems intuitively problematic when PZ and PX
are supported on domains with distinct topologies, which occurs
for example when the supports differ in their number of
connected components or “holes”, or when they are “knotted” differently. This seems inevitable in practice, as PZ
?
is usually quite simple (e.g. a Gaussian) while PX
is very
complicated (e.g. a distribution over images).
As our first contribution, we make precise the consequences

