Black-box Certification and Learning under Adversarial Perturbations
Hassan Ashtiani * 1 Vinayak Pathak * 2 Ruth Urner * 3

Abstract
We formally study the problem of classification
under adversarial perturbations from a learner’s
perspective as well as a third-party who aims at
certifying the robustness of a given black-box classifier. We analyze a PAC-type framework of semisupervised learning and identify possibility and
impossibility results for proper learning of VCclasses in this setting. We further introduce a new
setting of black-box certification under limited
query budget, and analyze this for various classes
of predictors and perturbation. We also consider
the viewpoint of a black-box adversary that aims
at finding adversarial examples, showing that the
existence of an adversary with polynomial query
complexity can imply the existence of a sample
efficient robust learner.

1. Introduction
We formally study the problem of classification under adversarial perturbations. An adversarial perturbation is an
imperceptible alteration of a classifier’s input which changes
its prediction. The existence of adversarial perturbations for
real-world input instances and typical classifiers (Szegedy
et al., 2014) has contributed to a lack of trust in predictive
tools derived from automated learning. Recent years have
thus seen a surge of studies proposing various heuristics
to enhance robustness to adversarial attacks (Chakraborty
et al., 2018). Existing solutions often either (i) modify the
learning procedure to increase the adversarial robustness,
e.g. by modifying the training data or the loss function used
for training (Sinha et al., 2018; Cohen et al., 2019; Salman
et al., 2019), or (ii) post-process an existing classifier to
enhance its robustness (Cohen et al., 2019).
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computing and Software, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada 2 Scotiabank,
Toronto, ON, Canada 3 Lassonde School of Engineering, EECS Department, York University, Toronto, ON, Canada. Correspondence
to: Hassan Ashtiani <zokaeiam@mcmaster.ca>, Vinayak Pathak
<vpathak@uwaterloo.ca>, Ruth Urner <ruth@eecs.yorku.ca>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

A user of a predictive tool, however, may not oftentimes
be involved in the training of the classifier nor have the
technical access or capabilities to modify its input/output
behavior. Instead, the predictor may have been provided
by a third party and the user may have merely a black-box
access to the predictor. That is, the predictor h presents
itself as an oracle that takes input query x and responds with
the label h(x). The provider of the predictive tool, while
not necessarily assumed to have malicious intent, is still naturally considered untrusted, and the user thus has an interest
in verifying the predictor’s performance (including adversarial robustness) on its own application domain. While
the standard notion of classification accuracy can be easily
estimated from an i.i.d. sample generated from user’s data
generating distribution, estimating the expected robust loss
is not that easy: Given a labeled instance (x, y), the user
can immediately verify whether the instance is misclassified
(h(x) 6= y) using a single query to h, but understanding
whether x is vulnerable under adversarial perturbations may
require many more queries to the oracle.
We introduce and analyze a formal model for black-box
certification under query access, and provide examples of
hypothesis classes and perturbation types1 for which such
a certifier exists. We further introduce the notion of witness sets for certification, and identify more general classes
of problems and perturbation types that admit black-box
certification with finite queries. On the contrary, we demonstrate cases of simple classes where the query complexity
of certification is unbounded.
We further look at the problem from the viewpoint of the
adversary, connecting the query complexity of an adversary
(for finding adversarial examples) and that of the certifier.
An intriguing question that we explore is whether the sample complexity of learning a robust classifier with respect to
a hypothesis class is related to the query complexity of an
optimal adversary (or certifier) for that class. We uncover
such a connection, showing that the existence of a successful
adversary with polynomial query complexity for a properly
compressible class implies sample efficient robust learnability of that class. For this, we adapt a compression-based
argument, demonstrating a sample complexity upper bound
1

A perturbation type captures the set of admissible perturbations the adversary is allowed to make at each point (See Section 2).

