Exploration Through Reward Biasing: Reward-Biased Maximum Likelihood
Estimation for Stochastic Multi-Armed Bandits
Xi Liu * 1 Ping-Chun Hsieh * 2 Yu-Heng Hung 2 Anirban Bhattacharya 3 P. R. Kumar 1

Abstract
Inspired by the Reward-Biased Maximum Likelihood Estimate method of adaptive control, we
propose RBMLE – a novel family of learning
algorithms for stochastic multi-armed bandits
(SMABs). For a broad range of SMABs including
both the parametric Exponential Family as well
as the non-parametric sub-Gaussian/Exponential
family, we show that RBMLE yields an index
policy. To choose the bias-growth rate α(t) in
RBMLE, we reveal the nontrivial interplay between α(t) and the regret bound that generally
applies in both the Exponential Family as well
as the sub-Gaussian/Exponential family bandits.
To quantify the finite-time performance, we prove
that RBMLE attains order-optimality by adaptively estimating the unknown constants in the
expression of α(t) for Gaussian and sub-Gaussian
bandits. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
the proposed RBMLE achieves empirical regret
performance competitive with the state-of-the-art
methods, while being more computationally efficient and scalable in comparison to the bestperforming ones among them.

and then applies the action optimal for that estimate. Specifically, consider an MDP with state space S, action space U,
and controlled transition probabilities p(i, j, u; η) denoting
the probability of transition to a next state s(t+1) = j when
the current state s(t) = i and action u(t) = u is applied
at time t, indexed by a parameter η in a set Ξ. The true
parameter is η 0 ∈ Ξ, but is unknown. A reward r(i, j, u)
is obtained when the system transitions from i to j under
u. Consider the goal of
the long-term averPmaximizing
T −1
age reward limT →∞ T1 t=0 r(s(t), s(t + 1), u(t)). Let
J(φ, η) denote the long-term average reward accrued by
the stationary control law φ : S → U which chooses the
action u(t) = φ(s(t)). Let Jopt (η) := maxφ J(φ, η) =
J(φη , η) be the optimal long-term reward, and φη an optimal control law,Qif the true parameter is η. Denote by
t−1
ηbt ∈ argmaxη∈Ξ τ =0 p(s(τ ), s(τ + 1), u(τ ); η) a MLE
of the true parameter η 0 . Under the CE approach, the action
taken at time t is u(t) = φηbt (s(t)). This approach was
shown to be sub-optimal by Borkar & Varaiya (1979) since
it suffers from the “closed-loop identifiability problem”: the
parameter estimates ηbt converge to a η ∗ for which it can
only be guaranteed that:
p(i, j, φη∗ (i); η ∗ ) = p(i, j, φη∗ (i); η 0 ) for all i, j,

(1)

and, in general, φη∗ need not be optimal for η 0 .

1. Introduction
Controlling an unknown system to maximize long-term average reward is a well studied adaptive control problem
(Kumar, 1985). For unknown Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs), Mandl (1974) proposed the certainty equivalent
(CE) method that at each stage makes a maximum likelihood estimate (MLE) of the unknown system parameters

To solve this fundamental problem, Kumar & Becker (1982)
noticed that due to (1), J(φη∗ , η ∗ ) = J(φη∗ , η 0 ). Since
J(φη∗ , η 0 ) ≤ Jopt (η 0 ), but J(φη∗ , η ∗ ) = Jopt (η ∗ ) due
to φ∗η being optimal for η ∗ , it follows that Jopt (η ∗ ) ≤
Jopt (η 0 ), i.e., the parameter estimates are biased in favor of
parameters with smaller optimal reward. To undo this bias,
with f denoting any strictly monotone increasing fucntion,
they suggested employing the RBMLE estimate:

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas,
USA 2 Department of Computer Science, National Chiao Tung
University, Hsinchu, Taiwan 3 Department of Statistics, Texas
A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA. Correspondence to: Ping-Chun Hsieh <pinghsieh@nctu.edu.tw>, Xi Liu
<xiliu.tamu@gmail.com>.

ηbtRBMLE = argmax

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

in the CE scheme, with u(t) = φηbtRBMLE (s(t)). In (2), α(t) :
[1, ∞) → R+ is allowed to be any function that satisfies
limt→∞ α(t) = ∞ and limt→∞ α(t)/t = 0. This method

*

η∈Ξ

f (Jopt (η))

α(t)

t−1
Y

p(s(τ ), s(τ + 1), u(τ ), η),

τ =0

(2)

