Near-optimal Regret Bounds for Stochastic Shortest Path

Alon Cohen 1 Haim Kaplan 1 2 Yishay Mansour 1 2 Aviv Rosenberg 2

Abstract
Stochastic shortest path (SSP) is a well-known
problem in planning and control, in which an
agent has to reach a goal state in minimum total
expected cost. In the learning formulation of the
problem, the agent is unaware of the environment
dynamics (i.e., the transition function) and has to
repeatedly play for a given number of episodes,
while learning the problem’s optimal solution. Unlike other well-studied models in reinforcement
learning (RL), the length of an episode is not
predetermined (or bounded) and is influenced by
the agent’s actions. Recently, Tarbouriech et al.
(2020) studied this problem in the context of regret minimization, and provided an algorithm
whose regret bound is inversely proportional to
the square root of the minimum instantaneous cost.
In this work we remove this dependence on the
minimum cost—we give an algorithm
p that guare ? |S| |A|K), where
antees a regret bound of O(B
B? is an upper bound on the expected cost of the
optimal policy, S is the set of states, A is the set of
actions and K is the number of episodes. We additionally show thatpany learning algorithm must
have at least Ω(B? |S||A|K) regret in the worst
case.

1. Introduction
Stochastic shortest path (SSP) is one of the most basic
models in reinforcement learning (RL). It includes the discounted return model and the finite-horizon model as special
cases. In SSP the goal of the agent is to reach a predefined
goal state in minimum expected cost. This setting captures
a wide variety of realistic scenarios, such as car navigation,
game playing and drone flying; i.e., tasks carried out in
episodes that eventually terminate.
1

Google Research, Tel Aviv 2 Tel Aviv University, Israel. Correspondence to: Alon Cohen <aloncohen@google.com>, Aviv
Rosenberg <avivros007@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

The focus of this work is on regret minimization in SSP.
It builds on extensive literature on theoretical aspects of
online RL, and in particular on the copious works about
regret minimization in either the average cost model or the
finite-horizon model. A major contribution to this literature
is the UCRL2 algorithm (Jaksch et al., 2010) that gives a
general framework to achieve optimism in face of uncertainty for these settings. The main methodology is to define
a confidence set that includes the true model parameters
with high probability. The algorithm periodically computes
an optimistic policy that minimizes the overall expected
cost simultaneously over all policies and over all parameters
within the confidence set, and proceeds to play this policy.
The only regret minimization algorithm specifically designed for SSP is that of Tarbouriech et al. (2020) that
assumes that all costs are bounded away from zero (i.e.,
there is a cmin > 0 such that all costs are in the range
[cmin , 1]).p They show a regret bound that scales as
e
O(D3/2 |S| |A|K/cmin ) where D is the minimum expected
time of reaching the goal state from any state, S is the set of
states, A is the set of actions and K is the number of episodes.
e 2/3 )
In addition, they show that the algorithm’s regret is O(K
when the costs are arbitrary (namely, may be zero).
Here we improve upon the work of Tarbouriech et al. (2020)
in several important aspects. First, we remove the dependency on c–1
and allow for zero costs while maintaining
min
√
e K). Second, we give a much simpler algoregret of O(
rithm in which the computation of the optimistic policy
p has
e ? |S| |A|K),
a simple solution.1 Our main regret term is O(B
where B? is an upper bound on the expected cost of the
optimal policy (note that B? ≤ D). We show p
that this is
almost optimal by giving a lower bound of Ω(B? |S||A|K).
In our work, we obtain a major improvement in the regret
bound through the use of confidence sets that are based
on Bernstein inequality (Azar et al., 2017), that is highly
sensitive to variance, instead of Hoeffding inequality. In
both our algorithm and the one of Tarbouriech et al. (2020),
the regret scales with the square root of the total variance,
1
There is a technical issue with the simpler optimistic policy
computation. To get the regret bounds described in this paper, we
need to compute the optimistic policy similarly to Tarbouriech
et al. (2020) (see Section 3). We keep the simpler computation
method in this paper, in hopes it can be proved to be sufficient.

