Two Routes to Scalable Credit Assignment without Weight Symmetry
Daniel Kunin * 1 Aran Nayebi * 2 Javier Sagastuy-Brena * 1
Surya Ganguli 3 Jonathan M. Bloom 4 5 Daniel L. K. Yamins 6 7 8

Abstract
The neural plausibility of backpropagation has
long been disputed, primarily for its use of nonlocal weight transport — the biologically dubious requirement that one neuron instantaneously
measure the synaptic weights of another. Until recently, attempts to create local learning rules that
avoid weight transport have typically failed in the
large-scale learning scenarios where backpropagation shines, e.g. ImageNet categorization with
deep convolutional networks. Here, we investigate a recently proposed local learning rule that
yields competitive performance with backpropagation and find that it is highly sensitive to metaparameter choices, requiring laborious tuning that
does not transfer across network architecture. Our
analysis indicates the underlying mathematical
reason for this instability, allowing us to identify
a more robust local learning rule that better transfers without metaparameter tuning. Nonetheless,
we find a performance and stability gap between
this local rule and backpropagation that widens
with increasing model depth. We then investigate several non-local learning rules that relax
the need for instantaneous weight transport into
a more biologically-plausible “weight estimation”
process, showing that these rules match state-ofthe-art performance on deep networks and operate effectively in the presence of noisy updates.
Taken together, our results suggest two routes towards the discovery of neural implementations
*
Equal contribution 1 Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering, Stanford University 2 Neurosciences PhD
Program, Stanford University 3 Department of Applied Physics,
Stanford University 4 Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 5 Cellarity, Cambridge, MA 6 Department of Psychology, Stanford University 7 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University 8 Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Aran Nayebi <anayebi@stanford.edu>,
Daniel Kunin <kunin@stanford.edu>, Javier Sagastuy-Brena
<jvrsgsty@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

for credit assignment without weight symmetry:
further improvement of local rules so that they
perform consistently across architectures and the
identification of biological implementations for
non-local learning mechanisms.

1. Introduction
Backpropagation is the workhorse of modern deep learning
and the only known learning algorithm that allows multilayer networks to train on large-scale tasks. However, any
exact implementation of backpropagation is inherently nonlocal, requiring instantaneous weight transport in which
backward error-propagating weights are the transpose of
the forward inference weights. This violation of locality
is biologically suspect because there are no known neural
mechanisms for instantaneously coupling distant synaptic
weights. Recent approaches such as feedback alignment
(Lillicrap et al., 2016) and weight mirror (Akrout et al.,
2019) have identified circuit mechanisms that seek to approximate backpropagation while circumventing the weight
transport problem. However, these mechanisms either fail
to operate at large-scale (Bartunov et al., 2018) or, as we
demonstrate, require complex and fragile metaparameter
scheduling during learning. Here we present a unifying
framework spanning a space of learning rules that allows
for the systematic identification of robust and scalable alternatives to backpropagation.
To motivate these rules, we replace tied weights in backpropagation with a regularization loss on untied forward and
backward weights. The forward weights parametrize the
global cost function, the backward weights specify a descent
direction, and the regularization constrains the relationship
between forward and backward weights. As the system
iterates, forward and backward weights dynamically align,
giving rise to a pseudogradient. Different regularization
terms are possible within this framework. Critically, these
regularization terms decompose into geometrically natural
primitives, which can be parametrically recombined to construct a diverse space of credit assignment strategies. This
space encompasses existing approaches (including feedback
alignment and weight mirror), but also elucidates novel
learning rules. We show that several of these new strategies

