A Pairwise Fair and Community-preserving Approach to k-Center Clustering

Brian Brubach 1 2 Darshan Chakrabarti 3 John P. Dickerson 1 Samir Khuller 4 Aravind Srinivasan 1
Leonidas Tsepenekas 1

Abstract
Clustering is a foundational problem in machine
learning with numerous applications. As machine
learning increases in ubiquity as a backend for
automated systems, concerns about fairness arise.
Much of the current literature on fairness deals
with discrimination against protected classes in
supervised learning (group fairness). We define
a different notion of fair clustering wherein the
probability that two points (or a community of
points) become separated is bounded by an increasing function of their pairwise distance (or
community diameter). We capture the situation
where data points represent people who gain some
benefit from being clustered together. Unfairness
arises when certain points are deterministically
separated, either arbitrarily or by someone who
intends to harm them as in the case of gerrymandering election districts. In response, we formally
define two new types of fairness in the clustering
setting, pairwise fairness and community preservation. To explore the practicality of our fairness
goals, we devise an approach for extending existing k-center algorithms to satisfy these fairness
constraints. Analysis of this approach proves that
reasonable approximations can be achieved while
maintaining fairness. In experiments, we compare the effectiveness of our approach to classical k-center algorithms/heuristics and explore the
tradeoff between optimal clustering and fairness.

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, USA 2 Computer Science Department, Wellesley College, Wellesley, MA, USA 3 School of
Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA,
USA 4 Department of Computer Science, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA. Correspondence to: Brian Brubach
<bb100@wellesley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Clustering is one of the foundational problems in unsupervised learning and operations research. In it, we seek to
partition n data points into clusters such that points within
each cluster are similar according to some distance function. Its numerous applications include document/webpage
similarity for search engines (Cutting et al., 1992; Zamir
et al., 1997), targeted advertising including employment opportunities (Datta et al., 2015), medical imaging (Srinivasan
et al., 2010; Malkomes et al., 2015), and various other data
mining and machine learning tasks. However, as machine
learning has become ubiquitous, concerns have arisen about
the “fairness” of many algorithms, especially when the data
points represent human beings. In this case, we seek additional guarantees on how people will be treated beyond the
typical goal of pure optimization.
The k-center problem is a fundamental clustering problem.
The objective is to select k center points and assign all other
points to clusters around them such that the maximum distance from any point to its assigned center is minimized.
The problem is NP-hard with the best possible approximation factor being 2 assuming P 6= N P (Hochbaum &
Shmoys, 1985; Gonzalez, 1985). Fairness for k-center can
have many definitions depending on the application. When
the points are labeled (e.g., with racial demographics or
another protected class), a group fairness constraint may
require clusters to contain a minimum amount of diversity
among labels (Chierichetti et al., 2017; Bercea et al., 2019;
Backurs et al., 2019). However, we consider a different kind
of fairness which bounds the probability that nearby points
(presumably similar or related) are assigned to different clusters. Our approach can also address issues of discrimination
against protected classes, albeit in a different way.
We introduce two new notions of fairness to the k-center
clustering problem, pairwise fairness and communitypreserving fairness. A k-center algorithm is α-pairwise
fair if every pair of points has a probability of at most α of
being assigned to different centers, where α(·) is an increasing function of the distance between the two points, and
α(0) = 0. We define a community as any subset of points
with arbitrary diameter D and a community is preserved if
its points are assigned to as few different clusters as possible

