Bayesian Optimisation over Multiple Continuous and Categorical Inputs

Binxin Ru∗ 1 Ahsan S. Alvi∗ 1 Vu Nguyen 1 Michael A. Osborne 1 Stephen J Roberts 1

Abstract
Efficient optimisation of black-box problems that
comprise both continuous and categorical inputs is important, yet poses significant challenges. Current approaches, like one-hot encoding, severely increase the dimension of the search
space, while separate modelling of categoryspecific data is sample-inefficient. Both frameworks are not scalable to practical applications
involving multiple categorical variables, each
with multiple possible values. We propose a new
approach, Continuous and Categorical Bayesian
Optimisation (CoCaBO), which combines the
strengths of multi-armed bandits and Bayesian
optimisation to select values for both categorical and continuous inputs. We model this mixedtype space using a Gaussian Process kernel, designed to allow sharing of information across
multiple categorical variables; this allows CoCaBO to leverage all available data efficiently.
We extend our method to the batch setting and
propose an efficient selection procedure that dynamically balances exploration and exploitation
whilst encouraging batch diversity. We demonstrate empirically that our method outperforms
existing approaches on both synthetic and realworld optimisation tasks with continuous and
categorical inputs.

1. Introduction
Existing work has shown Bayesian Optimisation (BO) to
be remarkably successful at optimising functions with continuous input spaces (Snoek et al., 2012; Hennig & Schuler,
2012; Hernández-Lobato et al., 2015; Ru et al., 2018;
Shahriari et al., 2016; Frazier, 2018; Alvi et al., 2019).
However, in many situations, optimisation problems involve a mixture of continuous and categorical variables.
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Oxford. Correspondence
to: Binxin Ru <robin@robots.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

For example, with a deep neural network, we may want
to adjust the learning rate and the weight decay (continuous), as well as the activation function type in each layer
(categorical). Similarly, in a gradient boosting ensemble of
decision trees, we may wish to adjust the learning rate and
the maximum depth of the trees (continuous), as well as the
boosting algorithm and loss function (categorical).
Having a mixture of categorical and continuous variables
presents challenges. If some inputs are categorical variables, then the common assumption that the BO acquisition function is differentiable over the input space, which
allows the acquisition function to be efficiently optimised,
is no longer valid. Recent research has dealt with categorical variables in different ways. The simplest approach for
BO with Gaussian process (GP) (Rasmussen & Williams,
2006) surrogates is to use a one-hot encoding on the categorical variables, so that they can be treated as continuous variables, and perform BO on the transformed space
(GPyOpt, 2016). Alternatively, the mixed-type inputs can
be handled using a hierarchical structure, such as using
random forests (Hutter et al., 2011; Bergstra et al., 2011)
or multi-armed bandits (MABs) (Gopakumar et al., 2018).
These approaches come with their own challenges, which
we will discuss below (see Section 3). In particular, the
existing approaches are not well designed for multiple categorical variables with multiple possible values. Additionally, no GP-based BO methods have explicitly considered
the batch setting for continuous-categorical inputs, to the
best of our knowledge.
In this paper, we present a new Bayesian optimisation approach for optimising a black-box function with multiple continuous and categorical inputs, termed Continuous
and Categorical Bayesian Optimisation (CoCaBO). Our approach is motivated by the success of MABs (Auer et al.,
2002a;b) in identifying the best value(s) from a discrete set
of options.
Our main contributions are as follows:
• We propose a method which combines the strengths of
MABs and BO to optimise black-box functions with
multiple categorical and continuous inputs. (Section
4).
• We present a GP kernel to capture complex interac-

