Accelerating Large-Scale Inference with Anisotropic Vector Quantization

Ruiqi Guo * 1 Philip Sun * 1 Erik Lindgren * 1 Quan Geng 1 David Simcha 1 Felix Chern 1 Sanjiv Kumar 1

Abstract
Quantization based techniques are the current
state-of-the-art for scaling maximum inner product search to massive databases. Traditional approaches to quantization aim to minimize the reconstruction error of the database points. Based
on the observation that for a given query, the
database points that have the largest inner products are more relevant, we develop a family
of anisotropic quantization loss functions. Under natural statistical assumptions, we show that
quantization with these loss functions leads to
a new variant of vector quantization that more
greatly penalizes the parallel component of a datapoint’s residual relative to its orthogonal component. The proposed approach, whose implementation is open-source, achieves state-of-theart results on the public benchmarks available at
ann-benchmarks.com.

1. Introduction
Maximum inner product search (MIPS) has become a popular paradigm for solving large scale classification and retrieval tasks. For example, in recommendation systems, user
queries and documents are embedded into a dense vector
space of the same dimensionality and MIPS is used to find
the most relevant documents given a user query (Cremonesi
et al., 2010). Similarly, in extreme classification tasks (Dean
et al., 2013), MIPS is used to predict the class label when
a large number of classes, often on the order of millions
or even billions are involved. Lately, MIPS has also been
applied to training tasks such as scalable gradient computation in large output spaces (Yen et al., 2018), efficient
sampling for speeding up softmax computation (Mussmann
and Ermon, 2016) and sparse updates in end-to-end trainable
memory systems (Pritzel et al., 2017).
To formally define the Maximum Inner Product Search
*
Equal contribution 1 Google Research. Correspondence to:
Philip Sun <sunphil@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

(MIPS) problem, consider a database X = {xi }i=1,2,...,n
with n datapoints, where each datapoint xi ∈ Rd in a ddimensional vector space. In the MIPS setup, given a query
q ∈ Rd , we would like to find the datapoint x ∈ X that
has the highest inner product with q, i.e., we would like to
identify
x∗i := arg maxhq, xi i.
xi ∈X

Exhaustively computing the exact inner product between q
and n datapoints is often expensive and sometimes infeasible. Several techniques have been proposed in the literature
based on hashing, graph search, or quantization to solve the
approximate maximum inner product search problem efficiently, and the quantization based techniques have shown
strong performance (Ge et al., 2014; Babenko and Lempitsky, 2014; Johnson et al., 2017).
In most traditional quantization works, the objective in the
quantization procedures is to minimize the reconstruction
error for the database points. We show this is a suboptimal
loss function for MIPS. This is because for a given query,
quantization error for database points that score higher, or
have larger inner products, is more important. Using this
intuition, we propose a new family of score-aware quantization loss functions and apply it to multiple quantization
techniques. Our contributions are as follows:
• We propose the score-aware quantization loss function.
The proposed loss can work under any weighting function of the inner product and regardless of whether the
datapoints vary in norm.
• Under natural statistical assumptions, we show that the
score-aware quantization loss can be efficiently calculated. The loss function leads to an anisotropic weighting that more greatly penalizes error parallel with the
datapoint than error orthogonal to the datapoint.
• The proposed loss is generally applicable to many quantization methods. We demonstrate the codebook learning and quantization procedures for product quantization and vector quantization can be efficiently adapted
to the proposed loss function.
• We show that anisotropic quantization leads to large
MIPS performance gains over reconstruction loss-

