On Learning Language-Invariant Representations
for Universal Machine Translation
Han Zhao 1 Junjie Hu 1 Andrej Risteski 1

Abstract
The goal of universal machine translation is to
learn to translate between any pair of languages.
Despite impressive empirical results and an increasing interest in massively multilingual models, theoretical analysis on translation errors made
by such universal machine translation models is
only nascent. In this paper, we formally prove certain impossibilities of this endeavour in general,
as well as prove positive results in the presence of
additional (but natural) structure of data. For the
former, we derive a lower bound on the translation error in the many-to-many translation setting,
which shows that any algorithm aiming to learn
shared sentence representations among multiple
language pairs has to make a large translation error on at least one of the translation tasks, if no
assumption on the structure of the languages is
made. For the latter, we show that if the paired
documents in the corpus follow a natural encoderdecoder generative process, we can expect a natural notion of “generalization”: a linear number of
language pairs, rather than quadratic, suffices to
learn a good representation. Our theory also explains what kinds of connection graphs between
pairs of languages are better suited: ones with
longer paths result in worse sample complexity.
We believe our theoretical insights and implications contribute to the future algorithmic design
of universal machine translation.

1. Introduction
Despite impressive improvements in neural machine translation (NMT), training a large multilingual NMT model with
hundreds of millions of parameters usually requires a collection of parallel corpora at a large scale, on the order of
1
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA. Correspondence
to: Han Zhao <han.zhao@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

millions or even billions of aligned sentences (Johnson et al.,
2017; Arivazhagan et al., 2019) for supervised training. Although it is possible to automatically crawl the web (Nie
et al., 1999; Resnik, 1999; Resnik & Smith, 2003) to collect
parallel sentences for high-resource language pairs such as
German-English and Chinese-English, it is often infeasible to manually translate large amounts of documents for
low-resource language pairs, e.g., Nepali-English, SinhalaEnglish (Guzmán et al., 2019). Much recent progress in
low-resource machine translation, has been driven by the
idea of universal machine translation (UMT), also known
as multilingual machine translation (Zoph & Knight, 2016;
Johnson et al., 2017; Gu et al., 2018), which aims at training one single NMT to translate between multiple source
and target languages. Typical UMT models leverage either a single shared encoder or language-specific encoders
to map all source languages to a shared space, and translate the source sentences to a target language by a decoder.
Inspired by the idea of UMT, there has been a recent trend towards learning language-invariant embeddings for multiple
source languages in a shared latent space, which eases the
cross-lingual generalization from high-resource languages
to low-resource languages on many tasks, e.g., parallel corpus mining (Schwenk, 2018; Artetxe & Schwenk, 2019),
sentence classification (Conneau et al., 2018b), cross-lingual
information retrieval (Litschko et al., 2018), and dependency
parsing (Kondratyuk & Straka, 2019), just to name a few.
The idea of finding an abstract “lingua franca” is very intuitive and the empirical results are impressive, yet theoretical
understanding of various aspects of universal machine translation is limited. In this paper, we particularly focus on two
basic questions:
1. How can we measure the inherent tradeoff between the
quality of translation and how language-invariant a
representation is?
2. How many language pairs do we need aligned sentences for, to be able to translate between any pair of
languages?
Toward answering the first question, we show that in a
completely assumption-free setup on the languages and distribution of the data, it is impossible to avoid making a large
translation error on at least one pair of the translation tasks.

