Zeno++: Robust Fully Asynchronous SGD

Cong Xie 1 Oluwasanmi Koyejo 1 Indranil Gupta 1

Abstract
We propose Zeno++, a new robust asynchronous
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) procedure,
intended to tolerate Byzantine failures of workers. In contrast to previous work, Zeno++ removes several unrealistic restrictions on workerserver communication, now allowing for fully
asynchronous updates from anonymous workers,
for arbitrarily stale worker updates, and for the
possibility of an unbounded number of Byzantine
workers. The key idea is to estimate the descent
of the loss value after the candidate gradient is
applied, where large descent values indicate that
the update results in optimization progress. We
prove the convergence of Zeno++ for non-convex
problems under Byzantine failures. Experimental results show that Zeno++ outperforms existing Byzantine-tolerant asynchronous SGD algorithms.

1. Introduction
Synchronous training and asynchronous training are the two
most common paradigms of distributed machine learning.
On the one hand, synchronous training requires the global
updates at the server to be blocked until all the workers
respond (after each period). In contrast, for asynchronous
training, the server can update the global model immediately
after each worker’s response. Theoretical and experimental analysis (Dutta et al., 2018) suggests that synchronous
training is more stable and has lower noise, but is slower
due to the global barrier across all the workers (after each
period). Since asynchronous training is comparatively faster
especially for heterogeneous systems with stragglers, in this
paper, we focus on asynchronous training. Doing so requires
us to tackle challenges including instability and noisiness
that arise from asynchony.
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, USA. Correspondence to: Cong Xie
<cx2@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Concretely, we study the security of distributed asynchronous Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) in a centralized worker-server architecture, also known as the
Parameter Server (or PS) architecture. In the PS architecture, there are server nodes and worker nodes. Each worker
pulls the global model from the servers, estimates the gradients using the local portion of the training data, then sends
the gradient estimates to the servers. The servers update the
model asynchronously, as soon as a new gradient is received
from any worker.
The security of machine learning has gained increasing attention in recent years. In particular, tolerance to Byzantine
failures (Blanchard et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2017; Yin et al.,
2018; Feng et al., 2014; Su & Vaidya, 2016; 2018; Xie
et al., 2019b; Alistarh et al., 2018; Cao & Lai, 2018; Xie
et al., 2019c) has become an important topic in the distributed machine learning literature. Byzantine nodes can
behave arbitrarily, capturing behavior ranging from crash
failures to malicious and arbitrary or compromised actions.
In brief, the goal of Byzantine workers is to prevent convergence of the model training. By construction, Byzantine
failures (Lamport et al., 1982) assume the worst case, i.e.,
the Byzantine workers can behave arbitrarily. Such failures
may be caused by a variety of reasons including but not
limited to: hardware/software bugs, vulnerable communication channels, poisoned datasets, or malicious attackers.
To make things worse, groups of Byzantine workers may
collude, resulting in more harmful attacks.
Byzantine failures have been well-studied for classical distributed systems, especially for consensus (Lamport et al.,
1982). These results include well-known bounds on how
many Byzantine workers can be tolerated. Yet, in distributed
machine learning, Byzantine failures have a different impact
than in classical consensus (Damaskinos et al., 2018). Unlike previous work, we consider Byzantine tolerance with
minimal assumptions—an unbounded number of Byzantine
workers, and full asynchrony with unbounded delay.
Byzantine tolerance of asynchronous SGD is challenging
due to several reasons:
• Full asynchrony. Lack of synchrony introduces additional noise into the stochastic gradients. This makes it
more difficult to distinguish gradients sent by Byzantine
workers from gradients sent by benign ones, especially

