How to Solve Fair k-Center in Massive Data Models
Ashish Chiplunkar * 1 Sagar Kale * 2 Sivaramakrishnan Natarajan Ramamoorthy * 3

Abstract
Fueled by massive data, important decision making is being automated with the help of algorithms,
therefore, fairness in algorithms has become an
especially important research topic. In this work,
we design new streaming and distributed algorithms for the fair k-center problem that models
fair data summarization. The streaming and distributed models of computation have an attractive
feature of being able to handle massive data sets
that do not fit into main memory. Our main contributions are: (a) the first distributed algorithm;
which has provably constant approximation ratio
and is extremely parallelizable, and (b) a two-pass
streaming algorithm with a provable approximation guarantee matching the best known algorithm
(which is not a streaming algorithm). Our algorithms have the advantages of being easy to implement in practice, being fast with linear running
times, having very small working memory and
communication, and outperforming existing algorithms on several real and synthetic data sets. To
complement our distributed algorithm, we also
give a hardness result for natural distributed algorithms, which holds for even the special case of
k-center.

1. Introduction
Data summarization is a central problem in the area of machine learning, where we want to compute a small summary
of the data. For example, if the input data is enormous, we
do not want to run our machine learning algorithm on the
whole input but on a small representative subset. How we
select such a representative summary is quite important. It
is well known that if the input is biased, then the machine
learning algorithms trained on this data will exhibit the same
bias. This is a classic example of selection bias but as exhib*

Equal contribution 1 Indian Institute of Technology Delhi
University of Vienna, Faculty of Computer Science 3 Theorem LP.
Correspondence to: Sagar Kale <SGRKL4@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

ited by algorithms themselves. Currently used algorithms
for data summarization have been shown to be biased with
respect to attributes such as gender, race, and age (see, e.g.,
(Kay et al., 2015)), and this motivates the fair data summarization problem. Recently, the fair k-center problem was
shown to be useful in computing fair summary (Kleindessner et al., 2019). In this paper, we continue the study of fair
k-center and add to the series of works on fairness in machine learning algorithms. Our main results are streaming
and distributed algorithms for fair k-center. These models
are extremely suitable for handling massive datasets. The
fact that the data summarization problem arises when the
input is huge makes our work all the more relevant!
Suppose the input is a set of real vectors with a gender attribute and you want to compute a summary of k data points
such that both1 genders are represented equally. Say we are
given a summary S. The cost we pay for not including a
point in S is its distance from S. Then the cost of S is the
largest cost of a point. We want to compute a summary with
minimum cost that is also fair, i.e., contains k/2 women
and k/2 men. In one sentence, we want to compute a fair
summary such that the point that is farthest from this summary is not too far. Fair k-center models this task: let the
number of points in the input be n, the number of groups
be m, target summary size be k, and we want to select a
summary S suchP
that S contains kj points belonging to
Group j, where j kj = k. And we want to minimize
maxx d(x, S) = maxx minx0 ∈S d(x, x0 ), where d denotes
the distance function. Note that each point belongs to exactly one of the m groups; for the case of gender, m = 2.
We call the special case where m = 1 and k1 = k as just kcenter throughout this paper. For k-center, there are simple
greedy algorithms with an approximation ratio of 2 (Gonzalez, 1985; Hochbaum & Shmoys, 1985), and getting better than 2-approximation is NP-hard (Hsu & Nemhauser,
1979). The NP-hardness result also applies to the more
general fair k-center. The best algorithm known for fair
k-center is a 3-approximation algorithm that runs in time
O(n2 log n) (Chen et al., 2016). A linear-time algorithm
with approximation guarantee of O(2m ), which is constant
if m is, was given recently (Kleindessner et al., 2019). Both
of these algorithms work only in the traditional random
1

sincere apologies to the people who identify with neither

