Collapsed amortized variational inference for
switching nonlinear dynamical systems

Zhe Dong 1 Bryan A. Seybold 1 Kevin P. Murphy 1 Hung H. Bui 2

Abstract
We propose an efficient inference method for
switching nonlinear dynamical systems. The key
idea is to learn an inference network which can
be used as a proposal distribution for the continuous latent variables, while performing exact
marginalization of the discrete latent variables.
This allows us to use the reparameterization trick,
and apply end-to-end training with stochastic gradient descent. We show that the proposed method
can successfully segment time series data, including videos and 3D human pose, into meaningful
“regimes” by using the piece-wise nonlinear dynamics.

1. Introduction
Consider looking down on an airplane flying across country
or a car driving through a field. The vehicle’s motion is
composed of straight, linear dynamics and curving, nonlinear dynamics. An example is illustrated in fig. 1(a). In
this paper, we propose a new inference algorithm for fitting
switching nonlinear dynamical systems (SNLDS), which
can be used to segment time series of high-dimensional signals, such as videos, or lower dimensional signals, such as
(x,y) locations, into meaningful discrete temporal “modes”
or “regimes”. The transitions between these modes may correspond to the changes in internal goals of the agent (e.g.,
a mouse switching from running to resting, as in Johnson
et al. (2016)) or may be caused by external factors (e.g.,
changes in the road curvature). Discovering such discrete
modes is useful for scientific applications (c.f., Wiltschko
et al. (2015); Linderman et al. (2019); Sharma et al. (2018))
as well as for planning in the context of hierarchical reinforcement learning (c.f., Kipf et al. (2019)).
Extensive previous work, some of which we review in Sec1

Google AI, Mountain View, California, USA 2 VinAI Research, Hanoi, Vietnam. Correspondence to: Zhe Dong <zhedong@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

(a) Ground Truth

(b) SNLDS

(c) SLDS

Figure 1. (a): Trajectory and ground truth segmentation of a particle. The direction of motion is indicated by the arrows. Blue is
moving straight, yellow is turning counter-clockwise, red is turning
clockwise. (c) Segmentation learned by our SNLDS model. (d)
Segmentation learned by a SLDS model. Note that to model the
nonlinear dynamics, the SLDS model needs to use more segments.

tion 3, explores modeling temporal data using various forms
of state space models (SSM). We are interested in the class
of SSM which has both discrete and continuous latent variables, which we denote by st and zt , where t is the discrete
time index. The discrete state, st ∈ {1, 2, . . . , K}, represents the mode of the system at time t, and the continuous
state, zt ∈ RH , represents other factors of variation, such
as location and velocity. The observed data is denoted by
xt ∈ RD , and can either be a low dimensional projection of
zt , such as the current location, or a high dimensional signal
that is informative about zt , such as an image. We may
optionally have observed input or control signals ut ∈ RU ,
which drive the system in addition to unobserved stochastic noise. We are interested in learning a generative model
of the form pθ (s1:T , z1:T , x1:T |u1:T ) from partial observations, namely (x1:T , u1:T ). This requires inferring the
posterior over the latent states, pθ (s1:T , z1:T |v1:T ), where
vt = (xt , ut ) contains all the visible variables at time t. For
training purposes, we usually assume that we have multiple such trajectories, possibly of different lengths, but we
omit the sequence indices from our notations for simplicity. This problem is very challenging, because the model
contains both discrete and continuous latent variables (a
so-called “hybrid system”) and has nonlinear transition and
observation models.
The main contribution of our paper is a new way to perform efficient approximate inference in this class of SNLDS

