Near-optimal sample complexity bounds for learning Latent k−polytopes and
applications to Ad-Mixtures

Chiranjib Bhattacharyya * 1 Ravindran Kannan * 2

Abstract
Deriving Optimal bounds on Sample Complexity
of Latent Variable models is an active area of research. Recently such bounds were obtained for
Mixture of Gaussians (Ashtiani et al., 2018), no
such results are known for Ad-mixtures, a generalization of Mixture distributions. In this paper
we show that O∗ (dk/m) samples are sufficient
to learn each of k− topic vectors of LDA, a popular Ad-mixture model, with vocabulary size d
and m ∈ Ω(1) words per document, to any constant error in L1 norm. The result is a corollary
of the major contribution of this paper: the first
sample complexity upper bound for the problem
(introduced in (Bhattacharyya & Kannan, 2020))
of learning the vertices of a Latent k− Polytope
in Rd , given perturbed points from it. The bound,
O∗ (dk/β), is optimal and linear in number of parameters. It applies to many stochastic models
including a broad class Ad-mixtures. To demonstrate the generality of the approach we specialize the setting to Mixed Membership Stochastic Block Models(MMSB) and show for the first
time that if an MMSB has k blocks, the sample
complexity is O∗ (k 2 ) under usual assumptions.

1. Introduction
Recently, in a seminal paper, building on long line of
research, (Ashtiani et al., 2018) showed that a mixture of k gaussians in Rd can be recovered using
O(number of parameters) iid samples drawn from the mixture.
Our aim in this paper is to prove similar results for Ad1

Department of CSA and RBCCPS, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru-560012, India 2 Microsoft Research Lab India, Bengaluru-560001, India. Correspondence to: Chiranjib
Bhattacharyya <chiru@iisc.ac.in>, Ravindran Kannan <kannan@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

mixtrues, a problem not tackled before. Ad-mixtures
are generalizations of mixture distributions and have been
studied extensively in various applications including Text
Modelling, Population genetics, Community detection and
many other fields (for a survey see (Airoldi et al., 2014)).
Whereas in a mixture distribution, there is a fixed convex combination of component distributions from which
all samples are generated, in Ad-mixtures, each sample is
drawn from a different randomly picked convex combination of component distributions. This results in substantial
overlap of distributions from which samples are picked and
makes the learning problem harder.
Ad-mixtures themselves are special cases of a Geometric
model called the Latent k-polytope (LKP) recently introduced in (Bhattacharyya & Kannan, 2020). In LKP, there
is a latent k− polytope K ⊂ Rd from which n iid observations in Rd are drawn, each obtained by stochastically
perturbing an unobserved(or latent ) point in K. The latent points are chosen from a known prior distribution and
each data point is chosen according to some known distribution. The LKP problem consists of approximating the
vertices from iid observations, and (Bhattacharyya & Kannan, 2020) developed a polynomial time approximation algorithm for the LKP problem under certain assumptions.
The sample complexity question for even special cases, let
alone the general LKP, has not been addressed. The central
problem addressed here is to find the sample complexity of
LKP problem where, we wish to learn each vertex within
L1 error εDiameterL1 (K) and establish a near-optimal
bound; we will show that O∗ (number of parameters) suffice under realistic assumptions.
Contributions Our results are summarized as follows.
Near-Optimal Sample Complexity for LKP: We prove
an upper bound of O∗ (dk/β) on the sample complexity of
LKP for ε ∈ Ω(1) where, β ∈ Ω(1) is a model-specific
constant (Corollary (4.2)). The bound is proved by showing that the vertices of LKP can be well approximated by
k points residing in a polytope completely characterized
by observed data, more specifically it is described by the
convex hull of sample averages of certain sized subsets of
observations.

