Optimal Sequential Maximization
One Interview is Enough!

Moein Falahatgar 1 Alon Orlitsky 2 Venkatadheeraj Pichapati 1

Abstract
Maximum selection under probabilistic queries
(probabilistic maximization) is a fundamental
algorithmic problem arising in numerous theoretical and practical contexts.
We derive
the first query-optimal sequential algorithm for
probabilistic-maximization. Departing from previous assumptions, the algorithm and performance guarantees apply even for infinitely many
items, hence in particular do not require a-priori
knowledge of the number of items. The algorithm has linear query complexity, and is optimal
also in the streaming setting.
To derive these results we consider a probabilistic setting where several candidates for a position are asked multiple questions with the goal
of finding who has the highest probability of
answering interview questions correctly. Previous work minimized the total number of questions asked by alternating back and forth between
the best performing candidates, in a sense, inviting them to multiple interviews. We show that
the same order-wise selection accuracy can be
achieved by querying the candidates sequentially,
never returning to a previously queried candidate.
Hence one interview is enough!

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning, one of machine learning’s tripodal
paradigms, applies a sequence of actions and uses observations of their outcomes to learn the best possible strategy. It typically addresses two general scenarios that differ
in the type of observations available to the learner. Full
knowledge, where following each action, the learner observes the outcomes of all possible actions, such as the
1
Apple Inc. 2 University of California, San Diego. Correspondence to: Venkatadheeraj Pichapati <dheerajpv7@ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

returns of all stocks on a given day; and partial knowledge, where the learner observes the outcomes of only a
subset of the actions. The simplest and by far most popular partial-knowledge observation is that of just the action
taken. For example, the effect of the administered medication, the click-rate of the placed ad, the performance of the
routing algorithm utilized, or back to investment, the return
of the strategy utilized.
The latter paradigm is captured by an idealized framework
where a gambler can choose between k slot-machine arms,
each with its own unknown return distribution. Through
successive arm pulls, the gambler tries to maximize their
return or find the most rewarding arm. The framework is
commonly called the multi-armed bandit (MAB) as “in the
long run... slot machines are as effective as human bandits
in separating the victim from his money” (Lai & Robbins,
1985).
Two common measures evaluate the gambler’s performance, and corresponding strategy. Regret, or explorationexploitation, aims to maximize the gambler’s expected total return over time (Auer et al., 2002; Bubeck et al., 2012);
Maximization, or pure exploration, seeks the arm with the
highest expected return (Bubeck et al., 2009; Karnin et al.,
2013; Gabillon et al., 2012); We consider the latter. Maximum selection (maximization) arises in numerous applications ranging from medical trials (Robbins, 1952) to social
choice (Caplin & Nalebuff, 1991), to wireless channel band
selection (Audibert & Bubeck, 2010).
The typical approach for finding PAC maximum arm with
linear query complexity (Even-Dar et al., 2006; Zhou et al.,
2014) is to conduct the pulls (queries) in rounds. Starting
with all n arms, in round i, all surviving arms are queried
certain number of times, and the top half performing arms
continue to the next round while the bottom half are discarded. Motivating this strategy is the goal of querying
low-expectation arms only few times, while querying highexpectation arms successively more times, till the best is
found. This approach inherently alternates between the
arms, repeatedly looking for the best subset, and refining
the selection in subsequent rounds.
For several applications, there is a cost associated with

