Mix-n-Match: Ensemble and Compositional Methods for Uncertainty
Calibration in Deep Learning

Jize Zhang 1 Bhavya Kailkhura 1 T. Yong-Jin Han 1

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of post-hoc calibration of machine learning classifiers. We introduce
the following desiderata for uncertainty calibration: (a) accuracy-preserving, (b) data-efficient,
and (c) high expressive power. We show that none
of the existing methods satisfy all three requirements, and demonstrate how Mix-n-Match calibration strategies (i.e., ensemble and composition)
can help achieve remarkably better data-efficiency
and expressive power while provably maintaining
the classification accuracy of the original classifier. Mix-n-Match strategies are generic in the
sense that they can be used to improve the performance of any off-the-shelf calibrator. We also
reveal potential issues in standard evaluation practices. Popular approaches (e.g., histogram-based
expected calibration error (ECE)) may provide
misleading results especially in small-data regime.
Therefore, we propose an alternative data-efficient
kernel density-based estimator for a reliable evaluation of the calibration performance and prove its
asymptotically unbiasedness and consistency. Our
approaches outperform state-of-the-art solutions
on both the calibration as well as the evaluation
tasks in most of the experimental settings. Our
codes are available at https://github.com/zhang64llnl/Mix-n-Match-Calibration.

Figure 1. (Top): (left) Temperature Scaling (TS) (Guo et al., 2017)
is data-efficient (initial rapid ECE drop) but not expressive (fails
to make progress later); in contrast, Isotonic Regression (IR)
(Zadrozny & Elkan, 2002) is more expressive but data-inefficient;
(right) IR does not preserve accuracy and introduces significant
accuracy drop. (Bottom) Mix-n-Match: (left) Data Ensemble and
Composition improve the data efficiency of IR, and (right) Model
Ensemble enhances the expressive power of TS. All results are for
calibrating a 50-layer Wide ResNet on ImageNet, apart from (a)
left (28-layer Wide ResNet on CIFAR-10).

1. Introduction
Machine learning (ML) models, e.g., deep neural networks,
are increasingly used for making potentially important decisions in applications ranging from object detection (Girshick, 2015), autonomous driving (Chen et al., 2015) to
medical diagnosis (Litjens et al., 2017). Several of these
applications are high-regret in nature and incorrect deci1
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratories Livermore, CA
94550. Correspondence to: Jize Zhang <zhang64@llnl.gov>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

sions have significant costs. Therefore, besides achieving
high accuracy, it is also crucial to obtain reliable uncertainty
estimates, which can help deciding whether the model predictions can be trusted (Jiang et al., 2018; Kendall & Gal,
2017). Specifically, a classifier should provide a calibrated
uncertainty measure in addition to its prediction. A classifier is well-calibrated, if the probability associated with
the predicted class label matches the probability of such
prediction being correct (Bröcker, 2009; Dawid, 1982). Unfortunately, many off-the-shelf ML models are not well
calibrated (Niculescu-Mizil & Caruana, 2005; Zadrozny &
Elkan, 2001; 2002). Poor-calibration is particularly promi-

