Privately Detecting Changes in Unknown Distributions

Rachel Cummings 1 Sara Krehbiel 2 Yuliia Lut 1 Wanrong Zhang 1

Abstract
The change-point detection problem seeks to identify distributional changes in streams of data. Increasingly, tools for change-point detection are
applied in settings where data may be highly sensitive and formal privacy guarantees are required,
such as identifying disease outbreaks based on
hospital records, or IoT devices detecting activity
within a home. Differential privacy has emerged
as a powerful technique for enabling data analysis
while preventing information leakage about individuals. Much of the prior work on change-point
detection—including the only private algorithms
for this problem—requires complete knowledge
of the pre-change and post-change distributions,
which is an unrealistic assumption for many practical applications of interest. This work develops
differentially private algorithms for solving the
change-point detection problem when the data
distributions are unknown. Additionally, the data
may be sampled from distributions that change
smoothly over time, rather than fixed pre-change
and post-change distributions. We apply our algorithms to detect changes in the linear trends
of such data streams. Finally, we also provide
experimental results to empirically validate the
performance of our algorithms.

1. Introduction
The change-point detection problem seeks to identify distributional changes in streams of data. It models data points
as initially being sampled from a pre-change distribution
P0 and then switching to being sampled from a post-change
1

H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia,
USA 2 Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Santa
Clara University, Santa Clara, California, USA. Correspondence
to: Rachel Cummings <rachelc@gatech.edu>; Sara Krehbiel
<skrehbiel@scu.edu>; Yuliia Lut <yuliia.lut@gatech.edu>;
Wanrong Zhang <wanrongz@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

distribution P1 at an unknown change-point time k ∗ . The
task is to quickly and accurately identify the change-point
time k ∗ . The change-point problem has been widely studied in theoretical statistics (Shewhart, 1931; Page, 1954;
Shiryaev, 1963; Pollak, 1987; Mei, 2008) as well as practical applications including climatology (Lund & Reeves,
2002), econometrics (Bai & Perron, 2003), and DNA analysis (Zhang & Siegmund, 2012).
Much of the previous work on change-point detection focused on the parametric setting, where the distributions P0
and P1 are perfectly known to the analyst. In this structured
setting, the analyst could use algorithms tailored to details
of these distributions, such as computing the maximum loglikehood estimator (MLE) of the change-point time. In this
work, we consider the nonparametric setting, where these
distributions are unknown to the analyst. This setting is
closer to practice, as it removes the unrealistic assumption
of perfect distributional knowledge. In practice, an analyst
may only have sample access to the current (pre-change)
distribution, and may wish to detect a change to any distribution that is sufficiently far away, without making specific
parametric assumptions on the future (post-change) distribution. The nonparametric setting requires different test
statistics, as common approaches like computing the MLE
do not work without full knowledge of P0 and P1 .
In many applications, change-point detection algorithms are
applied to sensitive data, and may require formal privacy
guarantees. For example, the Center for Disease Control
(CDC) may wish to analyze hospital records to detect disease outbreaks, or the Census Bureau may wish to analyze
income records to detect changes in employment rates. We
will use differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2006) as our
privacy notion, which has been well-established as the predominant privacy notion in theoretical computer science.
Informally, differential privacy bounds the effect of any individual’s data in a computation, and ensures that very little
can be inferred about an individual from seeing the output of a differentially private analysis. Differential privacy
is typically achieved algorithmically by adding noise that
scales with the sensitivity of a computation, which is the
maximum change in the function’s value that can be caused
by changing a single entry in the database. Privacy for high
sensitivity analyses require large amounts of noise, which
yield high statistical error (see Section 2.2 for more details).

