Learning from Irregularly-Sampled Time Series: A Missing Data Perspective
Steven Cheng-Xian Li 1 Benjamin M. Marlin 1

Abstract
Irregularly-sampled time series occur in many domains including healthcare. They can be challenging to model because they do not naturally yield
a fixed-dimensional representation as required
by many standard machine learning models. In
this paper, we consider irregular sampling from
the perspective of missing data. We model observed irregularly-sampled time series data as a
sequence of index-value pairs sampled from a continuous but unobserved function. We introduce
an encoder-decoder framework for learning from
such generic indexed sequences. We propose
learning methods for this framework based on
variational autoencoders and generative adversarial networks. For continuous irregularly-sampled
time series, we introduce continuous convolutional layers that can efficiently interface with existing neural network architectures. Experiments
show that our models are able to achieve competitive or better classification results on irregularlysampled multivariate time series compared to recent RNN models while offering significantly
faster training times.

1. Introduction
Irregularly-sampled time series are characterized by nonuniform time intervals between successive measurements.
Such data naturally occur in many real world domains. For
example, in clinical data, an individual patient’s state of
health may be recorded only at irregular time intervals with
different subsets of variables observed at different times.
Further, different individuals typically have different numbers of observations for different subsets of variables observed at different time points, including after aligning to
events like time of admission or disease onset.
These characteristics of irregularly-sampled time series data
1
University of Massachusetts Amherst. Correspondence to:
Steven Cheng-Xian Li <li.stevecx@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

create multiple challenges for classical machine learning
models and algorithms that require data to be defined with
respect to a fixed dimensional feature space. However, there
has been significant recent progress on this problem. For
example, the GRU-D model was proposed as a direct extension of discrete time RNNs to the case of continuous time
observations (Che et al., 2018). The model uses exponential decay dynamics applied to either visible or latent states.
Rubanova et al. (2019) proposed latent ordinary differential
equation (ODE) models as a more natural way to model
continuous dynamics. Latent ODEs extend the neural ODE
model (Chen et al., 2018), which enables modeling of complex ODEs using neural networks. However, many of these
models can be slow to learn due to their sequential nature.
The focus of this paper is on learning from a collection
of irregularly-sampled time series that are observed over
a fixed time span. The specific tasks we want to accomplish are: i) learning the distribution of the latent temporal
process, ii) given a time series, inferring the distribution
of the corresponding latent process, and iii) classification
of time series. If we view each time series as observations
sampled from a complete latent process defined over a time
span [0, T ], this is essentially a missing data problem as we
only have information about the latent process at a subset of
points in time within [0, T ].
Learning complex distributions in the presence of missing data is a problem that has received substantial recent
attention. For example, models have recently been proposed based on variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma &
Welling, 2014) such as partial VAEs (Ma et al., 2018; 2019)
and MIWAE (Mattei & Frellsen, 2019). Implicit models
based on generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) have also been recently proposed such
as MisGAN (Li et al., 2019). However, these models only
work for problems with finite dimensional data such as recommendation systems or image modeling. Neural processes
(Garnelo et al., 2018a;b) can be seen as an extension of partial VAEs for the continuous space that model distributions
over functions.
The main contribution of this paper is the development
of a scalable framework for learning distributions from
irregularly-sampled time series. We transform modeling
such time series data into a general missing data problem

