Explainable and Discourse Topic-aware Neural Language Understanding

Yatin Chaudhary 1 2 Hinrich Schütze 2 Pankaj Gupta 1

Abstract
Marrying topic models and language models exposes language understanding to a broader source
of document-level context beyond sentences via
topics. While introducing topical semantics in
language models, existing approaches incorporate
latent document topic proportions and ignore topical discourse in sentences of the document. This
work extends the line of research by additionally
introducing an explainable topic representation in
language understanding, obtained from a set of
key terms correspondingly for each latent topic
of the proportion. Moreover, we retain sentencetopic association along with document-topic association by modeling topical discourse for every
sentence in the document. We present a novel
neural composite language modeling (NCLM)
framework that exploits both the latent and explainable topics along with topical discourse at
sentence-level in a joint learning framework of
topic and language models. Experiments over a
range of tasks such as language modeling, word
sense disambiguation, document classification, retrieval and text generation demonstrate ability of
the proposed model in improving language understanding.

1. Introduction
Topic models (TMs) such as LDA (Blei et al., 2001) facilitate document-level semantic knowledge in the form of topics, explaining the thematic structures hidden in a document
collection. In doing so, they learn document-topic association in a generative fashion by counting word-occurrences
across documents. Essentially, the generative framework
assumes that each document is a mixture of latent topics,
i.e., topic-proportions and each latent topic is a unique dis1
Corporate Technology, Machine Intelligence (MIC-DE),
Siemens AG, Munich, Germany 2 CIS, University of Munich
(LMU), Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Yatin Chaudhary
<yatin.chaudhary@drimco.net>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

tribution over words in vocabulary. Beyond a document
representation, topic models also offer interpretability via
topics (a set of top key terms). Recently, neural topic models
(Gupta et al., 2019b;a; Miao et al., 2016) have been shown
to outperform LDA-based models. Thus, we consider neural
network based topic models in this work.
Language models (LMs) (Mikolov et al., 2010; Peters et al.,
2018) have recently gained success in natural language understanding by predicting the next (target) word in a sequence given its preceding and/or following context(s), accounting for linguistic structures such as word ordering.
However, LM are often contextualized by an n-gram window or a sentence, ignoring global semantics in context
beyond the sentence boundary especially in modeling documents. To capture long-term semantic dependencies, recent
works (Wang et al., 2018; Lau et al., 2017; Dieng et al.,
2017) have attempted to introduce document-level semantics in LMs at sentence-level by marrying topic and language
models, e.g., augmenting LSTM-based LMs with a latent
document-topic proportion (association) obtained from a
topic model for the document in which the sentence appears.
Motivation 1: While augmenting LMs with topical semantics, existing approaches incorporate latent document-topic
proportions and ignore an explanatory representation for
each latent topic of the proportion. Here, the explanatory
representation of a topic refers to a vector representation
obtained from a set of high-probability terms in its topicword distribution. For example in Figure 1(a), we run a
topic model over a document of three sentences and discover a latent document-topic proportion ĥd as well as three
topics (top-5 key terms) correspondingly explaining each
latent topic (T1, T2 and T3) of the proportion. Observe that
the context in sent#2 can not resolve the meaning of the
word chip. However, introducing ĥd with complementary
explainable topics (collections of key terms) provide an abstract (latent) and a fine granularity (explanatory) outlook,
respectively. To our knowledge, the scheme of augmenting
LMs with both the latent document-topic proportion and
explanatory topics remains unexplored.
Contribution 1: Complementing the latent document-topic
proportion, we also leverage explanatory topics in augmenting LMs with topical semantics in a neural composite language modeling (NCLM) framework, consisting of a neural

