InfoGAN-CR and ModelCentrality: Self-supervised Model Training and
Selection for Disentangling GANs
Zinan Lin 1 Kiran K. Thekumparampil 2 Giulia Fanti 1 Sewoong Oh 3

Abstract
Disentangled generative models map a latent code
vector to a target space, while enforcing that a subset of the learned latent codes are interpretable
and associated with distinct properties of the target distribution. Recent advances have been dominated by Variational AutoEncoder (VAE)-based
methods, while training disentangled generative
adversarial networks (GANs) remains challenging. In this work, we show that the dominant
challenges facing disentangled GANs can be mitigated through the use of self-supervision. We
make two main contributions: first, we design a
novel approach for training disentangled GANs
with self-supervision. We propose contrastive
regularizer, which is inspired by a natural notion of disentanglement: latent traversal. This
achieves higher disentanglement scores than stateof-the-art VAE- and GAN-based approaches. Second, we propose an unsupervised model selection
scheme called ModelCentrality, which uses generated synthetic samples to compute the medoid
(multi-dimensional generalization of median) of
a collection of models. The current common
practice of hyper-parameter tuning requires using
ground-truths samples, each labelled with known
perfect disentangled latent codes. As real datasets
are not equipped with such labels, we propose an
unsupervised model selection scheme and show
that it finds a model close to the best one, for both
VAEs and GANs. Combining contrastive regularization with ModelCentrality, we improve upon
the state-of-the-art disentanglement scores significantly, without accessing the supervised data.
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign 3 University of Washington.
Correspondence to:
Zinan Lin <zinanl@andrew.cmu.edu>,
Kiran K. Thekumparampil <thekump2@illinois.edu>, Giulia Fanti <gfanti@andrew.cmu.edu>, Sewoong Oh <sewoong@cs.washington.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
The ability to learn low-dimensional, informative data representations can greatly enhance the utility of data. The
notion of disentangled representations in particular was
theoretically proposed in (Bengio et al., 2013; Ridgeway,
2016; Higgins et al., 2016) for diverse applications including supervised and reinforcement learning. A disentangled
generative model takes a number of latent factors as inputs,
with each factor controlling an interpretable aspect of the
generated data. For example, in facial images, disentangled
latent factors might control variations in eyes, noses, and
hair.
Latent code value
-1

-0.6

-0.2

0.2

0.6

1

c1

shape

c2

rotation

c3

scale

c4

x-position

c5

y-position

Figure 1: Each row shows how the image changes when
traversing a single latent code under the proposed InfoGANCR architecture (dSprites dataset, § 3.2). Latent codes capture desired properties: {shape, rotation, scale, x-pos, ypos}, of the image.
Most approaches for disentangling latent factors (or codes)
are based on the following natural intuition. We say a generative model has a better disentanglement if changing one
latent code (while fixing other latent codes) makes a noticeable and distinct change in the generated sample (referred to
as “informativeness” and “disentanglement” in (Eastwood
& Williams, 2018)). Noticeable changes are desired as we
want the latent codes to capture important characteristics
of the image. Distinct changes are desired as we want each
latent code to represent an aspect of the samples different
from other latent codes. (Eastwood & Williams, 2018) also
values “completeness”, which refers to how much of the disentangling latent factors are covered by the learned model.
As such, disentanglement can be evaluated by traversing the

