Mapping Natural-language Problems to Formal-language Solutions Using
Structured Neural Representations

Kezhen Chen 1 2 Qiuyuan Huang 1 Hamid Palangi 1 Paul Smolensky 1 3 Kenneth D. Forbus 2 Jianfeng Gao 1

Abstract
Generating formal-language programs represented by relational tuples, such as Lisp programs or mathematical operations, to solve problems stated in natural language is a challenging task because it requires explicitly capturing
discrete symbolic structural information implicit
in the input. However, most general neural sequence models do not explicitly capture such
structural information, limiting their performance
on these tasks. In this paper, we propose a new
encoder-decoder model based on a structured neural representation, Tensor Product Representations (TPRs), for mapping Natural-language problems to Formal-language solutions, called TPN2F. The encoder of TP-N2F employs TPR ‘binding’ to encode natural-language symbolic structure in vector space and the decoder uses TPR
‘unbinding’ to generate, in symbolic space, a sequential program represented by relational tuples,
each consisting of a relation (or operation) and
a number of arguments. TP-N2F considerably
outperforms LSTM-based seq2seq models on two
benchmarks and creates new state-of-the-art results. Ablation studies show that improvements
can be attributed to the use of structured TPRs
explicitly in both the encoder and decoder. Analysis of the learned structures shows how TPRs
enhance the interpretability of TP-N2F.

1. Introduction
When people perform explicit reasoning, they can typically
describe the way to the conclusion step by step via relational
1

Microsoft Research, Redmond, USA. 2 Department of
Computer Science, Northwestern University, Evanston, USA.
3
Department of Cognitive Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA.. Correspondence to: Kezhen Chen
<kzchen@u.northwestern.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

descriptions. There is ample evidence that relational, structured representations are important for human cognition,
e.g., (Goldin-Meadow & Gentner, 2003; Forbus et al., 2017;
Crouse et al., 2018; Chen & Forbus, 2018; Chen et al., 2019;
Lee et al., 2019). Although a rapidly growing number of
researchers use deep learning to solve complex symbolic
reasoning and language tasks (a recent review is Gao et al.
(2019)), most existing deep learning models, including sequence models such as LSTMs, do not explicitly capture
human-like relational structured information.
In this paper we propose a novel neural architecture, TPN2F, for mapping a Natural-language (NL) question to a
Formal-language (FL) program represented by a sequence
of relational tuples (N2F). In the tasks we study, math or
programming problems are stated in natural language, and
answers are given as programs: sequences of relational
structured representations, to solve the problems step by
step like a human being, instead of directly generating the fnal answer. For example, from one of our datasets, MathQA:
given a natural-language math problem “20 is subtracted
from 60 percent of a number, the result is 88. Find the number?”, the formal-language solution program is “(add,n0,n2)
(divide,n1,const100) (divide,#0,#1)”, where n1 indicates
the frst number mentioned in the question and #i indicates
the output of the ith previous tuple. TP-N2F encodes the
natural-language symbolic structure of the problem in an
input vector space, maps this to a vector in an intermediate
space, and uses that vector to produce a sequence of output
vectors that are decoded as relational structures. Both input
and output structures are modeled as Tensor Product Representations (TPRs) (Smolensky, 1990) and the structured
representations of inputs are mapped to the structured representations of outputs. During encoding, NL-input symbolic
structures are encoded as vector space embeddings using
TPR ‘binding’ (following Palangi et al. (2018)); during decoding, symbolic constituents are extracted from structureembedding output vectors using TPR ‘unbinding’ (following
Huang et al. (2018; 2019)). By employing TPRs, the model
achieves better performance and increased interpretability.
Our contributions in this work are as follows. (i) We introduce the notion of abstract role-level analysis, and propose
such an analysis of N2F tasks. (ii) We present a new TP-N2F

