Implicit competitive regularization in GANs

Florian Schäfer * 1 Hongkai Zheng * 2 3 Anima Anandkumar 1

Abstract
The success of GANs is usually attributed to properties of the divergence obtained by an optimal
discriminator. In this work we show that this approach has a fundamental flaw:
If we do not impose regularity of the discriminator, it can exploit visually imperceptible errors
of the generator to always achieve the maximal
generator loss. In practice, gradient penalties are
used to regularize the discriminator. However,
this needs a metric on the space of images that
captures visual similarity. Such a metric is not
known, which explains the limited success of gradient penalties in stabilizing GANs.
Instead, we argue that the implicit competitive
regularization (ICR) arising from the simultaneous optimization of generator and discriminator enables GANs performance. We show that
opponent-aware modelling of generator and discriminator, as present in competitive gradient descent (CGD), can significantly strengthen ICR and
thus stabilize GAN training without explicit regularization. In our experiments, we use an existing
implementation of WGAN-GP and show that by
training it with CGD without any explicit regularization, we can improve the inception score (IS)
on CIFAR10, without any hyperparameter tuning.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs): (Goodfellow
et al., 2014) are a class of generative models based on a
competitive game between a generator that tries to generate
realistic new data, and a discriminator that tries to distinguish generated from real data. In practice, both players are
parameterized by neural networks that are trained simultaneously by a variant of stochastic gradient descent.
*

1

2

Equal contribution Caltech Shanghai Jiao Tong university
This work was produced while HZ was a visiting undergraduate researcher at Caltech. Correspondence to: Florian Schaefer <schaefer@caltech.edu>, Hongkai Zheng <devzhk@sjtu.edu.cn>.
3

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

The minimax interpretation: Presently, the success of
GANs is mostly attributed to properties of the divergence
or metric obtained under an optimal discriminator. For
instance, an optimal discriminator in the original GAN leads
to a generator loss equal to the Jensen-Shannon divergence
between real and generated distribution. Optimization over
the generator is then seen as approximately minimizing this
divergence. We refer to this point of view as the minimax
interpretation. The minimax interpretation has led to the
development of numerous GAN variants that aim to use
divergences or metrics with better theoretical properties.
The GAN-dilemma: However, every attempt to explain
GAN performance with the minimax interpretation faces
one of the two following problems:
1. Without regularity constraints, the discriminator
can always be perfect. This is because it can selectively
assign a high score to the finite amount of real data points
while assigning a low score on the remaining support of the
generator distribution, as illustrated in Figure 1. Therefore,
the Jensen-Shannon divergence between a continuous and
a discrete distribution always achieves its maximal value,
a property that is shared by all divergences that do not impose regularity constraints on the discriminator. Thus, these
divergences can not meaningfully compare the quality of
different generators.
2. Imposing regularity constraints needs a measure of
similarity of images. Imposing regularity on the discriminator amounts to forcing it to map similar images to similar
results. To do so, we would require a notion of similarity
between images that is congruent with human perception.
This is a longstanding unsolved problem in computer vision. Commonly used gradient penalties use the Euclidean
norm which is known to poorly capture visual similarity, as
illustrated in Figure 2.
We believe that the different divergences underlying the various GAN formulations have little to do with their ability
to produce realistic images. This is supported by the large
scale studies of Lucic et al. (2017) that did not find systematic differences in the performance of GANs associated
with different divergence measures. Understanding of GAN
performance is crucial in order to improve training stability
and reduce the required amount of hyperparameter tuning.

