Discriminative Jackknife: Quantifying Uncertainty in Deep Learning via
Higher-Order Influence Functions

Ahmed M. Alaa 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1 2

Abstract
Deep learning models achieve high predictive accuracy across a broad spectrum of tasks, but rigorously quantifying their predictive uncertainty remains challenging. Usable estimates of predictive
uncertainty should (1) cover the true prediction
targets with high probability, and (2) discriminate
between high- and low-confidence prediction instances. Existing methods for uncertainty quantification are based predominantly on Bayesian neural networks; these may fall short of (1) and (2) —
i.e., Bayesian credible intervals do not guarantee
frequentist coverage, and approximate posterior
inference undermines discriminative accuracy. In
this paper, we develop the discriminative jackknife
(DJ), a frequentist procedure that utilizes influence functions of a model’s loss functional to construct a jackknife (or leave-one-out) estimator of
predictive confidence intervals. The DJ satisfies
(1) and (2), is applicable to a wide range of deep
learning models, is easy to implement, and can be
applied in a post-hoc fashion without interfering
with model training or compromising its accuracy. Experiments demonstrate that DJ performs
competitively compared to existing Bayesian and
non-Bayesian regression baselines.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have achieved state-of-the-art performance on a variety of learning tasks, and are becoming
increasingly popular in various application domains (LeCun
et al., 2015). A key question often asked of such models is
“Can we trust this particular model prediction?” This question is highly relevant in high-stakes applications wherein
predictions are used to inform critical decision-making —
examples of such applications include: medical decision
1
UCLA 2 Cambridge University. Correspondence to: Ahmed
M. Alaa <ahmedmalaa@ucla.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

support (Alaa & van der Schaar, 2017), autonomous vehicles, and financial forecasts (Amodei et al., 2016). Despite their impressive accuracy, rigorously quantifying uncertainty in deep learning models is a challenging and yet
an unresolved problem (Gal, 2016; Ovadia et al., 2019).
Actionable estimates of predictive uncertainty are ones that
(1) cover the true prediction targets with a high probability,
and (2) discriminate between high- and low-confidence predictions. (Figure 1 depicts a pictorial visualization for these
coverage and discrimination requirements.) The coverage
requirement is especially relevant in applications where predictive uncertainty is incorporated in a decision-theoretic
framework (e.g., administering medical treatments (Dusenberry et al., 2019), or estimating value functions in modelfree reinforcement learning (White & White, 2010)). The
second requirement, discrimination, is crucial for auditing
model reliability (Schulam & Saria, 2019), detecting dataset
shifts and out-of-distribution samples (Barber et al., 2019a),
and actively collecting new training examples for which the
model is not confident (Cohn et al., 1996).
Existing methods for uncertainty estimation are based predominantly on Bayesian neural networks (BNNs), whereby
predictive uncertainty is evaluated via posterior credible intervals (Welling & Teh, 2011; Hernández-Lobato & Adams,
2015; Ritter et al., 2018; Maddox et al., 2019). However,
BNNs require significant modifications to the training procedure, and exact Bayesian inference is computationally prohibitive in practice. Approximate dropout-based inference
schemes (e.g., Monte Carlo dropout (Gal & Ghahramani,
2016) and variational dropout (Kingma et al., 2015)) have
been recently proposed as computationally efficient alternatives. However, Bayesian inference in dropout-based models
has been shown to be ill-posed, since the induced posterior
distributions in such models do not concentrate asymptotically (Osband, 2016; Hron et al., 2017), which jeopardizes
both the coverage and discrimination performance of the
resulting credible intervals. Moreover, even with exact inference, Bayesian credible intervals do not guarantee frequentist coverage (Bayarri & Berger, 2004). Non-Bayesian
alternatives have been recently developed based on ad-hoc
ensemble designs (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017) — but
formal and rigorous frequentist methods are still lacking.

