Automatic Shortcut Removal for Self-Supervised Representation Learning

Matthias Minderer 1 2 Olivier Bachem 1 Neil Houlsby 1 Michael Tschannen 1

Abstract
In self-supervised visual representation learning,
a feature extractor is trained on a “pretext task”
for which labels can be generated cheaply, without human annotation. A central challenge in
this approach is that the feature extractor quickly
learns to exploit low-level visual features such
as color aberrations or watermarks and then fails
to learn useful semantic representations. Much
work has gone into identifying such “shortcut”
features and hand-designing schemes to reduce
their effect. Here, we propose a general framework for mitigating the effect shortcut features.
Our key assumption is that those features which
are the first to be exploited for solving the pretext task may also be the most vulnerable to an
adversary trained to make the task harder. We
show that this assumption holds across common
pretext tasks and datasets by training a “lens” network to make small image changes that maximally
reduce performance in the pretext task. Representations learned with the modified images outperform those learned without in all tested cases.
Additionally, the modifications made by the lens
reveal how the choice of pretext task and dataset
affects the features learned by self-supervision.

Input image

Lens output

Difference

Figure 1. Example of automatic shortcut removal for the Rotation
prediction pretext task. The lens learns to remove features that
make it easy to solve the pretext task (concretely, it conceals
watermarks in this example). Shortcut removal forces the network
to learn higher-level features to solve the pretext task and improves
representation quality.

Self-supervision has recently led to significant advances
in unsupervised visual representation learning, with the
first self-supervised methods outperforming supervised ImageNet pre-training on selected vision benchmarks (Hénaff
et al., 2019; He et al., 2020; Misra & van der Maaten, 2019).

Google Research, Brain Team, Zürich, Switzerland 2 Work
done as part of the Google AI Residency. Correspondence to:
Matthias Minderer <mjlm@google.com>.

Yet, defining sensible pretext tasks remains a major challenge because neural networks are biased towards exploiting
the simplest features that allow solving the pretext task. This
bias works against the goal of learning semantically meaningful representations that transfer well to a wide range of
target tasks. Simple solutions to pretext tasks can be unintuitive and surprising. For example, in the self-supervised
task of predicting the orientation of rotated training images (Gidaris et al., 2018), logos and watermarks allow the
network to predict the orientation of the input image by
learning simple text features, rather than transferable object
representations (Figure 1). Similarly, nearly imperceptible
color fringes introduced by chromatic aberrations of camera
lenses provide a signal for context-based self-supervised
methods that is strong enough to significantly reduce the
quality of representations learned from these tasks, unless
they are specifically addressed by augmentation schemes
(Doersch et al., 2015; Noroozi & Favaro, 2016).

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

Many such data augmentation procedures have been proposed, but have relied on the intuition and creativity of
researchers to identify shortcut features. We aim to break

1. Introduction
In self-supervised visual representation learning, a neural
network is trained using labels that can be generated cheaply
from the data rather than requiring human labeling. These
artificial labels are used to create a “pretext task” that ideally
requires learning abstract, semantic features useful for a
large variety of vision tasks. A network pre-trained on the
pretext task can then be transferred to other vision tasks for
which labels are more expensive to obtain, e.g. by learning
a head or fine-tuning the network for the target task.
1

