Transparency Promotion with Model-Agnostic Linear Competitors

Hassan Rafique 1 Tong Wang 2 Qihang Lin 2 Arshia Sighani 3

Abstract
We propose a novel type of hybrid model for
multi-class classification, which utilizes competing linear models to collaborate with an existing black-box model, promoting transparency in
the decision-making process. Our proposed hybrid model, Model-Agnostic Linear Competitors
(MALC), brings together the interpretable power
of linear models and the good predictive performance of the state-of-the-art black-box models.
We formulate the training of a MALC model as
a convex optimization problem, optimizing the
predictive accuracy and transparency (defined as
the percentage of data captured by the linear models) in the objective function. Experiments show
that MALC offers more model flexibility for users
to balance transparency and accuracy, in contrast
to the currently available choice of either a pure
black-box model or a pure interpretable model.
The human evaluation also shows that more users
are likely to choose MALC for this model flexibility compared with interpretable models and
black-box models.

1. Introduction
There has been an increasing need for modern machine
learning models to provide accurate and interpretable predictions to assist humans in decision making, especially in
high stakes applications such as healthcare, judiciaries, etc.
(Letham et al., 2015; Yang et al., 2018; Caruana et al., 2015;
Chen et al., 2018). Thus, many state-of-the-art machine
learning models, such as neural networks and ensembles,
stumble in these domains since they are black-box in nature.
Black-box models have an opaque or highly complicated
decision-making process that is hard for a human to un1

Program in Applied Mathematical and Computational Sciences, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA 2 Department
of Business Analytics, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa,
USA 3 BASIS Independent Silicon Valley, San Jose, California,
USA. Correspondence to: Tong Wang <tong-wang@uiowa.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

derstand and rationalize. Driven by the practical needs,
researchers have shifted their focus to account for both
transparency and predictive performance of models in recent years.
Due to the extended interest and effort, various forms of
interpretable models have been proposed (Wang et al., 2017;
Zeng et al., 2017; Wei et al., 2019; Richter & Weber, 2016;
Wang, 2018). However, interpretability has multiple goals
that are not always aligned with the production of the most
generalizable model architecture (Lipton, 2018), especially
when users have strict and domain-specific requirements for
interpretability. Thus the performance loss is often prevalent
when dealing with complicated predictive tasks, putting
users in the dilemma of choosing between interpretability
and predictive performance.
In this paper, we propose a new form of a model, ModelAgnostic Linear Competitors (MALC), for multi-class classification. MALC utilizes linear models to predict a subset
of data while leaving the remaining possibly harder predictions to a black-box model. The model combines the
intuitive power of interpretable models and the good predictive performance of black-box models to reach some
controllable middle ground where both transparency and
good predictive performance is possible.
To build a hybrid model for multi-class classification, we design a unique mechanism to utilize competition and collaboration among the participating models. Given a K−class
classification problem, we design K + 1 models, which we
call competitors. K of the competitors are interpretable,
capturing K classes, respectively. The remaining one is a
pre-trained black-box model, called competitor B. Given
an input x, all of the K interpretable competitors bid to
claim the input by proposing a score. The input is then
assigned to the highest bidder, with a significant margin
over the other competitors’ scores. If there does not exist
a winner (not winning by a large margin), then none of the
K competitors can claim the input, and it is then sent to
competitor B by default. At competitor B, the input will be
classified, and this classification process is unknown to other
competitors the whole time (during training and testing), i.e.,
model-agnostic. The competitor B can be any pre-trained
multi-class classifier with high predictive accuracy. We let
all interpretable competitors be linear models, which are of-

