Obtaining Adjustable Regularization for Free via Iterate Averaging

Jingfeng Wu 1 Vladimir Braverman 1 Lin F. Yang 2

Abstract
Regularization for optimization is a crucial technique to avoid overfitting in machine learning. In
order to obtain the best performance, we usually
train a model by tuning the regularization parameters. It becomes costly, however, when a single
round of training takes significant amount of time.
Very recently, Neu & Rosasco (2018) show that
if we run stochastic gradient descent (SGD) on
linear regression problems, then by averaging the
SGD iterates properly, we obtain a regularized solution. It left open whether the same phenomenon
can be achieved for other optimization problems
and algorithms. In this paper, we establish an averaging scheme that provably converts the iterates of
SGD on an arbitrary strongly convex and smooth
objective function to its regularized counterpart
with an adjustable regularization parameter. Our
approaches can be used for accelerated and preconditioned optimization methods as well. We
further show that the same methods work empirically on more general optimization objectives
including neural networks. In sum, we obtain adjustable regularization for free for a large class of
optimization problems and resolve an open question raised by Neu & Rosasco (2018).

1. Introduction
Regularization for optimization is a key technique for avoiding over-fitting in machine learning and statistics (Grandvalet & Bengio, 2005; Krogh & Hertz, 1992; Tibshirani,
1996; Tikhonov & Arsenin, 1977). The effects of explicit
regularization methods, i.e., an extra regularization term
added to the vanilla objective, are well studied, e.g., ridge
regression (Tikhonov & Arsenin, 1977), LASSO (Tibshirani, 1996) and entropy regularization (Grandvalet & Bengio, 2005). Despite the great benefits of adopting explicit
1

Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA 2 University of
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Jingfeng
Wu <uuujf@jhu.edu>, Lin F. Yang <linyang@ee.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

regularization, it could cause a huge computational burden
to search for the optimal hyperparameter associated with
the extra regularization term, especially for large-scale machine learning problems (Devlin et al., 2018; He et al., 2016;
Silver et al., 2017).
In another line of research, people recognize and utilize the
implicit regularization caused by certain components in machine learning algorithms, e.g., initialization (He et al., 2015;
Hu et al., 2020), batch normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy,
2015; Cai et al., 2018), iterate averaging (Bach & Moulines,
2013; Jain et al., 2018; Neu & Rosasco, 2018), and optimizer such as gradient descent (GD) (Gunasekar et al., 2018;
Soudry et al., 2018; Suggala et al., 2018). The regularization effect usually happens along the process of training
the model and/or requires little post-computation. A great
deal of evidence indicates that such a implicit bias plays a
crucial role for the generalization abilities in many modern
machine learning models (Zhang et al., 2016; Zhu et al.,
2018; Wilson et al., 2017; Soudry et al., 2018). However,
the implicit regularization is often a fixed effect and lacks
the flexibility to be adjusted. To fully utilize it, we need a
thorough understanding about the mechanism of the implicit
regularization.
Among all the efforts spent on understanding and utilizing the implicit regularization, the work on bridging iterate averaging with explicit regularization (Neu & Rosasco,
2018) is extraordinarily appealing. In particular, Neu &
Rosasco (2018) show that for linear regression, one can
achieve `2 -regularization effect for free by simply taking
geometrical averaging over the optimization path generated
by stochastic gradient descent (SGD), which costs little additional computation. More interestingly, the regularization
is adjustable, i.e., the solution biased by the regularizer in
arbitrary strength can be obtained by iterate averaging using
the corresponding weighting scheme. In a nutshell, this regularization approach has advantages over both the implicit
regularization methods for being adjustable, and the explicit
regularization methods for being cheap to tune.
Nevertheless, Neu & Rosasco (2018) only provide a method
and its analysis for linear regression optimized by SGD.
However linear regression itself is a rather restricted optimization objective. A nature question arises:
Can we obtain “free” and “adjustable” regularization for

