Partial Trace Regression and Low-Rank Kraus Decomposition

Hachem Kadri 1 Stéphane Ayache 1 Riikka Huusari 2 Alain Rakotomamonjy 3 4 Liva Ralaivola 4

Abstract
The trace regression model, a direct extension
of the well-studied linear regression model, allows one to map matrices to real-valued outputs.
We here introduce an even more general model,
namely the partial-trace regression model, a family of linear mappings from matrix-valued inputs
to matrix-valued outputs; this model subsumes the
trace regression model and thus the linear regression model. Borrowing tools from quantum information theory, where partial trace operators have
been extensively studied, we propose a framework
for learning partial trace regression models from
data by taking advantage of the so-called low-rank
Kraus representation of completely positive maps.
We show the relevance of our framework with
synthetic and real-world experiments conducted
for both i) matrix-to-matrix regression and ii) positive semidefinite matrix completion, two tasks
which can be formulated as partial trace regression problems.

1. Introduction
Trace regression model. The trace regression model or,
in short, trace regression, is a generalization of the wellknown linear regression model to the case where input data
are matrices instead of vectors (Rohde & Tsybakov, 2011;
Koltchinskii et al., 2011; Slawski et al., 2015), with the
output still being real-valued. This model assumes, for the
pair of covariates (X, y), the following relation between
the matrix-valued random variable X and the real-valued
random variable y:

y = tr B∗> X + ,
(1)
1
Aix-Marseille University, CNRS, LIS, Marseille, France
Helsinki Institute for Information Technology HIIT, Department
of Computer Science, Aalto University, Espoo, Finland 3 Université
Rouen Normandie, LITIS, Rouen, France 4 Criteo AI Lab, Paris,
France. Correspondence to: Hachem Kadri <hachem.kadri@univamu.fr>.

Figure 1. Illustration of the partial trace operation. The partial
trace operation applied to m × m-blocks of a qm × qm matrix
gives a q × q matrix as an output.

where tr(·) denotes the trace, B∗ is some unknown matrix of regression coefficients, and  is random noise. This
model has been used beyond mere matrix regression for
problems such as phase retrieval (Candes et al., 2013), quantum state tomography (Gross et al., 2010), and matrix completion (Klopp, 2011).
Given a sample S = {(Xi , yi )}`i=1 , where Xi is a p1 × p2
matrix and yi ∈ R, and each (Xi , yi ) is assumed to be
distributed as (X, y), the training task associated with stab that is a proxy to
tistical model (1) is to find a matrix B
B∗ . To this end, Koltchinskii et al. (2011); Fan et al. (2019)
b of B∗ as the solution
proposed to compute an estimation B
of the regularized least squares problem
b = arg min
B
B

`
X

yi − tr B > Xi

2

+ λkBk1 ,

(2)

i=1

where k · k1 is the trace norm (or nuclear norm), which
B, a key feature for the authors to
promotes a low-rank b
b from B∗ . Slawski
establish bounds on the deviation of B
et al. (2015); Koltchinskii & Xia (2015) have considered the
.
particular case where p = p1 = p2 and B∗ is assumed to be
+
from Sp , the cone of positive semidefinite matrices of order
b
p, and they showed that guarantees on the deviation of B
b
from B∗ continue to hold when B is computed as

2

th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

b = arg min
B
B∈S+
p

`
X

2

(yi − tr (BXi )) .

(3)

i=1

Here, the norm regularization of (2) is no longer present
b to be in
and it is replaced by an explicit restriction for B
S+
(as
B
).
This
setting
is
tied
to
the
learning
of
completely
∗
p
positive maps developed hereafter.

