Convolutional dictionary learning based auto-encoders
for natural exponential-family distributions

Bahareh Tolooshams * 1 Andrew H. Song * 2 Simona Temereanca 3 Demba Ba 1

Abstract
We introduce a class of auto-encoder neural networks tailored to data from the natural exponential family (e.g., count data). The architectures
are inspired by the problem of learning the filters
in a convolutional generative model with sparsity constraints, often referred to as convolutional
dictionary learning (CDL). Our work is the first
to combine ideas from convolutional generative
models and deep learning for data that are naturally modeled with a non-Gaussian distribution
(e.g., binomial and Poisson). This perspective
provides us with a scalable and flexible framework that can be re-purposed for a wide range of
tasks and assumptions on the generative model.
Specifically, the iterative optimization procedure
for solving CDL, an unsupervised task, is mapped
to an unfolded and constrained neural network,
with iterative adjustments to the inputs to account
for the generative distribution. We also show that
the framework can easily be extended for discriminative training, appropriate for a supervised
task. We 1) demonstrate that fitting the generative model to learn, in an unsupervised fashion,
the latent stimulus that underlies neural spiking
data leads to better goodness-of-fit compared to
other baselines, 2) show competitive performance
compared to state-of-the-art algorithms for supervised Poisson image denoising, with significantly
fewer parameters, and 3) characterize the gradient
dynamics of the shallow binomial auto-encoder.

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Engineering and Applied
Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 2 Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 3 Brown University, Boston, MA. Correspondence to: Bahareh Tolooshams
<btolooshams@seas.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Learning shift-invariant patterns from a dataset has given
rise to work in different communities, most notably in signal
processing (SP) and deep learning. In the former, this problem is referred to as convolutional dictionary learning (CDL)
(Garcia-Cardona & Wohlberg, 2018). CDL imposes a linear
generative model where the data are generated by a sparse
linear combination of shifts of localized patterns. In the
latter, convolutional neural networks (NNs) (LeCun et al.,
2015) have excelled in identifying shift-invariant patterns.
Recently, the iterative nature of the optimization algorithms
for performing CDL has inspired the utilization of NNs
as an efficient and scalable alternative, starting with the
seminal work of (Gregor & Lecun, 2010), and followed
by (Tolooshams et al., 2018; Sreter & Giryes, 2018; Sulam
et al., 2019). Specifically, the iterative steps are expressed
as a recurrent NN, and thus solving the optimization simply
becomes passing the input through an unrolled NN (Hershey
et al., 2014; Monga et al., 2019). At one end of the spectrum,
this perspective, through weight-tying, leads to architectures
with significantly fewer parameters than a generic NN. At
the other end, by untying the weights, it motivates new
architectures that depart, and could not be arrived at, from
the generative perspective (Gregor & Lecun, 2010; Sreter &
Giryes, 2018).
The majority of the literature at the intersection of generative
models and NNs assumes that the data are real-valued and
therefore are not appropriate for binary or count-valued data,
such as neural spiking data and photon-based images (Yang
et al., 2011). Nevertheless, several works on Poisson image denoising, arguably the most popular application involving non real-valued data, can be found separately in
both communities. In the SP community, the negative Poisson data likelihood is either explicitly minimized (Salmon
et al., 2014; Giryes & Elad, 2014) or used as a penalty term
added to the objective of an image denoising problem with
Gaussian noise (Ma et al., 2013). Being rooted in the dictionary learning formalism, these methods operate in an
unsupervised manner. Although they yield good denoising performance, their main drawbacks are scalability and
computational efficiency.

