Amortised Learning by Wake-Sleep

Li K. Wenliang 1 Theodore Moskovitz 1 Heishiro Kanagawa 1 Maneesh Sahani 1

Abstract
Models that employ latent variables to capture
structure in observed data lie at the heart of
many current unsupervised learning algorithms,
but exact maximum-likelihood learning for powerful and flexible latent-variable models is almost always intractable. Thus, state-of-the-art approaches either abandon the maximum-likelihood
framework entirely, or else rely on a variety of
variational approximations to the posterior distribution over the latents. Here, we propose an
alternative approach that we call amortised learning. Rather than computing an approximation to
the posterior over latents, we use a wake-sleep
Monte-Carlo strategy to learn a function that directly estimates the maximum-likelihood parameter updates. Amortised learning is possible whenever samples of latents and observations can be
simulated from the generative model, treating the
model as a “black box”. We demonstrate its effectiveness on a wide range of complex models,
including those with latents that are discrete or
supported on non-Euclidean spaces.

1. Introduction
Many problems in machine learning, particularly unsupervised learning, can be approached by fitting flexible parametric probabilistic models to data, often based on “local”
latent variables whose number scales with the number of
observations. Once the optimal parameters are found, the
resulting model may be used to synthesise samples, detect
outliers, or relate observations to a latent “representation”.
The quality of all of these operations depends on the appropriateness of the model class chosen and the optimality of
the identified parameters.
Although many fitting objectives have been explored in the
literature, maximum-likelihood (ML) estimation remains
1
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit. Correspondence
to: Li K. Wenliang <kevinli@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

prominent and comes with attractive theoretical properties,
including consistency and asymptotic efficiency (Newey
& McFadden, 1994). A challenge, however, is that analytic evaluation of the likelihoods of rich, flexible latent
variable models is usually intractable. The ExpectationMaximisation (EM) algorithm (Dempster et al., 1977) offers
one route to ML estimation in such circumstances, but it
in turn requires an explicit calculation of (expected values
under) the posterior distribution over latent variables, which
also proves to be intractable in most cases of interest. Consequently, state-of-the-art ML-related methods almost always
rely on approximations, particularly in large-data settings.
Denote the joint distribution of a generative model as
pθ (z, x) where z is latent and x is observed, and θ is the
vector of parameters. EM breaks the ML problem into an iteration of two sub-problems. Given parameters θt on the tth
iteration, first find the posterior pθt (z|x); then maximise a
lower bound to the likelihood that depends on this posterior
to obtain θt+1 . This bound is tight when computed using
the correct posterior, ensuring convergence to a local mode
of the likelihood.
The intractability of pθ (z|x) forces some combination of
Monte-Carlo estimation and the use of a tractable parametric
approximating family which we call q(z|x) (Bishop, 2006).
To avoid repeating the expensive optimisation in finding
q(z|x) for each x, amortised inference trains an encoding
or recognition model, with parameters φ, to map from any x
directly to an approximate posterior qφ (z|x). Examples of
amortised inference models include the Helmholtz machine
(Dayan et al., 1995; Hinton et al., 1995) trained by the wakesleep algorithm; and the variational auto-encoder (VAE)
(Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014) trained
using reparamerisation gradient methods. With considerable effort on improving variational inference (reviewed in
(Zhang et al., 2018)), complex and flexible generative models have been trained on large, high-dimensional datasets.
However, approximate variational inference poses at least
three challenges. First, the parametric form of the approximate posterior q(z|x), and particularly any factorisations
assumed, must be crafted for each model. Second, methods
such as reparameterisation require specific transformations
tailored to the type of latent variables, whether they are
continuous or discrete, and whether or not the support is

