Spectral Subsampling MCMC for Stationary Time Series

Robert Salomone 1 Matias Quiroz 2 Robert Kohn 1 Mattias Villani 3 4 Minh-Ngoc Tran 5

Abstract
Bayesian inference using Markov Chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) on large datasets has developed
rapidly in recent years. However, the underlying
methods are generally limited to relatively simple
settings where the data have specific forms of independence. We propose a novel technique for
speeding up MCMC for time series data by efficient data subsampling in the frequency domain.
For several challenging time series models, we
demonstrate a speedup of up to two orders of magnitude while incurring negligible bias compared
to MCMC on the full dataset. We also propose
alternative control variates for variance reduction
based on data grouping and coreset constructions.

1. INTRODUCTION
Bayesian inference has gained widespread use in Statistics
and Machine Learning largely due to convenient and quite
generally applicable Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
and Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) algorithms that simulate from the posterior distribution of the model parameters.
However, it is now increasingly common for datasets to
contain millions or even billions of observations. This is
particularly true for temporal data recorded by sensors at
increasingly faster sampling rates. MCMC is often too
slow for such big data problems and practitioners are replacing MCMC with more scalable approximate methods such
as Variational Inference (Blei et al., 2017), Approximate
Bayesian Computation (Marin et al., 2012) and Integrated
Nested Laplace Approximation (Rue et al., 2009).
A recent strand of the literature instead proposes methods
that speed up MCMC and HMC by data subsampling, where
the costly likelihood evaluation in each MCMC iteration
is replaced by an estimate from a subsample of data observations (Quiroz et al., 2019a; Dang et al., 2019) or by
1

UNSW Sydney 2 University of Technology Sydney 3 Stockholm
University 4 Linköping University 5 University of Sydney. Correspondence to: Robert Salomone <r.salomone@unsw.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

a weighted coreset of data points found by optimization
(Campbell & Broderick, 2018; Campbell & Beronov, 2019;
Campbell & Broderick, 2019). Data subsampling methods
require that the log-likelihood is a sum, where each term
depends on a unique piece of data — a condition satisfied
for independent observations or for independent subjects in
longitudinal data (with potentially dependent data within
each subject) — but does not hold for general time series
problems.
Our paper extends the applicability of previously proposed
subsampling methods to stationary time series. The method
is based on using the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) to evaluate the likelihood function in the frequency domain for
the periodogram data. The advantage of working in the
frequency domain is that under quite general conditions the
periodogram observations are known to be asymptotically
independent and exponentially distributed with scale equal
to the spectral density. The logarithm of this so called Whittle likelihood approximation of the likelihood is therefore a
sum even when the data are dependent in the time domain.
The asymptotic nature of the Whittle likelihood makes it
especially suitable here since subsampling tends to be used
for large-scale problems where the Whittle likelihood is
expected to be accurate. Moreover, our algorithm can also
be used with the recently proposed Debiased Whittle Likelihood (Sykulski et al., 2019) which gives better likelihood
approximations for smaller datasets.
It is by now well established that efficient subsampling
MCMC methods require likelihood estimators with low
variance (Quiroz et al., 2019a;b). Variance reduction is
typically achieved by using control variates that approximate the individual log-likelihood terms, often by assuming
that these terms are approximately quadratic around a reference value. Our second contribution proposes a grouping
strategy that makes the grouped log-likelihood terms more
quadratic compared to that of the individual log-likelihood
terms. In addition, when the number of observation in each
group is large, we propose to use the coreset construction of
Campbell & Broderick (2018) to approximate the grouped
log-likelihood. This is advantageous when the grouped loglikelihood terms are not approximately quadratic. The new
control variate approach thus confers additional robustness
to the method, and is of independent interest beyond the
time series setting.

