Quantum Expectation-Maximization for Gaussian mixture models

Iordanis Kerenidis 1 2 Alessandro Luongo 3 1 Anupam Prakash 2

Abstract
We define a quantum version of ExpectationMaximization (QEM), a fundamental tool in unsupervised machine learning, often used to solve
maximum likelihood (ML) and Maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimation problems. We use QEM
to fit a Gaussian mixture model, and show how to
generalize it to fit mixture models with base distributions in the exponential family. Given quantum
access to a dataset, our algorithm has convergence
and precision guarantees similar to the classical
algorithm, while the runtime is polylogarithmic
in the number of elements in the training set and
polynomial in other parameters, such as the dimension of the feature space and the number of
components in the mixture. We discuss the performance of the algorithm on a dataset that is
expected to be classified successfully by classical
EM and provide guarantees for its runtime.

1. Introduction
Over the last few years, the effort to find real-world applications of quantum computers has greatly intensified. Along
with chemistry, material sciences, finance, one of the fields
where quantum computers are expected to be most beneficial is machine learning. Several different algorithms
have been proposed for quantum machine learning (Wiebe
et al., 2017; Harrow et al., 2009; Subaşı et al., 2019; Farhi
& Neven, 2018; Montanaro, 2016; Biamonte et al., 2017;
Chakrabarti et al., 2019), both for the supervised and unsupervised setting, and despite the lack of large-scale quantum
computers and quantum memory devices, some quantum
algorithms have been demonstrated in proof-of-principle
experiments (Li et al., 2015; Otterbach et al., 2017; Jiang
et al., 2019).
*
Equal contribution 1 Institute de Recherche en Informatique
Fondamental - Paris, France 2 QC Ware Corp. - Palo Alto, California 3 Atos Quantum Lab - Les Clayes sous Bois, France. Correspondence to: Alessandro Luongo <aluongo@irif.fr>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Here, we look at Expectation-Maximization (EM), a fundamental algorithm in unsupervised learning, that can be
used to fit different mixture models and give maximum likelihood estimates for latent variable models. Such generative
models are one of the most promising approaches to unsupervised problems. The goal of a generative model is to learn a
probability distribution that is most likely to have generated
the data collected in a dataset set V ∈ Rn×d of n vectors of
d features. Fitting a model consists in learning the parameters of a probability distribution p in a certain parameterized
family that best describes our vectors vi . This formulation
allows one to reduce a statistical problem into an optimization problem. For a given machine learning model γ, under
the assumption that each point is independent and identically distributed
log-likelihood of a dataset V is defined
Pthe
n
as `(γ; V ) := i=1 log p(vi |γ), where p(vi |γ) is the probability that a point vi comes from model γ. For ML estimates
∗
we want to find the model γM
L := arg maxγ `(γ; V ). Due
to the non-convex landscape of the function, optimizing `
using gradient based techniques often do not perform well.
MAP estimates can be seen as the Bayesian version of maximum likelihood estimation
Pn problems, and are defined as
∗
γM
AP := arg maxγ
i=1 log p(vi |γ) + log p(γ). MAP
estimates are often preferred over ML estimates, due to a
reduced propensity to overfit.
The EM algorithm has been proposed in different works
by different authors but has been formalized as we know
it in 1977 (Dempster et al., 1977). For more details, we
refer to (Lindsay, 1995; Bilmes et al., 1998). EM is an
iterative algorithm which is guaranteed to converge to a
(local) optimum of the likelihood, and it is widely used
to solve the ML or the MAP estimation problems. This
algorithm has a striking number of applications and has
been successfully used for medical imaging (Balafar et al.,
2010), image restoration (Lagendijk et al., 1990), problems
in computational biology (Fan et al., 2010), and so on.
One of the most important applications of the EM algorithm
is for fitting mixture models in machine learning (Murphy,
2012). Most of the mixture models use a base distribution
that belongs to the exponential family: Poisson (Church &
Gale, 1995), Binomial, Multinomial, log-normal (Dexter &
Tanner, 1972), exponential (Ghitany et al., 1994), Dirichlet
multinomial (Yin & Wang, 2014), and others. EM is also
used to fit mixtures of experts, mixtures of the student T dis-

