Graph-based Nearest Neighbor Search:
From Practice to Theory

Liudmila Prokhorenkova * 1 2 3 Aleksandr Shekhovtsov * 1 3

Abstract
Graph-based approaches are empirically shown to
be very successful for the nearest neighbor search
(NNS). However, there has been very little research on their theoretical guarantees. We fill this
gap and rigorously analyze the performance of
graph-based NNS algorithms, specifically focusing on the low-dimensional (d  log n) regime.
In addition to the basic greedy algorithm on nearest neighbor graphs, we also analyze the most
successful heuristics commonly used in practice:
speeding up via adding shortcut edges and improving accuracy via maintaining a dynamic list
of candidates. We believe that our theoretical insights supported by experimental analysis are an
important step towards understanding the limits
and benefits of graph-based NNS algorithms.

1. Introduction
Many methods in machine learning, pattern recognition,
coding theory, and other research areas are based on nearest
neighbor search (Bishop, 2006; Chen & Shah, 2018; May &
Ozerov, 2015; Shakhnarovich et al., 2006). In particular, the
k-nearest neighbor method is included in the list of top 10
algorithms in data mining (Wu et al., 2008). Since modern
datasets are mostly massive (both in terms of the number of
elements n and the dimension d), reducing the computation
complexity of NNS algorithms is of the essence. The nearest
neighbor problem is to preprocess a given dataset D in such
a way that for an arbitrary forthcoming query vector q we
can quickly (in time o(n)) find its nearest neighbors in D.
Many efficient methods exist for NN problem, especially
when the dimension d is small (Arya et al., 1998; Bentley,
*

Equal contribution 1 Yandex, Moscow, Russia 2 Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Moscow Region,
Russia 3 Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russia. Correspondence to: Liudmila Prokhorenkova <ostroumova-la@yandexteam.ru>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1975; Meiser, 1993). In particular, the algorithms based on
recursive partitions of the space, like k-d threes and random
projection trees, are widely used (Bentley, 1975; Dasgupta
& Freund, 2008; Dasgupta & Sinha, 2015; Keivani & Sinha,
2018). The most well-known algorithm usable for large d is
the Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH) (Indyk & Motwani,
1998), which is well studied theoretically and widely used
in practical applications.
Recently, graph-based approaches were shown to demonstrate superior performance over other types of algorithms
in many large-scale applications of NNS (Aumüller et al.,
2019). Most graph-based methods are based on constructing a nearest neighbor graph (or its approximation), where
nodes correspond to the elements of D, and each node is
connected to its nearest neighbors by directed edges (Dong
et al., 2011; Hajebi et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2012). Then,
for a given query q, one first takes an element in D (either
random or fixed predefined) and makes greedy steps towards
q on the graph: at each step, all neighbors of a current node
are evaluated, and the one closest to q is chosen. Various
additional heuristics were proposed to speed up graph-based
search (Baranchuk et al., 2019; Fu et al., 2019; Iwasaki &
Miyazaki, 2018; Malkov et al., 2014; Malkov & Yashunin,
2018).
While there is a lot of evidence empirically showing the
superiority of graph-based NNS algorithms in practical applications, there is very little theoretical research supporting
this. Laarhoven (2018) made the first step in this direction
by providing time–space trade-offs for approximate nearest
neighbor (ANN) search on sparse datasets uniformly distributed on a d-dimensional Euclidean sphere. The current
work significantly extends these results and differs in several
important aspects, as discussed in the next section.
Our analysis assumes the uniform distribution on a sphere,
and we mostly focus on the dense regime d  log n. This
setup is motivated by our experiments demonstrating that
uniformization and densification applied to a general dataset
may improve some graph-based NNS algorithms. The dense
regime is additionally motivated by the fact that real-world
datasets are known to have low intrinsic dimension (Beygelzimer et al., 2006; Lin & Zhao, 2019).

