Reinforcement Learning for Integer Programming: Learning to Cut

Yunhao Tang 1 Shipra Agrawal 1 Yuri Faenza 1

Abstract
Integer programming is a general optimization
framework with a wide variety of applications,
e.g., in scheduling, production planning, and
graph optimization. As Integer Programs (IPs)
model many provably hard to solve problems,
modern IP solvers rely on heuristics. These heuristics are often human-designed, and tuned over
time using experience and data. The goal of this
work is to show that the performance of those
heuristics can be greatly enhanced using reinforcement learning (RL). In particular, we investigate
a specific methodology for solving IPs, known
as the cutting plane method. This method is employed as a subroutine by all modern IP solvers.
We present a deep RL formulation, network architecture, and algorithms for intelligent adaptive selection of cutting planes (aka cuts). Across a wide
range of IP tasks, we show that our trained RL
agent significantly outperforms human-designed
heuristics. Further, our experiments show that the
RL agent adds meaningful cuts (e.g. resembling
cover inequalities when applied to the knapsack
problem), and has generalization properties across
instance sizes and problem classes. The trained
agent is also demonstrated to benefit the popular
downstream application of cutting plane methods
in Branch-and-Cut algorithm, which is the backbone of state-of-the-art commercial IP solvers.

1. Introduction
Integer Programming is a very versatile modeling tool for
discrete and combinatorial optimization problems, with applications in scheduling and production planning, among
others. In its most general form, an Integer Program (IP)
minimizes a linear objective function over a set of integer
points that satisfy a finite family of linear constraints. Clas1
Columbia University, New York, USA. Correspondence to:
yt2541@coluymbia.edu <Yunhao>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

sical results in polyhedral theory (see e.g. Conforti et al.
(2014)) imply that any combinatorial optimization problem
with finite feasible region can be formulated as an IP. Hence,
IP is a natural model for many graph optimization problems,
such as the celebrated Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP).
Due to the their generality, IPs can be very hard to solve in
theory (NP-hard) and in practice. There is no polynomial
time algorithm with guaranteed solutions for all IPs. It is
therefore crucial to develop efficient heuristics for solving
specific classes of IPs. Machine learning (ML) arises as a
natural tool for tuning those heuristics. Indeed, the application of ML to discrete optimization has been a topic of
significant interest in recent years, with a range of different
approaches in the literature (Bengio et al., 2018)
One set of approaches focus on directly learning the mapping from an IP instance to an approximate optimal solution (Vinyals et al., 2015; Bello et al., 2017; Nowak et al.,
2017; Kool and Welling, 2018). These methods implicitly
learn a solution procedure for a problem instance as a function prediction. These approaches are attractive for their
blackbox nature and wide applicability. At the other end
of the spectrum are approaches which embed ML agents
as subroutines in a problem-specific, human-designed algorithms (Dai et al., 2017; Li et al., 2018). ML is used
to improve some heuristic parts of that algorithm. These
approaches can benefit from algorithm design know-how
for many important and difficult classes of problems, but
their applicability is limited by the specific (e.g. greedy)
algorithmic techniques.
In this paper, we take an approach with the potential to
combine the benefits of both lines of research described
above. We design a reinforcement learning (RL) agent to be
used as a subroutine in a popular algorithmic framework for
IP called the cutting plane method, thus building upon and
benefiting from decades of research and understanding of
this fundamental approach for solving IPs. The specific cutting plane algorithm that we focus on is Gomory’s method
(Gomory, 1960). Gomory’s cutting plane method is guaranteed to solve any IP in finite time, thus our approach enjoys
wide applicability. In fact, we demonstrate that our trained
RL agent can even be used, in an almost blackbox manner, as a subroutine in another powerful IP method called
Branch-and-Cut (B&C), to obtain significant improvements.

