Does the Markov Decision Process Fit the Data:
Testing for the Markov Property in Sequential Decision Making

Chengchun Shi 1 Runzhe Wan 2 Rui Song 2 Wenbin Lu 2 Ling Leng 3

Abstract
The Markov assumption (MA) is fundamental
to the empirical validity of reinforcement learning. In this paper, we propose a novel ForwardBackward Learning procedure to test MA in sequential decision making. The proposed test does
not assume any parametric form on the joint distribution of the observed data and plays an important role for identifying the optimal policy in
high-order Markov decision processes (MDPs)
and partially observable MDPs. Theoretically, we
establish the validity of our test. Empirically, we
apply our test to both synthetic datasets and a
real data example from mobile health studies to
illustrate its usefulness.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a general technique that
allows an agent to learn and interact with an environment.
In RL, the state-action-reward triplet is typically modelled
by the Markov decision process (MDP, see e.g. Puterman,
1994). Central to the empirical validity of various RL algorithms is the Markov assumption (MA). Under MA, there
exists an optimal stationary policy that is no worse than
any non-stationary or history dependent policies (Puterman,
1994; Sutton & Barto, 2018). When this assumption is violated, the optimal policy might depend on lagged variables
and any stationary policy can be sub-optimal. Thus, MA
forms the basis for us to select the set of state variables to
implement RL algorithms. The focus of this paper is to test
MA in sequential decision making problems.
1
Department of Statistics, London School of Economics and Political Science, UK 2 Department of Statistics, North Carolina State
University, USA 3 Amazon, USA. Correspondence to: Chengchun
Shi <c.shi7@lse.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1.1. Contributions and Advances of Our Test
First, our test is useful in identifying the optimal policy in
high-order MDPs (HMDPs). Under HMDPs, the optimal
policy at time t depends not only on the current covariates St , but also the past state-action pairs (St−1 , At−1 ),
· · · , (St−κ0 +1 , At−κ0 +1 ) for some κ0 > 1. In real-world
applications, it remains challenging to properly select the
look-back period κ0 . On one hand, κ0 shall be sufficiently
large to guarantee MA holds. On the other hand, including
too many lagged variables will result in a very noisy policy.
To determine κ0 , we propose to construct the state by concatenating measurements taken at time points t, · · · , t−k+1
and sequentially apply our test for k = 1, 2, · · · , until the
null hypothesis MA is not rejected. Then we use existing
RL algorithms based on the constructed state to estimate the
optimal policy. We apply such a procedure to both synthetic
and real datasets in Section 5.2. Results show that the estimated policy based on our constructed states achieves the
largest value in almost all cases.
Second, our test is useful in detecting partially observable
MDPs (POMDPs). Suppose we concatenate measurements
over sufficiently many decision points and our test still rejects MA. Then we shall consider modelling the system
dynamics by POMDPs or other non-Markovian problems.
Applying RL algorithms designed for these settings has
been shown to outperform those for standard MDPs (see e.g.
Hausknecht & Stone, 2015). In Section 5.3, we illustrate
the usefulness of our test in detecting POMDPs.
Third, we propose a novel testing procedure to test MA. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first work on developing valid statistical tests for MA in sequential decision
making. Major challenges arise when the state vector is
moderate or high-dimensional. This is certainly the case
as we convert the process into an MDP by concatenating
data over multiple decision points. Modern machine learning (ML) algorithms are well-suited for prediction tasks in
high dimensions. Yet, the large bias of the resulting estimates makes statistical inference (e.g., hypothesis testing)
extremely difficult. The key ingredient of our test lies in
constructing a doubly robust estimating equation to alleviate the biases. This ensures our test statistic has a tractable
limiting distribution even in high dimensions. Consequently,

