Safe Imitation Learning via Fast Bayesian Reward Inference from Preferences

Daniel S. Brown 1 Russell Coleman 1 2 Ravi Srinivasan 2 Scott Niekum 1

Abstract
Bayesian reward learning from demonstrations
enables rigorous safety and uncertainty analysis
when performing imitation learning. However,
Bayesian reward learning methods are typically
computationally intractable for complex control
problems. We propose Bayesian Reward Extrapolation (Bayesian REX), a highly efficient
Bayesian reward learning algorithm that scales
to high-dimensional imitation learning problems
by pre-training a low-dimensional feature encoding via self-supervised tasks and then leveraging
preferences over demonstrations to perform fast
Bayesian inference. Bayesian REX can learn to
play Atari games from demonstrations, without
access to the game score and can generate 100,000
samples from the posterior over reward functions
in only 5 minutes on a personal laptop. Bayesian
REX also results in imitation learning performance that is competitive with or better than stateof-the-art methods that only learn point estimates
of the reward function. Finally, Bayesian REX enables efficient high-confidence policy evaluation
without having access to samples of the reward
function. These high-confidence performance
bounds can be used to rank the performance and
risk of a variety of evaluation policies and provide
a way to detect reward hacking behaviors.

1. Introduction
It is important that robots and other autonomous agents can
safely learn from and adapt to a variety of human preferences and goals. One common way to learn preferences
and goals is via imitation learning, in which an autonomous
agent learns how to perform a task by observing demonstrations of the task (Argall et al., 2009). When learning from
1
Computer Science Department, The University of Texas
at Austin. 2 Applied Research Laboratories, The University
of Texas at Austin. Correspondence to: Daniel Brown <dsbrown@cs.utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

demonstrations, it is important for an agent to be able to
provide high-confidence bounds on its performance with respect to the demonstrator; however, while there exists much
work on high-confidence off-policy evaluation in the reinforcement learning (RL) setting, there has been much less
work on high-confidence policy evaluation in the imitation
learning setting, where the reward samples are unavailable.
Prior work on high-confidence policy evaluation for imitation learning has used Bayesian inverse reinforcement
learning (IRL) (Ramachandran & Amir, 2007) to allow an
agent to reason about reward uncertainty and policy generalization error (Brown et al., 2018). However, Bayesian
IRL is typically intractable for complex problems due to the
need to repeatedly solve an MDP in the inner loop, resulting
in high computational cost as well as high sample cost if a
model is not available. This precludes robust safety and uncertainty analysis for imitation learning in high-dimensional
problems or in problems in which a model of the MDP is
unavailable. We seek to remedy this problem by proposing and evaluating a method for safe and efficient Bayesian
reward learning via preferences over demonstrations. Preferences over trajectories are intuitive for humans to provide
(Akrour et al., 2011; Wilson et al., 2012; Sadigh et al., 2017;
Christiano et al., 2017; Palan et al., 2019) and enable betterthan-demonstrator performance (Brown et al., 2019b;a). To
the best of our knowledge, we are the first to show that
preferences over demonstrations enable both fast Bayesian
reward learning in high-dimensional, visual control tasks as
well as efficient high-confidence performance bounds.
We first formalize the problem of high-confidence policy
evaluation (Thomas et al., 2015) for imitation learning. We
then propose a novel algorithm, Bayesian Reward Extrapolation (Bayesian REX), that uses a pairwise ranking likelihood
to significantly increase the efficiency of generating samples
from the posterior distribution over reward functions. We
demonstrate that Bayesian REX can leverage neural network
function approximation to learn useful reward features via
self-supervised learning in order to efficiently perform deep
Bayesian reward inference from visual demonstrations. Finally, we demonstrate that samples obtained from Bayesian
REX can be used to solve the high-confidence policy evaluation problem for imitation learning. We evaluate our method
on imitation learning for Atari games and demonstrate that
we can efficiently compute high-confidence bounds on pol-

