Uncertainty-Aware Lookahead Factor Models for Quantitative Investing

Lakshay Chauhan 1 John Alberg 1 Zachary C. Lipton 2 3

Abstract
On a periodic basis, publicly traded companies
report fundamentals, ﬁnancial data including revenue, earnings, debt, among others. Quantitative ﬁnance research has identiﬁed several factors,
functions of the reported data that historically correlate with stock market performance. In this
paper, we ﬁrst show through simulation that if we
could select stocks via factors calculated on future fundamentals (via oracle), that our portfolios
would far outperform standard factor models. Motivated by this insight, we train deep nets to forecast future fundamentals from a trailing 5-year history. We propose lookahead factor models which
plug these predicted future fundamentals into traditional factors. Finally, we incorporate uncertainty estimates from both neural heteroscedastic
regression and a dropout-based heuristic, improving performance by adjusting our portfolios to
avert risk. In retrospective analysis, we leverage
an industry-grade portfolio simulator (backtester)
to show simultaneous improvement in annualized
return and Sharpe ratio. Speciﬁcally, the simulated annualized return for the uncertainty-aware
model is 17.7% (vs 14.0% for a standard factor
model) and the Sharpe ratio is 0.84 (vs 0.52).

1. Introduction
Public stock markets provide a venue for buying and selling
shares, which represent fractional ownership of individual
companies. Prices ﬂuctuate frequently, with the drivers of
price movement occurring on multiple time scales. In the
short run, price movements might reﬂect the dynamics of
order execution (Barclay & Warner, 1993; Bessembinder,
2003) and the behavior of high frequency traders (Menkveld,
1

Euclidean Technologies, Seattle, USA 2 Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA 3 Amazon AI, Seattle, USA. Correspondence to: Lakshay Chauhan <lakshay.chauhan@euclidean.com>,
John Alberg <john.alberg@euclidean.com>, Zachary Lipton <zlipton@cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

2016; McGroarty et al., 2018). On the scale of days, price
ﬂuctuation might be driven by the news cycle (Boudoukh
et al., 2013; Rothenstein et al., 2011; Schumaker & Maida,
2018; Cruz et al., 2013), reports of sales numbers, or product
launches (Koku et al., 1997). In the long run, we expect a
company’s market value to reﬂect its ﬁnancial performance
as captured in fundamental data, i.e., reported ﬁnancial
information such as income, revenue, assets, dividends, and
debt (Goedhart et al., 2005b; Dimson et al., 2017; Goedhart
et al., 2005a). One popular strategy called value investing is
predicated on the idea that the best features for predicting the
long-term returns on shares in a company are the currentlyavailable fundamental data.
In a typical quantitative (systematic) investing strategy, we
sort the set of available stocks according to some factor and
construct investment portfolios comprised of those stocks
which score highest (Dimson et al., 2017). Many quantitative investors engineer value factors, typically a ratio of
some fundamental to the stock’s price. Examples include
book-to-market (the ratio of book value to market value)
and EBIT /EV (earnings before interest and taxes normalized by enterprise value). Stocks with high value factor
ratios are called value stocks and those with low ratios are
called growth stocks—presumably the high prices of these
stocks is predicated on anticipated growth in the future. A
basic premise of value investors is that the market tends
to systematically over-value growth stocks. Academic researchers have demonstrated (empirically) that portfolios
that upweight value stocks have historically outperformed
portfolios that upweight growth stocks over the long run
(Pätäri & Leivo, 2017; Fama & French, 1992).
In this paper, we propose an investment strategy that constructs portfolios of stocks based on predicted future fundamentals. Rather than comparing current fundamentals to the
current price, our approach is based on the intuition that the
long-term success of an investment depends on how well the
stock is currently priced relative to future fundamentals. To
verify this hypothesis, we run backtests with a clairvoyant
model (oracle) that can access future ﬁnancial reports.
Our experiments show that from Jan 1, 2000 to Dec 31, 2019,
a clairvoyant EBIT /EV factor model that perfectly forecasts future EBIT (12 months out) would have achieved
a 40% compound annualized return (Figure 2). That com-

