Don’t Waste Your Bits! Squeeze Activations and Gradients for
Deep Neural Networks via T INY S CRIPT

Fangcheng Fu 1 2 Yuzheng Hu 1 Yihan He 1 Jiawei Jiang 3 Yingxia Shao 4 Ce Zhang 3 Bin Cui 1 5

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed intensive research interests on training deep neural networks (DNNs)
more efficiently by quantization-based compression methods, which facilitate DNNs training in
two ways: (1) activations are quantized to shrink
the memory consumption, and (2) gradients are
quantized to decrease the communication cost.
However, existing methods mostly use a uniform
mechanism that quantizes the values evenly. Such
a scheme may cause a large quantization variance
and slow down the convergence in practice.
In this work, we introduce T INY S CRIPT, which
applies a non-uniform quantization algorithm to
both activations and gradients. T INY S CRIPT models the original values by a family of Weibull distributions and searches for “quantization knobs”
that minimize quantization variance. We also
discuss the convergence of the non-uniform
quantization algorithm on DNNs with varying
depths, shedding light on the number of bits required for convergence. Experiments show that
T INY S CRIPT always obtains lower quantization
variance, and achieves comparable model qualities against full precision training using 1-2 bits
less than the uniform-based counterpart.

1. Introduction
Deep learning (DL) has brought revolutionary changes to
machine learning and made remarkable improvements on
various complicated tasks such as image recognition, natural language processing, recommendation, and autonomous
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology & Key
Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies (MOE),
Peking University 2 Tencent Inc. 3 ETH Zurich 4 Beijing Key Lab of
Intelligent Telecommunications Software and Multimedia, BUPT
5
Center for Data Science & National Engineering Laboratory for
Big Data Analysis and Applications, Peking University. Correspondence to: Bin Cui <bin.cui@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

drawback 1:
most values tend to
be quantized to s2(=0) ✕ ✕
distribution
s0

s1

✕ ✕
✕ ✕ ✕ ✕
✕ ✕ ✕ ✕ ✕ ✕
✕ ✕ ✕ ✕ ✕ ✕
✕ ✕ ✕ ✕ ✕ ✕

s2

drawback 2:
high magnitude
in quant. error
s3

s4

Figure 1. Uniform quantization with n = 4 on a distribution which
has the properties of central tendency and long-tailed.

driving (He et al., 2016; Devlin et al., 2019; Arun & Govindan, 2018; Chen et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020; Gharibshah
et al., 2020). Recently, with the incredible surge of big
data and trend of edge-computing, many researchers have
devoted efforts to training deep neural networks (DNNs)
on edge devices. However, due to the large amount of
data and increasingly complex model architectures, training DNNs becomes both memory- and communicationbounded. For one thing, activations (a.k.a. feature maps) in
forward propagation need to be stored for gradient computation in backward propagation, which leads to large memory
footprints. For another, gradients need to be sent to central servers or exchanged among workers for model update,
resulting in heavy network transmission.
One approach to alleviating the burden of memory consumption and communication overhead is reducing the data size
by quantizing values to fewer bits, at the price of precision loss. For instance, gradient quantization accelerates
the overall training speed since the communication time is
decreased (Alistarh et al., 2017; Wen et al., 2017), whilst
(Chakrabarti & Moseley, 2019) copes with the memory
bottleneck by quantizing activations into 4 bits.
Given a tensor x and a set of quantization points s =
n
{st }t=0 satisfying −M = s0 < s1 < ... < sn = M ,
where M = ||x||∞ acts as a scaling factor1 , the stochastic
quantization on each element xi ∈ [st , st+1 ) is defined as
(
st ,
with probability (st+1 − xi )/(st+1 − st )
x̃i =
.
st+1 , with probability (xi − st )/(st+1 − st )
In a sense, each element is more likely to be quantized
1
(Alistarh et al., 2017) scales gradient with L2 norm in their
analysis, but uses L∞ norm in practice.

