Selective Dyna-Style Planning Under Limited Model Capacity

Zaheer Abbas 1 Samuel Sokota 1 Erin J. Talvitie 2 Martha White 1

Abstract
In model-based reinforcement learning, planning
with an imperfect model of the environment has
the potential to harm learning progress. But even
when a model is imperfect, it may still contain
information that is useful for planning. In this
paper, we investigate the idea of using an imperfect model selectively. The agent should plan in
parts of the state space where the model would be
helpful but refrain from using the model where
it would be harmful. An effective selective planning mechanism requires estimating predictive
uncertainty, which arises out of aleatoric uncertainty, parameter uncertainty, and model inadequacy, among other sources. Prior work has focused on parameter uncertainty for selective planning. In this work, we emphasize the importance
of model inadequacy. We show that heteroscedastic regression can signal predictive uncertainty
arising from model inadequacy that is complementary to that which is detected by methods designed for parameter uncertainty, indicating that
considering both parameter uncertainty and model
inadequacy may be a more promising direction
for effective selective planning than either in isolation.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning is a computational approach to
learning via interaction. An algorithmic agent is tasked
with determining a policy that yields a large cumulative
reward. Generally, the framework under which this agent
learns its policy falls into one of two groups: model-free
reinforcement learning or model-based reinforcement learning. In model-free reinforcement learning, the agent acts
in ignorance of any explicit understanding of the dynam1
The University of Alberta and the Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii) 2 Harvey Mudd College. Correspondence to: Zaheer Abbas <mzaheer@ualberta.ca>, Samuel Sokota
<sokota@ualberta.ca>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

ics of the environment, relying solely on its state to make
decisions. In contrast, in model-based reinforcement learning, the agent possesses a model of how its actions affect
the future. The agent uses this model to reason about the
implications of its decisions and plan its behavior.
The model-based approach to reinforcement learning offers
significant advantages in two regimes. The first is domains
in which acquiring experience is expensive. Model-based
methods can leverage planning to do policy improvement
without requiring further samples from the environment.
This is important both in the traditional Markov decision
process setting, where sample efficiency is often an important performance metric, and also in a more general pursuit
of artificial intelligence, where an agent may need to quickly
adapt to new goals. Second is the regime in which capacity
for function approximation is limited and the optimal value
function and policy cannot be represented. In such cases,
agents that plan at decision-time can construct temporary
local value estimates whose accuracy exceed the limits imposed by capacity restriction (Silver et al., 2008). These
agents are thereby able to achieve policies superior to those
of similarly limited model-free agents.
Far from being special cases, sample-sensitive, limitedcapacity settings are typical of difficult problems in reinforcement learning. It is therefore not surprising that many
of the most prominent success stories of reinforcement learning are model-based. In the Arcade Learning Environment
(ALE) (Bellemare et al., 2013), algorithms that distribute
training across many copies of an exact model of the environment have been shown to massively outperform algorithms
limited to a single instance of the environment (Kapturowski
et al., 2019). And in Chess, Shogi, Go, and Poker, superhuman performance can be reached by means of decision-time
planning on exact transition models (Silver et al., 2018;
Moravčı́k et al., 2017; Brown & Sandholm, 2017).
However, the premise of these successes is not the same as
that of the classical reinforcement learning problem. Rather
than being asked to learn a model from interactions with a
black box environment, these agents are provided an exact
model of the dynamics of the environment. While the latter
is in itself an important problem setting, the former is more
central to the pursuit of broadly intelligent agents.
Unfortunately, learning a useful model from interactions

