Adversarial Filters of Dataset Biases
Ronan Le Bras 1 Swabha Swayamdipta 1 Chandra Bhagavatula 1 Rowan Zellers 1 2 Matthew E. Peters 1
Ashish Sabharwal 1 Yejin Choi 1 2

Abstract
Large neural models have demonstrated humanlevel performance on language and vision benchmarks, while their performance degrades considerably on adversarial or out-of-distribution samples.
This raises the question of whether these models
have learned to solve a dataset rather than the
underlying task by overfitting to spurious dataset
biases. We investigate one recently proposed approach, AFL ITE, which adversarially filters such
dataset biases, as a means to mitigate the prevalent
overestimation of machine performance. We provide a theoretical understanding for AFL ITE, by
situating it in the generalized framework for optimum bias reduction. We present extensive supporting evidence that AFL ITE is broadly applicable for reduction of measurable dataset biases, and
that models trained on the filtered datasets yield
better generalization to out-of-distribution tasks.
Finally, filtering results in a large drop in model
performance (e.g., from 92% to 62% for SNLI),
while human performance still remains high. Our
work thus shows that such filtered datasets can
pose new research challenges for robust generalization by serving as upgraded benchmarks.3

1. Introduction
Large-scale neural networks have achieved superhuman performance across many popular AI benchmarks, for tasks as
diverse as image recognition (ImageNet; Russakovsky et al.,
2015), natural language inference (SNLI; Bowman et al.,
2015), and question answering (SQuAD; Rajpurkar et al.,
2016). However, the performance of such neural models
degrades considerably when tested on out-of-distribution
1

Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence 2 Paul G. Allen School
of Computer Science, University of Washington. Correspondence
to: Ronan Le Bras, Swabha Swayamdipta, Chandra Bhagavatula
<{ronanlb,swabhas,chandrab}@allenai.org>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).
3

Code & data at https://github.com/allenai/aflite-public

or adversarial samples, otherwise known as data “in the
wild” (Eykholt et al., 2018; Jia & Liang, 2017). This phenomenon indicates that high performance of the strongest
AI models is often confined to specific datasets, implicitly
making a closed-world assumption. In contrast, true learning of a task necessitates generalization, or an open-world
assumption. A major impediment to generalization is the
presence of spurious biases – unintended correlations between input and output – in existing datasets (Torralba &
Efros, 2011). Such biases or artifacts4 are often introduced
during data collection (Fouhey et al., 2018) or during human
annotation (Rudinger et al., 2017; Gururangan et al., 2018;
Poliak et al., 2018; Tsuchiya, 2018; Geva et al., 2019). Not
only do dataset biases inevitably bias the models trained on
them, but they have also been shown to significantly inflate
model performance, leading to an overestimation of the true
capabilities of current AI systems (Sakaguchi et al., 2020;
Hendrycks et al., 2019).
Many recent studies have investigated task or dataset specific biases, including language bias in Visual Question
Answering (Goyal et al., 2017), texture bias in ImageNet
(Geirhos et al., 2018), and hypothesis-only reliance in Natural Language Inference (Gururangan et al., 2018). These
studies have yielded domain-specific algorithms to address
the found biases. However, the vast majority of these studies follow a top-down framework where the bias reduction
algorithms are essentially guided by researchers’ intuitions
and domain insights on particular types of spurious biases.
While promising, such approaches are fundamentally limited by what the algorithm designers can manually recognize
and enumerate as unwanted biases.
Our work investigates AFL ITE, an alternative bottom-up
approach to algorithmic bias reduction. AFL ITE5 was recently proposed by Sakaguchi et al. (2020)—albeit very
succinctly—to systematically discover and filter any dataset
artifact in crowdsourced commonsense problems. AFL ITE
employs a model-based approach with the goal of removing
spurious artifacts in data beyond what humans can intuitively recognize, but those which are exploited by powerful
models. Figure 1 illustrates how AFL ITE reduces dataset
4
5

We will henceforth use biases and artifacts interchangeably.
Stands for Lightweight Adversarial Filtering.

