Multiclass Neural Network Minimization via Tropical Newton Polytope
Approximation

Georgios Smyrnis 1 Petros Maragos 1

Abstract
The field of tropical algebra is closely linked with
the domain of neural networks with piecewise linear activations, since their output can be described
via tropical polynomials in the max-plus semiring.
In this work, we attempt to make use of methods
stemming from a form of approximate division of
such polynomials, which relies on the approximation of their Newton Polytopes, in order to minimize networks trained for multiclass classification
problems. We make theoretical contributions in
this domain, by proposing and analyzing methods
which seek to reduce the size of such networks.
In addition, we make experimental evaluations on
the MNIST and Fashion-MNIST datasets, with
our results demonstrating a significant reduction
in network size, while retaining adequate performance.

1. Introduction
Minimax algebra (Cuninghame-Green, 1979) and tropical
geometry (Maclagan & Sturmfels, 2015) are fields of mathematics with various applications, such as in optimization
(Cohen et al., 2004; Akian et al., 2012), dynamical system
analysis (Butkovič, 2010; Maragos, 2017) and more. This
form of algebra corresponds to the analysis of the max-plus
semiring, which is defined as (IR ∪ {−∞}, max, +), meaning that regular addition and multiplication are substituted
with maximum and addition, respectively. Other works also
consider the dual version of this algebra, that is, min-plus algebra. In what follows, we shall consider the name “tropical
algebra” to refer to the max-plus version.
While the above field of mathematics has long been studied,
1

School of ECE, National Technical University of Athens,
Athens, Attiki, Greece. Also: Robot Perception and Interaction
Unit, Athena Research Center, Maroussi, Greece. Correspondence
to: Georgios Smyrnis <geosmirnis@gmail.com>, Petros Maragos
<maragos@cs.ntua.gr>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

the recent advent of neural networks has provided it with another application of great interest, which is the study of such
networks with piecewise linear activations. Neural networks
with ReLU activations, which fall under this category, are
closely linked with the field of tropical algebra, with recent
studies demonstrating that their output can be expressed by
the use of polynomials in the above semiring, henceforth
referred to as tropical polynomials (Charisopoulos & Maragos, 2017; 2018; Zhang et al., 2018). Therefore, further
analysis of such polynomials is expected to be useful in the
goal of furthering the study of such networks.
To that end, in recent studies (Smyrnis & Maragos, 2019;
Smyrnis et al., 2020) we introduced a process called Approximate Tropical Polynomial Divsion, which attempts to
emulate the normal Euclidean division of regular polynomials, when working with tropical polynomials. In that work,
we applied this process to the task of the minimization of
neural networks, trained for a binary classification problem.
This task is of interest, given that it is often the case that
neural networks require several redundant parameters during training, which may however be eliminated afterwards
(Luo et al., 2017; Han et al., 2015).
In this work, we further this initial study on the division of
multivariate tropical polynomials via a single divisor, by
examining how the process we previously introduced can
be extended to networks trained for multiclass classification
problems, an extension which requires the simultaneous
approximation of several Newton polytopes of tropical polynomials. We make theoretical contributions by analyzing
such extensions, and we also perform experiments on the
MNIST and Fashion-MNIST datasets to validate some of
our theoretical approaches, with results demonstrating adequate performance for the methods studied.
The rest of this work is structured as follows. In Section 2
we perform a review of certain previous works related to
this paper. In Section 3 we further analyze some key points
from our previous work, upon which we build. In Section
4 we present extensions of this minimization process in the
case of neural networks trained for multiclass classification
problems, and in Section 5 we present an alternative, more
stable, minimization method for the single class case, to be
used in the aforementioned multiclass extensions. Finally,

