Communication-Efficient Distributed PCA by Riemannian Optimization

Long-Kai Huang 1 Sinno Jialin Pan 1

Abstract

following empirical risk minimization (ERM) problem
w∗ =

In this paper, we study the leading eigenvector problem in a statistically distributed setting
and propose a communication-efficient algorithm
based on Riemannian optimization, which trades
local computation for global communication. Theoretical analysis shows that the proposed algorithm linearly converges to the centralized empirical risk minimization solution regarding the number of communication rounds. When the number
of data points in local machines is sufficiently
large, the proposed algorithm achieves a significant reduction of communication cost over existing distributed PCA algorithms. Superior performance in terms of communication cost of the
proposed algorithm is verified on real-world and
synthetic datasets.

Finding top eigenvectors of a symmetric matrix is a fundamental problem for various machine learning problems,
such as principal component analysis (PCA) (Hotelling,
1933; Wilkinson, 1965; Bishop, 2006), spectral clustering (Ng et al., 2002; Von Luxburg, 2007), etc. In this paper,
we focus on finding the first principal component of PCA,
i.e. the leading eigenvector of the data covariance matrix,
in a statistical setting where the data instances x ∈ Rd are
from some unknown but fixed distribution. This goal can be
formulated as a population risk minimization problem as

w∈Rd ,kwk=1



F (w) = − 12 w> Ex∼D xx> w.

(2)

as P
an approximate minimizer of F in (1), where Â =
N
1
>
i=1 xi xi is the empirically normalized covariance maN
trix. If the eigengap δ between the first and second eigenvalues of Â is positive, the optimum of (2) is w∗ = v (or −v)
where v is the leading eigenvector of Â.

1. Introduction

min

arg min F̂ (w) = − 21 w> Âw,

w∈Rd ,kwk=1

(1)

Given a set of i.i.d. data examples xi for i = 1, 2, ..., N
from the distribution D, we can use the solution of the
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore.
Correspondence to:
Long-Kai Huang <LHUANG018@e.ntu.edu.sg>, Sinno J. Pan
<sinnopan@ntu.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

In the literature, various algorithms based on the Euclidean space have been developed to solve the PCA problem (Golub & Van Loan, 1996; Oja & Karhunen, 1985;
Shamir, 2015; 2016). In recent years, the problem (2) is
also studied based on Riemannian optimization (Absil et al.,
2008) as the unit norm constraint on the variable in (2)
indeed admits the geometry structure as a hypersphere (a
Riemannian manifold). On the hypersphere manifold, the
objective function (2) becomes an unconstrained problem
and thus Riemannian optimization algorithms (Absil et al.,
2008), such as Riemannian SGD (Bonnabel, 2013; Zhang
& Sra, 2016), Riemannian SVRG (RSVRG) (Zhang et al.,
2016), can be directly applied to solve it.
All of the aforementioned algorithms assume that a single
machine is able to store and access all the training data to
solve the leading eigenvector problem in (2). However, due
to the explosive increase of training data, the data size may
exceed the storage and computation capacities of a single
machine. In addition, the training data may be originally
geo-distributed over different local machines. Centralizing
all the training data to a single machine is impractical due
to the extremely high data transmission cost. Thus, it is
crucial to consider (2) in a distributed setting, where N
data samples are stored in K machines, each maintaining n
instances xki .1 In the distributed setting, each machine k can
construct a local estimate of F (w): fk (w) = − 12 w> Ak w,
Pn
>
where Ak = n1 i=1 xki xki . In general, the local empirical
estimation fk (w) is much less accurate than centralized
estimation F̂ (w). Therefore, the local machines should
cooperate and communicate with each other to obtain a
solution converging to the centralized ERM solution w∗ .
A simple algorithm to solve (2) in the distributed setting is
1
For simplicity in analysis, we assume the sample size in each
machine is the same.

