Interpreting Robust Optimization via Adversarial Influence Functions

Zhun Deng 1 Cynthia Dwork 1 Jialiang Wang 1 Linjun Zhang 2

Abstract
Robust optimization has been widely used in
nowadays data science, especially in adversarial
training. However, little research has been done
to quantify how robust optimization changes the
optimizers and the prediction losses comparing
to standard training. In this paper, inspired by
the influence function in robust statistics, we introduce the Adversarial Influence Function (AIF)
as a tool to investigate the solution produced by
robust optimization. The proposed AIF enjoys a
closed-form and can be calculated efficiently. To
illustrate the usage of AIF, we apply it to study
model sensitivity — a quantity defined to capture the change of prediction losses on the natural
data after implementing robust optimization. We
use AIF to analyze how model complexity and
randomized smoothing affect the model sensitivity with respect to specific models. We further
derive AIF for kernel regressions, with a particular application to neural tangent kernels, and
experimentally demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed AIF. Lastly, the theories of AIF will
be extended to distributional robust optimization.

1. Introduction
Robust optimization is a classic field of optimization theory
that seeks to achieve a certain measure of robustness against
uncertainty in the parameters or inputs involved (Ben-Tal
et al., 2009; Beyer & Sendhoff, 2007). Recently, it has been
used to address a concern in deep neural networks — the
deep neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial perturbations (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Szegedy et al., 2013).
In supervised learning, given input x, output y and a certain
loss function l, adversarial training through robust optimiza1

John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences,
Harvard University 2 Department of Statistics, Rutgers University.
Correspondence to: Zhun Deng <zhundeng@g.harvard.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

tion for a model M is formulated as
min Ex,y max l(θM , x + δ, y, M),

θ M ∈Θ

δ∈R(x)

(1)

where R(x) is some constrained set, which is usually taken
as a small neighborhood of x in robust optimization. For example, in image recognition (He et al., 2016), an adversarial
attack should be small so that it is visually imperceptible.
Although adversarial training through robust optimization
has achieved great success in defending against adversarial
attacks (Madry et al., 2017), the influence of such adversarial training on predictions is under-explored, even for
a simple model M. In particular, let us define the regular
optimizer and the robust optimizer respectively:
M
θmin
:= arg min Ex,y l(θM , x, y, M),
θ M ∈Θ

M
θε,min
:= arg min Ex,y max l(θM , x + δ, y, M). (2)
θ M ∈Θ

δ∈R(x,ε)

M
It is unclear how Ex,y l(θε,min
, x, y, M) — the prediction loss on the original data with robust optimizer—
performs compared to the optimal prediction loss
M
Ex,y l(θmin
, x, y, M). The difficulty for studying this questions is the underlying NP-hardness of solving robust optimization. Even for the simple models, say quadratic models,
the robust optimization problem is NP-hard if the constraint
set is polyhedral (Minoux, 2010).

To address this problem, drawing inspiration from the idea
of influence function in robust statistics (Croux & Haesbroeck, 1999; Hampel; 1974; Huber & Ronchetti, 2009),
which characterizes how the prediction loss changes when
a small fraction of data points being contaminated, we propose the Adversarial Influence Function (AIF) to investigate
the influence of robust optimization on prediction loss. Taking advantage of small perturbations, AIF has a closed-form
expression and can be calculated efficiently. Moreover, AIF
enables us to analyze the prediction error without implementing the robust optimization, which typically takes long
time due to the computational burden of searching adversaries.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2
lays out the setup and notation. Section 3 defines model
sensitivity, which is used to understand how robust optimization affects the predictions. To efficiently approximate the

