Concentration bounds for CVaR estimation:
The cases of light-tailed and heavy-tailed distributions

Prashanth L.A. 1 Krishna Jagannathan 2 Ravi Kumar Kolla 3

Abstract
Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR) is a widely
used risk metric in applications such as finance.
We derive concentration bounds for CVaR estimates, considering separately the cases of subGaussian, light-tailed and heavy-tailed distributions. For the sub-Gaussian and light-tailed
cases, we use a classical CVaR estimator based
on the empirical distribution constructed from
the samples. For heavy-tailed random variables,
we assume a mild ‘bounded moment’ condition, and derive a concentration bound for a
truncation-based estimator. Our concentration
bounds exhibit exponential decay in the sample
size, and are tighter than those available in the
literature for the above distribution classes. To
demonstrate the applicability of our concentration results, we consider the CVaR optimization
problem in a multi-armed bandit setting. Specifically, we address the best CVaR-arm identification problem under a fixed budget. Using our
CVaR concentration results, we derive an upperbound on the probability of incorrect arm identification.

1. Introduction
In applications such as portfolio optimization in finance,
the quality of a portfolio is not satisfactorily captured by
the expected value of return. Indeed, in such applications,
a more risk-sensitive metric is desirable, so as to capture
typical losses in the case of adverse events. Value-at-Risk
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
2
Indian Institute of Technology Madras.
Department
of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technol3
ogy Madras.
ABInBev, Bangalore.
Correspondence to:
Prashanth L.A. <prashla@cse.iitm.ac.in>, Krishna Jagannathan <krishnaj@ee.iitm.ac.in>, Ravi Kumar Kolla
<kolla.422@gmail.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

(VaR) and Conditional-Value-at-Risk (CVaR) are two riskaware metrics, which are widely used in applications such
as portfolio optimization and insurance. VaR at level α ∈
(0, 1) conveys the maximum loss incurred by the portfolio
with a confidence of α. In other words, the portfolio incurs
a loss greater than VaR at level α with probability 1 − α.
In turn, CVaR at level α ∈ (0, 1) captures the expected loss
incurred by the portfolio, given that the losses exceed VaR
at level α. CVaR has an advantage over VaR, in that the
former is a coherent1 risk measure (Artzner et al., 1999).
1.1. Our Contributions
In this paper, we derive concentration bounds for CVaR
estimators, for the cases of sub-Gaussian, light-tailed and
heavy-tailed random variables. For sub-Gaussian and lighttailed distributions, our concentration bound uses a classical CVaR estimator based on the empirical distribution. For
the heavy-tailed case, we employ a truncation-based CVaR
estimator, and derive a concentration result under a mild assumption: the pth moment of the distribution is assumed to
exist, for some p > 1. Notably, our concentration bounds
enjoy an exponential decay in the sample size, for heavytailed as well as light-tailed distributions. Our results also
subsume or strengthen several existing CVaR concentration
results, as we discuss later. We believe our bounds are order optimal, and the dependence on the number of samples
as well as the accuracy cannot be improved.
In order to highlight an important application for our CVaR
concentration results, we consider a stochastic bandit setup with a risk-sensitive metric for measuring the quality of
an arm. In particular, we consider a K-armed stochastic
bandit setting, and study the problem of finding the arm
with the lowest CVaR value in a fixed budget setting. We
propose an algorithm for the best CVaR arm identification
that is inspired by successive-rejects (SR) (Audibert et al.,
2010). Using our CVaR concentration results, we establish
an upper bound on the probability of incorrect arm identification for the SR-based algorithm for CVaR.
1
A risk measure is said to be coherent, if it is monotonic, translation invariant, sub-additive, and positive homogeneous.

