Laplacian Regularized Few-Shot Learning

Imtiaz Masud Ziko 1 Jose Dolz 1 Eric Granger 1 Ismail Ben Ayed 1

Abstract
We propose a transductive Laplacian-regularized
inference for few-shot tasks. Given any feature
embedding learned from the base classes, we
minimize a quadratic binary-assignment function
containing two terms: (1) a unary term assigning query samples to the nearest class prototype,
and (2) a pairwise Laplacian term encouraging
nearby query samples to have consistent label assignments. Our transductive inference does not
re-train the base model, and can be viewed as a
graph clustering of the query set, subject to supervision constraints from the support set. We derive
a computationally efficient bound optimizer of a
relaxation of our function, which computes independent (parallel) updates for each query sample,
while guaranteeing convergence. Following a simple cross-entropy training on the base classes, and
without complex meta-learning strategies, we conducted comprehensive experiments over five fewshot learning benchmarks. Our LaplacianShot
consistently outperforms state-of-the-art methods
by significant margins across different models,
settings, and data sets. Furthermore, our transductive inference is very fast, with computational
times that are close to inductive inference, and
can be used for large-scale few-shot tasks.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have achieved human-level performances in various tasks. The success of these models rely
considerably on exhaustive learning from large-scale labeled
data sets. Nevertheless, they still have difficulty generalizing to novel classes unseen during training, given only
a few labeled instances for these new classes. In contrast,
humans can learn new tasks easily from a handful of examples, by leveraging prior experience and related context.
1
ÉTS Montreal, Canada. Correspondence to: Imtiaz Masud
Ziko <imtiaz-masud.ziko.1@etsmtl.ca>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Few-shot learning (Fei-Fei et al., 2006; Miller et al., 2000;
Vinyals et al., 2016) has emerged as an appealing paradigm
to bridge this gap. Under standard few-shot learning scenarios, a model is first trained on substantial labeled data over
an initial set of classes, often referred to as the base classes.
Then, supervision for novel classes, which are unseen during
base training, is limited to just one or few labeled examples per class. The model is evaluated over few-shot tasks,
each one supervised by a few labeled examples per novel
class (the support set) and containing unlabeled samples for
evaluation (the query set).
The problem has recently received substantial research interests, with a large body of work based on complex metalearning and episodic-training strategies. The meta-learning
setting uses the base training data to create a set of few-shot
tasks (or episodes), with support and query samples that
simulate generalization difficulties during test times, and
train the model to generalize well on these artificial tasks.
For example, (Vinyals et al., 2016) introduced matching
network, which employs an attention mechanism to predict the unknown query samples as a linear combination
of the support labels, while using episodic training and
memory architectures. Prototypical networks (Snell et al.,
2017) maintain a single prototype representation for each
class in the embedding space, and minimize the negative
log-probability of the query features with episodic training.
Ravi & Larochelle (2017) viewed optimization as a model
for few-shot learning, and used an LSTM meta-learner to
update classifier parameters. Finn et al. (2017) proposed
MAML, a meta-learning strategy that attempts to make a
model “easy” to fine-tune. These widely adopted works
were recently followed by an abundant meta-learning literature, for instance, (Sung et al., 2018; Oreshkin et al., 2018;
Mishra et al., 2018; Rusu et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019b; Hou
et al., 2019; Ye et al., 2020), among many others.
Several recent studies explored transductive inference for
few-shot tasks, e.g., (Liu et al., 2019b; Hou et al., 2019;
Dhillon et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2019;
Qiao et al., 2019), among others. Given a few-shot task
at test time, transductive inference performs class predictions jointly for all the unlabeled query samples of the task,
rather than one sample at a time as in inductive inference.
For instance, TPN (Liu et al., 2019b) used label propagation (Zhou et al., 2004) along with episodic training and a

