Learning Calibratable Policies using Programmatic Style-Consistency
Eric Zhan 1 Albert Tseng 1 Yisong Yue 1 Adith Swaminathan 2 Matthew Hausknecht 2

Abstract
We study the problem of controllable generation
of long-term sequential behaviors, where the goal
is to calibrate to multiple behavior styles simultaneously. In contrast to the well-studied areas
of controllable generation of images, text, and
speech, there are two questions that pose significant challenges when generating long-term behaviors: how should we specify the factors of
variation to control, and how can we ensure that
the generated behavior faithfully demonstrates
combinatorially many styles? We leverage programmatic labeling functions to specify controllable styles, and derive a formal notion of styleconsistency as a learning objective, which can
then be solved using conventional policy learning approaches. We evaluate our framework using demonstrations from professional basketball
players and agents in the MuJoCo physics environment, and show that existing approaches that
do not explicitly enforce style-consistency fail to
generate diverse behaviors whereas our learned
policies can be calibrated for up to 45 (1024) distinct style combinations.

1. Introduction
The widespread availability of recorded tracking data is enabling the study of complex behaviors in many domains,
including sports (Chen et al., 2016a; Le et al., 2017b; Zhan
et al., 2019; Yeh et al., 2019), video games (Kurin et al.,
2017; Broll et al., 2019; Hofmann, 2019), laboratory animals (Eyjolfsdottir et al., 2014; 2017; Branson et al., 2009;
Johnson et al., 2016), facial expressions (Suwajanakorn
et al., 2017; Taylor et al., 2017), commonplace activities
such as cooking (Nishimura et al., 2019), and transportation
(Bojarski et al., 2016; Luo et al., 2018; Li et al., 2018; Chang
et al., 2019). A key aspect of modern behavioral datasets is
1

California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 2 Microsoft
Research, Redmond, WA. Correspondence to: Eric Zhan
<ezhan@caltech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

that the behaviors can exhibit very diverse styles (e.g., from
multiple demonstrators). For example, Figure 1a depicts
demonstrations from basketball players with variations in
speed, desired destinations, and curvature of movement.
The goal of this paper is to study controllable generation of
diverse behaviors by learning to imitate raw demonstrations;
or more technically, to develop style-calibrated imitation
learning methods. A controllable, or calibratable, policy
would enable the generation of behaviors consistent with
various styles, such as low movement speed (Figure 1b), or
approaching the basket (Figure 1c), or both styles simultaneously (Figure 1d). Style-calibrated imitation learning
methods that can yield such policies can be broadly useful
to: (a) perform more robust imitation learning from diverse
demonstrations (Wang et al., 2017; Broll et al., 2019), (b)
enable diverse exploration in reinforcement learning agents
(Co-Reyes et al., 2018), or (c) visualize and extrapolate
counterfactual behaviors beyond those seen in the dataset
(Le et al., 2017a), amongst many other tasks.
Performing style-calibrated imitation is a challenging task.
First, what constitutes a “style”? Second, when can we
be certain that a policy is “calibrated” when imitating a
style? Third, how can we scale policy learning to faithfully
generate combinatorially many styles? In related tasks like
controllable image generation, common approaches for calibration use adversarial information factorization or mutual
information between generated images and user-specified
styles (e.g. gender, hair length, etc.) (Creswell et al., 2017;
Lample et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2016b). However, we
find that these indirect approaches fall well short of generating calibratable sequential behaviors. Intuitively, the
aforementioned objectives provide only indirect proxies for
style-calibration. For example, Figure 2 illustrates that an
indirect baseline approach struggles to reliably generate trajectories to reach a certain displacement, even though the
dataset contains many examples of such behavior.
Research questions. We seek to answer three research
questions while tackling this challenge. The first is strategic:
since high-level stylistic attributes like movement speed are
typically not provided with the raw demonstration data, what
systematic form of domain knowledge can we leverage to
quickly and cleanly extract highly varied style information
from raw behavioral data? The second is formulaic: how can

