Can Stochastic Zeroth-Order Frank-Wolfe Method Converge Faster for
Non-Convex Problems?
Hongchang Gao 1 2 Heng Huang 1 3

Abstract

where ⌦ ⇢ Rd denotes a closed convex feasible set, each
component function fi is smooth and non-convex, and n represents the number of component functions. Many problems
in machine learning can be represented by Eq. (1). A representative example is the robust low-rank matrix completion
problem, which is defined as follows:

Frank-Wolfe algorithm is an efficient method
for optimizing non-convex constrained problems.
However, most of existing methods focus on
the first-order case. In real-world applications,
the gradient is not always available. To address
the problem of lacking gradient in many applications, we propose two new stochastic zerothorder Frank-Wolfe algorithms and theoretically
proved that they have a faster convergence rate
than existing methods for non-convex problems.
Specifically, the function queries oracle of the proposed faster zeroth-order Frank-Wolfe (FZFW)
1/2
method is O( n ✏2 d ) which can match the iteration
complexity of the first-order counterpart approximately. As for the proposed faster zeroth-order
conditional gradient sliding (FZCGS) method, its
1/2
function queries oracle is improved to O( n ✏ d ),
indicating that its iteration complexity is even better than that of its first-order counterpart NCGSVR. In other words, the iteration complelxity of
the accelerated first-order Frank-Wolfe method
NCGS-VR is suboptimal. Then, we proposed a
new algorithm to improve its IFO (incremental
1/2
first-order oracle) to O( n ✏ ). At last, the empirical studies on benchmark datasets validate our
theoretical results.

min

kXk⇤ R

In this paper, we consider the following constrained finitesum minimization problem:
min F (x) =
x2⌦

1
fi (x) ,
n i=1

(i,j)2O

1

exp

n (x
i,j

yi,j )2 o⌘

2

,

(2)

where O denotes the observed elements,
is a hyperparameter, and kXk⇤  R stands for the low-rank constraint. Here, the component function is a non-convex function which is less sensitive to the residual than the least
square loss.

1. Introduction

n
X

X ⇣

(1)

1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA 2 Department of Computer and
Information Sciences, Temple University, Philadelphia, USA 3 JD
Finance America Corporation. Correspondence to: Heng Huang
<heng.huang@pitt.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Compared with the non-constraint finite-sum minimization
problem, optimizing Eq. (1) has to deal with the constraint,
which introduces new challenges. A straightforward method
to optimize the large-scale Eq. (1) is the projected gradient
descent method which first takes a step along the gradient
direction and then performs the projection to satisfy the
constraint. However, the computational overhead of the
projection step is usually large. For instance, the low-rank
constraint in Eq. (2) requires the time-consuming singular
value decomposition. Unlike the projected gradient descent
method, Frank-Wolfe method (Frank & Wolfe, 1956) is
more efficient when dealing with the constraint. Specifically, rather than performing projection, it solves an efficient
linear subproblem to make the solution lie in the feasible
set ⌦. Thus, Frank-Wolfe method has been popularly used
in optimizing Eq. (1).
The classical Frank-Wolfe method (a.k.a. Conditional Gradient method) is first proposed for convex constrained problems. It attracts increasing attention in machine learning
community (Clarkson, 2010; Jaggi; Lacoste-Julien & Jaggi,
2015; Mokhtari et al., 2018; Hassani et al., 2019; Zhang
et al., 2019) since it is efficient to optimize some difficult
machine learning problems, such as the low-rank constraint
problem. As for the convex problem, (Jaggi; Lacoste-Julien
& Jaggi, 2015; Hazan & Luo, 2016; Lan & Zhou, 2016)
analyzed and improved the convergence rate under different
settings. As for the non-convex problem, (Lacoste-Julien,
2016) demonstrated the convergence rate of non-convex FW

