Context-aware Dynamics Model
for Generalization in Model-Based Reinforcement Learning

Kimin Lee 1 * Younggyo Seo 2 * Seunghyun Lee 2 Honglak Lee 3 4 Jinwoo Shin 2

Abstract

et al., 2019; Hafner et al., 2019; 2020; Kaiser et al., 2020).

Model-based reinforcement learning (RL) enjoys
several benefts, such as data-effciency and planning, by learning a model of the environments
dynamics. However, learning a global model that
can generalize across different dynamics is a challenging task. To tackle this problem, we decompose the task of learning a global dynamics model
into two stages: (a) learning a context latent vector that captures the local dynamics, then (b) predicting the next state conditioned on it. In order
to encode dynamics-specifc information into the
context latent vector, we introduce a novel loss
function that encourages the context latent vector
to be useful for predicting both forward and backward dynamics. The proposed method achieves
superior generalization ability across various simulated robotics and control tasks, compared to
existing RL schemes.

However, it has been evidenced that model-based RL methods often struggle to generalize to an unseen environment with different transition dynamics (Nagabandi et al.,
2019a;b). For example, when using a vanilla model-based
RL method for the simple CartPole task (see Figure 1), even
a minimal change in the pole mass leads to an inaccurate
next-step prediction. This, in turn, leads to poor planning,
and eventually performance degradation, as demonstrated in
our experiments (see Table 1). Such failure to take account
of transition dynamics shift makes them unreliable for reallife deployment, which requires robustness to a myriad of
changing environmental factors.

1. Introduction
Model-based reinforcement learning (RL) with highcapacity function approximators, such as deep neural networks (DNNs), has been used to solve a variety of sequential decision-making problems, including board games (e.g.,
Go and Chess (Schrittwieser et al., 2019)), video games
(e.g., Atari games (Kaiser et al., 2020; Schrittwieser et al.,
2019)), and complex robotic control tasks (Zhang et al.,
2019; Nagabandi et al., 2019a; Hafner et al., 2020). By
learning a model of the environment’s dynamics and utilizing the dynamics model for planning, model-based RL
achieves superior data-effciency to model-free RL methods in general (Deisenroth & Rasmussen, 2011; Levine &
Abbeel, 2014), and sometimes even beats model-free RL
methods trained on suffcient amount of data (Schrittwieser
*

Equal contribution 1 UC Berkeley 2 KAIST 3 University of
Michigan Ann Arbor 4 Google Brain. Correspondence to: Kimin
Lee <kiminlee@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

To improve the generalization capabilities of model-based
RL methods, several strategies have been proposed, including meta-learning (Nagabandi et al., 2019a;b) and graph
networks (Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2018) (see Section 2 for
further details). A notable such example is the model-based
meta-RL method suggested by Nagabandi et al. (2019a),
where a meta-learned prior model adapts to a recent trajectory segment, either by updating hidden state of a recurrent
model (Duan et al., 2016), or by updating model parameters
via a small number of gradient steps (Finn et al., 2017).
However, it is questionable whether a simple gradient or
hidden state updates would capture the rich contextual information that the environment offers. Instead, we argue that
separating context encoding (i.e., capturing the contextual
information) and transition inference (i.e., predicting the
next state conditioned on the captured information) can be
more effective for learning the environment dynamics.
Contribution. In this paper, we develop a context-aware
dynamics model (CaDM) capable of generalizing across
a distribution of environments with varying transition dynamics. First, to capture the contextual information, we
introduce a context encoder that produces a latent vector
from a recent experience. Then, by conditioning our forward dynamics model on this latent vector, we effectively
perform an online adaptation to the unseen environment.
We emphasize that the proposed CaDM can incorporate any
dynamics model, e.g., fully-connected network or recurrent
neural network, simply by conditioning the dynamics model
on the encoder output. The novel ingredient of CaDM is its

