Time-Consistent Self-Supervision for Semi-Supervised Learning

Tianyi Zhou * 1 Shengjie Wang * 1 Jeff A. Bilmes 1

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) leverages unlabeled data when training a model with insufficient
labeled data. A common strategy for SSL is to
enforce the consistency of model outputs between
similar samples, e.g., neighbors or data augmentations of the same sample. However, model
outputs can vary dramatically on unlabeled data
over different training stages, e.g., when using
large learning rates. This can introduce harmful
noises and inconsistent objectives over time
that may lead to concept drift and catastrophic
forgetting. In this paper, we study the dynamics
of neural net outputs in SSL and show that
selecting and using first the unlabeled samples
with more consistent outputs over the course of
training (i.e., “time-consistency”) can improve the
final test accuracy and save computation. Under
the time-consistent data selection, we design an
SSL objective composed of two self-supervised
losses, i.e., a consistency loss between a sample
and its augmentation, and a contrastive loss
encouraging different samples to have different
outputs. Our approach achieves SOTA on several
SSL benchmarks with much fewer computations.

1

Introduction

Semi-supervised learning (SSL) tackles a challenging problem commonly encountered in real-world applications, i.e.,
how one should train a reliable machine learning model with
limited amounts of labeled samples but a rich reserve of unlabeled samples. For many tasks, collecting accurate labeled
data is expensive and error-prone as it requires human labor,
while unlabeled data is cheap and abundant. Commonly
used methodology in the early days of SSL includes label
and measure propagation (Zhu & Ghahramani, 2002; Zhou
et al., 2003; Subramanya & Bilmes, 2011) and manifold
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Washington, Seattle. Correspondence to: Tianyi Zhou <tianyizh@uw.edu>, Shengjie Wang
<wangsj@uw.edu>, Jeff A. Bilmes <bilmes@uw.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

regularization (Niyogi, 2013), which encourage the label
consistency within a local neighborhood on the embedded
data manifold (i.e., the model should produce similar label
distributions for samples geodesically close to each other),
and where the manifold is approximated by a graph. This
encourages the model to be locally smooth on the manifold.
Recent deep learning shows that a trained neural net not
only works as an accurate classifier but also provides hiddenlayer features that can capture manifold structure at multiple
scales (Verma et al., 2019a; Zeiler & Fergus, 2014) Moreover, with prior knowledge of data and inductive bias embedded in the neural net architecture and training strategies, e.g.,
convolutions and data augmentations (Zhang et al., 2018;
DeVries & Taylor, 2017; Cubuk et al., 2019a;b), we can
train a more locally consistent model with better generalization performance. This motivates recent progress on selfsupervision (Raina et al., 2007; Trinh et al., 2019; Zhang
et al., 2016; Noroozi & Favaro, 2016) and SSL (Sajjadi et al.,
2016; Iscen et al., 2019; Miyato et al., 2019; Athiwaratkun
et al., 2019; Laine & Aila, 2017; Berthelot et al., 2019;
Oliver et al., 2018), in which a self-supervised loss (which
does not require ground-truth labels) defined on data augmentations can encourage a neural network’s local smoothness on the data manifold. For example, the loss can encourage that a sample and its augmentations should have similar outputs, or different samples (and their augmentations)
should have different outputs. The former is usually called
“consistency regularization” (Rasmus et al., 2015), while
the latter is regarded as a “contrastive loss” (Chopra et al.,
2005) or a “triplet loss” (Weinberger & Saul, 2009). Neural
networks trained by this strategy have achieved substantial
improvements on SSL (Sajjadi et al., 2016; Berthelot et al.,
2020) and unsupervised learning (Caron et al., 2018; He
et al., 2019) tasks without leveraging the weighed neighborhood graphs commonly used in earlier works. More recently,
MixMatch (Berthelot et al., 2019) and ReMixMatch (Berthelot et al., 2020) utilize a consistency loss with data augmentations and, with a delicate combination of regularization
techniques, gets significantly improved SSL performance
on several datasets, thus demonstrating the effectiveness of
combining data augmentation and self-supervision.
The self-supervised loss defined on data augmentations can
be explained as an ordinary supervised loss with a pseudo
target (Lee, 2013; Miyato et al., 2019) generated by the neu-

