Optimal Differential Privacy Composition for Exponential Mechanisms

Jinshuo Dong * 1 2 David Durfee * 2 Ryan Rogers * 2

Abstract
Composition is one of the most important properties of differential privacy (DP), as it allows
algorithm designers to build complex private algorithms from DP primitives. We consider precise composition bounds of the overall privacy
loss for exponential mechanisms, one of the fundamental classes of mechanisms in DP. Exponential mechanism has also become a fundamental building block in private machine learning, e.g. private PCA and hyperparameter selection. We give explicit formulations of the optimal privacy loss for both the adaptive and nonadaptive composition of exponential mechanism.
For the non-adaptive setting in which each mechanism has the same privacy parameter, we give
an efficiently computable formulation of the optimal privacy loss. In the adaptive case, we derive a recursive formula and an efficiently computable upper bound. These precise understandings about the problem lead to a 40% saving of
the privacy budget in a practical application. Furthermore, the algorithm-specific analysis shows a
difference in privacy parameters of adaptive and
non-adaptive composition, which was widely believed to not exist based on the evidence from
general analysis.

1. Introduction
Differential privacy (DP) has emerged as the leading privacy benchmark in machine learning as well as data analytics on sensitive data sets. The basic idea is to inject noise
into training algorithms so that it masks individual level of
information while still preserves statistical efficiency. One
of the fundamental DP primitives is exponential mechanism, which has various application in machine learning,
*
Equal contribution 1 Applied Mathematics and Computational Sciences, University of Pennsylvania 2 Data Science Applied Research, LinkedIn. Correspondence to: Jinshuo Dong
<djs.pku@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

such as hyper parameter selection (Liu and Talwar, 2019),
private PCA (Chaudhuri et al., 2013), synthetic data generation (Hardt and Rothblum, 2010), and so on. As a building
block, it is often used repeatedly/recursively. The overall
privacy guarantee was often handled by a general composition theorem in DP, which is one of the most important features of DP that leads to its success. However, the general
theorem (Dwork et al., 2010) is suboptimal and not making use of any specific structure of the algorithm, hence
often underestimates the true privacy guarantee of the algorithm. A possible negative consequence is algorithm designers may decide to inject more noise until general composition theorem says its private, hence incurring unnecessary drop in model accuracy. If the precise privacy guarantee was known, we could have added the exact amount of
noise for desired level of privacy, and not waste any model
accuracy.
That being said, exact and optimal privacy characterization
is important for private machine learning. Recently, there
have been extensive works in this direction. Kairouz et al.
(2017); Murtagh and Vadhan (2016) provides optimal composition theorem when all that is know is each component
being (ε, δ)-DP.
Although these black box composition theorems give optimal privacy parameters over multiple rounds of general DP
algorithms, one should be able to improve by making use
of the specific structure of the components. That is, white
box composition can further improve privacy analysis. An
example of this type of analysis is the moments accountant considered in Abadi et al. (2016). They analyzed the
privacy of noisy stochastic gradient descent as a composition of subsampled Gaussian mechanism and achieved the
first reasonably private MNIST classifier without significant drop in accuracy compared to non-private baselines.
However, no optimality is known for their privacy analysis.
Dong et al. (2019) invented techniques that manage to exhibit exact and optimal analysis of white box composition
for a wide range of algorithms, including most building
block algorithms of DP such as Laplace mechanism, Gaussian mechanism and their subsampled versions (Bu et al.,
2019). However, their technique does not directly apply to
exponential mechanism. Durfee and Rogers (2019) introduced bounded range (BR) as a property for DP algorithms

