Representing Unordered Data Using Complex-Weighted Multiset Automata

Justin DeBenedetto 1 David Chiang 1

Abstract
Unordered, variable-sized inputs arise in many
settings across multiple fields. The ability for setand multiset-oriented neural networks to handle
this type of input has been the focus of much work
in recent years. We propose to represent multisets
using complex-weighted multiset automata and
show how the multiset representations of certain
existing neural architectures can be viewed as
special cases of ours. Namely, (1) we provide a
new theoretical and intuitive justification for the
Transformer model’s representation of positions
using sinusoidal functions, and (2) we extend the
DeepSets model to use complex numbers, enabling
it to outperform the existing model on an extension
of one of their tasks.

1. Introduction
Neural networks which operate on unordered, variable-sized
input (Vinyals et al., 2016; Wagstaff et al., 2019) have
been gaining interest for various tasks, such as processing
graph nodes (Murphy et al., 2019), hypergraphs (Maron
et al., 2019), 3D image reconstruction (Yang et al., 2020),
and point cloud classification and image tagging (Zaheer
et al., 2017). Similar networks have been applied to multiple
instance learning (Pevný & Somol, 2016).
One such model, DeepSets (Zaheer et al., 2017), computes a
representation of each element of the set, then combines the
representations using a commutative function (e.g., addition)
to form a representation of the set that discards ordering
information. Zaheer et al. (2017) provide a proof that any
function on sets can be modeled in this way, by encoding
sets as base-4 fractions and using the universal function
approximation theorem, but their actual proposed model is
far simpler than the model constructed by the theorem.
1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University
of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA. Correspondence
to: Justin DeBenedetto <jdebened@nd.edu>, David Chiang <dchiang@nd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

In this paper, we propose to compute representations of multisets using weighted multiset automata, a variant of weighted
finite-state (string) automata in which the order of the input
symbols does not affect the output. This representation can
be directly implemented inside a neural network. We show
how to train these automata efficiently by approximating
them with string automata whose weights form complex,
diagonal matrices.
Our representation is a generalization of DeepSets’, and it
also turns out to be a generalization of the Transformer’s
position encodings (Vaswani et al., 2017). In Sections 4 and
5, we discuss the application of our representation in both
cases.
• Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) encode the position of a word as a vector of sinusoidal functions that
turns out to be a special case of our representation of
multisets. So weighted multiset automata provide a new
theoretical and intuitive justification for sinusoidal position encodings. We experiment with several variations
on position encodings inspired by this justification, and
although they do not yield an improvement, we do find
that learned position encodings in our representation do
better than learning a different vector for each absolute
position.
• We extend the DeepSets model to use our representation,
which amounts to upgrading it from real to complex
numbers. On an extension of one of their tasks (adding a
sequence of one-digit numbers and predicting the units
digit), our model is able to reach perfect performance,
whereas the original DeepSets model does no better
than chance.

2. Definitions
We first review weighted string automata, then modify the
definition to weighted multiset automata.
2.1. String automata
Weighted finite automata are commonly pictured as directed
graphs whose edges are labeled by symbols and weights,
but we use an alternative representation as collections of
matrices: for each symbol a, this representation takes all

