Asynchronous Coagent Networks

James E. Kostas * 1 Chris Nota * 1 Philip S. Thomas 1

Abstract
Coagent policy gradient algorithms (CPGAs) are
reinforcement learning algorithms for training a
class of stochastic neural networks called coagent
networks. In this work, we prove that CPGAs converge to locally optimal policies. Additionally, we
extend prior theory to encompass asynchronous
and recurrent coagent networks. These extensions
facilitate the straightforward design and analysis
of hierarchical reinforcement learning algorithms
like the option-critic, and eliminate the need for
complex derivations of customized learning rules
for these algorithms.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) policies are often represented
by stochastic neural networks (SNNs). SNNs are networks
where the outputs of some units are not deterministic functions of the units’ inputs. Several classes of algorithms
from various branches of RL research, such as those using
options (Sutton et al., 1999) or hierarchical architectures
(Bacon et al., 2017), can be formulated as using SNN policies (see Section 2 for more examples). In this paper we
study the problem of deriving learning rules for RL agents
with SNN policies.
Coagent networks are one formulation of SNN policies for
RL agents (Thomas & Barto, 2011). Coagent networks are
comprised of conjugate agents, or coagents; each coagent
is an RL algorithm learning and acting cooperatively with
the other coagents in its network. In this paper, we focus
specifically on the case where each coagent is a policy gradient RL algorithm, and call the resulting algorithms coagent
policy gradient algorithms (CPGAs). Intuitively, CPGAs
cause each individual coagent to view the other coagents as
part of the environment. That is, individual coagents learn
and interact with the combination of both the environment
*

Equal contribution 1 College of Information and Computer
Sciences, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA. Correspondence to: James E. Kostas <jekostas@umass.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

and the other coagents as if this combination was a single
environment.
Typically, algorithm designers using SNNs must create specialized training algorithms for their architectures and prove
the correctness of these algorithms. Coagent policy gradient
algorithms (CPGAs) provide an alternative: they allow algorithm designers to easily derive stochastic gradient update
rules for the wide variety of policy architectures that can be
represented as SNNs. To analyze a given policy architecture (SNN), one must simply identify the inputs and outputs
of each coagent in the network. The theory in this paper
then immediately provides a policy gradient (stochastic gradient ascent) learning rule for each coagent, providing a
simple mechanism for obtaining convergent update rules for
complex policy architectures. This process is applicable to
SNNs across several branches of RL research.
This paper also extends that theory and the theory in prior
work to encompass recurrent and asynchronous coagent
networks. A network is recurrent if it contains cycles. A
network is asynchronous if units in the neural network do
not execute simultaneously or at the same rate. The latter
property allows distributed implementations of large neural
networks to operate asynchronously. Additionally, a coagent
network’s capacity for temporal abstraction (learning, reasoning, and acting across different scales of time and task)
may be enhanced, not just through the network topology,
but by designing networks where different coagents execute
at different rates. Furthermore, these extensions facilitate
the straightforward design and analysis of hierarchical RL
algorithms like the option-critic.
The contributions of this paper are: 1) a complete and formal
proof of a key CPGA result on which this paper relies (prior
work provides an informal and incomplete proof), 2) a generalization of the CPGA framework to handle asynchronous
recurrent networks, 3) empirical support of our theoretical
claims regarding the gradients of asynchronous CPGAs,
and 4) a proof that asynchronous CPGAs generalize the
option-critic framework, which serves as a demonstration of
how CPGAs eliminate the need for the derivation of custom
learning rules for architectures like the option-critic. Our
simple mechanistic approach to gradient derivation for the
option-critic is a clear example of the usefulness of the coagent framework to any researcher or algorithm designer

