Learning Structured Latent Factors from Dependent Data:
A Generative Model Framework from Information-Theoretic Perspective

Ruixiang Zhang 1 2 Masanori Koyama 3 Katsuhiko Ishiguro 3

Abstract
Learning controllable and generalizable representation of multivariate data with desired structural
properties remains a fundamental problem in machine learning. In this paper, we present a novel
framework for learning generative models with
various underlying structures in the latent space.
We represent the inductive bias in the form of
mask variables to model the dependency structure in the graphical model and extend the theory
of multivariate information bottleneck (Friedman
et al., 2001) to enforce it. Our model provides a
principled approach to learn a set of semantically
meaningful latent factors that reflect various types
of desired structures like capturing correlation or
encoding invariance, while also offering the flexibility to automatically estimate the dependency
structure from data. We show that our framework
unifies many existing generative models and can
be applied to a variety of tasks, including multimodal data modeling, algorithmic fairness, and
out-of-distribution generalization.

1. Introduction
Learning structured latent representation of multivariate
data is a fundamental problem in machine learning. Many
latent variable generative models have been proposed to date
based on different inductive biases that reflect the model’s
assumptions or people’s domain knowledge. For instance,
the objectives of the family of β-VAEs (Higgins et al., 2016;
Chen et al., 2018; Kim & Mnih, 2018) try to enforce a
coordinate-wise independent structure among latent variables to discover disentangled factors of variations.
While these methods have been proven useful in the field of
applications on which they were evaluated, most of them are
1

Mila 2 Université de Montréal, Montréal, Canada 3 Preferred
Networks Inc., Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Ruixiang Zhang
<ruixiang.zhang@umontreal.ca>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

built-in rather heuristic ways to encode the desired structure.
One usually needs to construct an entirely different model
whenever the domain of application changes. In general, the
type of inductive bias differs significantly across different
applications. It is a burden to craft a different architecture for
each application, and there have not been many studies done
for the general and unified way of explicitly representing an
inductive bias to be enforced in generative models.
In this paper, we propose a framework of generative model
that can represent various types of inductive biases in the
form of Bayesian networks. Our method can not only unify
many existing generative models in previous studies, but
it also can lead to new insights about establishing connections between different models across different domains and
extending them to new applications.
We summarize our contributions in this work as: (i) We
propose a novel general framework of probabilistic generative model with explicit dependency structure representation to learn structured latent representation of multivariate
data. (ii) We propose an information-theoretic training objective by generalizing the multivariate information bottleneck theory to encode prior knowledge or impose inductive
bias. (Sec. 3.3) (iii) We propose a flexible and tractable inference model with linear number of inference networks
coupled with super-exponential number of possible dependency structures to model exponential number of inference
distributions. (Sec. 3.4) (iv) We show that our proposed
framework unifies many existing models and demonstrate
its effectiveness in different application tasks, including
multi-modal data generative modeling, algorithmic fairness,
and out-of-distribution generalization.

2. Background
2.1. Notations
We use capital letters (i.e. X ≡ X1:N ) to denote a vector of
N random variables, and lower case letters (i.e. x) for the
values. We use P (X) to denote the probability distribution
and corresponding density with p(x). Given a set S ⊆
{1, 2, . . . , N } of indexes, we use XS ≡ [Xi ]i∈S to represent
corresponding subset of random variables. Similar notation
is used for binary indicator vector b that Xb ≡ [Xi ]bi =1 .

