Causal Modeling for Fairness in Dynamical Systems

Elliot Creager 1 2 David Madras 1 2 Toniann Pitassi 1 2 Richard Zemel 1 2

Abstract
In many application areas—lending, education,
and online recommenders, for example—fairness
and equity concerns emerge when a machine
learning system interacts with a dynamically
changing environment to produce both immediate and long-term effects for individuals and demographic groups. We discuss causal directed
acyclic graphs (DAGs) as a unifying framework
for the recent literature on fairness in such dynamical systems. We show that this formulation
affords several new directions of inquiry to the
modeler, where causal assumptions can be expressed and manipulated. We emphasize the importance of computing interventional quantities
in the dynamical fairness setting, and show how
causal assumptions enable simulation (when environment dynamics are known) and off-policy
estimation (when dynamics are unknown) of intervention on short- and long-term outcomes, at
both the group and individual levels.

1. Introduction
How do we design fair policies for complex, evolving systems? Recently, the literature on fairness in dynamical
systems has begun exploring the role of algorithmic systems
in shaping their environments over time (Hashimoto et al.,
2018; Lum & Isaac, 2016; Ensign et al., 2018). The key
insight from these papers is that the repeated application
of algorithmic tools in a changing environment can have
fairness implications in the long-term distinct from those in
the short-term.
However, the methods in this literature are quite disparate,
with little overlap existing between various works in terms
of modeling choices, goals, or assumptions. This lack of
formal similarity is surprising, given that these papers are
usually structurally alike: each proposes a dynamics model
1
University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute. Correspondence to:
Elliot Creager <creager@cs.toronto.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

for a particular domain (e.g. lending (Mouzannar et al.,
2019), hiring (Hu & Chen, 2018), recommendations (Bountouridis et al., 2019)), exposes unfairness that arises from
long-term usage of some baseline policy, and then proposes
a “fair” policy to mitigate some of these biases.
In this paper, we propose unifying the literature on fairness
in dynamical systems via causal directed acyclic graphs
(DAGs) (Pearl, 2009; Richardson & Robins, 2013). While
causal DAGs have been used to study one-shot fair decisionmaking (Kusner et al., 2017; 2019; Kilbertus et al., 2017),
they are uncommon in fairness settings involving sequential
decisions. We show that several intuitive models of longterm unfairness are naturally expressed using causal DAGs.
We also show that causal reasoning is useful for analyzing
models and evaluating policies for these problems.
Our contributions are:
• We show that causal DAGs are a unifying framework
for the literature on fairness in dynamical systems,
reformulating examples from the literature using structural causal models and policy interventions.
• We demonstrate empirically that when environment dynamics are unknown, causal reasoning can help utilize
observational data to improve off-policy estimation and
learning.
• We show that if dynamics are known, causal DAGs
serve as flexible simulators for analyzing policies and
models, through extending and investigating model
assumptions.
We proceed as follows. In Section 2, we introduce key
background concepts of structural causal models and policy
interventions. In Section 3, we demonstrate the application
of causal DAGs to several key concepts in the fairness in
dynamical systems literature. In Section 4 we discuss related
work in fairness and causality. In Section 5 we empirically
demonstrate that causal modelling can improve off-policy
estimation and selection in a dynamical fairness problem,
and in Section 6 we show how the explication of underlying
causal assumptions enables model extension and analysis.1
1

Code at github.com/ecreager/causal-dyna-fair

