Planning to Explore via Self-Supervised World Models

Ramanan Sekar 1 * Oleh Rybkin 1 * Kostas Daniilidis 1 Pieter Abbeel 2 Danijar Hafner 3 4 Deepak Pathak 5 6
Model Learning

Abstract
Reinforcement learning allows solving complex
tasks, however, the learning tends to be taskspecific and the sample efficiency remains a
challenge. We present Plan2Explore, a selfsupervised reinforcement learning agent that
tackles both these challenges through a new
approach to self-supervised exploration and fast
adaptation to new tasks, which need not be known
during exploration. During exploration, unlike
prior methods which retrospectively compute
the novelty of observations after the agent has
already reached them, our agent acts efficiently
by leveraging planning to seek out expected future
novelty. After exploration, the agent quickly
adapts to multiple downstream tasks in a zero or a
few-shot manner. We evaluate on challenging
control tasks from high-dimensional image
inputs. Without any training supervision or taskspecific interaction, Plan2Explore outperforms
prior self-supervised exploration methods, and
in fact, almost matches the performances oracle
which has access to rewards. Videos and
code: https://ramanans1.github.io/
plan2explore/

1. Introduction
The dominant approach in sensorimotor control is to train
the agent on one or more pre-specified tasks either via rewards in reinforcement learning, or via demonstrations in
imitation learning. However, learning each task from scratch
is often inefficient, requiring a large amount of task-specific
environment interaction for solving each task. How can
an agent quickly generalize to unseen tasks it has never
experienced before in a zero or few-shot manner?
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Pennsylvania 2 UC Berkeley
Google Research, Brain Team 4 University of Toronto 5 Carnegie
Mellon University 6 Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to:
Oleh Rybkin <oleh@seas.upenn.edu>.
3

th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Task A

Task B

Task C
Environment
without Rewards

Task-Agnostic
Exploration

Global
World Model

Zero or Few Shot
Adaptation

Figure 1. The agent first leverages planning to explore in a selfsupervised manner, without task-specific rewards, to efficiently
learn a global world model. After the exploration phase, it receives
reward functions at test time to adapt to multiple downstream tasks,
such as standing, walking, running, and flipping using either zero
or few tasks-specific interactions.

Task-agnostic RL Because data collection is often expensive, it would be ideal to not keep collecting data for each
new task. Hence, we explore the environment once without
reward to collect a diverse dataset for later solving any downstream task, as shown in Figure 1. After the task-agnostic
exploration phase, the agent is provided with downstream
reward functions and needs to solve the tasks with limited or
no further environment interaction. Such a self-supervised
approach would allow solving various tasks without having
to repeat the expensive data collection for each new task.
Intrinsic motivation To explore complex environments
in the absence of rewards, the agent needs to follow a form of
intrinsic motivation that is computed from inputs that could
be high-dimensional images. For example, an agent could
seek inputs that it cannot yet predict accurately (Schmidhuber, 1991; Oudeyer et al., 2007; Pathak et al., 2017),
maximally influence its inputs (Klyubin et al., 2005; Eysenbach et al., 2018), or visit rare states (Poupart et al., 2006;
Lehman & Stanley, 2011; Bellemare et al., 2016; Burda
et al., 2018). However, most prior methods learn a modelfree exploration policy to act in the environment which
needs large amounts of samples for finetuning or adaptation
when presented with rewards for downstream tasks.
Retrospective novelty Model-free exploration methods
not only require large amounts of experience to adapt to
downstream tasks, they can also be inefficient during exploration. These agents usually first act in the environment,

