Spectral Frank-Wolfe Algorithm: Strict Complementarity and Linear
Convergence

Lijun Ding 1 Yingjie Fei 1 Qiantong Xu 2 Chengrun Yang 3

Abstract

The set Sn is called the spectrahedron, which is nonempty
and compact. Hence Problem (1) always has an optimal
solution. In this paper, we assume Problem (1) admits a
unique optimal solution X? with rank r? for the sake of
simplicity. The main results, Theorem 3 and 6 below, can
be adapted to the setting where multiple optimal solutions
exist; see Section A in the Appendix for a further discussion.
It is worth noting that for almost all matrix C, the solution
of Problem (1) is indeed unique (Drusvyatskiy & Lewis,
2011, Corollary 3.5).

We develop a novel variant of the classical FrankWolfe algorithm, which we call spectral FrankWolfe, for convex optimization over a spectrahedron. The spectral Frank-Wolfe algorithm has a
novel ingredient: it computes a few eigenvectors
of the gradient and solves a small-scale SDP in
each iteration. Such procedure overcomes slow
convergence of the classical Frank-Wolfe algorithm due to ignoring eigenvalue coalescence. We
demonstrate that strict complementarity of the optimization problem is key to proving linear convergence of various algorithms, such as the spectral
Frank-Wolfe algorithm as well as the projected
gradient method and its accelerated version.

1. Introduction
We consider solving the following optimization problem
with the decision variable X ∈ Rn×n :
minimize f (X) := g(AX) + hC, Xi
subject to tr(X) = 1 X  0.

(1)

Problem setup. The setup of Problem (1) is as follows.
We assume C ∈ Rn×n is a symmetric matrix. The constraint X  0 means that X is symmetric and positive
semidefinite. We assume that A : Sn → Rm is a linear map from the set of symmetric matrices Sn to the mdimensional Euclidean space. We also assume that the
function g : Rm → R is differentiable and its gradient ∇g
is Lg -Lipschitz continuous. We use tr(·) to denote the standard trace operation, the sum of diagonal entries of the input
matrix. We denote by Sn the feasible region of Problem (1).

Applications. The optimization problem covers many low
rank matrix recovery problems including matrix sensing
` & Recht,
(Recht et al., 2010), matrix completion (Candes
2009; Jaggi & Sulovskỳ, 2010), phase retrieval (Candes
et al., 2015; Yurtsever et al., 2017), and blind deconvolution
(Ahmed et al., 2013). The constraints X  0 and tr(X) =
1 impose low-rankness on the solution. The rank r? of
optimal solutions in these applications is expected to be
small comparing to the problem dimension n. We note that
the following problem:
minimizekXk∗ ≤α

f (X),

(2)

is sometimes a more direct optimization formulation for
aforementioned low rank matrix recovery problems. Since
Problem (2) can be re-formulated as Problem (1) (Jaggi &
Sulovskỳ, 2010), we consider Problem (1) as our main focus
of study in this paper.

School of ORIE, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14850,
USA 2 Facebook AI Research, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA
3
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14850, USA. Correspondence to: Lijun Ding
<ld446@cornell.edu>.

Background and related works. A natural but costly algorithm for solving (1) is using the projected gradient descent method (PGD) or its accelerated version (APGD) (Nesterov, 2013). Although the iteration complexity of PGD or
APGD is considerably low,1 each of their iteration requires
computing a full eigenvalue decomposition of an n × n
matrix, which scales as O(n3 ) (Trefethen & Bau III, 1997).
The high per-iteration cost prevents their large-scale deployment. Hence, projection-free methods are sought, such as
the Frank-Wolfe method (FW) (Frank & Wolfe, 1956; Jaggi,
2013) presented in Algorithm 1. In the spectrahedron setting,

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1
PGD or APGD achieves an -approximate solution in
O(log( 1 )) iterations for strongly convex f . APGD achieves an
-approximate solution O( √1 ) for general smooth f .

1

