Maximum Entropy Gain Exploration for
Long Horizon Multi-goal Reinforcement Learning

Silviu Pitis * 1 2 Harris Chan * 1 2 Stephen Zhao 1 Bradly Stadie 2 Jimmy Ba 1 2

Abstract
What goals should a multi-goal reinforcement
learning agent pursue during training in longhorizon tasks? When the desired (test time) goal
distribution is too distant to offer a useful learning
signal, we argue that the agent should not pursue
unobtainable goals. Instead, it should set its own
intrinsic goals that maximize the entropy of the
historical achieved goal distribution. We propose
to optimize this objective by having the agent pursue past achieved goals in sparsely explored areas
of the goal space, which focuses exploration on
the frontier of the achievable goal set. We show
that our strategy achieves an order of magnitude
better sample efficiency than the prior state of
the art on long-horizon multi-goal tasks including
maze navigation and block stacking.1

1. Introduction
Multi-goal reinforcement learning (RL) agents (Plappert
et al., 2018; Schaul et al., 2015b; Kaelbling, 1993) learn
goal-conditioned behaviors that can achieve and generalize
across a range of different goals. Multi-goal RL forms a
core component of hierarchical agents (Sutton et al., 1999;
Nachum et al., 2018), and has been shown to allow unsupervised agents to learn useful skills for downstream tasks
(Warde-Farley et al., 2019; Hansen et al., 2020). Recent
advances in goal relabeling (Andrychowicz et al., 2017)
have made learning possible in complex, sparse-reward environments whose goal spaces are either dense in the initial
state distribution (Plappert et al., 2018) or structured as a
curriculum (Colas et al., 2018). But learning without demonstrations in long-horizon tasks remains a challenge (Nair
et al., 2018a; Trott et al., 2019), as learning signal decreases
exponentially with the horizon (Osband et al., 2014).
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute.
Correspondence to: Silviu Pitis <spitis@cs.toronto.edu>, Harris
Chan <hchan@cs.toronto.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

In this paper, we improve upon existing approaches to intrinsic goal setting and show how multi-goal agents can form
an automatic behavioural goal curriculum that allows them
to master long-horizon, sparse reward tasks. We begin with
an algorithmic framework for goal-seeking agents that contextualizes prior work (Baranes & Oudeyer, 2013; Florensa
et al., 2018; Warde-Farley et al., 2019; Nair et al., 2018b;
Pong et al., 2019) and argue that past goal selection mechanisms are not well suited for long-horizon, sparse reward
tasks (Section 2). By framing the long-horizon goal seeking
task as optimizing an initially ill-conditioned distribution
matching objective (Lee et al., 2019), we arrive at our unsupervised Maximum Entropy Goal Achievement (MEGA)
objective, which maximizes the entropy of the past achieved
goal set. This early unsupervised objective is annealed into
the original supervised objective once the latter becomes
tractable, resulting in our OMEGA objective (Section 3).
We propose a practical algorithmic approach to maximizing
entropy, which pursues past achieved goals in sparsely explored areas of the achieved goal distribution, as measured
by a learned density model. The agent revisits and explores
around these areas, pushing the frontier of achieved goals
forward (Ecoffet et al., 2019). This strategy, similar in spirit
to Baranes & Oudeyer (2013) and Florensa et al. (2018),
encourages the agent to explore at the edge of its abilities, which avoids spending environment steps in pursuit of
already mastered or unobtainable goals. When used in combination with hindsight experience replay and an off-policy
learning algorithm, our method achieves more than an order
of magnitude better sample efficiency than the prior state of
the art on difficult exploration tasks, including long-horizon
mazes and block stacking (Section 4). Finally, we draw
connections between our approach and the empowerment
objective (Klyubin et al., 2005; Salge et al., 2014) and identify a key difference to prior work: rather than maximize
empowerment on-policy by setting maximally diverse goals
during training (Gregor et al., 2016; Warde-Farley et al.,
2019; Nair et al., 2018b; Pong et al., 2019), our proposed
approach maximizes it off-policy by setting goals on the
frontier of the past achieved goal set. We conclude with
discussion of related and future work (Sections 5-7).
1

Code available at https://github.com/spitis/mrl

