Forecasting Sequential Data Using Consistent Koopman Autoencoders

Omri Azencot * 1 N. Benjamin Erichson * 2 Vanessa Lin 2 Michael W. Mahoney 2

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks are widely used on
time series data, yet such models often ignore the
underlying physical structures in such sequences.
A new class of physics-based methods related to
Koopman theory has been introduced, offering
an alternative for processing nonlinear dynamical systems. In this work, we propose a novel
Consistent Koopman Autoencoder model which,
unlike the majority of existing work, leverages
the forward and backward dynamics. Key to our
approach is a new analysis which explores the
interplay between consistent dynamics and their
associated Koopman operators. Our network is
directly related to the derived analysis, and its
computational requirements are comparable to
other baselines. We evaluate our method on a
wide range of high-dimensional and short-term
dependent problems, and it achieves accurate estimates for significant prediction horizons, while
also being robust to noise.

1. Introduction
Sequential data processing and forecasting is a fundamental
problem in the engineering and physics sciences. Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) provide a powerful class of
models for these tasks, designed to learn long-term dependencies via their hidden state variables. However, training
RNNs over long time horizons is notoriously hard (Pascanu
et al., 2013) due to the problem of exploding and vanishing
gradients (Bengio et al., 1994). Several approaches have
been proposed to mitigate this issue using unitary hiddento-hidden weight matrices (Arjovsky et al., 2016) or analyzing stability properties (Miller & Hardt, 2019), among
other solutions. Still, attaining long-term memory remains a
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics at UC
Los Angeles, CA, USA. 2 ICSI and Department of Statistics
at UC Berkeley, CA, USA.. Correspondence to: Omri Azencot <azencot@math.ucla.edu>, N. Benjamin Erichson <erichson@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

challenge and moreover, modeling short-term dependencies
might also be affected due to the limited expressivity of
unitary RNNs (Kerg et al., 2019).
Another shortcoming of traditional RNNs is their difficulty
to incorporate high-level constraints into the model. In this
context, physics-based methods have been proposed, relating RNNs to dynamical systems (Sussillo & Barak, 2013)
or differential equations (Chang et al., 2019). This point
of view allows one to construct models which enjoy highlevel properties such as time invertibility via Hamiltonian
(Greydanus et al., 2019) or Symplectic (Chen et al., 2020;
Zhong et al., 2020) networks. Other techniques suggested
reversible RNNs (MacKay et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2018) to
alleviate the large memory footprints RNNs induce during
training. In this work, we advocate that modeling timeseries data which exhibit strong short-term dependencies
can benefit from relaxing the strict stability as well as time
invertibility requirements.
An interesting physics motivated alternative for analyzing
time series data has been introduced in Koopman-based
models (Takeishi et al., 2017; Morton et al., 2018; 2019; Li
et al., 2020). Koopman theory is based on the insight that
a nonlinear dynamical system can be fully encoded using
an operator that describes how scalar functions propagate in
time. The Koopman operator is linear, and thus preferable
to work with in practice, as tools from linear algebra and
spectral theory can be directly applied. While Koopman’s
theory (Koopman, 1931) was established almost a century
ago, significant advances have been recently accomplished
in the theory and methodology with applications in the
fluid mechanics (Mezić, 2005) and geometry processing
(Ovsjanikov et al., 2012) communities.
The Koopman operator maps between function spaces and
thus it is infinite-dimensional and can not be represented
on a computer. Nevertheless, most machine learning approaches hypothesize that there exists a data transformation
under which an approximate finite-dimensional Koopman
operator is available. Typically, this map is represented
via an autoencoder network, embedding the input onto a
low-dimensional latent space. In that space, the Koopman
operator is approximated using a linear layer that encodes
the dynamics (Takeishi et al., 2017). The main advantage
of this framework is that the resulting models are easy to

