Efficient Domain Generalization via Common-Specific Low-Rank
Decomposition

Vihari Piratla * 1 Praneeth Netrapalli 2 Sunita Sarawagi 1

Abstract
Domain generalization refers to the task of training a model which generalizes to new domains
that are not seen during training. We present
CSD (Common Specific Decomposition), for this
setting, which jointly learns a common component (which generalizes to new domains) and a
domain specific component (which overfits on
training domains). The domain specific components are discarded after training and only the
common component is retained. The algorithm
is extremely simple and involves only modifying
the final linear classification layer of any given
neural network architecture. We present a principled analysis to understand existing approaches,
provide identifiability results of CSD, and study
the effect of low-rank on domain generalization.
We show that CSD either matches or beats state
of the art approaches for domain generalization
based on domain erasure, domain perturbed data
augmentation, and meta-learning. Further diagnostics on rotated MNIST, where domains are interpretable, confirm the hypothesis that CSD successfully disentangles common and domain specific components and hence leads to better domain
generalization; moreover, our code and dataset are
publicly available at the following URL: https:
//github.com/vihari/csd.

1. Introduction
In the domain generalization (DG) task we are given domaindemarcated data from multiple domains during training, and
our goal is to create a model that will generalize to instances
from new domains during testing. Unlike in the more popu* Most work done during internship at Microsoft Research,
India. 1 Department of Computer Science, Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai, India 2 Microsoft Research, Bangalore, India.
Correspondence to: Vihari Piratla <viharipiratla@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

lar domain adaptation task (Mansour et al., 2009; Ben-David
et al., 2006; DauméIII et al., 2010) that explicitly adapts
to a fixed target domain, DG requires zero-shot generalization to individual instances from multiple new domains.
Domain generalization is of particular significance in largescale deep learning networks because large training sets
often entail aggregation from multiple distinct domains, on
which today’s high-capacity networks easily overfit. Standard methods of regularization only address generalization
to unseen instances sampled from the distribution of training domains, and have been shown to perform poorly on
instances from unseen domains.
Domain Generalization approaches have a rich history. Earlier methods were simpler and either sought to learn feature
representations that were invariant across domains (Motiian et al., 2017; Muandet et al., 2013; Ghifary et al., 2015;
Wang et al., 2019), or decomposed parameters into shared
and domain-specific components (Khosla et al., 2012; Li
et al., 2017). Of late however the methods proposed for
DG are significantly more complicated and expensive. A
recent favorite is gradient-based meta-learning that trains
with sampled domain pairs to minimize either loss on one
domain while updating parameters on another domain (Balaji et al., 2018; Li et al., 2018a), or minimizes the divergence
between their representations (Dou et al., 2019). Another approach is to augment training data with domain adversarial
perturbations (Shankar et al., 2018).
Contributions
Our paper starts with analyzing the domain generalization
problem in a simple and natural generative setting. We use
this setting to provide a principled understanding of existing DG approaches and improve upon prior decomposition
methods. We design an algorithm CSD that decomposes
only the last softmax parameters into a common component
and a low-rank domain-specific component with a regularizer to promote orthogonality of the two parts. We prove
identifiability of the shared parameters, which was missing
in earlier decomposition-based approaches. We analytically
study the effect of rank in trading off domain-specific noise
suppression and domain generalization, which in earlier
work was largely heuristics-driven.
We show that our method despite its simplicity provides

