Towards Understanding the Regularization of Adversarial Robustness on
Neural Networks
Yuxin Wen * 1 2 Shuai Li * 1 Kui Jia 1 2

Abstract
The problem of adversarial examples has shown
that modern Neural Network (NN) models could
be rather fragile. Among the more established
techniques to solve the problem, one is to require
the model to be -adversarially robust (AR); that
is, to require the model not to change predicted labels when any given input examples are perturbed
within a certain range. However, it is observed
that such methods would lead to standard performance degradation, i.e., the degradation on
natural examples. In this work, we study the
degradation through the regularization perspective. We identify quantities from generalization
analysis of NNs; with the identifed quantities we
empirically fnd that AR is achieved by regularizing/biasing NNs towards less confdent solutions
by making the changes in the feature space (induced by changes in the instance space) of most
layers smoother uniformly in all directions; so to a
certain extent, it prevents sudden change in prediction w.r.t. perturbations. However, the end result
of such smoothing concentrates samples around
decision boundaries, resulting in less confdent solutions, and leads to worse standard performance.
Our studies suggest that one might consider ways
that build AR into NNs in a gentler way to avoid
the problematic regularization.

1. Introduction
Despite the remarkable performance (Krizhevsky et al.,
2012) of Deep Neural Networks (NNs), they are found to
be rather fragile and easily fooled by adversarial examples
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Electronic and Information Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou,
Guangdong 510640, China 2 Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, 510335,
China. Correspondence to: Shuai Li <lishuai918@gmail.com>,
Yuxin Wen <wen.yuxin@mail.scut.edu.cn>, Kui Jia <kuijia@scut.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

(Szegedy et al., 2014). More intriguingly, these adversarial
examples are generated by adding imperceptible noise to
normal examples, and thus are indistinguishable for humans.
NNs that are more robust to adversarial examples tend to
have lower standard accuracy (Su et al., 2018), i.e., the accuracy measured on natural examples. The trade-off between
robustness and accuracy has been empirically observed in
many works (Fawzi et al., 2018; Kurakin et al., 2017; Madry
et al., 2018; Tsipras et al., 2019), and has been theoretically
analyzed under the context of simple models, e.g., linear
models (Tsipras et al., 2019), quadratic models (Fawzi et al.,
2018), but it is not clear whether the analysis generalizes to
NNs. For example, Tsipras et al. (2019) show that for linear
models, if examples are close to decision boundaries, robustness provably conficts with accuracy, though the proof
seems unlikely to generalize to NNs. Arguably, the most
widely used remedy is developed to require NNs to be adversarially robust (AR), e.g., via Adversarial Training
(Madry et al., 2018), Lipschitz-Margin Training (Tsuzuku
et al., 2018); that is, they require the model not to change
predicted labels when any given input examples are perturbed within a certain range. In practice, such AR methods
are found to lead to worse performance measured in standard classifcation accuracy. Alternatives to build AR into
NNs are also being developed. For instance, Zhang et al.
(2019) show that a gap exists between surrogate risk gap
and 0-1 risk gap if many examples are close to decision
boundaries, and better robustness can be achieved by pushing examples away from decision boundaries. But pushing
examples away again degrades NN performance in their
experiments. But they are yet to be widely adopted by the
community.
We investigate how adversarial robustness built into NNs
by the arguably most established method, i.e., Adversarial Training (Madry et al., 2018), infuences the behaviors
of NNs to make them more robust but have lower performance through the lens of regularization. In an earlier time
(Szegedy et al., 2014), adversarial training has been suggested as a form of regularization: it augments the training
of NNs with adversarial examples, and thus might improve
the generalization of the end models. Note that such a hard
requirement that the adversarial examples need to be classifed correctly is different from the methods that increase

