Uncertainty Estimation Using a Single Deep Deterministic Neural Network

Joost van Amersfoort 1 Lewis Smith 1 Yee Whye Teh 2 Yarin Gal 1

Abstract
We propose a method for training a deterministic deep model that can find and reject out of
distribution data points at test time with a single
forward pass. Our approach, deterministic uncertainty quantification (DUQ), builds upon ideas of
RBF networks. We scale training in these with a
novel loss function and centroid updating scheme
and match the accuracy of softmax models. By
enforcing detectability of changes in the input
using a gradient penalty, we are able to reliably
detect out of distribution data. Our uncertainty
quantification scales well to large datasets, and
using a single model, we improve upon or match
Deep Ensembles in out of distribution detection
on notable difficult dataset pairs such as FashionMNIST vs. MNIST, and CIFAR-10 vs. SVHN.

1. Introduction
Estimating uncertainty reliably and efficiently has remained
an open problem with many important applications such
as guiding exploration in Reinforcement Learning (Osband et al., 2016) or as a method for selecting data points
for which to acquire labels in Active Learning (Houlsby
et al., 2011). Until now, most approaches for estimating
uncertainty in deep learning rely on ensembling (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017) or Monte Carlo sampling (Gal
& Ghahramani, 2016). In this paper, we introduce a deep
model that is able to estimate uncertainty in a single forward
pass. We call our model DUQ, Deterministic Uncertainty
Quantification, and we construct it by re-examining ideas
originally suggested in the 90s. We combine these with
recent advances and make a number of improvements which
enable scalable training of modern deep learning architectures. We evaluate our model against the current best approach for estimating uncertainty in Deep Learning, Deep
1
OATML, Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford 2 Department of Statistics, University
of Oxford.
Correspondence to: Joost van Amersfoort
<joost.van.amersfoort@cs.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

(a) Deep Ensembles

(b) Our model - DUQ

Figure 1. Uncertainty results on two moons dataset. Yellow indicates high certainty, while blue indicates uncertainty. DUQ is
certain only on the data distribution, and uncertain away from
it: the ideal result. Deep Ensembles is uncertain only along the
decision boundary, and certain elsewhere.

Ensembles, and show that DUQ compares favourably on a
number of evaluations, such as out of distribution (OoD) detection of FashionMNIST vs MNIST, and CIFAR vs. SVHN.
We visualise how DUQ performs on the two moons dataset
in Figure 1. We see that DUQ is only certain on the training
data, and its certainty decreases away from it. Deep Ensembles are not able to obtain meaningful uncertainty on this
dataset, because of a lack of diversity in the different models
in the ensemble. We make our code publicly available1 .
DUQ consists of a deep model and a set of feature vectors
corresponding to the different classes (centroids). A prediction is made by computing a kernel function, a distance
function, between the feature vector computed by the model
and the centroids. This type of model is called an RBF
network (LeCun et al., 1998a) and uncertainty is measured
as the distance between the model output and the closest
centroid. A data point for which the feature vector is far
away from all centroids does not belong to any class and can
be considered out of distribution. In this paper, we define
uncertainty to be predictive uncertainty.
The model is trained by minimising the distance to the
correct centroid, while maximising it with respect to the
others. This incentivises the model to put the features of
training data close to a particular centroid, however there is
no mechanism that dictates what should happen away from
the training data. Therefore we need to enforce that DUQ is
1
https://github.com/y0ast/
deterministic-uncertainty-quantification

