Bio-Inspired Hashing for Unsupervised Similarity Search
Chaitanya K. Ryali 1 2 John J. Hopfield 3 Leopold Grinberg 4 Dmitry Krotov 2 4

Abstract
The fruit fly Drosophila’s olfactory circuit has
inspired a new locality sensitive hashing (LSH)
algorithm, FlyHash. In contrast with classical
LSH algorithms that produce low dimensional
hash codes, FlyHash produces sparse highdimensional hash codes and has also been shown
to have superior empirical performance compared
to classical LSH algorithms in similarity search.
However, FlyHash uses random projections and
cannot learn from data. Building on inspiration
from FlyHash and the ubiquity of sparse expansive representations in neurobiology, our work
proposes a novel hashing algorithm BioHash
that produces sparse high dimensional hash codes
in a data-driven manner. We show that BioHash
outperforms previously published benchmarks
for various hashing methods. Since our learning algorithm is based on a local and biologically
plausible synaptic plasticity rule, our work provides evidence for the proposal that LSH might
be a computational reason for the abundance of
sparse expansive motifs in a variety of biological
systems. We also propose a convolutional variant BioConvHash that further improves performance. From the perspective of computer science,
BioHash and BioConvHash are fast, scalable
and yield compressed binary representations that
are useful for similarity search.

1. Introduction
Sparse expansive representations are ubiquitous in neurobiology. Expansion means that a high-dimensional input
is mapped to an even higher dimensional secondary representation. Such expansion is often accompanied by a
sparsification of the activations: dense input data is mapped
1
Department of CS and Engineering, UC San Diego 2 MITIBM Watson AI Lab 3 Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton
University 4 IBM Research. Correspondence to: C.K. Ryali <rckrishn@eng.ucsd.edu>, D. Krotov <krotov@ibm.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

into a sparse code, where only a small number of secondary
neurons respond to a given stimulus.
A classical example of the sparse expansive motif is the
Drosophila fruit fly olfactory system. In this case, approximately 50 projection neurons send their activities to about
2500 Kenyon cells (Turner et al., 2008), thus accomplishing
an approximately 50x expansion. An input stimulus typically activates approximately 50% of projection neurons,
and less than 10% Kenyon cells (Turner et al., 2008), providing an example of significant sparsification of the expanded
codes. Another example is the rodent olfactory circuit. In
this system, dense input from the olfactory bulb is projected
into piriform cortex, which has 1000x more neurons than the
number of glomeruli in the olfactory bulb. Only about 10%
of those neurons respond to a given stimulus (Mombaerts
et al., 1996). A similar motif is found in rat’s cerebellum
and hippocampus (Dasgupta et al., 2017).
From the computational perspective, expansion is helpful
for increasing the number of classification decision boundaries by a simple perceptron (Cover, 1965) or increasing
memory storage capacity in models of associative memory
(Hopfield, 1982). Additionally, sparse expansive representations have been shown to reduce intrastimulus variability
and the overlaps between representations induced by distinct stimuli (Sompolinsky, 2014). Sparseness has also been
shown to increase the capacity of models of associative
memory (Tsodyks & Feigelman, 1988).
The goal of our work is to use this “biological” inspiration
about sparse expansive motifs, as well as local Hebbian
learning, for designing a novel hashing algorithm BioHash
that can be used in similarity search. We describe the task,
the algorithm, and demonstrate that BioHash improves
retrieval performance on common benchmarks.
Similarity search and LSH. In similarity search, given
a query q 2 Rd , a similarity measure sim(q, x), and a
database X 2 Rn⇥d containing n items, the objective
is to retrieve a ranked list of R items from the database
most similar to q. When data is high-dimensional (e.g. images/documents) and the databases are large (millions or billions items), this is a computationally challenging problem.
However, approximate solutions are generally acceptable,
with Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH) being one such approach (Wang et al., 2014). Similarity search approaches

