Inductive Relation Prediction by Subgraph Reasoning

Komal K. Teru 1 2 Etienne G. Denis 1 2 William L. Hamilton 1 2

Abstract
The dominant paradigm for relation prediction in
knowledge graphs involves learning and operating on latent representations (i.e., embeddings) of
entities and relations. However, these embeddingbased methods do not explicitly capture the compositional logical rules underlying the knowledge
graph, and they are limited to the transductive
setting, where the full set of entities must be
known during training. Here, we propose a graph
neural network based relation prediction framework, GraIL, that reasons over local subgraph
structures and has a strong inductive bias to learn
entity-independent relational semantics. Unlike
embedding-based models, GraIL is naturally inductive and can generalize to unseen entities and
graphs after training. We provide theoretical proof
and strong empirical evidence that GraIL can represent a useful subset of first-order logic and show
that GraIL outperforms existing rule-induction
baselines in the inductive setting. We also demonstrate significant gains obtained by ensembling
GraIL with various knowledge graph embedding
methods in the transductive setting, highlighting
the complementary inductive bias of our method.

1. Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) are a collection of facts which
specify relations (as edges) among a set of entities (as nodes).
Predicting missing facts in KGs—usually framed as relation
prediction between two entities—is a widely studied problem in statistical relational learning (Nickel et al., 2016).
The most dominant paradigm, in recent times, has been to
learn and operate on latent representations (i.e., embeddings)
of entities and relations. These methods condense each
entity’s neighborhood connectivity pattern into an entityspecific low-dimensional embedding, which can then be
*

1

2

Equal contribution McGill University Mila. Correspondence
to: Komal K. Teru <komal.teru@mail.mcgill.ca>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

Figure 1. Illustration of transductive and inductive settings for relation prediction in knowledge graphs.

used to predict missing edges (Bordes et al., 2013; Trouillon
et al., 2017; Dettmers et al., 2018; Sun et al., 2019). For
example, in Figure 1a, the embeddings of LeBron and
A.Davis will contain the information that they are both
part of the Lakers organization, which could later be retrieved to predict that they are teammates. Embedding-based
methods have enjoyed great success by exploiting such local connectivity patterns. However, it is not clear if they
effectively capture the relational semantics of knowledge
graphs—i.e., the logical rules that hold among the relations
underlying the knowledge graph.
Indeed, the relation prediction task can also be viewed as
a logical induction problem, where one seeks to derive
probabilistic logical rules (horn clauses) underlying a given
KG. For example, from the KG shown in Figure 1a one can
derive the simple rule
∃Y.(X, spouse of, Y ) ∧ (Y, lives in, Z)
→ (X, lives in, Z). (1)
Using the example from Figure 1b, this rule can predict the relation (A.Davis, lives in, L.A). While the
embedding-based methods encode entity-specific neighborhood information into an embedding, these logical rules
capture entity-independent relational semantics.
One of the key advantages of learning entity-independent

