Why Are Learned Indexes So Effective?

Paolo Ferragina * 1 Fabrizio Lillo * 2 Giorgio Vinciguerra * 1

Abstract
A recent trend in algorithm design consists of
augmenting classic data structures with machine
learning models, which are better suited to reveal
and exploit patterns and trends in the input data
so to achieve outstanding practical improvements
in space occupancy and time efficiency. This is
especially known in the context of indexing data
structures where, despite few attempts in evaluating their asymptotic efficiency, theoretical results are yet missing in showing that learned indexes are provably better than classic indexes,
such as B+ -trees and their variants. In this paper,
we present the first mathematically-grounded answer to this open problem. We obtain this result by discovering and exploiting a link between
the original problem and a mean exit time problem over a proper stochastic process which, we
show, is related to the space and time occupancy
of those learned indexes. Our general result is
then specialised to five well-known distributions:
Uniform, Lognormal, Pareto, Exponential, and
Gamma; and it is corroborated in precision and
robustness by a large set of experiments.

time efficiency over a plethora of problems and applications, such as databases, search engines, operating systems,
sorting algorithms (Ferragina & Vinciguerra, 2020a).
The most successful example of the interplay between data
structures and machine learning is the indexable dictionary
problem, which asks to store a set S of n keys over a universe U (e.g. reals, integers, etc.) in an index structure that
efficiently supports the following query operations:
• member (x) = TRUE if x ∈ S, FALSE otherwise;
• predecessor (x) = max{y ∈ S | y < x};
• range(x, y) = S ∩ [x, y].

For this problem, many learned data structures (or learned
indexes, as they are called in this case) have been proposed.
Examples include the ones in (Ao et al., 2011; Kraska et al.,
2018; Galakatos et al., 2019; Ding et al., 2020; Ferragina &
Vinciguerra, 2020b) and others surveyed in (Ferragina &
Vinciguerra, 2020a). The common idea is that indexes are
models that can be trained to map keys to their location in
the sorted S, and this mapping is enough to implement the
above queries.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Pisa, Italy 2 Department of Mathematics, University
of Bologna, Italy. Correspondence to: Giorgio Vinciguerra
<giorgio.vinciguerra@phd.unipi.it>.

To clarify, let us denote by rank (x) the primitive that returns, for any key x ∈ U, the number of keys in S which are
smaller than x, and let A be the array storing the keys of S
in sorted order. Then, member (x) can be implemented by
checking whether A[rank (x)] = x; predecessor (x) consists of returning A[rank (x) − 1]; and range(x, y) consists of scanning the array A from position rank (x) up to
the first key larger than y. Given rank , we reformulate
the indexable dictionary problem as a supervised learning task over a dataset of points {(x, rank (x))}x∈S in
which we look for a model f : U → {0, . . . , n − 1} mapping keys to their position in A that minimises the error
|f (x) − rank (x)| over all x ∈ U. The possible presence
of an error imposes also the design of proper algorithms
that subsequently correct f (x) to get the exact rank (x),
and thus answer correctly the query on x. As an example,
we can use a binary search in A in a neighbourhood of size
err = maxx∈U |f (x) − rank (x)| around the approximate
position f (x). An illustrative example is given in Figure 1.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

We observe that this has been a significant breakthrough
in the design of indexes, because the resulting learned data
structure answers queries in O(log err ) time plus the cost

1. Introduction
Very recently, the unexpected combination of data structures and Machine Learning (ML) has led to the development of a new area of algorithmic research, called learned
data structures. The key design idea consists of augmenting — and sometimes even replacing — classic building blocks of data structures, such as arrays, trees or hash
tables, with ML models, which are better suited to reveal
and exploit patterns and trends in the input data. This feature, orchestrated with proper algorithms, has led to outstanding practical improvements in space occupancy and

