DeBayes: a Bayesian Method for Debiasing Network Embeddings

Maarten Buyl 1 Tijl De Bie 1

Abstract
As machine learning algorithms are increasingly
deployed for high-impact automated decision
making, ethical and increasingly also legal standards demand that they treat all individuals fairly,
without discrimination based on their age, gender, race or other sensitive traits. In recent years
much progress has been made on ensuring fairness and reducing bias in standard machine learning settings. Yet, for network embedding, with
applications in vulnerable domains ranging from
social network analysis to recommender systems,
current options remain limited both in number
and performance. We thus propose DeBayes: a
conceptually elegant Bayesian method that is capable of learning debiased embeddings by using
a biased prior. Our experiments show that these
representations can then be used to perform link
prediction that is significantly more fair in terms
of popular metrics such as demographic parity
and equalized opportunity.

1. Introduction
In recent years, machine learning algorithms have increasingly taken up decision making responsibilities in the real
world. However, their traditional focus on accuracy makes
them prone to discriminate in ways that are morally or
legally unacceptable. This development has sparked a surge
of research interest in machine learning fairness (Friedler
et al., 2019), where the objective is to learn how to make
decisions that remain accurate while avoiding to discriminate against individuals with respect to a particular set of
sensitive attributes.
A naive attempt at preventing discrimination is to simply
remove the sensitive information from the input, thereby
1
Department of Electronics and Information Systems (ELIS),
IDLab, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. Correspondence
to: Maarten Buyl <maarten.buyl@ugent.be>, Tijl De Bie
<tijl.debie@ugent.be>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

avoiding what is seen as disparate treatment. Yet moral
standards and anti-discrimination laws are typically also
concerned about disparate impact (Barocas & Selbst, 2016).
This alternative notion of discrimination demands that outcomes do not disproportionately hurt or benefit people with
specific sensitive attributes (Zafar et al., 2017). In machine
learning, avoiding disparate impact is often difficult, since
the sensitive attributes are typically not independent of other
features in the data (Pedreshi et al., 2008). f While research
in fair binary classification has been plentiful, fairness has
seen relatively little attention in the field of network embedding (Mehrabi et al., 2019). There, the goal is to find a
low-dimensional representation for every node in a graph
dataset, in order to perform various downstream tasks such
as node classification, community detection, and link prediction (Cui et al., 2018). The latter is concerned with
estimating, given the observed network structure, the likelihood of an edge between two nodes. The field has seen
tremendous interest in recent years due to the ubiquity of
the graph structured data, with applications in e.g. social
graphs and recommender systems (Hamilton et al., 2017).
However, these networks often represent connections between people, possibly giving rise to fairness issues. For
example, friendship recommendation in social media graphs
may reinforce historical biases towards certain groups (Stoica et al., 2018). A similar issue has been found in book
recommendation, where algorithms may be biased towards
suggesting books with male authors (Ekstrand et al., 2018).
In this work, our aim is to provide an elegant method to
increase fairness at both the level of network embedding
and at the level of its downstream task: link prediction. An
algorithm that naturally allows us to do so is Conditional
Network Embedding (CNE) (Kang et al., 2019): a Bayesian
network embedding algorithm that uses a prior distribution
to model the structural properties of the network, such as
the node degrees or any block structure. Given this, CNE
then searches for an embedding that optimally describes
the affinities between nodes insofar these are not already
captured by the prior.
Proposed method We introduce DeBayes, an adaptation
of CNE where the sensitive information is modelled as
strongly as possible in the prior distribution. Consequently,
the learned embeddings no longer need to represent this
information, i.e. it is debiased. The idea is illustrated with

