Sample Amplification:
Increasing Dataset Size even when Learning is Impossible

Brian Axelrod * 1 Shivam Garg * 1 Vatsal Sharan * 1 Gregory Valiant * 1

Abstract
Given data drawn from an unknown distribution,
D, to what extent is it possible to “amplify” this
dataset and faithfully output an even larger set
of samples that appear to have been drawn from
D? We formalize this question as follows: an
(n, m) amplification procedure takes as input n
independent draws from an unknown distribution D, and outputs a set of m > n “samples”
which must be indistinguishable from m samples
drawn iid from D. We consider this sample amplification problem in two fundamental settings:
the case where D is an arbitrary discrete distribution supported on k elements, and the case
where D is a d-dimensional Gaussian with unknown mean, and fixed covariance matrix. Perhaps surprisingly, we show a valid amplification
procedure exists for both of these settings, even
in the regime where the size of the input dataset,
n, is significantly less than what would be necessary to learn distribution D to non-trivial accuracy. We also show that our procedures are optimal up to constant factors. Beyond these results,
we describe potential applications of sample amplification, and formalize a number of curious directions for future research.

1. Learning, Testing, and Sample
Amplification
How much do you need to know about a distribution, D, in
order to produce a dataset of size m that is indistinguishable from a set of independent draws from D? Do you need
to learn D, to nontrivial accuracy in some natural metric,
*

Alphabetical ordering 1 Stanford University, United States.
Correspondence to: Brian Axelrod <baxelrod@stanford.edu>,
Shivam
Garg
<shivamgarg@stanford.edu>,
Vatsal
Sharan
<vsharan@cs.stanford.edu>,
Gregory
Valiant
<valiant@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

or does it suffice to have access to a smaller dataset of size
n < m drawn from D, and then “amplify” this dataset
to create one of size m? In this work we formalize this
question, and show that for two natural classes of distribution, discrete distributions with bounded support, and ddimensional Gaussians, non-trivial data “amplification” is
possible even in the regime in which you are given too few
samples to learn.
From a theoretical perspective, this question is related to
the meta-question underlying work on distributional property testing and estimation: To answer basic hypothesis
testing or property estimation questions regarding a distribution D, to what extent must one first learn D, and can
such questions be reliably answered given a relatively modest amount of data drawn from D? Much of the excitement
surrounding distributional property testing and estimation
stems from the fact that, for many such testing and estimation questions, a surprisingly small set of samples from
D suffices—significantly fewer samples than would be required to learn D. These surprising answers have been revealed over the past two decades. The question posed in
our work fits with this body of work, though instead of asking how much data is required to perform a hypothesis test,
we are asking how much data is required to fool an optimal hypothesis test—in this case an “identity tester” which
knows D and is trying to distinguish a set of m independent
samples drawn from D, versus m datapoints constructed in
some other fashion.
From a more practical perspective, the question we consider also seems timely. Deep neural network based systems, trained on a set of samples, can be designed to perform many tasks, including testing whether a given input
was drawn from a distribution in question (i.e. “discrimination”), as well as sampling (often via the popular Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) approach). There are
many relevant questions regarding the extent to which current systems are successful in accomplishing these tasks,
and the question of how to quantify the performance of
these systems is still largely open. In this work, however,
we ask a different question: Suppose a system can accomplish such a task—what would that actually mean? If a
system can produce a dataset that is indistinguishable from

