Variational Imitation Learning with Diverse-quality Demonstrations

Voot Tangkaratt 1 Bo Han 2 1 Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan 1 Masashi Sugiyama 1 3

Abstract

an assumption that diversity is caused by noise-densities.

Learning from demonstrations can be challenging when the quality of demonstrations is diverse,
and even more so when the quality is unknown
and there is no additional information to estimate
the quality. We propose a new method for imitation learning in such scenarios. We show that
simple quality-estimation approaches might fail
due to compounding error, and fix this issue by
jointly estimating both the quality and reward using a variational approach. Our method is easy to
implement within reinforcement-learning frameworks and also achieves state-of-the-art performance on continuous-control benchmarks. Our
work enables scalable and data-efficient imitation
learning under more realistic settings than before.

Learning from diverse-quality demonstrations becomes less
challenging when the quality of demonstrations is known.
In such scenarios, we can use data-cleaning techniques to remove low-quality demonstrations (Han et al., 2011), or use
multi-modal approaches to learn good policies that correspond to high-quality demonstrations (Li et al., 2017; Wang
et al., 2017). In some scenarios, experts may not provide the
quality directly. Instead, they provide additional information
about the quality. With such information, learning is still
relatively easy, since the quality can be estimated by their
confidence scores (Wu et al., 2019), ranking scores (Brown
et al., 2019), or a small number of high-quality demonstrations (Audiffren et al., 2015). However, these scenarios
assume the availability of experts who provide the quality
or additional information. Our goal in this paper is to go beyond these scenarios and perform IL under a more realistic
setting where experts are not required.

1. Introduction
Sequential decision making aims to learn a good policy
that makes good decisions (Puterman, 1994). Imitation
Learning (IL) is a specific case which learns such a policy from demonstrations (Schaal, 1999), and it performs
well when high-quality demonstrations from experts are
available (Ho & Ermon, 2016; Fu et al., 2018; Peng et al.,
2019). However, in reality, the quality of demonstrations
can be diverse, i.e., high- and low-quality demonstrations
are mixed. This scenario typically happens when collecting demonstrations from experts is costly, e.g., in robotics
where experts must have domain-specific knowledge (Mandlekar et al., 2018; Osa et al., 2018). Unfortunately, learning
from diverse-quality demonstrations is challenging, because
low-quality demonstrations often negatively affect learning performance, e.g., in robotics where they may cause
damages to robots (Shiarlis et al., 2016). In this paper, we
propose a new method to solve this learning problem under
1

RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Japan
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University,
Hong Kong 3 Department of Complexity Science and Engineering, The University of Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Voot
Tangkaratt <voot.tangkaratt@riken.jp>.

We propose a new method for IL with diverse-quality
demonstrations by modeling the quality with a probabilistic graphic model under a noise-density assumption. We
show that simple quality-estimation approaches might fail
due to compounding error, and fix this issue by estimating the quality along with a reward function that represents
an intention of experts’ decision making. To handle large
state-action spaces, we use a variational approach, which
can be easily implemented within reinforcement-learning
frameworks (Sutton & Barto, 1998) and is scalable to large
state-action spaces by using neural networks. We also propose importance sampling to improve the data-efficiency
of our method. The final method is called Variational IL
with Diverse-quality demonstrations (VILD). Experiments
on continuous-control tasks demonstrate that VILD is robust against diverse-quality demonstrations and achieves
state-of-the-art performance.

2. IL with Diverse-quality Demonstrations

2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Before delving into our main contribution, we first give
backgrounds about RL and IL. Then, we formulate a new
setting in IL called IL with diverse-quality demonstrations
and discuss deficiencies of existing methods.

