Structured Linear Contextual Bandits:
A Sharp and Geometric Smoothed Analysis

Vidyashankar Sivakumar 1 2

Zhiwei Steven Wu 2

Abstract
Bandit learning algorithms typically involve the
balance of exploration and exploitation. However,
in many practical applications, worst-case scenarios needing systematic exploration are seldom encountered. In this work, we consider a smoothed
setting for structured linear contextual bandits
where the adversarial contexts are perturbed by
Gaussian noise and the unknown parameter θ∗ has
structure, e.g., sparsity, group sparsity, low rank,
etc. We propose simple greedy algorithms for
both the single- and multi-parameter (i.e., different parameter for each context) settings and provide a unified regret analysis for θ∗ with any assumed structure. The regret bounds are expressed
in terms of geometric quantities such as Gaussian
widths associated with the structure of θ∗ . We
also obtain sharper regret bounds compared to
earlier work for the unstructured θ∗ setting as a
consequence of our improved analysis. We show
there is implicit exploration in the smoothed setting where a simple greedy algorithm works.

1. Introduction
Contextual bandits (Langford & Zhang, 2007) is a powerful framework for sequential decision-making, with many
applications to clinical trials, web search, and content optimization. In a typical scenario, users arrive over time, and
the algorithm chooses among various content (e.g., news
articles) to present to each user and observes the outcome
(e.g., clicks). A popular parametric formulation for this
problem is the linear contextual bandit setting (Chu et al.,
2011; Li et al., 2010): in rounds t = 1, . . . , T , the algorithm
1

Walmart Labs, Sunnyvale 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Minnesota, Twin Cities. Correspondence to:
Vidyashankar Sivakumar <sivak017@umn.edu>, Zhiwei Steven
Wu <steven7woo@gmail.com>, Arindam Banerjee <banerjee@cs.umn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Arindam Banerjee 2

selects a context xtit from k available contexts xt1 , . . . , xtk
and receives a noisy reward rt (xtit ) = hxtit , θ∗ i + ω t where
θ∗ is the unknown parameter and ω t denotes the reward
noise. The goal of the algorithm is to select contexts to
maximize rewards over time observing only the available
contexts and the reward associated with the selected context
in each round. Such algorithms typically need to balance
exploration, making potentially sub-optimal decisions for
the sake of information acquisition, and exploitation, selecting decisions that are optimal based on the estimate of θ∗ .
In particular, the greedy algorithm that myopically selects
contexts maximizing rewards based on the ordinary least
squares estimate θ̂, i.e., choosing xtit = argmax hxti , θ̂i is
xti :1≤i≤k

known to be sub-optimal in the worst case (see Mansour
et al. (2018) for an example). However, the greedy algorithm
offers several appealing features, including its simplicity in
computation and the selection is aligned with each user’s
short-term interest (Bird et al., 2016; Kannan et al., 2017).
Given the advantages of the greedy algorithm, there has
been recent work that investigates when the greedy algorithms perform well. On the practical side, Bietti et al.
(2018) shows that there is strong empirical evidence that
exploration-free algorithms perform well on real data sets.
On the theoretical side, a line of work (Bastani et al., 2018;
Kannan et al., 2018; Raghavan et al., 2018) analyzed conditions under which inherent diversity in the data makes
explicit exploration unnecessary. In particular, the work
of (Kannan et al., 2018; Raghavan et al., 2018) provide a
smoothed analysis on the greedy algorithm under the following setting: in each round the contexts xti , 1 ≤ i ≤ k are of
the form µti + git , where the µti ∈ Rp ’s are chosen adaptively
by an adversary and git ∼ N (0, σ 2 Ip×p ) are independent
Gaussian perturbations from nature. The expected reward
associated with each xti is then hxti , θi∗ i, where the unknown
parameter θi∗ can vary across different actions i.
Our work substantially generalizes the smoothed analysis framework for linear contextual bandits considered in
Kannan et al. (2018); Raghavan et al. (2018). We enrich
and refine these prior analyses by explicitly capturing the
structure in the unknown parameters—specifically, θi∗ with
small atomic norms R(·) such as `1 norm, group-sparse
norms, nuclear norms, k-support norm, etc. (Jacob et al.,

