CAUSE: Learning Granger Causality from Event Sequences using Attribution
Methods
Wei Zhang 1 Thomas Kobber Panum 2 Somesh Jha 1 3 Prasad Chalasani 3 David Page 4

Abstract
We study the problem of learning Granger causality between event types from asynchronous, interdependent, multi-type event sequences. Existing
work suffers from either limited model flexibility or poor model explainability and thus fails
to uncover Granger causality across a wide variety of event sequences with diverse event interdependency. To address these weaknesses, we
propose CAUSE (Causality from AttribUtions
on Sequence of Events), a novel framework for
the studied task. The key idea of CAUSE is
to first implicitly capture the underlying event
interdependency by fitting a neural point process, and then extract from the process a Granger
causality statistic using an axiomatic attribution
method. Across multiple datasets riddled with diverse event interdependency, we demonstrate that
CAUSE achieves superior performance on correctly inferring the inter-type Granger causality
over a range of state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Many real-world processes generate a massive number of
asynchronous and interdependent events in real time. Examples include the diagnosis and drug prescription histories
of patients in electronic health records, the posting and
responding behaviors of users on social media, and the
purchase and selling orders executed by traders in stock
markets, among others. Such data can be generally viewed
as multi-type event sequences, in which each event consists
of both a timestamp and a type label, indicating when and
what the event is, respectively.
1
Computer Scineces Department, University of WisconsinMadison, Madison, WI, USA. 2 Department of Electronic Systems,
Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark. 3 XaiPient Inc., Princeton,
NJ, USA. 4 Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Duke
University, Durham, NC, USA.. Correspondence to: Wei Zhang
<zhangwei@cs.wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

In this paper, we focus on the fundamental problem of uncovering causal structure among event types from multi-type
event sequence data. Since the question of “true causality”
is deeply philosophical (Schaffer, 2003), and there are still
massive debates on its definition (Pearl, 2009; Imbens & Rubin, 2015), we consider a weaker notion of causality based
on predictability—Granger causality. While Granger causality was initially used for studying the dependence structure
for multivariate time series (Granger, 1969; Dahlhaus &
Eichler, 2003), it has also been extended to multi-type event
sequences (Didelez, 2008). Intuitively, for event sequence
data, an event type is said to be (strongly) Granger causal
for another event type if the inclusion of historical events of
the former type leads to better predictions of future events
of the latter type.
Due to their asynchronous nature, in the literature, multitype event sequences are often modeled by multivariate
point process (MPP), a class of stochastic processes that
characterize the random generation of points on the real
line. Existing point process models for inferring inter-type
Granger causality from multi-type event sequences appear
to be limited to a particular case of MPPs—Hawkes process (Eichler et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2016; Hall & Willett,
2016; Yang et al., 2017; Achab et al., 2018), which assumes
past events can only independently and additively excite the
occurrence of future events according to a collection of pairwise kernel functions. While these Hawkes process-based
models are very interpretable and many include favorable
statistical properties, the strong parametric assumptions inherent in Hawkes processes render these models unsuitable
for many real-world event sequences with potentially abundant inhibitive effects or event interactions. For example,
maintenance events should reduce the chances of a system
breaking down, and a patient who takes multiple medicines
at the same time is more likely to experience unexpected
adverse events.
Regarding event sequence modeling in general, a new class
of MPPs, loosely referred to as neural point processes
(NPPs), has recently emerged in the literature (Du et al.,
2016; Xiao et al., 2017; Mei & Eisner, 2017; Xiao et al.,
2019). NPPs use deep (mostly recurrent) neural networks
to capture complex event dependencies, and thus excel at
predicting future events due to their model flexibility. How-

