Efficient Policy Learning from Surrogate-Loss Classification Reductions
Andrew Bennett 1 Nathan Kallus 1

Abstract
Recent work on policy learning from observational data has highlighted the importance of efficient policy evaluation and has proposed reductions to weighted (cost-sensitive) classification. However, efficient policy evaluation need
not yield efficient estimation of optimal policy
parameters. We consider the estimation problem
given by a weighted surrogate-loss classification
reduction of policy learning with any score function — either direct, inverse-propensity weighted,
or doubly robust — and show that, under a correct
specification assumption, the weighted classification formulation need not be efficient for policy
parameters. We draw a contrast to actual (possibly weighted) binary classification, where correct
specification implies a parametric model, while
for policy learning it only implies a semiparametric model, and we show that efficiency in optimal
parameter estimation implies optimal regret. In
light of this, we instead propose an estimation
approach based on the generalized method of moments, which is efficient for the policy parameters.
We propose a particular method based on recent
developments on solving moment problems using
neural networks and demonstrate the efficiency
and regret benefits of this method empirically.

1. Introduction
Policy learning from observational data is an important but
challenging problem because it requires reasoning about
the effects of interventions not observed in the data. For
example, if we wish to learn an improved policy for medical treatment assignment based on observational data from
electronic health records, we must take care to consider
potential confounding: since healthier patients who were already predisposed to positive outcomes were likely to have
historically been assigned less invasive treatments, naı̈ve
1
Cornell University, and Cornell Tech, New York. Correspondence to: Andrew Bennett <awb222@cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

approaches may incorrectly infer that a policy of always assigning less invasive treatments will obtain better outcomes.
Various recent work has tackled this problem, known as
policy learning from observational (or, off-policy) data, by
optimizing causally-grounded estimates of policy value such
as inverse-propensity weighting (IPW), doubly robust (DR)
estimates, or similar (Beygelzimer & Langford, 2009; Jiang
et al., 2019; Kallus, 2017; 2018; Kallus & Zhou, 2018;
Kitagawa & Tetenov, 2018; Qian & Murphy, 2011; Swaminathan & Joachims, 2015; Zhao et al., 2012; Zhou et al.,
2017). In particular, Athey & Wager (2017); Zhou et al.
(2017), among others, highlight the importance of using
efficient estimates of policy value as optimization objectives, i.e., having minimal asymptotic mean-squared error
(MSE). Examples of efficient estimators are direct modeling
or IPW when outcome functions or propensities are sufficiently smooth (Hahn, 1998; Hirano et al., 2003), or DR
leveraging cross-fitting (Chernozhukov et al., 2018) in more
general non-parametric settings.
Regardless of which of these three estimates one uses, the
resulting optimization problem amounts to a difficult binary
optimization problem. Therefore many of the above leverage a reduction of this problem to weighted classification
(for two actions; cost-sensitive classification more generally) and leverage tractable convex formulations that use
classification surrogate loss functions for the zero-one loss,
such as, for example, hinge loss (Zhao et al., 2012; Zhou
et al., 2017, which yields a weighted SVM) and logistic
loss (Jiang et al., 2019, which yields a weighted logistic regression). The recently proposed entropy learning approach
of Jiang et al. (2019) is particularly appealing, since the
logistic regression-based surrogate loss is smooth and therefore allows for statistical inference on the estimated optimal
parameters. In general however, one may consider using
any surrogate loss function that is classification-calibrated
(Bartlett et al., 2006), meaning that any policy that minimizes the surrogate loss is optimal.
However, as we here emphasize, even if we use policy value
estimates that are efficient, this does not imply that we
obtain efficient estimation/learning of the optimal policy
itself, even if the surrogate-loss model is well-specified. For
example, in the case of logistic loss, we demonstrate that,
although logistic regression is statistically efficient for actual

