Stochastic Subspace Cubic Newton Method

Filip Hanzely 1 Nikita Doikov 2 Peter Richtárik 1 Yurii Nesterov 2

Abstract

are interested in the regime where the dimension d is very
large, which arises in many contexts, such as the training
of modern over-parameterized machine learning models.
In this regime, coordinate descent (CD) methods, or more
generally subspace descent methods, are the methods of
choice.

In this paper, we propose a new randomized
second-order optimization algorithm—Stochastic
Subspace Cubic Newton (SSCN)—for minimizing a high dimensional convex function f . Our
method can be seen both as a stochastic extension
of the cubically-regularized Newton method of
Nesterov and Polyak (2006), and a second-order
enhancement of stochastic subspace descent of
Kozak et al. (2019). We prove that as we vary
the minibatch size, the global convergence rate of
SSCN interpolates between the rate of stochastic
coordinate descent (CD) and the rate of cubic regularized Newton, thus giving new insights into the
connection between first and second-order methods. Remarkably, the local convergence rate of
SSCN matches the rate of stochastic subspace descent applied to the problem of minimizing the
quadratic function 12 (x − x∗ )> ∇2 f (x∗ )(x − x∗ ),
where x∗ is the minimizer of f , and hence depends on the properties of f at the optimum
only. Our numerical experiments show that SSCN
outperforms non-accelerated first-order CD algorithms while being competitive to their accelerated variants.

1.1. Subspace descent methods
Subspace descent methods rely on update rules of the form
x+ = x + Sh,

(2)

In these methods, the subspace matrix S is typically chosen first, followed by the determination of the parameters
h which define the linear combination of the columns determining the update direction. Several different rules have
been proposed in the literature for choosing the matrix S,
including greedy, cyclic and randomized rules. In this work
we consider a randomized rule. In particular, we assume
that S is sampled from an arbitrary but fixed distribution D
restricted to requiring that S be of full column rank1 with
probability one.

In this work we consider the optimization problem
min {F (x) := f (x) + ψ(x)} ,

h ∈ Rτ (S) ,

where S is a thin matrix, typically with a negligible number
of columns compared to the dimension (i.e., τ (S)  d).
That is, they move from x to x+ along the subspace spanned
by the columns of S.

1. Introduction

x∈Rd

S ∈ Rd×τ (S) ,

(1)

where f : Rd → R is convex and twice differentiable and
ψ : Rd → R ∪ {+∞} is a simple convex function. We
1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia 2 Catholic University
of Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.
Correspondence to:
Filip Hanzely <fhanzely@gmail.com>,
Nikita
Doikov
<nikita.doikov@uclouvain.be>,
Peter
Richtárik <peter.richtarik@kaust.edu.sa>, Yurii Nesterov
<yurii.nesterov@uclouvain.be>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Once S ∼ D is sampled, a rule for deciding the stepsize h
varies from algorithm to algorithm, but is mostly determined
by the underlying oracle model for information access to
function f . For instance, first-order methods require access
to the subspace gradient ∇S f (x) := S> ∇f (x), and are
relatively well studied (Nesterov, 2012; Stich et al., 2013;
Richtárik & Takáč, 2014; Wright, 2015; Kozak et al., 2019).
At the other extreme are variants performing a full subspace
minimization, i.e., f is minimized over the affine subspace
given by
{x + Sh | h ∈ Rτ (S) };
see (Chang et al., 2008). In particular, in this paper we
are interested in the second-order oracle model; i.e., we
1
It is rather simple to extend our results to matrices S which
are column-rank deficient. However, this would introduce a rather
heavy notation burden which we decided to avoid for the sake of
clarity and readability.

