Optimistic Policy Optimization with Bandit Feedback

Yonathan Efroni * 1 Lior Shani * 1 Aviv Rosenberg 2 Shie Mannor 1

Abstract
Policy optimization methods are one of the most
widely used classes of Reinforcement Learning
(RL) algorithms. Yet, so far, such methods have
been mostly analyzed from an optimization perspective, without addressing the problem of exploration, or by making strong assumptions on
the interaction with the environment. In this
paper we consider model-based RL in the tabular finite-horizon MDP setting with unknown
transitions and bandit feedback. For this setting,
we propose an optimistic policy optimization
al√
gorithm for which we establish Õ( S 2 AH 4 K)
regret for√stochastic rewards. Furthermore, we
prove Õ( S 2 AH 4 K 2/3 ) regret for adversarial
rewards. Interestingly, this result matches previous bounds derived for the bandit feedback case,
yet with known transitions. To the best of our
knowledge, the two results are the first sub-linear
regret bounds obtained for policy optimization
algorithms with unknown transitions and bandit
feedback.

1. Introduction
Policy Optimization (PO) is among the most widely used
methods in Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Peters & Schaal,
2006; 2008; Deisenroth & Rasmussen, 2011; Lillicrap et al.,
2015; Levine et al., 2016; Gu et al., 2017). Unlike valuebased approaches, e.g., Q-learning, these types of methods
directly optimize the policy by incrementally changing it.
Furthermore, PO methods span wide variety of popular
algorithms such as policy-gradient algorithms (Sutton et al.,
2000), natural policy gradient (Kakade, 2002), trust region
policy optimization (TRPO) (Schulman et al., 2015) and
soft actor-critic (Haarnoja et al., 2018).
*
Equal contribution 1 Technion - Israel Institute of Technology,
Haifa, Israel 2 Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. Correspondence to: Lior Shani <shanlior@gmail.com>, Yonathan Efroni
<jonathan.efroni@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

Due to their popularity, there is a rich literature that provides different types of theoretical guarantees for different
PO methods (Scherrer & Geist, 2014; Abbasi-Yadkori et al.,
2019; Agarwal et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019; Bhandari &
Russo, 2019; Shani et al., 2019; Wei et al., 2019) for both
the approximate and tabular settings. However, previous
results, concerned with regret or PAC bounds for the RL
setting when the model is unknown and only bandit feedback is given, provide guarantees which critically depend
on ‘concentrability coefficients’ (Kakade & Langford, 2002;
Munos, 2003; Scherrer, 2014) or on a unichain MDP assumption (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2019). However, these
coefficients might be infinite and are usually small only for
highly stochastic domains, while the unichain assumption is
often very restrictive.
√
Recently, Cai et al. (2019) established an Õ( K) regret
bound for an optimistic PO method in the case of an unknown model and assuming full-information feedback on
adversarially chosen instantaneous costs, where K is the
number of episodes seen by the agent. In this work, we
eliminate the full-information assumption on the cost, as in
most practical settings only bandit feedback on the cost is
given, i.e., the cost is observed through interacting with the
environment. Specifically, we establish regret bounds for an
optimistic PO method in the case of an unknown model and
bandit feedback on the instantaneous cost in two regimes:
√
1. For stochastic cost, we establish an Õ( S 2 AH 4 K)
regret bound for a PO method (Section 6).
2. For√ adversarially chosen cost, we establish an
Õ( S 2 AH 4 K 2/3 ) regret bound for a PO method.
The regret bound matches the Õ K 2/3 upper bound
obtained by Neu et al. (2010a) for PO methods which
have an access to the true model and observe bandit
adversarial cost feedback (Section 7).

2. Preliminaries
Stochastic MDPs. A finite horizon stochastic Markov
Decision Process (MDP) M is defined by a tuple
H
(S, A, H, {ph }H
h=1 , {ch }h=1 ), where S and A are finite
state and action spaces with cardinality S and A, respectively, and H ∈ N is the horizon of the MDP. On time

