Bidirectional Model-based Policy Optimization

Hang Lai 1 Jian Shen 1 Weinan Zhang 1 Yong Yu 1

Abstract
Model-based reinforcement learning approaches
leverage a forward dynamics model to support
planning and decision making, which, however,
may fail catastrophically if the model is inaccurate. Although there are several existing methods dedicated to combating the model error, the
potential of the single forward model is still limited. In this paper, we propose to additionally construct a backward dynamics model to reduce the
reliance on accuracy in forward model predictions.
We develop a novel method, called Bidirectional
Model-based Policy Optimization (BMPO) to utilize both the forward model and backward model
to generate short branched rollouts for policy optimization. Furthermore, we theoretically derive a
tighter bound of return discrepancy, which shows
the superiority of BMPO against the one using
merely the forward model. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that BMPO outperforms state-of-theart model-based methods in terms of sample efficiency and asymptotic performance.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) methods are commonly divided into two categories: (1) model-free RL (MFRL) which
directly learns a policy or value function from observation
data, and (2) model-based RL (MBRL) which builds a predictive model of the environment and generates samples
from it to derive a policy or a controller. While MFRL algorithms have achieved remarkable success in different ranges
of areas (Mnih et al., 2015; Lillicrap et al., 2015; Schulman
et al., 2017), they need a large number of samples, which
limit their applications mostly to simulators. Model-based
methods, in contrast, have shown great potential in reducing
the sample complexity (Deisenroth et al., 2013). However,
the asymptotic performance of MBRL methods often lags
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Hang Lai <laihang@apex.sjtu.edu.cn>, Weinan Zhang
<wnzhang@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

behind their model-free counterparts due to model error,
which is especially severe for multi-step rollout because of
the compounding error (Asadi et al., 2018b).
Several previous works have been proposed to alleviate
compounding model error in different ways. For example,
Whitney & Fergus (2018) and Asadi et al. (2019) introduced
multi-step models which directly predict the consequence of
executing a sequence of actions; Mishra et al. (2017) tried to
divide trajectories into temporal segments and make predictions over segments instead of one timestep; Talvitie (2017),
Kaiser et al. (2019) and Freeman et al. (2019) proposed to
train the dynamics model on its own outputs, hoping the
model is capable of giving accurate predictions in the region
of its outputs. Wu et al. (2019) attributed long horizon rollouts mismatching to the one-step supervised learning and
proposed to learn the model via model imitation. Besides
the above innovations in model learning, Nguyen et al. and
Xiao et al. (2019) developed methods of using adaptive rollout horizon according to the estimated compounding error,
and Janner et al. (2019) proposed to use truncated short
rollouts branched from real states. However, even with the
compounding model error mitigated, it is almost impossible
to obtain perfect multi-step predictions in practice, and thus
the potential of the single forward model is still limited.
In this paper, we investigate how to maximally take advantage of the underlying dynamics of the environment to
reduce the reliance on the accuracy of the forward model.
When making decisions, human beings can not only predict future consequences of current behaviors forward but
also imagine possible traces leading to a target goal backward. Based on this consideration, inspired by Edwards
et al. (2018) and Goyal et al. (2018), we propose to learn a
backward model in addition to the forward dynamics model
to generate simulated rollouts backwards. To be specific,
given a state and a previous action, the backward model
predicts the preceding state, which means it can generate
trajectories that terminate at one certain state.
Now, intuitively, if we utilize both the forward model and
the backward model to sample bidirectionally from some
encountering states for policy optimization, the model error
will compound separately in different directions. As Figure 1 shows, when we generate trajectories with the same
length using a forward model and bidirectional models re-

