Ready Policy One: World Building Through Active Learning

Philip J. Ball * 1 Jack Parker-Holder * 1 Aldo Pacchiano 2 Krzysztof Choromanski 3 Stephen Roberts 1

Abstract
Model-Based Reinforcement Learning (MBRL)
offers a promising direction for sample efficient
learning, often achieving state of the art results for
continuous control tasks. However many existing MBRL methods rely on combining greedy
policies with exploration heuristics, and even
those which utilize principled exploration bonuses
construct dual objectives in an ad hoc fashion.
In this paper we introduce Ready Policy One
(RP1), a framework that views MBRL as an active learning problem, where we aim to improve
the world model in the fewest samples possible.
RP1 achieves this by utilizing a hybrid objective
function, which crucially adapts during optimization, allowing the algorithm to trade off reward
v.s. exploration at different stages of learning. In
addition, we introduce a principled mechanism to
terminate sample collection once we have a rich
enough trajectory batch to improve the model.
We rigorously evaluate our method on a variety of
continuous control tasks, and demonstrate statistically significant gains over existing approaches.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) considers the problem of an
agent learning to construct of actions that result in an agent
receiving high rewards in a given environment. This can
be achieved in various ways such as: learning an explicit
mapping (a policy) from states to actions that maximizes expected return (policy gradients), or inferring such a mapping
by calculating the expected return for a given state-action
pair (TD-control methods). Model-Based Reinforcement
Learning (MBRL) seeks to improve the above by learning a
model of the dynamics (from agent’s interactions with the
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford 2 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, UC Berkeley 3 Google Brain Robotics. Correspondence to: Philip Ball <ball@robots.ox.ac.uk>, Jack Parker-Holder
<jackph@robots.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

environment) that can be leveraged across many different
tasks (transferability) and for planning, which is substantially less expensive than a real environment (which plays
crucial role in robotics applications).
A series of recent work (Ha and Schmidhuber, 2018; Hafner
et al., 2019; Kurutach et al., 2018; Clavera et al., 2018; Chua
et al., 2018; Kaiser et al., 2020; Schrittwieser et al., 2019)
illustrate the benefits of MBRL-approaches that allow us to
decouple learning task-dependent policy and task-agnostic
dynamics. With recent advances, MBRL approaches often
outperform model-free methods (Wang et al., 2019). However, these results are often overly sensitive to heuristics.
In particular, many of these methods lack a principled mechanism to acquire data for training the model. This issue is
circumvented in (Ha and Schmidhuber, 2018), since they
only consider environments which can be explored with
random policies. Other model-based approaches, such as
(Kurutach et al., 2018; Feinberg et al., 2018; Hafner et al.,
2020), rely on stochastic policies to aid exploration, and
inevitably acquire redundant data which reduces sample
efficiency. Such issues have been highlighted previously
(Schmidhuber, 1991; Sun et al., 2011), and motivate the
design of our algorithm. Concretely, we reduce the cost
incurred from data collection by using active learning methods, and introduce an early stopping mechanism to address
the issue of redundancy.
Efficient exploration is a challenge for existing RL algorithms, and is a core focus in model-free RL (Chentanez
et al., 2005; Houthooft et al., 2016; Brafman and Tennenholtz, 2003; Lopes et al., 2012). Despite often considering
a principled objective, these methods generally contain a
fixed temperature parameter, thus requiring hand engineering to determine the optimal degree of exploration. Our
approach adjusts this parameter in an online manner from
the collected trajectories, and we provide an information
theoretic motivation for our exploration objective.
In this paper, we introduce a novel approach to acquiring
data for training world models through exploration. Our algorithm, Ready Policy One (RP1), includes principled mechanisms which acquire data for model-based RL through the
lens of Online Active Learning. Crucially, we continue to
jointly optimize our policies for both reward and model
uncertainty reduction, since we wish to avoid focusing on

