Alleviating Privacy Attacks via Causal Learning

Shruti Tople 1 Amit Sharma 1 Aditya V. Nori 1

Abstract
Machine learning models, especially deep neural
networks are known to be susceptible to privacy
attacks such as membership inference where an
adversary can detect whether a data point was
used to train a model. Such privacy risks are exacerbated when a model is used for predictions on
an unseen data distribution. To alleviate privacy
attacks, we demonstrate the benefit of predictive
models that are based on the causal relationships
between input features and the outcome. We first
show that models learnt using causal structure generalize better to unseen data, especially on data
from different distributions than the train distribution. Based on this generalization property, we
establish a theoretical link between causality and
privacy: compared to associational models, causal
models provide stronger differential privacy guarantees and are more robust to membership inference attacks. Experiments on simulated Bayesian
networks and the colored-MNIST dataset show
that associational models exhibit upto 80% attack accuracy under different test distributions
and sample sizes whereas causal models exhibit
attack accuracy close to a random guess.

1

Introduction

Machine learning algorithms, especially deep neural networks (DNNs) have found diverse applications in domains
such as healthcare (Esteva et al., 2019) and finance (Tsantekidis et al., 2017; Fischer & Krauss, 2018). However,
a line of recent research has shown that deep learning algorithms are susceptible to privacy attacks that leak information about the training dataset (Fredrikson et al., 2015;
Rahman et al., 2018; Song & Shmatikov, 2019; Hayes et al.,
2019). Particularly, one such attack called membership inference reveals whether a data sample was present in the
1

Microsoft Research.
Correspondence to:
Shruti
Tople
<shruti.tople@microsoft.com>,
Amit
Sharma
<amshar@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

training dataset (Shokri et al., 2017). The privacy risks
due to membership inference elevate when the DNNs are
used in sensitive applications such as in healthcare. For
example, HIV-AIDS patients would not want to reveal their
participation in the training dataset.
Membership inference attacks are shown to exploit overfitting of the model on the training dataset (Yeom et al.,
2018). Existing defenses propose the use of generalization
techniques such as adding learning rate decay, dropout or using adversarial regularization techniques (Nasr et al., 2018;
Salem et al., 2019). All these approaches assume that the
test and the training data belong to the same distribution. In
practice, a model trained using data from one distribution is
often used on a (slightly) different distribution. For example,
hospitals in one region may train a model and share it with
hospitals in different regions. Generalizing to a new context,
however, is a challenge for any machine learning model.
We extend the scope of membership inference attacks to
different distributions and show that the risk increases for
associational models such as neural networks as the test
distribution is changed.
Our Approach. To alleviate privacy attacks, we propose
using models that depend on the causal relationship between
input features and the output. Causal learning has been used
to optimize for fairness and explainability properties of
the predicted output (Kusner et al., 2017; Nabi & Shpitser,
2018; Datta et al., 2016). However, the connection of causal
learning to enhancing privacy of models is yet unexplored.
To the best of our knowledge, we provide the first analysis
of privacy benefits of causal models. By definition, causal
relationships are invariant across input distributions (Peters
et al., 2016), and therefore predictions of causal models
should be independent of the observed data distribution, let
alone the observed dataset. Thus, causal models generalize
better even with changes in the data distribution.
In this paper, we show that the generalizability property of
causal models directly ensures better privacy guarantees for
the input data. Concretely, we prove that with reasonable assumptions, a causal model always provides stronger (i.e.,
smaller  value) differential privacy guarantees than an
associational model trained on the same features and
with the same amount of added noise. Consequently, we
show that membership attacks are ineffective (almost a ran-

