Training Binary Neural Networks using the Bayesian Learning Rule
Xiangming Meng 1 Roman Bachmann* 2 Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan 1

Abstract
Neural networks with binary weights are
computation-efficient and hardware-friendly, but
their training is challenging because it involves a
discrete optimization problem. Surprisingly, ignoring the discrete nature of the problem and using gradient-based methods, such as the StraightThrough Estimator, still works well in practice.
This raises the question: are there principled approaches which justify such methods? In this
paper, we propose such an approach using the
Bayesian learning rule. The rule, when applied
to estimate a Bernoulli distribution over the binary weights, results in an algorithm which justifies some of the algorithmic choices made by
the previous approaches. The algorithm not only
obtains state-of-the-art performance, but also enables uncertainty estimation for continual learning
to avoid catastrophic forgetting. Our work provides a principled approach for training binary
neural networks which justifies and extends existing approaches.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been remarkably successful in machine learning but their training and deployment requires a high energy budget and hinders their application to resource-constrained devices, such as mobile
phones, wearables, and IoT devices. Binary neural networks
(BiNNs), where weights and/or activations are restricted to
binary values, are one promising solution to address this
issue (Courbariaux et al., 2016; 2015). Compared to fullprecision DNNs, e.g., using 32-bits, using BiNNs directly
gives a 32 times reduction in the model size. Further computational efficiency is obtained by using specialized hardware,
1

RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project (AIP),
Tokyo, Japan. 2 École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL),
Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Mohammad Emtiyaz
Khan <emtiyaz.khan@riken.jp>.
*
This work is performed during an internship at the RIKEN Center
for AIP.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

e.g., by replacing the multiplication and addition operations
with the bit-wise xnor and bitcount operations (Rastegari et al., 2016; Mishra et al., 2018; Bethge et al., 2020).
In the near future, BiNNs are expected to play an important
role in energy-efficient and hardware-friendly deep learning.
A problem with BiNNs is that their training is much more
difficult than their continuous counterpart. BiNNs obtained
by quantizing already trained DNNs do not work well, and
it is preferable to optimize for binary weights directly. Such
training is challenging because it involves a discrete optimization problem. Continuous optimization methods such
as the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015) are not expected to perform well or even converge.
Despite such theoretical issues, a method called StraightThrough-Estimator (STE) (Bengio et al., 2013), which employs continuous optimization methods, works remarkably
well (Courbariaux et al., 2015). The method is justified
based on “latent” real-valued weights which are discretized
at every iteration to get binary weights. The gradients used
to update the latent weights, however, are computed at the
binary weights (see Figure 1 (a) for an illustration). It is
not clear why these gradients help the search for the minimum of the discrete problem (Yin et al., 2019; Alizadeh
et al., 2019). Another recent work by Helwegen et al. (2019)
dismisses the idea of latent weights, and proposes a new
optimizer called Binary Optimizer (Bop) based on inertia.
Unfortunately, the steps used by their optimizers too are
derived based on intuition and are not theoretically justified
using an optimization problem. Our goal in this paper is
to address this issue and propose a principled approach to
justify the algorithmic choices of these previous approaches.
In this paper, we present a Bayesian perspective to justify
previous approaches. Instead of optimizing a discrete objective, the Bayesian approach relaxes it by using a distribution
over the binary variable, resulting in a principled approach
for discrete optimization. We use a Bernoulli approximation
to the posterior and estimate it using a recently proposed
approximate Bayesian inference method called the Bayesian
learning rule (Khan & Lin, 2017; Khan & Rue, 2020). This
results in an algorithm which justifies some of the algorithmic choices made by existing methods; see Table 1 for
a summary of results. Since our algorithm is based on a
well-defined optimization problem, it is easier to extend its

