Channel Equilibrium Networks for Learning Deep Representation

Wenqi Shao * 1 Shitao Tang * 2 Xingang Pan 3 Ping Tan 2 Xiaogang Wang 1 Ping Luo 4

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are typically constructed by stacking multiple building
blocks, each of which contains a normalization
layer such as batch normalization (BN) and a rectified linear function such as ReLU. However, this
work shows that the combination of normalization and rectified linear function leads to inhibited channels, which have small magnitude and
contribute little to the learned feature representation, impeding the generalization ability of CNNs.
Unlike prior arts that simply removed the inhibited channels, we propose to “wake them up” during training by designing a novel neural building
block, termed Channel Equilibrium (CE) block,
which enables channels at the same layer to contribute equally to the learned representation. We
show that CE is able to prevent inhibited channels
both empirically and theoretically. CE has several appealing benefits. (1) It can be integrated
into many advanced CNN architectures such as
ResNet and MobileNet, outperforming their original networks. (2) CE has an interesting connection with the Nash Equilibrium, a well-known
solution of a non-cooperative game. (3) Extensive
experiments show that CE achieves state-of-theart performance on various challenging benchmarks such as ImageNet and COCO.

1. Introduction
Normalization methods such as batch normalization (BN)
(Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015), layer normalization (LN) (Ba et al.,
2016) and instance normalization (IN) (Ulyanov et al., 2016)
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electronic Engineering,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Department of Computer
Science, Simon Fraser University 3 Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 Department
of Computer Science,The University of Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Wenqi Shao <weqish@link.cuhk.edu.hk>, Ping Luo
<pluo@cs.hku.hk>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

are important components for a wide range of tasks such
as image classification (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015), object detection (He et al., 2017a), and image generation (Miyato
et al., 2018). They are often combined with rectified linear activation functions such as rectified linear unit (ReLU)
(Glorot et al., 2011; Nair & Hinton, 2010), exponential linear
unit (ELU) (Clevert et al., 2015) and leaky ReLU (LReLU)
(Maas et al., 2013) and used in many recent advanced convolutional neural networks (CNNs). The combination of
normalization and rectified unit becomes one of the most
popular building block for CNNs.
However, recent studies showed that the above building
block leads to inhibited channels (as known as “channel
collapse”) after training a CNN, where a significant amount
of feature channels always produce small values (Mehta
et al., 2019) as shown in Fig.1(a&b). These inhibited channels contribute little to the learned feature representation,
making the network more reliant on the remaining channels, which impedes its generalization ability as shown in
(Morcos et al., 2018). For example, the lottery hypothesis (Frankle & Carbin, 2018) found that when a CNN is
over-parameterized, it always contains unimportant (“dead”)
channels whose feature values are extremely small. Although these inhibited channels could be pruned in training
to reduce the model size, it would lead to the limited generalization ability of the network (Yu et al., 2018; He et al.,
2017b).
Instead of simply removing the inhibited “dead” channels,
this work investigates an alternative to “wake them up” by
proposing a novel neural building block, termed Channel
Equilibrium (CE), to replace the ordinary combination of
normalization and rectified units. CE encourages channels
at the same layer of a network to contribute more equally
in representation learning. With CE, all channels are useful in the learned representation, preventing CNNs from
relying on specific channels and thus enhancing the generalization ability. For example, Fig.1 shows that CE not only
reduces the number of inhibited channels but encourages
all channels to contribute equally to network’s prediction,
when different combinations of normalization approaches
and rectified units are presented, consistently improving
their generalization to testing samples.
The main contributions of this work are three-fold. (1) We

