Skew-Fit: State-Covering Self-Supervised
Reinforcement Learning

Vitchyr H. Pong * 1 Murtaza Dalal * 1 Steven Lin * 1 Ashvin Nair 1 Shikhar Bahl 1 Sergey Levine 1

Abstract
Autonomous agents that must exhibit flexible and
broad capabilities will need to be equipped with
large repertoires of skills. Defining each skill
with a manually-designed reward function limits
this repertoire and imposes a manual engineering
burden. Self-supervised agents that set their own
goals can automate this process, but designing
appropriate goal setting objectives can be difficult, and often involves heuristic design decisions.
In this paper, we propose a formal exploration
objective for goal-reaching policies that maximizes state coverage. We show that this objective
is equivalent to maximizing goal reaching performance together with the entropy of the goal
distribution, where goals correspond to full state
observations. To instantiate this principle, we
present an algorithm called Skew-Fit for learning a maximum-entropy goal distributions and
prove that, under regularity conditions, Skew-Fit
converges to a uniform distribution over the set
of valid states, even when we do not know this
set beforehand. Our experiments show that combining Skew-Fit for learning goal distributions
with existing goal-reaching methods outperforms
a variety of prior methods on open-sourced visual goal-reaching tasks and that Skew-Fit enables a real-world robot to learn to open a door,
entirely from scratch, from pixels, and without
any manually-designed reward function.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) provides an appealing formalism for automated learning of behavioral skills, but separately learning every potentially useful skill becomes prohibitively time consuming, both in terms of the experience
*
Equal contribution 1 University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Vitchyr H. Pong <vitchyr@eecs.berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Left: Robot learning to open a door with Skew-Fit,
without any task reward. Right: Samples from a goal distribution
when using (a) uniform and (b) Skew-Fit sampling. When used as
goals, the diverse samples from Skew-Fit encourage the robot to
practice opening the door more frequently.

required for the agent and the effort required for the user
to design reward functions for each behavior. What if we
could instead design an unsupervised RL algorithm that
automatically explores the environment and iteratively distills this experience into general-purpose policies that can
accomplish new user-specified tasks at test time?
In the absence of any prior knowledge, an effective exploration scheme is one that visits as many states as possible,
allowing a policy to autonomously prepare for user-specified
tasks that it might see at test time. We can formalize the
problem of visiting as many states as possible as one of
maximizing the state entropy H(S) under the current policy.2 Unfortunately, optimizing this objective alone does not
result in a policy that can solve new tasks: it only knows
how to maximize state entropy. In other words, to develop
principled unsupervised RL algorithms that result in useful
policies, maximizing H(S) is not enough. We need a mechanism that allows us to reuse the resulting policy to achieve
new tasks at test-time.
We argue that this can be accomplished by performing goaldirected exploration: a policy should autonomously visit as
many states as possible, but after autonomous exploration, a
user should be able to reuse this policy by giving it a goal
G that corresponds to a state that it must reach. While not
all test-time tasks can be expressed as reaching a goal state,
a wide range of tasks can be represented in this way. Mathematically, the goal-conditioned policy should minimize the
2

We consider the distribution over terminal states in a finite
horizon task and believe this work can be extended to infinite
horizon stationary distributions.

