Hierarchically Decoupled Imitation for Morphological Transfer

Donald J. Hejna III 1 Pieter Abbeel 1 Lerrel Pinto 1 2

Abstract
Learning long-range behaviors on complex
high-dimensional agents is a fundamental
problem in robot learning. For such tasks, we
argue that transferring learned information from
a morphologically simpler agent can massively
improve the sample efficiency of a more complex
one. To this end, we propose a hierarchical
decoupling of policies into two parts: an independently learned low-level policy and a transferable
high-level policy. To remedy poor transfer
performance due to mismatch in morphologies,
we contribute two key ideas. First, we show
that incentivizing a complex agent’s low-level to
imitate a simpler agent’s low-level significantly
improves zero-shot high-level transfer. Second,
we show that KL-regularized training of the
high level stabilizes learning and prevents modecollapse. Finally, on a suite of publicly released
navigation and manipulation environments, we
demonstrate the applicability of hierarchical
transfer on long-range tasks across morphologies.
Our code and videos can be found at https:
//sites.google.com/berkeley.edu/
morphology-transfer.

1. Introduction
How should one use Reinforcement Learning (RL) to train
their new four-legged walking robot? Training a robot from
scratch is often infeasible as current RL algorithms typically
require millions (Schulman et al., 2017; Haarnoja et al.,
2018) to billions (Baker et al., 2019) of samples. Moreover, robots are expensive and slow, which further limits the
applicability of learning from scratch. Because of this, tackling the challenge of high sample complexity has received
significant interest and prompted a wide array of solutions
1

Department of EECS, University of California, Berkeley
Computer Science, New York University. Correspondence to:
Donald J. Hejna III <jhejna@berkeley.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. In this work, we focus on the problem of transferring
long-horizon policies across morphologies. Hence, given an already performant simple agent, we imitate its behaviors on a more
complex agent for transfer through hierarchical decoupling.

ranging from off-policy learning (Lillicrap et al., 2015) to
temporal abstractions in learning (Kulkarni et al., 2016).
A primary reason behind RL’s sample inefficiency is the
lack of prior knowledge used in training new policies. One
of the biggest takeaways from advances in computer vision
(CV) and natural language processing (NLP) is that priors
(both architectural and parametric) are invaluable. Hence
this begs the question: why should an agent learn a task
from scratch? Why not use strong priors? Recent works
have shown the promise of semantic priors such as auxiliary
losses (Jaderberg et al., 2016), and architectural priors such
as transfer learning networks (Rusu et al., 2016). However
unlike passive domains such as object detection, problems
in motor control and robotics offer another strong prior:
morphology. Instead of learning policies from scratch on
a given agent, we can use policies previously learned on
morphologically different agents as a prior. For example,
instead of training a quadruped walking policy to solve a
maze from scratch, requiring millions of expensive samples, we could transfer-learn from a much simpler robot,
say a Roomba wheeled robot. This morphological transfer
affords two benefits: first, learning a policy first on a simple
morphology and then transferring to a harder one induces a
natural curriculum for learning (Bengio et al., 2009) which
provides richer rewards and learning signal; second, this
allows us to use fewer samples from complex robots that
are often expensive and time-consuming.
But how do we effectively transfer policies across morpholo-

