Data-Dependent Differentially Private Parameter Learning for Directed
Graphical Models

Amrita Roy Chowdhury 1 Theodoros Rekatsinas 1 Somesh Jha 1 2

Abstract
Directed graphical models (DGMs) are a class
of probabilistic models that are widely used for
predictive analysis in sensitive domains such as
medical diagnostics. In this paper, we present
an algorithm for differentially private learning
of the parameters of a DGM. Our solution optimizes for the utility of inference queries over
the DGM and adds noise that is customized to
the properties of the private input dataset and the
graph structure of the DGM. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first explicit data-dependent
privacy budget allocation algorithm in the context
of DGMs. We compare our algorithm with a standard data-independent approach over a diverse
suite of benchmarks and demonstrate that our solution requires a privacy budget that is roughly
3× smaller to obtain the same or higher utility.

1. Introduction
Directed graphical models (DGMs) are a class of probabilistic models that are widely used in causal reasoning and predictive analytics (Koller & Friedman, 2009). A typical use
case for these models is answering “what-if” queries over
domains that often work with sensitive information. For example, DGMs are used in medical diagnosis for answering
questions, such as what is the most probable disease given a
set of symptoms (Pearl, 1998). In learning such models, it
is common that the underlying graph structure of the model
is publicly known. For instance, in the case of medical data,
the dependencies between several physiological symptoms
and diseases are well established, standardized, and publicly
available. However, the parameters of the model have to be
learned from observations. These observations may contain
sensitive information as in the case of medical applications.
1

Department of Computer Sciences, University of WisconsinMadison, USA 2 XaiPient, USA. Correspondence to: Amrita Roy
Chowdhury <amrita@cs.wisc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Hence, learning and publicly releasing the parameters of the
probabilistic model may lead to privacy violations (Shokri
et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2016a), and thus, the need for
privacy-preserving learning mechanisms for DGMs.
In this paper, we focus on the problem of privacy-preserving
learning of the parameters of a DGM. For our privacy definition, we use differential privacy (DP) (Dwork & Roth, 2014)
– currently the de-facto standard for privacy. We consider
the setting when the structure of the target DGM is publicly
known and the parameters of the model are learned from
fully observed data. In this case, all parameters can be estimated via counting queries over the input observations (also
referred to as data set in the remainder of the paper). The
direct way to ensure differential privacy is to add suitable
noise to the observations using the standard Laplace mechanism (Dwork & Roth, 2014). Unfortunately, this method is
data-independent, i.e., the noise added to the base observations is oblivious of the properties of the input data set and
the structure of the DGM, resulting in sub-optimal utility.
To address this issue, we turn to data-dependent methods
which add noise that is customized to the properties of the
input data sets (Li et al., 2014; Zhang et al.; Cormode et al.,
2012b; Acs et al., 2012; Xu et al., 2012; Xiao et al., 2012;
Kotsogiannis et al., 2017b).
We propose a data-dependent, -DP algorithm for learning
the parameters of a DGM over fully observed data. Our goal
is to minimize errors in arbitrary inference queries that are
subsequently answered over the learned DGM. The main
contributions are:
(1) Explicit data-dependent privacy-budget allocation:
Our algorithm computes the parameters of the conditional
probability distribution of each random variable in the DGM
via separate measurements from the input data set. This lets
us optimize the privacy budget allocation across the different variables with the objective of reducing the error in
inference queries. We formulate this optimization objective
in a data-dependent manner – our optimization objective is
informed by both the private input data set and the public
graph structure of the DGM. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first work to propose explicit data-dependent
privacy-budget allocation in the context of DGMs. We evaluate our algorithm on four DGM benchmarks and demon-

