Best Arm Identification for Cascading Bandits in the Fixed Confidence Setting

Zixin Zhong 1 Wang Chi Cheung 2 3 Vincent Y. F. Tan 1 3 4

Abstract
We design and analyze C ASCADE BAI, an algorithm for finding the best set of K items, also
called an arm, within the framework of cascading
bandits. An upper bound on the time complexity of C ASCADE BAI is derived by overcoming a
crucial analytical challenge, namely, that of probabilistically estimating the amount of available
feedback at each step. To do so, we define a
new class of random variables (r.v.’s) which we
term as left-sided sub-Gaussian r.v.’s; this class
is a relaxed version of the sub-Gaussian r.v.’s.
This enables the application of a sufficiently tight
Bernstein-type concentration inequality. We show,
through the derivation of a lower bound on the
time complexity, that the performance of C AS CADE BAI is optimal in some practical regimes.
Finally, extensive numerical simulations corroborate the efficacy of C ASCADE BAI as well as the
tightness of our upper bound on its time complexity.

1. Introduction
Online recommender systems seek to recommend a small
list of items (such as movies or hotels) to users based on
a larger ground set [L] := {1, . . . , L} of items. In this
paper, we consider the cascading bandits model (Craswell
et al., 2008; Kveton et al., 2015a), which is widely used in
information retrieval and online advertising. Upon seeing
the chosen list, the user looks at the items sequentially. She
clicks on an item if she is attracted by it and skips to the
next one otherwise. This process stops when she clicks on
1
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore,
Singapore 2 Department of Industrial Systems and Management,
National University of Singapore, Singapore 3 Institute of Operations Research and Analytics, National University of Singapore,
Singapore 4 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence
to: Zixin Zhong <zixin.zhong@u.nus.edu>, Wang Chi Cheung
<isecwc@nus.edu.sg>, Vincent Y. F. Tan <vtan@nus.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

one item in the list or if no item is clicked, it is deemed that
she is not attracted by any of the items. The items that are
in the ground set but not in the chosen list and those in the
list that come after the attractive one are unobserved.
Each item i ∈ [L], with a certain click probability w(i) ∈
[0, 1] which is unknown to the learning agent, attracts the
user independently of other items. Under this assumption,
the optimal solution is the list of items with largest w(i)’s.
Based on the chosen lists and obtained feedback in previous
steps, the agent tries to learn the click probabilities (explore
the combinatorial space) in order to find the optimal list
with high probability in as few time steps as possible.
Main Contributions. Given δ > 0, a learning agent aims
to find a list of optimal items of size K with probability
at least 1 − δ in minimal time steps. To achieve a greater
generality, we provide results for identifying a list of nearoptimal items (Even-Dar et al., 2002; Mannor & Tsitsiklis,
2004; Kalyanakrishnan et al., 2012), where the notion of
near-optimality is precisely defined in Section 2. First, we
design C ASCADE BAI(, δ, K) and derive an upper bound
on its time complexity. Second, we establish a lower bound
on the time complexity of any best arm identification (BAI)
algorithm in cascading bandits, which implies that the performance of C ASCADE BAI(, δ, K) is optimal in some
regimes. Finally, our extensive numerical results corroborate the efficacy of C ASCADE BAI(, δ, K) and the tightness
of our upper bound on its time complexity.
Different from combinatorial semi-bandit settings, the
amount of feedback in cascading bandits is, in general,
random. The analysis of cascading bandits involves the
unique challenge in adapting to the variation of the amount
of feedback across time. To this end, we define a random
variable (r.v.) that describes the feedback from the user at
a step and bound its expectation. We define a novel class
of r.v.’s, known as left-sided sub-Gaussian (LSG) r.v.’s, and
apply a concentration inequality to quantify the variation of
the amount of feedback.
Bernstein-type concentration inequalities are applied in
many stochastic bandit problems and indicate that subGaussian (SG) distributions possess light tails (Audibert
& Bubeck, 2010). Since it turns out that we only need to
analyze a one-sided tail in this work, it suffices to consider
a one-sided SG condition, which motivates the definition

