Optimizing Long-term Social Welfare in Recommender Systems:
A Constrained Matching Approach

Martin Mladenov 1 Elliot Creager 2 3 * Omer Ben-Porat 4 † Kevin Swersky 1 Richard Zemel 2 3 Craig Boutilier 1

Abstract
Most recommender systems (RS) research assumes that a user’s utility can be maximized
independently of the utility of the other agents
(e.g., other users, content providers). In realistic settings, this is often not true—the dynamics
of an RS ecosystem couple the long-term utility of all agents. In this work, we explore settings in which content providers cannot remain
viable unless they receive a certain level of user
engagement. We formulate the recommendation
problem in this setting as one of equilibrium selection in the induced dynamical system, and show
that it can be solved as an optimal constrained
matching problem. Our model ensures the system reaches an equilibrium with maximal social
welfare supported by a sufficiently diverse set
of viable providers. We demonstrate that even
in a simple, stylized dynamical RS model, the
standard myopic approach to recommendation—
always matching a user to the best provider—
performs poorly. We develop several scalable
techniques to solve the matching problem, and
also draw connections to various notions of user
regret and fairness, arguing that these outcomes
are fairer in a utilitarian sense.

1. Introduction
Investigations of various notions of fairness in machine
learning (ML) have shown that, without due care, applying
ML in many domains can result in biased outcomes that
disadvantage specific individuals or groups (Dwork et al.,
2012; Barocas & Selbst, 2016). Content recommender systems (RSs), which match users to content (e.g., news, music,
*
Work done as a student researcher at Google Research † Work
partially done as an intern at Google Research 1 Google Research
2
University of Toronto 3 Vector Institute 4 Technion. Correspondence to: Martin Mladenov <mmladenov@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

video), typically rely on ML to predict a user’s interests to
recommend “good” content (Konstan et al., 1997; Jacobson
et al., 2016; Covington et al., 2016). Since these predictions
are learned from past behavior, many issues of ML fairness
arise in RS settings (Beutel et al., 2019).
One aspect of “fairness” that has received little attention
emerges when one considers the dynamics of the RS ecosystem. Both users and content providers have particular incentives for engaging with an RS platform—incentives which
interact, via the RS matching policy, to couple the longterm utility of agents on both sides of this content “marketplace.” Some work has looked at the impact of RS policies
on provider welfare (Singh & Joachims, 2018), on longterm user and provider metrics (e.g., using RL (Chen et al.,
2018; Ie et al., 2019b) or assessing various other phenomena
(Ribeiro et al., 2020; Celma, 2010)). However, little work
has looked at the interaction of the two on the ecosystem
dynamics induced by the RS policy (though there are some
exceptions, e.g., (Ben-Porat & Tennenholtz, 2018), which
are discussed below).
In this work, we focus on provider behavior using a stylized
model of a content RS ecosystem in which providers require
a certain degree of user engagement (e.g., views, time spent,
satisfaction) to remain viable. This required degree (or
“threshold”) of engagement reflects their incentives (social,
economic, or otherwise) to participate in the RS; and if
this threshold is not met, a provider will withdraw from the
platform (i.e., their content is no longer accessible). If this
occurs, user segments for whom that provider’s content is
ideal may be disadvantaged, leading such users to derive
less utility from the RS. This may often arise, say, for users
and providers of niche content.
Typical RS policies are myopic: given a user request or
query, it returns the provider that is (predicted to be) bestaligned with that query. In our model, myopic policies often
drive the dynamical system to a poor equilibrium, with low
user social welfare and poor provider diversity. By contrast,
a more holistic approach to matching requests to providers
can derive much greater user welfare. We formulate policy optimization in our model as a constrained matching
problem, which optimizes for the socially optimal equilibrium of the ecosystem. We develop scalable techniques for

