Efficient Robustness Certificates for Discrete Data:
Sparsity-Aware Randomized Smoothing for Graphs, Images and More

Aleksandar Bojchevski 1 Johannes Gasteiger 1 Stephan Günnemann 1

Abstract
Existing techniques for certifying the robustness
of models for discrete data either work only for a
small class of models or are general at the expense
of efficiency or tightness. Moreover, they do not
account for sparsity in the input which, as our
findings show, is often essential for obtaining nontrivial guarantees. We propose a model-agnostic
certificate based on the randomized smoothing
framework which subsumes earlier work and is
tight, efficient, and sparsity-aware. Its computational complexity does not depend on the number of discrete categories or the dimension of the
input (e.g. the graph size), making it highly scalable. We show the effectiveness of our approach
on a wide variety of models, datasets, and tasks –
specifically highlighting its use for Graph Neural
Networks. So far, obtaining provable guarantees
for GNNs has been difficult due to the discrete
and non-i.i.d. nature of graph data. Our method
can certify any GNN and handles perturbations to
both the graph structure and the node attributes.1

1. Introduction
Verifying the robustness of machine learning models is crucial since data can be noisy, incomplete, manipulated by
an adversary, or simply different from what was previously
observed. Even a seemingly accurate classifier is of limited
use if slight perturbations of the input can lead to misclassification. Robustness certificates provide provable guarantees
that no perturbation regarding a specific threat model will
change the prediction of an instance. However, obtaining
meaningful robustness guarantees is challenging since it
often involves solving a difficult optimization problem.
1
Technical University of Munich. Correspondence to: Aleksandar Bojchevski <a.bojchevski@in.tum.de>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
1
You can find the project page and the code online:
https://www.daml.in.tum.de/sparse_smoothing

An overwhelming majority of certificates in the literature
can handle only continuous data. The few approaches that
tackle discrete data either work for a small class of models, or stay general while sacrificing efficiency or tightness.
While our proposed approach works in general and can be
used for any discrete data such as sequences (text, audio),
discretized images or molecules, we highlight its use for
graphs – a particularly important instance of discrete data.
Specifically, we focus on Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
since they are a fundamental building block (alongside
CNNs and RNNs) for many machine learning models today.
Their rise to prominence is not surprising since often realworld data can be naturally represented as a graph. They
have been successfully applied across a variety of domains
and applications: from breast cancer classification (Rhee
et al., 2018) to fraud detection (Wang et al., 2019).
At the same time, there is strong evidence showing that
GNNs suffer from poor adversarial robustness (Zügner et al.,
2018; Dai et al., 2018; Zügner & Günnemann, 2019a) – they
are sensitive to small adversarial perturbations designed to
achieve a malicious goal. Take for example a GNN-based
model for detecting fake news on a social network (Monti
et al., 2019; Shu et al., 2020). Adversaries have a strong
incentive to fool the system in order to avoid detection. In
this context, a perturbation could mean modification of the
graph structure (inserting or deleting edges in the social
graph) or modifying the node attributes (e.g. the text content
of the news). Even in scenarios where adversaries are unlikely, understanding the robustness of GNNs to worst-case
noise is important, especially in safety-critical applications.
While some (heuristic) defenses exist (Xu et al., 2019; Entezari et al., 2020), we should never assume that the attackers
will not be able to break them in the future (Carlini & Wagner, 2017). Robustness certificates, on the other hand, are by
definition unbreakable. Given a clean input x and a perturbation set Br (x) encoding the threat model (e.g. all inputs
within an lp -ball of radius r centered at x) the goal is to
verify that the prediction for x and ∀x̃ ∈ Br (x) is the same.
If this holds, we say that x is certifiably robust w.r.t. Br (x).
Existing certificates for graphs handle either attribute perturbations (Zügner & Günnemann, 2019b) or structure per-

