Learning To Stop While Learning To Predict

Xinshi Chen 1 Hanjun Dai 2 Yu Li 3 Xin Gao 3 Le Song 1 4

There is a recent surge of interest in designing
deep architectures based on the update steps in
traditional algorithms, or learning neural networks
to improve and replace traditional algorithms.
While traditional algorithms have certain stopping criteria for outputting results at different iterations, many algorithm-inspired deep models are
restricted to a “fixed-depth” for all inputs. Similar
to algorithms, the optimal depth of a deep architecture may be different for different input instances,
either to avoid “over-thinking”, or because we
want to compute less for operations converged already. In this paper, we tackle this varying depth
problem using a steerable architecture, where a
feed-forward deep model and a variational stopping policy are learned together to sequentially
determine the optimal number of layers for each
input instance. Training such architecture is very
challenging. We provide a variational Bayes perspective and design a novel and effective training
procedure which decomposes the task into an oracle model learning stage and an imitation stage.
Experimentally, we show that the learned deep
model along with the stopping policy improves
the performances on a diverse set of tasks, including learning sparse recovery, few-shot meta
learning, and computer vision tasks.

1. Introduction
Recently, researchers are increasingly interested in the connections between deep learning models and traditional algorithms: deep learning models are viewed as parameterized
algorithms that operate on each input instance iteratively,
and traditional algorithms are used as templates for designing deep learning architectures. While an important con1
Georgia Institute of Technology, USA 2 Google Research, USA
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Saudi
Arabia 4 Ant Financial, China. Correspondence to: Xinshi Chen
<xinshi.chen@gatech.edu>, Le Song <lsong@cc.gatech.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

(a): Learning-based Algorithm design
Fixed-depth Learned Algorithm

𝒙

𝒙𝑻

…

𝑓#$ 𝑓#%

Dynamic-depth Traditional Algorithm

𝒙

hand-designed
update step

𝑓#&

𝒙𝒕

criteria

satisfied

𝒙𝒕
(output)

not satisfied

(b): Task-imbalanced Meta Learning
Task 1

Task 2

𝜃) ∇ ℒ
# .
…

Abstract

𝜃*+,-.

∇# ℒ/
𝜃*+,-/

D

Figure 1. Motivation for learning to stop.

cept in traditional algorithms is the stopping criteria for
outputting the result, which can be either a convergence
condition or an early stopping rule, such stopping criteria
has been more or less ignored in algorithm-inspired deep
learning models. A “fixed-depth” deep model is used to
operate on all problem instances (Fig. 1 (a)). Intuitively,
for deep learning models, the optimal depth (or the optimal
number of steps to operate on an input) can also be different
for different input instances, either because we want to compute less for operations converged already, or we want to
generalize better by avoiding “over-thinking”. Such motivation aligns well with both the cognitive science literature (?)
and many examples below:
• In learning to optimize (Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Li &
Malik, 2016), neural networks are used as the optimizer
to minimize some loss function. Depending on the initialization and the objective function, an optimizer should
converge in different number of steps;
• In learning to solve statistical inverse problems such as
compressed sensing (Chen et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019),
inverse covariance estimation (Shrivastava et al., 2020),
and image denoising (Zhang et al., 2019), deep models are learned to directly predict the recovery results.
In traditional algorithms, problem-dependent early stopping rules are widely used to achieve regularization for a
variance-bias trade-off. Deep learning models for solving
such problems maybe also achieve a better recovery accuracy by allowing instance-specific computation steps;
• In meta learning, MAML (Finn et al., 2017) used an
unrolled and parametrized algorithm to adapt a common

