Self-supervised Label Augmentation via Input Transformations

Hankook Lee 1 Sung Ju Hwang 2 3 4 Jinwoo Shin 2 1

Abstract
Self-supervised learning, which learns by constructing artificial labels given only the input
signals, has recently gained considerable attention for learning representations with unlabeled datasets, i.e., learning without any humanannotated supervision. In this paper, we show
that such a technique can be used to significantly
improve the model accuracy even under fullylabeled datasets. Our scheme trains the model
to learn both original and self-supervised tasks,
but is different from conventional multi-task learning frameworks that optimize the summation of
their corresponding losses. Our main idea is to
learn a single unified task with respect to the joint
distribution of the original and self-supervised
labels, i.e., we augment original labels via selfsupervision of input transformation. This simple,
yet effective approach allows to train models easier by relaxing a certain invariant constraint during learning the original and self-supervised tasks
simultaneously. It also enables an aggregated
inference which combines the predictions from
different augmentations to improve the prediction accuracy. Furthermore, we propose a novel
knowledge transfer technique, which we refer to
as self-distillation, that has the effect of the aggregated inference in a single (faster) inference. We
demonstrate the large accuracy improvement and
wide applicability of our framework on various
fully-supervised settings, e.g., the few-shot and
imbalanced classification scenarios.

1. Introduction
In recent years, self-supervised learning (Doersch et al.,
2015) has shown remarkable success in unsupervised repre1
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea
Graduate School of AI, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea 3 School of Computing, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea 4 AITRICS, Seoul, Korea. Correspondence to: Jinwoo Shin <jinwoos@kaist.ac.kr>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

sentation learning for images (Doersch et al., 2015; Noroozi
& Favaro, 2016; Larsson et al., 2017; Gidaris et al., 2018;
Zhang et al., 2019a), natural language (Devlin et al., 2018),
and video games (Anand et al., 2019). When humanannotated labels are scarce, the approach constructs artificial
labels, referred to as self-supervision, only using the input
examples and then learns their representations via predicting
the labels. One of the simplest, yet effective self-supervised
learning approaches is to predict which transformation t
is applied to an input x from observing only the modified
input t(x), e.g., t can be a patch permutation (Noroozi &
Favaro, 2016) or a rotation (Gidaris et al., 2018). To predict
such transformations, a model should distinguish between
what is semantically natural or not, and consequently, it
learns high-level semantic representations of inputs.
The simplicity of transformation-based self-supervision has
encouraged its wide applicability for other purposes beyond
unsupervised representation learning, e.g., semi-supervised
learning (Zhai et al., 2019; Berthelot et al., 2020), improving
robustness (Hendrycks et al., 2019), and training generative
adversarial networks (Chen et al., 2019). The prior works
commonly maintain two separate classifiers (yet sharing
common feature representations) for the original and selfsupervised tasks, and optimize their objectives simultaneously. However, this multi-task learning approach typically
provides no accuracy gain when working with fully-labeled
datasets. This inspires us to explore the following question:
how can we effectively utilize the transformation-based selfsupervision for fully-supervised classification tasks?
Contribution. We first discuss our observation that the
multi-task learning approach forces the primary classifier
for the original task to be invariant with respect to transformations of a self-supervised task. For example, when
using rotations as self-supervision (Zhai et al., 2019), which
rotates each image 0, 90, 180, 270 degrees while preserving
its original label, the primary classifier is forced to learn
representations that are invariant to the rotations. Forcing such invariance could lead to increasing complexity of
tasks since the transformations could largely change characteristics of samples and/or meaningful information for
recognizing objects, e.g., image classification {6 vs. 9} or
{bird vs. bat}.1 Consequently, this could hurt the overall
1

This is because bats hang typically upside down, while birds

