Learning to Combine Top-Down and Bottom-Up Signals
in Recurrent Neural Networks with Attention over Modules
Sarthak Mittal 1 Alex Lamb 2 Anirudh Goyal 2 Vikram Voleti 1 2 Murray Shanahan 3 Guillaume Lajoie 1 2
Michael Mozer 4 Yoshua Bengio 1 2

Abstract
Robust perception relies on both bottom-up and
top-down signals. Bottom-up signals consist of
what’s directly observed through sensation. Topdown signals consist of beliefs and expectations
based on past experience and short-term memory, such as how the phrase ‘peanut butter and ...’
will be completed. The optimal combination of
bottom-up and top-down information remains an
open question, but the manner of combination
must be dynamic and both context and task dependent. To effectively utilize the wealth of potential
top-down information available, and to prevent
the cacophony of intermixed signals in a bidirectional architecture, mechanisms are needed to
restrict information flow. We explore deep recurrent neural net architectures in which bottom-up
and top-down signals are dynamically combined
using attention. Modularity of the architecture
further restricts the sharing and communication
of information. Together, attention and modularity direct information flow, which leads to reliable
performance improvements in perceptual and language tasks, and in particular improves robustness
to distractions and noisy data. We demonstrate
on a variety of benchmarks in language modeling,
sequential image classification, video prediction
and reinforcement learning that the bidirectional
information flow can improve results over strong
baselines.

1. Introduction
Deep learning emerged from the goal of learning representational hierarchies, with the higher levels corresponding to ab1

Mila 2 Université de Montréal 3 Imperial College London
Google Research, Brain Team. Correspondence to: Sarthak Mittal
<sarthmit@gmail.com>.

4

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

stract features used for decision-making (Hinton et al., 2006;
Bengio et al., 2007; Salakhutdinov & Hinton, 2009). Hierarchical models are often taken to imply that computation proceeds in a feedforward or bottom up fashion, i.e., stage-wise
information processing in which low-level (sensory) representations construct or modulate high level (conceptual)
representations. However, they could equally well support
the flow of information in a feedback or top down fashion,
i.e., information processing in which high-level representations modulate lower-level representations. Neuroscientists
have noted that reciprocity of connectivity among anatomically distinct areas of neocortex is common (Felleman &
Van Essen, 1991; Rockland, 2015), causing early visual areas to be modulated by later stages of processing (Bastos
et al., 2015). The same is true for other sensory modalities as well (Manita et al., 2015). Neuroimaging research
has found evidence for distinct bidirectional activity flows
with functional consequences (Dijkstra et al., 2017; Nielsen
et al., 1999), and neurophysiological and neuroanatomical
studies indicate the important role of top-down information
for guiding processing resources to behaviorally relevant
events (Baluch & Itti, 2011; Gilbert, 2013). The Global
Workspace theory (Baars, 1997; Dehaene et al., 2017) posits
that top-down signals are necessary to broadcast information throughout neocortex, which enables conscious states
and verbal behavior. Nonetheless, the neural mechanisms of
interaction between bottom-up and top-down pathways are
still poorly understood. One goal of our research is to conduct machine-learning experiments to explore the value of
top-down mechanisms for learning, achieving robustness to
distributional shifts, and guiding the development of novel
and improved neural architectures.
In the cognitive science community, the relative contributions of bottom-up and top-down signals have been an ongoing subject of debate for over 40 years (Kinchla & Wolfe,
1979; Rauss & Pourtois, 2013). The McClelland & Rumelhart (1981) model of printed-word reading consisted of a
hierarchy of detectors, from letter fragments to letters to
words, with bidirectional connectivity. The top-down connectivity imposed orthographic constraints of the vocabulary
and helped to explain human proficiency in reading. The
model also accounted for puzzling behavioral phenomena,

