Contrastive Multi-View Representation Learning on Graphs

Kaveh Hassani 1 Amir Hosein Khasahmadi 1 2

Abstract
We introduce a self-supervised approach for learning node and graph level representations by contrasting structural views of graphs. We show that
unlike visual representation learning, increasing
the number of views to more than two or contrasting multi-scale encodings do not improve performance, and the best performance is achieved by
contrasting encodings from first-order neighbors
and a graph diffusion. We achieve new state-ofthe-art results in self-supervised learning on 8 out
of 8 node and graph classification benchmarks
under the linear evaluation protocol. For example,
on Cora (node) and Reddit-Binary (graph) classification benchmarks, we achieve 86.8% and 84.5%
accuracy, which are 5.5% and 2.4% relative improvements over previous state-of-the-art. When
compared to supervised baselines, our approach
outperforms them in 4 out of 8 benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNN) (Li et al., 2015; Gilmer et al.,
2017; Kipf & Welling, 2017; Veličković et al., 2018; Xu
et al., 2019b) reconcile the expressive power of graphs
in modeling interactions with unparalleled capacity of
deep models in learning representations. They process
variable-size permutation-invariant graphs and learn lowdimensional representations through an iterative process of
transferring, transforming, and aggregating the representations from topological neighbors. Each iteration expands
the receptive field by one-hop and after k iterations the
nodes within k-hops influence one another (Khasahmadi
et al., 2020). GNNs are applied to data with arbitrary topology such as point clouds (Hassani & Haley, 2019), meshes
(Wang et al., 2018), robot designs (Wang et al., 2019), physical processes (Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2018), social net1
Autodesk AI Lab, Toronto, Canada 2 Vector Institute,
Toronto, Canada.
Correspondence to: Kaveh Hassani
<kaveh.hassani@autodesk.com>, Amir Hosein Khasahmadi
<amir.khasahmadi@autodesk.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

works (Kipf & Welling, 2017), molecules (Duvenaud et al.,
2015), and knowledge graphs (Vivona & Hassani, 2019).
For an overview see (Zhang et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2020).
GNNs mostly require task-dependent labels to learn rich
representations. Nevertheless, annotating graphs is challenging compared to more common modalities such as video,
image, text, and audio. This is partly because graphs are usually used to represent concepts in specialized domains, e.g.,
biology. Also, labeling graphs procedurally using domain
knowledge is costly (Sun et al., 2020). To address this, unsupervised approaches such as reconstruction based methods
(Kipf & Welling, 2016) and contrastive methods (Li et al.,
2019) are coupled with GNNs to allow them learn representations without relying on supervisory data. The learned
representations are then transferred to a priori unknown
down-stream tasks. Recent works on contrastive learning
by maximizing mutual information (MI) between node and
graph representations have achieved state-of-the-art results
on both node classification (Veličković et al., 2019) and
graph classification (Sun et al., 2020) tasks. Nonetheless,
these methods require specialized encoders to learn graph
or node level representations.
Recent advances in multi-view visual representation learning (Tian et al., 2019; Bachman et al., 2019; Chen et al.,
2020), in which composition of data augmentations is used
to generate multiple views of a same image for contrastive
learning, has achieved state-of-the-art results on image
classification benchmarks surpassing supervised baselines.
However, it is not clear how to apply these techniques to
data represented as graphs. To address this, we introduce a
self-supervised approach to train graph encoders by maximizing MI between representations encoded from different
structural views of graphs. We show that our approach outperforms previous self-supervised models with significant
margin on both node and graph classification tasks without
requiring specialized architectures. We also show that when
compared to supervised baselines, it performs on par with
or better than strong baselines on some benchmarks.
To further improve contrastive representation learning on
node and graph classification tasks, we systematically study
the major components of our framework and surprisingly
show that unlike visual contrastive learning: (1) increasing the number of views, i.e., augmentations, to more than

