A Swiss Army Knife for Minimax Optimal Transport

Sofien Dhouib 1 Ievgen Redko 2 Tanguy Kerdoncuff 2 Rémi Emonet 2 Marc Sebban 2

Abstract
The Optimal transport (OT) problem and its associated Wasserstein distance have recently become
a topic of great interest in the machine learning
community. However, its underlying optimization
problem is known to have two major restrictions:
(i) it strongly depends on the choice of the cost
function and (ii) its sample complexity scales exponentially with the dimension. In this paper, we
propose a general formulation of a minimax OT
problem that can tackle these limitations by jointly
optimizing the cost matrix and the transport plan,
allowing us to define a robust distance between
distributions. We propose to use a cutting-set
method to solve this general problem and show
its links and advantages compared to other existing minimax OT approaches. Additionally, we
use this method to define a notion of stability allowing us to select the ground metric robust to
bounded perturbations. Finally, we provide an
experimental study highlighting the efficiency of
our approach.

1. Introduction
In many scientific areas, we are often confronted with a
necessity of comparing different objects to assess their relatedness. In machine learning, for instance, these objects may
be individual data points in similarity based classification
(e.g., k-nearest neighbors (Cover & Hart, 2006), non-linear
support vector machines (Boser et al., 1992)) or probability distributions in generative modelling (Goodfellow et al.,
2014) and hypothesis testing. For this latter case, the optimal transportation (OT) metric (also called the Wasserstein
distance) has recently emerged as a powerful tool used to
1
Univ Lyon, INSA-Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1,
UJM-Saint Etienne, CNRS, Inserm, CREATIS UMR 5220, U1206,
F-69100, LYON, France 2 Univ Lyon, UJM-Saint-Etienne, CNRS,
Institut d Optique Graduate School Laboratoire Hubert Curien
UMR 5516, F-42023, Saint-Etienne, France. Correspondence to:
Sofien Dhouib <sofiane.dhouib@creatis.insa-lyon.fr>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

compare complex objects based on the OT problem (Monge,
1781) that roughly quantifies the minimal amount of effort
required to transform one distribution into another. Several
key features of this metric lead to its widespread use in many
different applications and setups (Gramfort et al., 2015; Kusner et al., 2015; Bonneel et al., 2016; Courty et al., 2017;
Laclau et al., 2017). First, it takes into account the geometry
of the underlying data distributions by the means of pairwise costs calculated for the points that they are supported
on. Second, it allows to compare distributions with disjoint supports thus avoiding the vanishing gradient problem
(Arjovsky et al., 2017) when used as a loss function.
In this paper, we study a general formulation of the OT
problem with a minimax objective function where one seeks
an OT plan with respect to (w.r.t.) the worst possible ground
metric (also called cost function) belonging to an arbitrary
and possibly infinite convex set. Such a minimax formulation is of a particular interest as it has been shown previously (i) to reduce the sample complexity and increase
the robustness to noise of the original OT problem for highdimensional data (Paty & Cuturi, 2019), (ii) to allow to consider submodular cost functions (Alvarez-Melis et al., 2018)
and (iii) to use it as a loss in generative models (Genevay
et al., 2018). We advance the study of the minimax OT
further by providing the following contributions. First, for
an infinite set of cost functions defined by a Mahalanobis
distance, we reformulate the minimax OT problem as a
minimization of the arbitrary dual norm of the matrix of
second-order displacements and show how one can use it
to smoothly interpolate between the original OT problem
and the minimax formulation of (Paty & Cuturi, 2019) included as a special case. Second, we provide a generic
solver for minimax OT for both regularized and unregularized minimax OT problems and for both finite and infinite
families of cost functions contrary to previous work (Paty
& Cuturi, 2019; Alvarez-Melis et al., 2018) that considered
the differentiable and strictly convex regularized OT problem only. Finally, we introduce the notion of cost matrix
stability and solve its underlying optimization problem. It
consists in finding a cost function from a list of possible
candidates that leads to a stable transportation cost in its
unit ball neighborhood.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section
2, we provide the necessary introductory definitions related

