Variance Reduced Coordinate Descent with Acceleration:
New Method With a Surprising Application to Finite-Sum Problems

Filip Hanzely 1 Dmitry Kovalev 1 Peter Richtárik 1

Abstract
We propose an accelerated version of stochastic
variance reduced coordinate descent – ASVRCD.
As other variance reduced coordinate descent
methods such as SEGA or SVRCD, our method
can deal with problems that include a nonseparable and non-smooth regularizer, while accessing a random block of partial derivatives in
each iteration only. However, ASVRCD incorporates Nesterov’s momentum, which offers favorable iteration complexity guarantees over both
SEGA and SVRCD. As a by-product of our theory, we show that a variant of Katyusha (AllenZhu, 2017) is a specific case of ASVRCD, recovering the optimal oracle complexity for the finite
sum objective.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we aim to solve the regularized optimization
problem
min P (x) := f (x) + ψ(x),
(1)
x∈Rd

where function f is convex and differentiable, while the
regularizer ψ is convex and non-smooth. Furthermore, we
assume that the dimensionality d is large.
The most standard approach to deal with the huge d is
to decompose the space, i.e., use coordinate descent, or,
more generally, subspace descent methods (Nesterov, 2012;
Wright, 2015; Kozak et al., 2019). Those methods are especially popular as they achieve a linear convergence rate on
strongly convex problems while enjoying a relatively cheap
cost of performing each iteration.
However, coordinate descent methods are only feasible if
the regularizer ψ is separable (Richtárik & Takáč, 2014). In
1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology,
Thuwal, Saudi Arabia. Correspondence to: Filip Hanzely
<filip.hanzely@kaust.edu.sa>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

contrast, if ψ is not separable, the corresponding stochastic
gradient estimator has an inherent (non-zero) variance at
the optimum, and thus the linear convergence rate is not
achievable.
This phenomenon is, to some extent, similar when applying Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) (Robbins & Monro,
1951; Nemirovski et al., 2009) on finite sum objective – the
corresponding stochastic gradient estimator has a (non-zero)
variance at the optimum, which prevents SGD from converging linearly. Recently, the issue of sublinear convergence
of SGD has been resolved using the idea of control variates (Hickernell et al., 2005), resulting in famous variance
reduced methods such as SVRG (Johnson & Zhang, 2013)
and SAGA (Defazio et al., 2014a).
Motivated by the massive success of variance reduced methods for finite sums, control variates have been proposed to
“fix” coordinate descent methods to minimize problem (1)
with non-separable ψ. To best of our knowledge, there are
two such algorithms in the literature – SEGA (Hanzely et al.,
2018) and SVRCD (Hanzely & Richtárik, 2019), which we
now quickly describe.1
Let xk be the current iterate of SEGA (or SVRCD) and
suppose that the oracle reveals the i-th partial derivative
∇i f (xk ) (for i chosen uniformly at random). The simplest
unbiased gradient estimator of ∇f (xk ) can be constructed
as g̃ k = d∇i f (xk )ei (where ei ∈ Rd is the i-th standard
basis vector). The idea behind these methods is to enrich
g̃ k using a control variate hk ∈ Rd , resulting in a new (still
unbiased) gradient estimator g k :
g k = d∇i f (xk )ei − dhki ei + hk ,
where hki ∈ R stands for the i-th element of vector hk .
How to choose the sequence of control variates {hk }? Intuitively, we wish for both sequences {hk } and {∇f (xk })
to have an identical limit point. In such case, we have
limk→∞ Var(g k ) = 0, and thus one shall expect faster convergence. There is no unique way of setting {hk } to have
the mentioned property satisfied – this is where SEGA and
SVRCD differ. See Algorithm 1 for details.
1
VRSSD (Kozak et al., 2019) is yet another stochastic subspace descent algorithm aided by control variates; however, it was

