On hyperparameter tuning in general clustering problems

Xinjie Fan 1 Yuguang Yue 1 Purnamrita Sarkar 1 Y. X. Rachel Wang 2

Abstract
Tuning hyperparameters for unsupervised learning problems is difficult in general due to the lack
of ground truth for validation. However, the success of most clustering methods depends heavily
on the correct choice of the involved hyperparameters. Take for example the Lagrange multipliers of
penalty terms in semidefinite programming (SDP)
relaxations of community detection in networks,
or the bandwidth parameter needed in the Gaussian kernel used to construct similarity matrices
for spectral clustering. Despite the popularity of
these clustering algorithms, there are not many
provable methods for tuning these hyperparameters. In this paper, we provide an overarching
framework with provable guarantees for tuning
hyperparameters in the above class of problems
under two different models. Our framework can
be augmented with a cross validation procedure to
do model selection as well. In a variety of simulation and real data experiments, we show that our
framework outperforms other widely used tuning
procedures in a broad range of parameter settings.

1. Introduction
A standard statistical model has parameters, which characterize the underlying data distribution; an inference algorithm
to learn these parameters typically involve hyperparameters (or tuning parameters). Popular examples include the
penalty parameter in regularized regression models, the
number of clusters in clustering analysis, the bandwidth
parameter in kernel based clustering, nonparameteric density estimation or regression methods (Wasserman, 2006;
Tibshirani et al., 2015), to name but a few. It is well-known
that selecting these hyperparameters may require repeated
training to search through different combinations of plau1
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences, University of
Texas at Austin 2 School of Mathematics and Statistics, University
of Sydney. Correspondence to: <{xfan, yuguang}@utexas.edu,
purna.sarkar@austin.utexas.edu, rachel.wang@sydney.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

sible hyperparameter values and often has to rely on good
heuristics and domain knowledge from the user.
A classical method to do automated hyperparameter tuning is the nonparametric procedure Cross Validation (CV)
(Stone, 1974; Zhang, 1993) which has been used extensively in machine learning and statistics (Hastie et al., 2005).
CV has been studied extensively in supervised learning settings, particularly in low dimensional linear models (Shao,
1993; Yang et al., 2007) and penalized regression in high
dimension (Wasserman & Roeder, 2009). Other notable
stability based methods for model selection in similar supervised settings include (Breiman et al., 1996; Bach, 2008;
Meinshausen & Bühlmann, 2010; Lim & Yu, 2016). Finally, a large number of empirical methods exist in the
machine learning literature for tuning hyperparameters in
various training algorithms (Bergstra & Bengio, 2012; Bengio, 2000; Snoek et al., 2012; Bergstra et al., 2011), most of
which do not provide theoretical guarantees.
In contrast to the supervised setting with i.i.d. data used
in many of the above methods, in this paper, we consider
unsupervised clustering problems with possible dependence
structure in the datapoints. We propose an overarching
framework for hyperparameter tuning and model selection
for different probabilistic clustering models. Here the challenge is two-fold. Since labels are not available, choosing a
criterion for evaluation and in general a method for selecting
hyperparameters is not easy. One may consider splitting the
data in different folds and selecting the model or hyperparameter with the most stable solution. However, for multiple
splits of the data, the inference algorithm may get stuck at
the same local optima, and thus stability alone can lead to
a suboptimal solution (Von Luxburg et al., 2010). In Wang
(2010) and Fang & Wang (2012), the authors overcome
this by redefining the number of clusters as one that gives
the most stable clustering for a given algorithm. In (Meila,
2018), a semi-definite program (SDP) maximizing an inner
product criterion is performed for each clustering solution,
and the value of the objective function is used to evaluate
the stability of the clustering. The analysis is done without
model assumptions. The second difficulty arises if there is
dependence structure in the datapoints, which necessitates
careful splitting procedures for CV.
To illustrate the generality of our framework, we focus on

