Double Reinforcement Learning for Efficient and Robust Off-Policy Evaluation

Nathan Kallus 1 Masatoshi Uehara 2

Abstract
Off-policy evaluation (OPE) in reinforcement
learning allows one to evaluate novel decision
policies without needing to conduct exploration,
which is often costly or otherwise infeasible. We
consider for the first time the semiparametric efficiency limits of OPE in Markov decision processes (MDPs), where actions, rewards, and states
are memoryless. We show existing OPE estimators may fail to be efficient in this setting. We
develop a new estimator based on cross-fold estimation of q-functions and marginalized density
ratios, which we term double reinforcement learning (DRL). We show that DRL is efficient when
both components are estimated at fourth-root rates
and is also doubly robust when only one component is consistent. We investigate these properties
empirically and demonstrate the performance benefits due to harnessing memorylessness.

s0

a0

r0

s1

a1

r1

s2

Figure 1. Non-Markov decision process (NMDP)
s0

a0

r0

s1

a1

r1

s2

Figure 2. Markov decision process (MDP)

Table 1. Comparison of estimators under MDP. DR (doubly robust)
means only one nuisance is needed for consistency. Efficient refers
to whether the estimator achieves the efficiency bound under MDP.
Estimator
IS
DM
DR (Jiang & Li, 2016)
MIS (Xie et al., 2019)
DRL (Proposed)

DR

Efficient

Nuisances
ν
q
ν, q
µ
µ, q

1. Introduction
Off-policy evaluation (OPE) is the problem of estimating
mean rewards of a given policy (target policy) for a sequential decision-making problem using data generated by the
log of another policy (behavior policy). OPE is a key problem in reinforcement learning (RL) (Precup et al., 2000;
Mahmood et al., 2014; Li et al., 2015; Thomas & Brunskill,
2016; Jiang & Li, 2016; Munos et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2018;
Bibaut et al., 2019) and it finds applications as varied as
healthcare (Murphy, 2003) and education (Mandel et al.,
2014). Because data can be scarce, it is crucial to use all
available data efficiently, while at the same time using flexible, nonparametric estimators that avoid misspecification
error.
In this paper, our goal is to obtain an estimator for policy
value with minimal asymptotic mean squared error under
*

Equal contribution 1 Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA
Harvard University, Massachusetts, Boston, USA. Correspondence to: Masatoshi Uehara <ueharamasatoshi136@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

nonparametric models for the sequential decision process
and behavior policy, that is, achieving the semiparametric
efficiency bound (Bickel et al., 1998). Toward that end, we
explore the efficiency bound and efficient influence function
of the target policy value under two models: non-Markov
decision processes (NMDP) and Markov decision processes
(MDP). The two models are illustrated in Figs. 1 and 2
and defined precisely in Section 1.1. While much work
has studied efficient estimation under NMDP (Jiang & Li,
2016; Thomas & Brunskill, 2016; Dudik et al., 2014; Kallus
& Uehara, 2019a), work on MDP has been restricted to the
parametric, finite-state-finite-action case (Jiang & Li, 2016)
and no globally efficient estimators have been proposed.
The two models are clearly nested and indeed we obtain that
the efficiency bounds are generally strictly ordered. In other
words, if we correctly leverage the Markov property, we can
obtain OPE estimators that are more efficient than existing
ones. This is quite important, given the practical difficulty
of evaluation in long horizons (see, e.g., Gottesman et al.,
2019) and given that many RL problems are Markovian.
We propose the Double Reinforcement Learning (DRL) estimator, which is given by cross-fold estimation and plug-in

