Knowing The What But Not The Where in Bayesian Optimization

Vu Nguyen 1

Abstract
Bayesian optimization has demonstrated impressive success in finding the optimum input x∗ and
output f ∗ = f (x∗ ) = max f (x) of a black-box
function f . In some applications, however, the
optimum output f ∗ is known in advance and the
goal is to find the corresponding optimum input
x∗ . In this paper, we consider a new setting in
BO in which the knowledge of the optimum output f ∗ is available. Our goal is to exploit the
knowledge about f ∗ to search for the input x∗ efficiently. To achieve this goal, we first transform the
Gaussian process surrogate using the information
about the optimum output. Then, we propose two
acquisition functions, called confidence bound
minimization and expected regret minimization.
We show that our approaches work intuitively
and give quantitatively better performance against
standard BO methods. We demonstrate real applications in tuning a deep reinforcement learning
algorithm on the CartPole problem and XGBoost
on Skin Segmentation dataset in which the optimum values are publicly available.

1. Introduction
Bayesian optimization (BO) (Brochu et al., 2010; Shahriari
et al., 2016; Oh et al., 2018; ?) is an efficient method for the
global optimization of a black-box function. BO has been
successfully employed in selecting chemical compounds
(Hernández-Lobato et al., 2017), material design (Frazier
& Wang, 2016; Li et al., 2018), algorithmic assurance (?),
and in search for hyperparameters of machine learning algorithms (Snoek et al., 2012; Klein et al., 2017; Chen et al.,
2018). These recent results suggest BO is more efficient
than manual, random, or grid search.
Bayesian optimization finds the global maximizer x∗ =
1 University of Oxford, UK. Correspondence to: Vu Nguyen
<vu@robots.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Michael A Osborne 1

arg maxx∈X f (x) of the black-box function f by incorporating prior beliefs about f and updating the prior with evaluations where X ⊂ Rd is the search domain. The model
used for approximating the black-box function is called the
surrogate model. A popular choice for a surrogate model
is the Gaussian process (GP) (Rasmussen, 2006) although
there are existing alternative options, such as random forests
(Hutter et al., 2011), deep neural networks (Snoek et al.,
2015), Bayesian neural networks (Springenberg et al., 2016)
and Mondrian trees (Wang et al., 2018). This surrogate
model is then used to define an acquisition function which
determines the next query of the black-box function.
In some settings, the optimum output f ∗ = f (x∗ ) is known
in advance. For example, the optimal reward is available for
common reinforcement learning benchmarks or we know
the optimum accuracy is 100 in tuning classification algorithm for specific datasets. As another example in inverse
optimization, we retrieve the input resulting the given target (??). The question is how to efficiently utilize such
prior knowledge to find the optimal inputs using the fewest
number of queries.
In this paper, we give the first BO approach to this setting in
which we know what we are looking for, but we do not know
where it is. Specifically, we know the optimum output f ∗ =
maxx∈X f (x) and aim to search for the unknown optimum
input x∗ = arg maxx∈X f (x) by utilizing f ∗ value.
We incorporate the information about f ∗ into Bayesian optimization in the following ways. First, we use the knowledge
of f ∗ to build a transformed GP surrogate model. Our intuition in transforming a GP is based on the fact that the blackbox function value f (x) should not be above the threshold
f ∗ (since f ∗ ≥ f (x), ∀x ∈ X , by definition). As a result,
the GP surrogate should also follow this property. Second,
we propose two acquisition functions which make decisions
informed by the f ∗ value, namely confidence bound minimization and expected regret minimization.
We validate our model using benchmark functions and tuning a deep reinforcement learning algorithm where we observe the optimum value in advance. These experiments
demonstrate that our proposed framework works both intuitively better and experimentally outperforms the baselines.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:

