Robustness to Spurious Correlations via Human Annotations
Megha Srivastava 1 Tatsunori Hashimoto 1 Percy Liang 1

Abstract
The reliability of machine learning systems critically assumes that the associations between features and labels remain similar between training and test distributions. However, unmeasured variables, such as confounders, break this
assumption—useful correlations between features
and labels at training time can become useless
or even harmful at test time. For example, high
obesity is generally predictive for heart disease,
but this relation may not hold for smokers who
generally have lower rates of obesity and higher
rates of heart disease. We present a framework for
making models robust to spurious correlations by
leveraging humans’ common sense knowledge of
causality. Specifically, we use human annotation
to augment each training example with a potential
unmeasured variable (i.e. an underweight patient
with heart disease may be a smoker), reducing the
problem to a covariate shift problem. We then introduce a new distributionally robust optimization
objective over unmeasured variables (UV-DRO)
to control the worst-case loss over possible testtime shifts. Empirically, we show improvements
of 5–10% on a digit recognition task confounded
by rotation, and 1.5–5% on the task of analyzing
NYPD Police Stops confounded by location.

1. Introduction
The increasing use of machine learning in socioeconomic
problems as well as high-stakes decision-making emphasizes the importance of designing models that can perform
well over a wide range of users and conditions (Barocas &
Selbst, 2016; Blodgett et al., 2016; Hovy & Sgaard, 2015;
Tatman, 2017). In some cases, the set of target users and test
distributions are known—for example, research in the fair
machine learning community has largely been motivated by
1
Computer Science Department, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Megha Srivastava <megha@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

case studies such as face-recognition systems performing
poorly on populations with dark skin color (Buolamwini
& Gebru, 2018). However, there exist many more distributional shifts that the designer of a machine learning system
may have been unaware of when collecting data, or may be
impossible to measure. Existing approaches such as distributional robustness (Ben-Tal et al., 2013; Lam & Zhou, 2015)
and domain adaptation (Mansour et al., 2009b; Blitzer et al.,
2011; Gong et al., 2013) require either a priori specifying
the distribution shifts, or sampling from the target test distributions. How can we ensure that a model performs reliably
at test time without explicitly specifying the domain shifts?
Existing research on human-in-the-loop systems and crowdsourcing have shown that humans have a rich understanding of the plausible domain shifts in our world, as well as
how these changes affect the prediction task (Talmor et al.,
2019; Mostafazadeh et al., 2016). Can we leverage humans’
strong prior knowledge to understand the possible distribution shifts for a specific machine learning task? The key
idea of our paper is to use human commonsense reasoning
as a source of information about potential test-time shifts,
and effectively use this information to learn robust models.
To see how human annotations may help, consider the task
of creating large-scale diagnostic models for medicine. Although these models are trained on large amounts of data,
they almost invariably lack features for important risk factors that were either hidden for legal reasons (e.g. health
insurance providers cannot collect genetic information), privacy concerns (e.g. collection of ethnic information (Ploeg
et al., 2004)), or simply unobserved (e.g. drug use). For
example, a diagnostic model for heart disease trained on
the general population may learn to predict heart disease
based upon obesity. However, when used in a drug rehabilitation facility with former smokers, this model may perform
poorly, as smokers are often underweight and have high
heart disease risk (Jarvik, 1991). In this case, smoking is
an unmeasured confounder which degrades the model’s robustness. A human expert could help with such confounded
shifts by annotating the data and identifying that examples
with low obesity but significant heart problems may be due
to smoking. We would then be able to train our model to be
robust to distribution shifts over these unmeasured variables
(i.e. if our test set consists primarily of smokers).

