Incremental Sampling Without Replacement for Sequence Models

Kensen Shi 1 David Bieber 1 Charles Sutton 1

Abstract
Sampling is a fundamental technique, and sampling without replacement is often desirable when
duplicate samples are not beneficial. Within machine learning, sampling is useful for generating diverse outputs from a trained model. We
present an elegant procedure for sampling without replacement from a broad class of randomized
programs, including generative neural models that
construct outputs sequentially. Our procedure
is efficient even for exponentially-large output
spaces. Unlike prior work, our approach is incremental, i.e., samples can be drawn one at a time,
allowing for increased flexibility. We also present
a new estimator for computing expectations from
samples drawn without replacement. We show
that incremental sampling without replacement is
applicable to many domains, e.g., program synthesis and combinatorial optimization.

1. Introduction
Sampling from programmatically-defined distributions is a
fundamental technique. Machine learning problems often
involve learning distributions over structured objects such as
sentences, images, audio, biological sequences, and source
code. These distributions usually factorize into a product
of conditional distributions, e.g., the probability of a word
given the previous words. Such distributions are naturally
represented as programs with sampling operations, which
we call randomized programs.
To predict a structured output, traditional search methods
like beam search compute a set of predictions that approximately maximize the probability according to a learned
model. However, recent work has instead favored sampling
from the model, with the goal of obtaining diverse and
higher-quality predictions (Shi et al., 2019; Fan et al., 2018;
Kool et al., 2019b; Holtzman et al., 2018; 2019; Radford
et al., 2019). The same considerations suggest that sampling
1

Google. Correspondence to: Kensen Shi <kshi@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

without replacement could be even more desirable by avoiding duplicate samples, especially in machine learning where
the training objective often pushes the output distribution to
become extremely peaked.
We present a data structure called UniqueRandomizer for
sampling without replacement from randomized programs.
The main advantage is that it is incremental, allowing for
increased flexibility in stopping conditions for the sampling
procedure. For instance, one can draw more samples until a
solution is found, or until a sample-based estimate has converged, or enough sample diversity is obtained, and so on. A
closely related algorithm for sampling without replacement
is Stochastic Beam Search (SBS) (Kool et al., 2019b), based
on the Gumbel-top-k trick. SBS is mathematically more
complex than UniqueRandomizer and does not readily support incrementality, but it has advantages in parallelism and
in providing an importance-sampling method for statistical
estimation. Fortunately, we are able to present a combined
method with both advantages, i.e., the flexibility of incremental sampling and efficiency of batched computations.
We also derive an improved estimator that can be used with
any method of sampling without replacement.
We experimentally demonstrate that using UniqueRandomizer leads to higher-quality samples in program synthesis
and combinatorial optimization. More broadly, a major contribution of this paper is making the case that UniqueRandomizer is a general technique that can be applied to many
scenarios.

2. Approach
As a motivating example, consider a program synthesis task:
given pseudocode for a short program and some input/output
examples, generate the corresponding source code. Suppose
that we train a neural sequence-to-sequence model that takes
pseudocode as input and generates candidate programs. We
would like to sample from the model until we find a program
that satisfies the examples.
We do not know upfront how many samples are needed to
find a solution, so to minimize computational waste, we
want to sample from the model incrementally, one sample
at a time until a solution is found. Furthermore, we have no
use for duplicate samples because the quality of a sampled

