Fast Computation of Nash Equilibria in Imperfect Information Games

Remi Munos 1 Julien Perolat 1 Jean-Baptiste Lespiau 1 Mark Rowland 1 Bart De Vylder 1 Marc Lanctot 1
Finbarr Timbers 1 Daniel Hennes 1 Shayegan Omidshafiei 1 Audrunas Gruslys 1 Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar 1
Edward Lockhart 1 Karl Tuyls 1

Abstract
We introduce and analyze a class of algorithms,
called Mirror Ascent against an Improved Opponent (MAIO), for computing Nash equilibria in
two-player zero-sum games, both in normal form
and in sequential form with imperfect information. These algorithms update the policy of each
player with a mirror-ascent step to maximize the
value of playing against an improved opponent.
An improved opponent can be a best response, a
greedy policy, a policy improved by policy gradient, or by any other reinforcement learning or
search techniques. We establish a convergence result of the last iterate to the set of Nash equilibria
and show that the speed of convergence depends
on the amount of improvement offered by these
improved policies. In addition, we show that under some condition, if we use a best response as
improved policy, then an exponential convergence
rate is achieved.

1. Introduction
This paper considers the problem of computing a Nash
equilibrium for two-player zero-sum games in two types
of games: normal-form games and imperfect information
games (IIGs) in extensive form. We introduce and analyze a
class of algorithms, called Mirror Ascent against an Improved Opponent (MAIO), which updates the policy of
each player by following a step of mirror-ascent for maximizing its expected reward against an improved policy for
the opponent. The actual implementation of the algorithm
depends on how we choose to define the ‘improved policy’.
If we use the best response (BR) (the opponent’s best policy
against the current player) as improved policy we show that,
under some condition, the algorithm (MAIO-BR) produces
1
DeepMind.
Correspondence to:
<munos@google.com>.

Remi Munos

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

a sequence of policies that converges to the set of Nash
equilibria at an exponential rate. By that we mean that
some weighted `2 distance between the policies produced
by the algorithm and the set of Nash equilibria decreases as
O(exp(−βt)), for some problem-dependent constant β >
0, where t is the number of iterations of the algorithm.
However, in large IIGs it may be computationally prohibitive to compute a full best response at every iteration
(since this is equivalent to solving an optimal control problem). Our analysis shows that the speed of convergence to
the set of Nash equilibria depends on a measure (called the
improvement) of how much each player is able to improve
its own policy against a fixed opponent. In principle, the best
response provides the best possible improvement, but due
to its high computational cost other less-computationally
expensive strategies can provide an improved policy as well
at a lower computational cost. Examples of improved polices are the greedy policy (one-step policy improvement),
a multi-step improved policy, such as in Monte Carlo Tree
Search (MCTS), a policy improved by policy gradient, or
by any other reinforcement learning or search algorithm.
Our analysis shows convergence for all such cases, which
opens new avenues for designing algorithms with convergence guarantees, while offering a trade-off in terms of
computational cost versus convergence speed toward the
Nash equilibrium.
Literature context: This work sits in the context of computing Nash equilibria for sequential games. One can distinguish several approaches to find a Nash equilibrium: (i)
Linear programming has been the first approach applied
to compute minimax equilibrium in imperfect information
games (Von Stengel, 1996; Koller et al., 1994; Koller and Pfeffer, 1997) using sequence-form reductions methods. But
these methods remain quite inefficient as the size of the
action space grows even if linear programming methods
(Khachiyan, 1980; Karmarkar, 1984; Nesterov and Todd,
1998) achieve exponential convergence to Nash equilibria
in value, with a rate independent of game-dependent quantities. (ii) Fictitious play (FP) has been considered in the
tabular case in (Heinrich et al., 2015) and with function
approximation (Heinrich and Silver, 2016). In the normal

