Decentralised Learning with Distributed Gradient Descent and Random
Features
Dominic Richards 1 Patrick Rebeschini 1 Lorenzo Rosasco 2 3 4

Abstract
We investigate the generalisation performance of
Distributed Gradient Descent with Implicit Regularisation and Random Features in the homogenous setting where a network of agents are given
data sampled independently from the same unknown distribution. Along with reducing the
memory footprint, Random Features are particularly convenient in this setting as they provide
a common parameterisation across agents that
allows to overcome previous difficulties in implementing Decentralised Kernel Regression. Under
standard source and capacity assumptions, we establish high probability bounds on the predictive
performance for each agent as a function of the
step size, number of iterations, inverse spectral
gap of the communication matrix and number of
Random Features. By tuning these parameters,
we obtain statistical rates that are minimax optimal with respect to the total number of samples
in the network. The algorithm provides a linear improvement over single machine Gradient
Descent in memory cost and, when agents hold
enough data with respect to the network size and
inverse spectral gap, a linear speed-up in computational runtime for any network topology. We
present simulations that show how the number of
Random Features, iterations and samples impact
predictive performance.

1. Introduction
In supervised learning, an agent is given a collection of
training data to fit a model that can predict the outcome
1
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, 24-29 St Giles’,
Oxford, OX1 3LB 2 MaLGa Center, Universitá degli Studi di Genova, Genova, Italy 3 Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Morego, 30,
Genoa 16163, Italy 4 Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. Correspondence to: Patrick Rebeschini
<patrick.rebeschini@stats.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

of new data points. Due to the growing size of modern
data sets and complexity of many machine learning models,
a popular approach is to incrementally improve the model
with respect to a loss function that measures the performance
on the training data. The complexity and stability of the
resulting model is then controlled implicitly by algorithmic
parameters, such as, in the case of Gradient Descent, the step
size and number of iterations. An appealing collection of
models in this case are those associated to the Reproducing
Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS) for some positive definite
kernel, as the resulting optimisation problem (originally
over the space of functions) admits a tractable form through
the Kernel Trick and Representer Theorem, see for instance
(Schölkopf et al., 2001).
Given the growing size of data, privacy concerns as well as
the manner in which data is collected, distributed computation has become a requirement in many machine learning
applications. Here training data is split across a number
of agents which alternate between communicating model
parameters to one another and performing computations on
their local data. In centralised approaches (effective star
topology), a single agent is typically responsible for collecting, processing and disseminating information to the agents.
Meanwhile for many applications, including ad-hoc wireless
and peer-to-peer networks, such centralised approaches are
unfeasible. This motivates decentralised approaches where
agents in a network only communicate locally within the
network i.e. to neighbours at each iteration.
Many problems in decentralised multi-agent optimisation
can be phrased as a form of consensus optimisation (Tsitsiklis et al., 1986; Tsitsiklis, 1984; Johansson et al., 2007;
Nedic & Ozdaglar, 2009; Nedić et al., 2009; Johansson et al.,
2009; Lobel & Ozdaglar, 2011; Matei & Baras, 2011; Boyd
et al., 2011; Duchi et al., 2012; Shi et al., 2015; Mokhtari
& Ribeiro, 2016). In this setting, a network of agents wish
to minimise the average of functions held by individual
agents, hence “reaching consensus” on the solution of the
global problem. A standard approach is to augment the
original optimisation problem to facilitate a decentralised
algorithm. This typically introduces additional penalisation (or constraints) on the difference between neighbouring
agents within the network, and yields a higher dimensional
optimisation problem which decouples across the agents.

