Generative Flows with Matrix Exponential

Changyi Xiao 1 Ligang Liu 1

Abstract
Generative flows models enjoy the properties of
tractable exact likelihood and efficient sampling,
which are composed of a sequence of invertible
functions. In this paper, we incorporate matrix
exponential into generative flows. Matrix exponential is a map from matrices to invertible matrices, this property is suitable for generative flows.
Based on matrix exponential, we propose matrix
exponential coupling layers that are a general case
of affine coupling layers and matrix exponential
invertible 1 × 1 convolutions that do not collapse
during training. And we modify the networks architecture to make training stable and significantly
speed up the training process. Our experiments
show that our model achieves great performance
on density estimation amongst generative flows
models.

1. Introduction
Generative models aim to learn a probability distribution
given data sampled from that distribution, in contrast with
discriminative models, which do not require a large amount
of annotations. A number of models have been proposed
including generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma
& Welling, 2013; Rezende et al., 2014), autoregressive models (Van Oord et al., 2016), and generative flows models
(Dinh et al., 2014; 2016; Rezende & Mohamed, 2015). Generative flows models transform a simple probability distribution into a complex probability distribution through a
sequence of invertible functions. They gain popularity recently due to exact density estimation and efficient sampling.
In applications, they have been used for density estimation
(Dinh et al., 2016), data generation (Kingma & Dhariwal,
2018) and reinforcement learning (Ward et al., 2019).
How to design invertible functions is the core of generative
1

University of Science and Technology of China. Correspondence to: Ligang Liu <lgliu@ustc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

flows models. There are two principles that should be followed. First, the Jacobian determinant should be computed
efficiently. Second, the inverse function should be tractable.
Dinh et al. (2014) proposed coupling layers, they first applied generative flows models into density estimation. Dinh
et al. (2016) extended the work with more expressive invertible functions and improved the architecture of generative
flows models. Kingma & Dhariwal (2018) proposed Glow:
generative flow with invertible 1 × 1 convolutions, which
significantly improved the performance of generative flows
models on density estimation and showed that generative
flows models are capable of realistic synthesis. These flows
all have easy Jacobian determinant and inverse.
However, generative flows models have not achieved the
same performance on density estimation as state-of-the-art
autoregressive models. In order to ensure that the function is
invertible and effectively compute the Jacobian determinant,
generative flows models suffer from two issues. First, due to
the constraints of network, the network is not as expressive
as that of GANs. Most of the flows constrain the Jacobian
to a triangular matrix, which influences the effectiveness
of the network. They apply element-wise transformation,
parametrized by part of dimensions. Dinh et al. (2014)
proposed additive transformations, then Dinh et al. (2016)
presented affine transformations. These transformations are
very simple invertible transformations. In (Huang et al.,
2018; Ho et al., 2019), they used invertible networks instead
of affine transformations, but which still are univariate invertible transformations. Using univariate transformations
also hurts the performance of generative flows models. Designing univariate invertible transformations is relatively
simple compared with multivariate invertible transformations. Second, the dimension of latent space of generative
flows models is same as the input space, which makes the
network pretty large for high-dimensional data. Dinh et al.
(2016) proposed a multiscale architecture to alleviate this
problem, which gradually factors out a part of the total
dimensions at regular intervals.
In this paper, we combine matrix exponential with generative flows to propose a new flow called matrix exponential
flows. Matrix exponential can be seen as a map from matrices to invertible matrices, this property is suitable for
constructing invertible transformations. Meanwhile, matrix
exponential has other properties that are also helpful for

