Debiased Sinkhorn barycenters
Hicham Janati 1 2 Marco Cuturi 3 2 Alexandre Gramfort 2

Abstract
Entropy regularization in optimal transport (OT)
has been the driver of many recent interests for
Wasserstein metrics and barycenters in machine
learning. It allows to keep the appealing geometrical properties of the unregularized Wasserstein
distance while having a significantly lower complexity thanks to Sinkhorn’s algorithm. However,
entropy brings some inherent smoothing bias, resulting for example in blurred barycenters. This
side effect has prompted an increasing temptation in the community to settle for a slower algorithm such as log-domain stabilized Sinkhorn
which breaks the parallel structure that can be
leveraged on GPUs, or even go back to unregularized OT. Here we show how this bias is tightly
linked to the reference measure that defines the
entropy regularizer and propose debiased Wasserstein barycenters that preserve the best of both
worlds: fast Sinkhorn-like iterations without entropy smoothing. Theoretically, we prove that the
entropic OT barycenter of univariate Gaussians
is a Gaussian and quantify its variance bias. This
result is obtained by extending the differentiability and convexity of entropic OT to sub-Gaussian
measures with unbounded supports. Empirically,
we illustrate the reduced blurring and the computational advantage on various applications.

1. Introduction
Comparing, interpolating or averaging probability distributions is an ubiquitous problem in machine learning. Optimal
transport (OT) offers an efficient way to do exactly that
while taking into account the geometry of the space they
live in (Peyré & Cuturi, 2018). Let P(Rd ) denote the set
of probability measures on Rd . Given some divergence
F : P(Rd ) ⇥ P(Rd ) ! R and weights (wk )k such that
1

Inria Saclay, France 2 CREST-ENSAE, France 3 Google Research, Brain team, France. Correspondence to: Hicham Janati
<hicham.janati@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

PK

k=1 wk = 1, the weighted barycenter of a set of probability measures (↵k )k can be defined as the Fréchet mean:
K
X
def
↵F = arg min↵2P(Rd )
wk F (↵k , ↵) .
(1)
k=1

Here ↵F can be thought as a weighted average of distributions. While the (↵k )k may have a fixed support or
known finite supports when working in machine learning
applications, the support of ↵F may or may not be known.
When the latter is unknown a priori, free support methods
are needed to jointly minimize the objective with respect
to both the support and the mass of the distribution (Cuturi & Doucet, 2014). Otherwise, fixed support methods,
which only optimize weights on known supports, are employed (Benamou et al., 2014). While free support methods
are more general and memory efficient, fixed support ones
are faster in practice. In this paper, we focus on fixed support
methods.
Using the Wasserstein distance as a divergence F , Li &
Wang (2006) were the first to propose the Fréchet mean (1)
for a clustering application in computer vision. This idea
was later adopted by Agueh & Carlier (2011) to formally
define Optimal Transport (OT) barycenters. However, the
Wasserstein distance is defined through a linear programming problem which does not scale to large datasets. To
address this computational issue, some form of regularization is mandatory: either regularize the measures themselves
using sliced projections for instances or regularize the OT
problem using `2 (Blondel et al., 2018) or entropy (Cuturi, 2013). While `2 preserves some of the sparsity of the
non-regularized optimal transportation plan, entropy regularization leads to an approximation of the Wasserstein
distance that can be solved using a fast and parallelizable
GPU-friendly algorithm: the celebrated Sinkhorn’s algorithm (Cuturi, 2013). In the rest of this paper, we will focus
on entropic OT. Let C be a non-negative cost function on
Rd ⇥ Rd such that C(x, y) = 0 , x = y. For instance, a
usual choice is C(x, y) = kx yk2 . Entropy regularized
OT between ↵, 2 P(Rd ) with the reference measures
m1 , m2 2 P(Rd ) is defined as:
def

1 ,m2
OTm
(↵, ) =
"
Z
min
C d⇡ + " KL(⇡|m1 ⌦ m2 ) ,
d

d

⇡2P(R ⇥R )
⇡#1 =↵,⇡#2 =

Rd⇥d

(2)

