Error-Bounded Correction of Noisy Labels

Songzhu Zheng 1 Pengxiang Wu 2 Aman Goswami 3 Mayank Goswami 4 Dimitris Metaxas 2 Chao Chen 5

Abstract
To collect large scale annotated data, it is inevitable to introduce label noise, i.e., incorrect
class labels. To be robust against label noise,
many successful methods rely on the noisy classifiers (i.e., models trained on the noisy training
data) to determine whether a label is trustworthy.
However, it remains unknown why this heuristic
works well in practice. In this paper, we provide
the first theoretical explanation for these methods.
We prove that the prediction of a noisy classifier
can indeed be a good indicator of whether the
label of a training data is clean. Based on the
theoretical result, we propose a novel algorithm
that corrects the labels based on the noisy classifier prediction. The corrected labels are consistent with the true Bayesian optimal classifier with
high probability. We incorporate our label correction algorithm into the training of deep neural
networks and train models that achieve superior
testing performance on multiple public datasets.

1. Introduction
Label noise is ubiquitous in real world data. It may be
caused by unintentional mistakes of manual or automatic annotators (Yan et al., 2014; Andreas et al., 2017). It may also
be introduced by malicious attackers (Jacob et al., 2017).
Noisy labels impair the performance of a model (Smyth
et al., 1994; Brodley & Friedl, 1999), especially a deep neural network, which tends to have strong memorization power
(Frénay & Verleysen, 2014; Zhang et al., 2017). Improving
the robustness of a model trained with noisy labels is a crucial yet challenging task in many applications (Volodymyr
1

Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics, Stony
Brook University, NY, USA 2 Department of Computer Science,
Rutgers University, NJ, USA 3 Bain & Company, Bangalore, India. 4 Department of Computer Science, City University of New
York, NY, USA 5 Department of Biomedical Informatics, Stony
Brook University, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Songzhu Zheng
<zheng.songzhu@stonybrook.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

& Geoffrey E., 2012; Wu et al., 2018).
Many methods have been proposed to train a robust model
on data with label noise. One may re-calibrate the model by
explicitly estimating a noise transition matrix, namely, the
probability of one label being corrupted into another (Goldberger & Ben-Reuven, 2017; Patrini et al., 2017). One may
also introduce hidden layers (Reed et al., 2014), prior on
data distribution (Lee et al., 2019) or modified loss function
(Van Rooyen et al., 2015; Shen & Sanghavi, 2019; Zhang
& Sabuncu, 2018) to improve the robustness of the model.
However, these methods either assume strong global priors on the data or lack sufficient supervision for the neural
network to achieve satisfying performance. Furthermore,
global model-correction mechanisms tend to rely on a few
parameters; estimating these parameters can be challenging
and the error will lead to failing of the training.
To adapt to heterogeneous noise pattern and to fully exploit the power of deep neural networks, data-re-calibrating
methods have been proposed to focus on individual data
instead of an overall model adjustment (Malach & ShalevShwartz, 2017; Jiang et al., 2018; Han et al., 2018; Tanaka
et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018; Ren et al., 2018; Cheng
et al., 2020). These methods learn to re-calibrate the model
on each individual datum depending on its own context.
They gradually collect clean data whose labels are trustworthy. As more clean data are collected, the quality of
the trained models improves. These methods slowly accumulate useful/trustworthy information and eventually attain
state-of-the-art quality models.
Despite the success of data-re-calibrating methods, their
underlying mechanism remains elusive. It is unclear why
the neural nets trained on noisy labels can help select clean
data. A theoretical underpinning will not only explain the
phenomenon, but also advance the methodology. One major challenge for these methods is to control the data recalibration quality. It is hard to monitor the model’s recalibrating decision on individual data. An aggressive selection of clean data can unknowingly accumulate irreversible
errors. On the other hand, an overly-conservative strategy
can be very slow in training, or stops with insufficient clean
data and mediocre models. A theoretical guarantee will
help develop models with self-assurance that the decision
on each datum is reasonably close to the truth.

