RIFLE: Backpropagation in Depth for Deep Transfer Learning through
Re-Initializing the Fully-connected LayEr

Xingjian Li * 1 2 Haoyi Xiong * 1 Haozhe An 1 Chengzhong Xu 2 3 Dejing Dou 1

Abstract
Fine-tuning the deep convolution neural network
(CNN) using a pre–trained model helps transfer knowledge learned from larger datasets to
the target task. While the accuracy could be
largely improved even when the training dataset
is small, the transfer learning outcome is usually constrained by the pre-trained model with
close CNN weights (Liu et al., 2019), as the
backpropagation here brings smaller updates to
deeper CNN layers. In this work, we propose RIFLE– a simple yet effective strategy that deepens backpropagation in transfer learning settings,
through periodically Re-Initializing the Fullyconnected LayEr with random scratch during the
fine-tuning procedure. RIFLE brings meaningful updates to the weights of deep CNN layers
and improves low-level feature learning, while
the effects of randomization can be easily converged throughout the overall learning procedure. The experiments show that the use of RIFLE significantly improves deep transfer learning accuracy on a wide range of datasets, outperforming known tricks for the similar purpose, such as Dropout, DropConnect, Stochastic
Depth, Disturb Label and Cyclic Learning Rate,
under the same settings with 0.5%–2% higher
testing accuracy. Empirical cases and ablation
studies further indicate RIFLE brings meaningful updates to deep CNN layers with accuracy
improved.

*
Equal contribution 1 Big Data Lab, Baidu Research, Beijing, China 2 Faculty of Science and Technology, University of
Macau, Macau SAR, China 3 State Key Lab of IOTSC, Department of Computer Science, University of Macau, Macau
SAR, China. Correspondence to: Xingjian Li, Haoyi Xiong
<{lixingjian,xionghaoyi}@baidu.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

1. Introduction
Blessed by tons of labeled datasets that are open to the public, deep learning (LeCun et al., 2015) has shown enormous success for image classification and object detection tasks in the past few years. In addition to training a
deep convolution neural network (CNN) from scratch with
empty or random initialization, a more effective way might
be fine-tuning a deep CNN using the weights of a pre–
trained model, e.g., ResNet-50 trained using ImageNet, as
the starting point (Kornblith et al., 2019), since the learning
dynamics would converge to a local minima of loss that is
close to its starting point (Neyshabur et al., 2015; Soudry
et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019). To the end, such deep transfer learning paradigms reuse convolutional filters of welltrained models (Yosinski et al., 2014; Long et al., 2015),
and are capable of extracting useful features from the target dataset for better classification after a short fine-tuning
procedure.
While above fine-tuning practice greatly enhances the accuracy of image classification even when the training
dataset is small (Bengio, 2012; Kornblith et al., 2019),
the room for further enhancement still exists. Due to
the use of well-trained filters, the fine-tuning procedure
frequently converges very quickly, while most of CNN
weights have not been updated sufficiently. Although the
fully-connected (FC) layer would be fine tuned with superior performance to classify the training datasets (Zhang
et al., 2017), the features learned for classifications might
still be largely based on the source datasets of transfer
learning rather than the target one (Yosinski et al., 2014;
Long et al., 2015). From the error backpropagation’s perspectives (Rumelhart et al.; LeCun et al., 1988), the fast
convergence of the FC layer leads to trivial weight updates to CNN (Liu et al., 2019), while the updates would
become smaller and smaller with the depth of CNN layers (Srivastava et al., 2015). In such way, compared to
the CNN weights learned from the target training dataset
directly, the fine-tuning procedure seldom changes or improves the deep CNN layers (Liu et al., 2019). Our research hereby assumes that the in-depth backpropagation
could further improve the performance of transfer learning
based on pre–trained models.

