Distribution Augmentation for Generative Modeling

Heewoo Jun * 1 Rewon Child * 1 Mark Chen 1 John Schulman 1 Aditya Ramesh 1 Alec Radford 1
Ilya Sutskever 1

Abstract
We present distribution augmentation (DistAug),
a simple and powerful method of regularizing
generative models. Our approach applies augmentation functions to data and, importantly, conditions the generative model on the specific function
used. Unlike typical data augmentation, DistAug
allows usage of functions which modify the target
density, enabling aggressive augmentations more
commonly seen in supervised and self-supervised
learning. We demonstrate this is a more effective
regularizer than standard methods, and use it to
train a 152M parameter autoregressive model on
CIFAR-10 to 2.56 bits per dim (relative to the
state-of-the-art 2.80). Samples from this model
attain FID 12.75 and IS 8.40, outperforming the
majority of GANs. We further demonstrate the
technique is broadly applicable across model architectures and problem domains.

1. Introduction
Data augmentation is an indispensable tool in the training of
deep neural networks, especially for discriminative (Cubuk
et al., 2019), semi-supervised (Xie et al., 2019a;b), and
self-supervised (Hénaff et al., 2019; He et al., 2019) vision
tasks. However, data augmentation has not played a role
in many of the recent advances on pixel-level generative
modeling (Salimans et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2018; Menick
& Kalchbrenner, 2018; Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018; Ho et al.,
2019; Parmar et al., 2018; Child et al., 2019). This is partly
caused by the difficulty of applying data augmentation to
generative modeling: aggressive augmentation functions
can change the data distribution the model learns, distorting
its samples and incurring a penalty to its log-likelihood.

Figure 1. Unconditional samples from a large autoregressive model
trained on CIFAR-10 with DistAug. In addition to attaining stateof-the-art likelihoods, at temperature 0.94 this model generates
samples competitive with or superior to many GANs (FID 12.75,
IS 8.40).

Equal contribution 1 OpenAI, San Francisco, California, USA.
Correspondence to: Heewoo Jun <heewoo@openai.com>, Rewon
Child <rewon@openai.com>.

To illustrate, consider a supervised learning setting where
the distribution of interest is over a small number of class
variables y given a high-dimensional image x. In this case,
many transformations t(x) can be applied to x such that
the conditional distribution p(y|t(x)) remains unchanged.
Generative models, in contrast, seek to learn the distribution p(x) itself, and as such any t(x) we use must result in
images which are also likely under the original distribution.
Even mild augmentation functions, however, (like adding
Gaussian noise, shifting/rotating and padding with null pixels, or cutting out portions of the image), result in images
very unlikely under the original distribution. Models trained
with these augmentations may fit the original distribution
poorly and generate distorted samples.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

This work introduces distribution augmentation (DistAug),
a method of regularizing generative models even under
augmentations which distort the data distribution. The

*

