Strength from Weakness: Fast Learning Using Weak Supervision

Joshua Robinson 1 Stefanie Jegelka 1 Suvrit Sra 1

Abstract
We study generalization properties of weakly supervised learning, that is, learning where only a
few “strong” labels (the actual target for prediction) are present but many more “weak” labels are
available. In particular, we show that pretraining
using weak labels and finetuning using strong can
accelerate the learning rate for the strong task to
the fast rate of O(1/n), where n is the number
of strongly labeled data points. This acceleration
can happen even if, by itself, the strongly labeled
√
data admits only the slower O(1/ n) rate. The
acceleration depends continuously on the number
of weak labels available, and on the relation between the two tasks. Our theoretical results are
reflected empirically across a range of tasks and
illustrate how weak labels speed up learning on
the strong task.

1. Introduction
While access to large amounts of labeled data has enabled
the training of big models with great successes in applied
machine learning, labeled data remains a key bottleneck.
In numerous settings (e.g., scientific measurements, experiments, medicine), obtaining a large number of labels can be
prohibitively expensive, error prone, or otherwise infeasible.
When labels are scarce, a common alternative is to use additional sources of information: “weak labels” that contain
information about the “strong” target task and are more
readily available, e.g., a related task, or noisy versions of
strong labels from non-experts or cheaper measurements.
Such a setting is called weakly supervised learning, and,
given its great practical relevance, it has received much attention (Zhou, 2018; Pan & Yang, 2009; Liao et al., 2005;
Dai et al., 2007; Huh et al., 2016). A prominent example
that enabled breakthrough results in computer vision and is
now standard is pretraining, where one first trains a com1 Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139.
Correspondence to: Joshua Robinson <joshrob@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

plex model on a related, large data task, and to then uses
the learned features for finetuning on the small-data target
task (Girshick et al., 2014; Donahue et al., 2014; Zeiler &
Fergus, 2014; Sun et al., 2017). Numerous approaches to
weakly supervised learning have succeeded in a variety of
tasks; beyond computer vision (Oquab et al., 2015; Durand
et al., 2017; Carreira & Zisserman, 2017; Fries et al., 2019).
Examples include clinical text classification (Wang et al.,
2019), sentiment analysis (Medlock & Briscoe, 2007), social media content tagging (Mahajan et al., 2018) and many
others. Weak supervision is also closely related to unsupervised learning methods such as complementary and contrastive learning (Xu et al., 2019; Chen & Batmanghelich,
2019; Arora et al., 2019), and particularly to self-supervised
learning (Doersch et al., 2015), where feature maps learned
via supervised training on artificially constructed tasks have
been found to even outperform ImageNet learned features on
certain downstream tasks (Misra & van der Maaten, 2019).
In this paper, we make progress towards building theoretical
foundations for weakly supervised learning, i.e., where we
have a few strong labels, but too few to learn a good model
in a conventional supervised manner. Specifically we ask,
Under what conditions can large amounts of
weakly labeled data provably help us learn
a better model than strong labels alone?
We answer this question by analyzing a generic feature
learning algorithm that learns features by pretraining on
the weak task, and fine-tunes a model on those features for
the strong downstream task. While generalization bounds
√
for supervised learning typically scale as O(1/ n), where
n is the number of strongly labeled data points, we show
that the pretrain-finetune algorithm can do better, achieving
e n−γ ) for 1/2 ≤ γ ≤ 1, where
the superior rate of O(
γ depends on how much weak data is available, and on
generalization error for the weak task. This rate smoothly
e 1/n) in the best case, when weak
interpolates between O(
data is plentiful and the weak task is not too difficult, and
slower rates when less weak data is available or the weak
task itself is hard.
One instantiation of our results for categorical weak labels
√
says that, if we can train a model with O(1/ m) excess risk
for the weak task (where m is the amount of weak data),
and m = Ω(n2 ), then we obtain a “fast rate” e
O(1/n) on the

