The Sample Complexity of Best-k Items Selection from Pairwise Comparisons

Wenbo Ren 1 Jia Liu 2 Ness B. Shroff 1 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
1.1. Background and Motivation

This paper studies the sample complexity (aka
number of comparisons) bounds for the active
best-k items selection from pairwise comparisons.
From a given set of items, the learner can make
pairwise comparisons on every pair of items, and
each comparison returns an independent noisy result about the preferred item. At any time, the
learner can adaptively choose a pair of items to
compare according to past observations (i.e., active learning). The learner’s goal is to find the (approximately) best-k items with a given confidence,
while trying to use as few comparisons as possible.
In this paper, we study two problems: (i) finding
the probably approximately correct (PAC) best-k
items and (ii) finding the exact best-k items, both
under strong stochastic transitivity and stochastic triangle inequality. For PAC best-k items selection, we first show a lower bound and then
propose an algorithm whose sample complexity
upper bound matches the lower bound up to a constant factor. For the exact best-k items selection,
we first prove a worst-instance lower bound. We
then propose two algorithms based on our PAC
best items selection algorithms: one works for
k = 1 and is sample complexity optimal up to a
loglog factor, and the other works for all values
of k and is sample complexity optimal up to a log
factor.

1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA 2 Department of Computer
Science, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, USA 3 Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA. Correspondence to: Wenbo Ren
<ren.453@osu.edu>, Jia Liu <jialiu@iastate.edu>, Ness B.
Shroff <shroff.11@osu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

Ranking from pairwise comparisons (or pairwise ranking)
is a fundamental problem that has been widely applied to
various areas, such as recommender systems, searching,
crowd-sourcing, and social choices. In a pairwise ranking
system, the learner wants to learn the full or partial ranking
(e.g., best-k items) of a set of items from noisy pairwise
comparisons, where items can refer to various things such as
products, posts, choices, and pages; and comparisons refer
to processes or queries that indicate qualities or users’ preferences over the items. In this paper, for simplicity, we use
the terms “item”, “comparison”, and “users’ preference”.
A noisy pairwise comparison is a query over two items that
returns a noisy result about the preferred one. Here, “noisy”
simply means that the comparison could return the less preferred one, which may be the result of the uncertain nature
of physics, machines, or humans. Since the comparisons
can reveal some information about the users’ preferences,
by repeatedly comparing these items, the learner may find
a reasonable global ranking (e.g., (Hunter, 2004)) or local
ranking (e.g., (Park et al., 2015)) of these items.
Based on when the comparisons are generated, the ranking
problems can be divided into two classes: passive ranking
(e.g., (Park et al., 2015; Shah et al., 2017)) and active ranking (e.g., (Pfeiffer et al., 2012; Chen et al., 2013; Falahatgar
et al., 2017a; Ren et al., 2019)). In passive ranking, the
learner first has all the comparison data and then develops
a reasonable ranking. In active ranking, the learner does
not have all the comparison data at the beginning, and can
adaptively choose items to compare during the learning
process. This paper studies the fully active ranking (or active learning), where for each comparison, the learner can
adaptively choose two items to compare according to past
observations. Chen et al. (2013) showed that in a crowdsourcing dataset, their active ranking algorithm uses only
3% comparisons and achieves almost the same performance
as passive ranking.
This paper focuses on the best-k-items-selection problem.
For many applications, ranking all the items may be neither
efficient nor necessary. For instance, in a video sharing
website, filters may generate hundreds of candidate videos,

