Lookahead-Bounded Q-Learning

Ibrahim El Shar 1 Daniel R. Jiang 1

Abstract
We introduce the lookahead-bounded Q-learning
(LBQL) algorithm, a new, provably convergent
variant of Q-learning that seeks to improve the
performance of standard Q-learning in stochastic
environments through the use of “lookahead” upper and lower bounds. To do this, LBQL employs
previously collected experience and each iteration’s state-action values as dual feasible penalties to construct a sequence of sampled information relaxation problems. The solutions to
these problems provide estimated upper and lower
bounds on the optimal value, which we track via
stochastic approximation. These quantities are
then used to constrain the iterates to stay within
the bounds at every iteration. Numerical experiments on benchmark problems show that LBQL
exhibits faster convergence and more robustness
to hyperparameters when compared to standard
Q-learning and several related techniques. Our
approach is particularly appealing in problems
that require expensive simulations or real-world
interactions.

1

Introduction

Since its introduction by Watkins (1989), Q-learning has
become one of the most widely-used reinforcement learning
(RL) algorithms (Sutton & Barto, 2018), due to its conceptual simplicity, ease of implementation, and convergence
guarantees (Jaakkola et al., 1994; Tsitsiklis, 1994; Bertsekas
& Tsitsiklis, 1996). However, practical, real-world applications of Q-learning are diffcult due to the often high cost of
obtaining data and experience from real environments, along
with other issues such as overestimation bias (Szepesvári,
1998; Even-Dar & Mansour, 2003; Lee & Powell, 2019).
In this paper, we address these challenges for a specifc
class of problems with partially known transition models.
We write the system dynamics as st+1 = f (st , at , wt+1 ),
1
Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Pittsburgh,
PA, USA. Correspondence to: Ibrahim El Shar <ije8@pitt.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

where st and at are the current state and action, st+1 is the
next state, wt+1 is random noise, and f is the transition
function. We focus on problems where f is known, but the
noise wt+1 can only be observed through interactions with
the environment. This type of model is the norm in the control (Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 1996) and operations research
(Powell, 2007) communities. In this work, we propose
and analyze a new RL algorithm called lookahead-bounded
Q-learning (LBQL), which exploits knowledge of the transition function f to improve the effciency of Q-learning and
address overestimation bias. It does so by making better use
of the observed data through estimating upper and lower
bounds using a technique called information relaxation (IR)
(Brown et al., 2010).
Indeed, there are abundant real-world examples that fall into
this subclass of problems, as we now illustrate with a few
examples. In inventory control, the transition from one inventory state to the next is a well-specifed function f given
knowledge of a stochastic demand wt+1 (Kunnumkal &
Topaloglu, 2008). For vehicle routing, f is often simply the
routing decision itself, while wt+1 are exogenous demands
that require observation (Secomandi, 2001). In energy operations, a typical setting is to optimize storage that behaves
through linear transitions f together with unpredictable renewable supply, wt+1 (Kim & Powell, 2011). In portfolio
optimization, f is the next portfolio, and wt+1 represents
random prices (Rogers, 2002). In Section 5 of this paper,
we discuss in detail another application domain that follows
this paradigm: repositioning and spatial dynamic pricing
for car sharing (He et al., 2019; Bimpikis et al., 2019).
Although we specialize to problems with partially known
transition dynamics, this should not be considered restrictive: in fact, our proposed algorithm can be integrated with
the framework of model-based RL to handle the standard
model-free RL setting, where f is constantly being learned.
We leave this extension to future work.
Main Contributions. We make the following methodological and empirical contributions in this paper.
1. We propose a novel algorithm that takes advantage
of IR theory and Q-learning to generate upper and
lower bounds on the optimal value. This allows our
algorithm to mitigate the effects of maximization bias,
while making better use of the collected experience and

