FACT: A Diagnostic for Group Fairness Trade-offs

Joon Sik Kim 1 2 Jiahao Chen 3 Ameet Talwalkar 1 4

Abstract
Group fairness, a class of fairness notions that
measure how different groups of individuals are
treated differently according to their protected
attributes, has been shown to conflict with one
another, often with a necessary cost in loss of
model’s predictive performance. We propose a
general diagnostic that enables systematic characterization of these trade-offs in group fairness. We
observe that the majority of group fairness notions
can be expressed via the fairness–confusion tensor, which is the confusion matrix split according
to the protected attribute values. We frame several
optimization problems that directly optimize both
accuracy and fairness objectives over the elements
of this tensor, which yield a general perspective
for understanding multiple trade-offs including
group fairness incompatibilities. It also suggests
an alternate post-processing method for designing
fair classifiers. On synthetic and real datasets, we
demonstrate the use cases of our diagnostic, particularly on understanding the trade-off landscape
between accuracy and fairness.

1. Introduction
As machine learning continues to be more widely used for
applications with societal impact such as credit decisioning,
predictive policing, and employment applicant screening,
practitioners face regulatory, ethical, and legal challenges
to prove whether or not their models are fair (Crawford
et al., 2019). To provide quantitative tests of model fairness,
the practitioners further need to choose between multiple
definitions of fairness that exist in the machine learning
literature (Calders et al., 2009; Žliobaitė, 2015; Narayanan,
2018). Among them is a class of definitions called group
1

Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, USA 2 Work paritally done during an internship at JP
Morgan 3 JP Morgan AI Research, New York, USA 4 Determined
AI, San Francisco, USA. Correspondence to: Joon Sik Kim
<joonkim@cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

fairness, which measures how a group of individuals with
certain protected attributes are treated differently from other
groups. This notion is widely studied as a concept of disparate impact in the legal context, and one specific instance
of this notion was enforced as a law for fair employment
process back in 1978 (Biddle, 2006). From a technical point
of view however, several notions of group fairness have been
shown to conflict with one another (Kleinberg et al., 2017;
Chouldechova, 2017), sometimes with a necessary cost in
loss of accuracy (Liu et al., 2019). Such considerations
complicate the practical development and assessment of
machine learning models designed to satisfy group fairness,
as the conditions under which these trade-offs must necessarily occur can be too abstract to understand. Previous
works on these trade-offs have been presented in ad hoc and
definition-specific manner, which further calls for a more
general perspective addressing the trade-offs in practice.
As an example, suppose an engineer is responsible for training a loan prediction model from a large user dataset, subject
to mandatory group fairness requirements shaped by regulatory concerns. She has many choices for how to train this
fair model, with fairness enforced before (Kamiran et al.,
2010; Zemel et al., 2013; Madras et al., 2018; Samadi et al.,
2018; Song et al., 2019; Tan et al., 2020), during (Zafar
et al., 2015; 2017), or after (Dwork et al., 2012; Feldman
et al., 2015; Hardt et al., 2016) training. However, she must
resort to trial and error to determine which of these myriad
approaches, if any, will produce a compliant model with sufficient performance1 to satisfy business needs. It may even
turn out that despite her best efforts, the fairness constraints
set by the regulators are actually impossible to satisfy to
begin with, due to limitations intrinsic to the prediction task
and data at hand. If there was a tool to understand the potential trade-offs exhibited by the model, even before training,
it would be easier for multiple parties to effectively reconcile
the conflicting components in designing fair classifiers.
Motivated by such practical considerations, we propose the
FACT (FAirness-Confusion Tensor) diagnostic for exploring
the trade-offs involving group fairness: the diagnostic provides a general framework under which the practitioners can
understand both fairness–fairness trade-offs and fairness–
1

In this work, performance refers to classical metrics derived
from the confusion matrix, e.g., accuracy, precision and fairness
notions are not part of it.

