Controlling Overestimation Bias with Truncated Mixture of Continuous
Distributional Quantile Critics

Arsenii Kuznetsov 1 Pavel Shvechikov 1 2 Alexander Grishin 1 3 Dmitry Vetrov 1 3

Abstract
The overestimation bias is one of the major impediments to accurate off-policy learning. This
paper investigates a novel way to alleviate the
overestimation bias in a continuous control setting. Our method—Truncated Quantile Critics,
TQC,—blends three ideas: distributional representation of a critic, truncation of critics prediction, and ensembling of multiple critics. Distributional representation and truncation allow for arbitrary granular overestimation control, while ensembling provides additional score improvements.
TQC outperforms the current state of the art on all
environments from the continuous control benchmark suite, demonstrating 25% improvement on
the most challenging Humanoid environment.

1. Introduction
Sample efficient off-policy reinforcement learning demands
accurate approximation of the Q-function. Quality of approximation is key for stability and performance, since it is
the cornerstone for temporal difference target computation,
and action selection in value-based methods (Mnih et al.,
2013), or policy optimization in continuous actor-critic settings (Haarnoja et al., 2018a; Fujimoto et al., 2018b).
In continuous domains, policy optimization relies on gradients of the Q-function approximation, sensing and exploiting erroneous positive biases. Recently, Fujimoto et al.
(2018b) significantly improved the performance of a continuous policy by introducing a novel way to alleviate the
overestimation bias (Thrun & Schwartz, 1993). We continue this line of research and propose an alternative highly
competitive method for controlling overestimation bias.
1

Samsung AI center, Moscow, Russia 2 National Research University Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russia 3 SamsungHSE Laboratory, National Research University Higher School
of Economics, Moscow, Russia. Correspondence to: Arsenii
Kuznetsov <brickerino@gmail.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Thrun & Schwartz (1993) elucidate the overestimation as
a consequence of Jensen’s inequality: the maximum of the
Q-function over actions is not greater than the expected
maximum of noisy (approximate) Q-function. Specifically,
for any action-dependent random noise U (a) such that
∀a EU [ U (a) ] = 0,
max Q(s, a) = max EU [ Q(s, a) + U (a) ]
a
a
h
i
≤ EU max{Q(s, a) + U (a)} .

(1)

a

In practice, the noise U (a) may arise for various reasons and
from various sources, such as spontaneous errors in function approximation, Q-function invalidation due to ongoing
policy optimization, stochasticity of environment, etc. Offpolicy algorithms grounded in temporal difference learning
are especially sensitive to approximation errors since errors are propagated backward through episodic time and
accumulate over the learning process.
The de facto standard for alleviating overestimations in discrete control is the double estimator (Van Hasselt, 2010;
2013). However, Fujimoto et al. (2018b) argue that for
continuous control this estimator may still overestimate in
highly variable state-action space regions, and propose to
promote underestimation by taking the minimum over two
separate approximators. These approximators constitute
naturally an ensemble, the size of which controls the intensity of underestimation: more approximators correspond to
more severe underestimation (Lan et al., 2020). We argue,
that this approach, while very successful in practice, has a
few shortcomings:
• The overestimation control is coarse: it is impossible to take the minimum over a fractional number of
approximators (see Section 4.1).
• The aggregation with min is wasteful: it ignores all estimates except the minimal one, diminishing the power
of the ensemble of approximators.
We address these shortcomings with a novel method called
Truncated Quantile Critics (TQC). In the design of TQC, we
draw on three ideas: distributional representation of a critic,
truncation of approximated distribution, and ensembling.

