Healing Products of Gaussian Process Experts

Samuel Cohen * 1 Rendani Mbuvha * 2 3 Tshilidzi Marwala 2 Marc Peter Deisenroth 1 2

Abstract
Gaussian processes (GPs) are nonparametric
Bayesian models that have been applied to regression and classification problems. One of the
approaches to alleviate their cubic training cost
is the use of local GP experts trained on subsets of the data. In particular, product-of-expert
models combine the predictive distributions of local experts through a tractable product operation.
While these expert models allow for massively distributed computation, their predictions typically
suffer from erratic behaviour of the mean or uncalibrated uncertainty quantification. By calibrating
predictions via a tempered softmax weighting, we
provide a solution to these problems for multiple
product-of-expert models, including the generalised product of experts and the robust Bayesian
committee machine. Furthermore, we leverage
the optimal transport literature and propose a new
product-of-expert model that combines predictions of local experts by computing their Wasserstein barycenter, which can be applied to both
regression and classification.

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes (GPs) (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006)
are nonparametric stochastic processes that have been applied extensively to regression and classification problems.
However, their cubic training and quadratic prediction cost
hinders their application in large-scale problems. Different
approaches alleviate this issue, including sparse approximations (Snelson & Ghahramani, 2006; Csato & Opper, 2002;
Quiñonero Candela & Rasmussen, 2005; Titsias, 2009), the
exploitation of structural assumptions (Wilson & Nickisch,
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University College London, UK 2 Institute of Intelligent Systems, University of Johannesburg, South Africa 3 School of Statistics and
Actuarial Science, University of the Witwatersrand, South Africa.
Correspondence to: Samuel Cohen <samuel.cohen.19@ucl.ac.uk>,
Rendani Mbuvha <rendani.mbuvha@wits.ac.za>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

2015) and local-expert models (Tresp, 2000a; Rasmussen &
Ghahramani, 2001; Cao & Fleet, 2014; Deisenroth & Ng,
2015; Rullière et al., 2018; Trapp et al., 2019).
Sparse approximations effectively reduce the rank of the
covariance matrix through inducing inputs, reducing the
training cost from O(n3 ) to O(nm2 ), where m is the number of inducing points and n is the size of the training dataset.
Optimisation consists of jointly learning kernel hyperparameters and inducing locations. In particular, Titsias (2009)
treats inducing locations as variational parameters and optimises them and the kernel hyperparameters by maximising
a lower bound on the marginal likelihood. Hensman et al.
(2013) scale this approach by introducing mini-batching,
reducing the complexity to O(m3 ), while Gal et al. (2014)
reparametrise the problem to allow for distributed inference.
An alternative to sparse GP approximations is to use local experts. Here, the training dataset is partitioned into
J subsets of size m where m  n. Then, J local GP
experts are trained on each of these subsets, thereby reducing the training complexity to O(Jm3 ). Importantly, this
approach scales to large datasets because training and prediction with each expert can be distributed across computing
units (Deisenroth & Ng, 2015). For instance, Rasmussen &
Ghahramani (2001); Tresp (2000a); Trapp et al. (2019) consider mixture-of-expert models (MoEs). In particular, Trapp
et al. (2019) propose a sum-product network with localexpert GP leaves allowing for tractable and exact posterior
inference. Other approaches leverage product-of-experts
models (PoEs) (Tresp, 2000b; Cao & Fleet, 2014), whereby
a global prediction can be obtained by means of averaging
the predictions of local experts. Generalisations of these
models can control the relevance of different experts when
making predictions (Cao & Fleet, 2015; Deisenroth & Ng,
2015; Liu et al., 2018).
In this work, we focus on PoEs because closed-form inference and training are tractable, which is not the case with
typical MoEs. However, previous PoE approaches to combining predictions at test time suffer from unrealistic overor under-estimation of the variance and erratic mean behaviours. This holds especially when the number of points
m assigned to each expert is low, in which case a significant number of experts are weak (Deisenroth & Ng, 2015).
These approaches are thus not overly robust to variations

