Parameter-free, Dynamic, and Strongly-Adaptive Online Learning

Ashok Cutkosky 1 2

Abstract
We provide a new online learning algorithm that
for the first time combines several disparate notions of adaptivity. First, our algorithm obtains a
“parameter-free” regret bound that adapts to the
norm of the comparator and the squared norm of
the size of the gradients it observes. Second, it obtains a “strongly-adaptive” regret bound, so that
for any given interval
√ of length N , the regret over
the interval is Õ( N ). Finally, our algorithm obtains an optimal “dynamic” regret bound: for any
sequence of comparators with
√ path-length P , our
algorithm obtains regret Õ( P N ) over intervals
of length N . Our primary technique for achieving
these goals is a new method of combining constrained online learning regret bounds that does
not rely on an expert meta-algorithm to aggregate
learners.

1. Online Learning and Strong-Adaptivity
Online learning is a popular way to analyze iterative optimization algorithms (Shalev-Shwartz, 2011; Zinkevich,
2003). Briefly, online learning is a game played between
the learning algorithm and an environment over T rounds.
In each round, the learning algorithm outputs a vector wt
in some convex space W and then the environment reveals
a loss function `t and the learner suffers loss `t (wt ). The
goal is typically to obtain small regret:
RT (ẘ) =

T
X

`t (wt ) − `t (ẘ)

t=1

We can use this game to model the progress of an iterative
machine learning training procedure: let wt be the tth set
of model parameters output by the training algorithm and
`t be the loss on the tth minibatch. Then the regret simply
1

Google Research 2 Boston University, Boston Massachusetts, USA. Correspondence to:
Ashok Cutkosky
<ashok@cutkosky.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

measures how fast the training algorithm is able to converge
to the optimal parameters ẘ. More generally, online learning can be used to model many sequential decision making
processes in which the characteristics of the `t may change
from round to round. For example, `t may represent outcomes varying from the effects of a medical treatment to the
score obtained by a game-playing robot.
In order to achieve tractable theoretical guarantees, in this
paper we will make the common assumption that each `t is
a convex function. With this assumption, we can set gt to
be a subgradient of `t at wt and then obtain
RT (ẘ) ≤

T
X

hgt , wt − ẘi

(1)

t=1

All our results will come from upper bounding this linearized regret, so for simplicity in the rest of this paper we
assume that each loss `t is linear and use the right hand side
of (1) as the definition of the regret. This setting is often
called online linear optimization (OLO), and many popular
and successful algorithms have been designed an analyzed
for this setting (Duchi et al., 2010; McMahan & Streeter,
2010; Zinkevich, 2003)
It is well-known that in online linear optimization,√one
cannot guarantee worst-case regret better than O(DG T ),
where G = max kgt k and D = supx,y∈W kx − yk is the
diameter of the domain W , and this bound is achieved by
online gradient descent (Abernethy et al., 2008). As a result,
much of the work in online linear optimization is in designing adaptive algorithms (Hazan et al., 2008; Duchi et al.,
2010; McMahan & Streeter, 2010). These algorithms should
perform better in non-worst-case settings without sacrificing
worst-case guarantees, and typically obtain bounds of the
form:
v
u T
uX
RT (ẘ) ≤ Dt
kgt k2
t=1

The above bound achieves adaptivity to non-worst-case sequences of losses gt , but does not adapt to a non-worstcase comparison point ẘ. In order to fix this, so-called
“parameter-free” algorithms (Cutkosky & Orabona, 2018;
Kempka et al., 2019; Cutkosky & Sarlos, 2019; van der
Hoeven, 2019; Mhammedi & Koolen, 2020) obtain smaller

