Task-Oriented Active Perception and Planning in Environments
with Partially Known Semantics

Mahsa Ghasemi 1 Erdem Arinc Bulgur 2 Ufuk Topcu 2

Abstract
We consider an agent that is assigned with a temporal logic task in an environment whose semantic
representation is only partially known. We represent the semantics of the environment with a
set of state properties, called atomic propositions
over which, the agent holds a probabilistic belief
and updates it as new sensory measurements arrive. The goal is to design a joint perception and
planning strategy for the agent that realizes the
task with high probability. We develop a planning
strategy that takes the semantic uncertainties into
account and by doing so provides probabilistic
guarantees on the task success. Furthermore, as
new data arrive, the belief over the atomic propositions evolves and, subsequently, the planning
strategy adapts accordingly. We evaluate the proposed method on various finite-horizon tasks in
planar navigation settings where the empirical
results show that the proposed method provides
reliable task performance that also improves as
the knowledge about the environment enhances.

1. Introduction
An autonomous agent should simultaneously perceive its
surroundings and plan for a given task according to its current knowledge. Machine learning algorithms have been
hugely successful in dealing with different perception tasks
such as semantic segmentation and object detection while
extensive studies of control problems have led to numerous
planning algorithms with provable theoretical guarantees.
On the other hand, algorithms for joint perception and planning with the effectiveness of machine learning and the
provable guarantees from control theory do not yet exist.
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Texas at Austin 2 Department of Aerospace Engineering and
Engineering Mechanics, University of Texas at Austin. Correspondence to: Mahsa Ghasemi <mahsa.ghasemi@utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Joint perception and planning pose two fundamental challenges. The first challenge is designing an interface that
not only enables the planning to use the perception outputs but also provides a way for the perception to ask for
information-gathering strategies. The second challenge is
the well-known trade-off of exploration versus exploitation,
i.e., to what extent the agent should search for new information or to what extent it can rely on its current knowledge to
take actions.
We argue that a pivotal factor to overcome these challenges
is to associate the agent’s knowledge and the available information to the task progress. Building this association
requires compositional and structured reasoning over the
task. Examples of structured task descriptions and compositional reward functions are sub-goal sequences (Singh,
1992), linear temporal logic (Wen et al., 2015; Li et al., 2017;
Hahn et al., 2019), and reward machines (Icarte et al., 2018;
2019). Temporal logic specifications are interpretable by humans, can model a variety of tasks including non-Markovian
ones, have a structured representation as an automaton, and
are suitable for automated verification. Here, we focus on
a subclass of temporal logic specifications, namely syntactically co-safe linear temporal logic (scLTL) (Kupferman
& Vardi, 2001) that is tailored for specifying finite-horizon
tasks.
In this paper, we study a problem of joint perception and
planning under uncertainty. In particular, we consider an
agent that interacts with an environment captured by a
Markov decision process (MDP) (Puterman, 2014) and aims
to successfully perform a task expressed by an scLTL specification. Our main contribution is to employ the structured
form of a temporal logic specification to develop a taskoriented perception and planning. A temporal logic specification formally describes a task by imposing constraints
on the task-related attributes of the states, called atomic
propositions, that the agent visits. For instance, the temporal logic representation of a reach-avoid task is “avoid the
blocked states until reaching to the target state,” where the
set of atomic propositions is {blocked,target}. We model
the semantic knowledge of the agent about the environment,
called belief, through distributions over the atomic propositions. As new perception outputs arrive, the agent updates

