MetaFun: Meta-Learning with Iterative Functional Updates

Jin Xu 1 Jean-Francois Ton 1 Hyunjik Kim 2 Adam R. Kosiorek 1 3 Yee Whye Teh 1

Abstract
We develop a functional encoder-decoder approach to supervised meta-learning, where labeled data is encoded into an infinite-dimensional
functional representation rather than a finitedimensional one. Furthermore, rather than directly producing the representation, we learn a
neural update rule resembling functional gradient
descent which iteratively improves the representation. The final representation is used to condition
the decoder to make predictions on unlabeled data.
Our approach is the first to demonstrates the success of encoder-decoder style meta-learning methods like conditional neural processes on largescale few-shot classification benchmarks such
as miniImageNet and tieredImageNet, where it
achieves state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
The goal of meta-learning is to be able to generalise to new
tasks from the same task distribution as the training tasks.
In supervised meta-learning, a task can be described as making predictions on a set of unlabelled data points (target) by
effectively learning from a set of data points with labels (context). Various ideas have been proposed to tackle supervised
meta-learning from different perspectives (Andrychowicz
et al., 2016; Ravi & Larochelle, 2016; Finn et al., 2017;
Koch, 2015; Snell et al., 2017; Vinyals et al., 2016; Santoro
et al., 2016; Rusu et al., 2019). In this work, we are particularly interested in a family of meta-learning models that use
an encoder-decoder pipeline, such as Neural Processes (Garnelo et al., 2018a;b). The encoder is a permutation-invariant
function on the context that summarises the context into a
task representation, while the decoder produces a predictive
model for the targets, conditioned on the task representation.
1

Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford,
United Kingdom 2 Google DeepMind, London, United Kingdom
3
Applied AI Lab, Oxford Robotics Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Jin Xu
<jin.xu@stats.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

The objective of meta-learning is then to learn the encoder
and the decoder such that the produced predictive model
generalises well to the targets of new tasks.
Previous works in this category such as the Conditional
Neural Process (CNP) and the Neural Process (NP) (Garnelo et al., 2018a;b) use sum-pooling operations to produce
finite-dimensional, vectorial, task representations. In this
work, we investigate the idea of summarising tasks with
infinite-dimensional functional representations. Although
there is a theoretical guarantee that sum-pooling of instancewise representations can express any set function (universality) (Zaheer et al., 2017; Bloem-Reddy & Teh, 2020),
in practice CNP and NP tend to underfit the context (Kim
et al., 2019). This observation is in line with the theoretical finding that for universality, the dimension of the task
representation should be at least as large as the cardinality of the context set, if the encoder is a smooth function
Wagstaff et al. (2019). We develop a method that explicitly
uses functional representations. Here the effective dimensionality of the task representation grows with the number
of context points, which addresses the aforementioned issues of fixed-dimensional representations. Moreover, in
practice it is difficult to model interactions between data
points with only sum-pooling operations. This issue can be
partially addressed by inserting modules such as relation
networks (Sung et al., 2018; Rusu et al., 2019) or set transformers (Lee et al., 2019a) before sum-pooling. However,
only within-context but not context-target interactions can
be modelled by these modules. The construction of our
functional representation involves measuring similarities
between all data points, which naturally contains information regarding interactions between elements in either the
context or the target.
Furthermore, rather than producing the functional representation in a single pass, we develop an approach that learns
iterative updates to encode the context into the task representation. In general, learning via iterative updates is
often easier than directly learning the final representation,
because of the error-correcting opportunity at each iteration.
For example, an iterative parameterisation of the encoder
in Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) has been demonstrated
to be effective in reducing the amortisation gap (Marino
et al., 2018), while in meta-learning, both learning to learn
methods (Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Ravi & Larochelle,

