Projective Preferential Bayesian Optimization

Petrus Mikkola 1 Milica Todorović 2 Jari J¨arvi 2 Patrick Rinke 2 Samuel Kaski 1 3

Abstract
Bayesian optimization is an effective method for
fnding extrema of a black-box function. We
propose a new type of Bayesian optimization
for learning user preferences in high-dimensional
spaces. The central assumption is that the underlying objective function cannot be evaluated directly, but instead a minimizer along a projection
can be queried, which we call a projective preferential query. The form of the query allows for
feedback that is natural for a human to give, and
which enables interaction. This is demonstrated
in a user experiment in which the user feedback
comes in the form of optimal position and orientation of a molecule adsorbing to a surface. We
demonstrate that our framework is able to fnd a
global minimum of a high-dimensional black-box
function, which is an infeasible task for existing
preferential Bayesian optimization frameworks
that are based on pairwise comparisons.

Figure 1. An illustration of a projective preferential query on
molecular properties: in which rotation is the molecule most likely
to bind to the surface. Here, x ∈ X describes the location and
orientation of a molecule as a vector x = (X, Y, Z, a, b, c). In the
fgure, the projective preferential query (ξ, x) fnds the optimal
rotation along the horizontal plane, defned by the coordinate b.
This corresponds to setting ξi = 0 to all coordinates i except the
one corresponding to b, and by rotating the molecule the expert
then gives the optimal value α∗ that corresponds to the optimal
value for coordinate b. The other coordinates are kept fxed (these
are determined by x).

1. Introduction
Let f : X → R
be a black-box function defned on a
QD
hypercube X = d=1 [ad , bd ] where D ≥ 2. Without loss
of generality we assume that 0 ∈ X . The objective is to fnd
a global minimizer
x∗ = argmin f (x).

(1)

x∈X

We assume, as in Preferential Bayesian Optimization (PBO,
González et al., 2017), that f is not directly accessible. In
PBO, queries to f can done in pairs of points x, x0 ∈ X ,
and the binary feedback indicates whether f (x) > f (x0 ). In
contrast, in our work we assume that queries to f are be done
1
Helsinki Institute for Information Technology HIIT, Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Espoo, Finland 2 Department of Applied Physics, Aalto University, Espoo,
Finland 3 The University of Manchester, UK. Correspondence
to: Petrus Mikkola <petrus.mikkola@aalto.f>, Samuel Kaski
<samuel.kaski@aalto.f>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

over the projection onto a projection vector ξ ∈ Ξ ⊂ X .
The feedback is the optimal scalar projection, that is, the
length α∗ of the projection in the direction ξ. We assume
that there are zero coordinates in ξ, and these coordinates
are set to fxed values described by a reference vector x ∈ X .
Formally, given a query (ξ, x), the feedback is obtained as
a minimizer over the possible scalar projections,

α∗ = argmin f (αξ + x),

(2)

α∈Iξ

where Iξ ≡ {α ∈ R|αξ + x ∈ X }.
What are then natural use cases for such projective preferential queries? The main motivation comes from humans
serving as the oracles. The form of the query enables effcient learning of user preferences over choice sets in which
each choice has multiple attributes, and in particular over
continuous choice sets. An important application is knowledge elicitation from trained professionals (doctors, physi-

