Familywise Error Rate Control by Interactive Unmasking

Boyan Duan 1 Aaditya Ramdas 1 2 Larry Wasserman 1 2

Abstract

when µ < 0, it has nondecreasing density. A low p-value
suggests evidence to reject the null hypothesis.

We propose a method for multiple hypothesis testing with familywise error rate (FWER) control,
called the i-FWER test. Most testing methods
are predefined algorithms that do not allow modifications after observing the data. However, in
practice, analysts tend to choose a promising algorithm after observing the data; unfortunately,
this violates the validity of the conclusion. The
i-FWER test allows much flexibility: a human
(or a computer program acting on the human’s
behalf) may adaptively guide the algorithm in a
data-dependent manner. We prove that our test
controls FWER if the analysts adhere to a particular protocol of masking and unmasking. We
demonstrate via numerical experiments the power
of our test under structured non-nulls, and then
explore new forms of masking.

Recent work on testing focuses on a large number of hypotheses, referred to as multiple testing, driven by various
applications in Genome-wide Association Studies, medicine,
brain imaging, etc. (see (Farcomeni, 2008; Goeman & Solari, 2014) and references therein). In such a setup, we
are given n null hypotheses {Hi }ni=1 and their p-values
P1 , . . . , Pn . A multiple testing method examines the pvalues, possibly together with some side/prior information,
and decides whether to reject each hypothesis (i.e., infers
which ones are the non-nulls). Let H0 be the set of hypotheses that are truly null and R be the set of rejected
hypotheses, then V = |H0 ∩ R| is the number of erroneous
rejections. This paper considers a classical error metric,
familywise error rate:
FWER := P(V ≥ 1),

1. Introduction
Hypothesis testing is a critical instrument in scientific research to quantify the significance of a discovery. For example, suppose an observation Z ∈ R follows a Gaussian
distribution with mean µ and unit variance. We wish to
distinguish between the following null and alternative hypotheses regarding the mean value:
H0 : µ ≤ 0

versus

H1 : µ > 0.

(1)

A test decides whether to reject the null hypothesis, usually
by calculating a p-value: the probability of observing an
outcome at least as extreme as the observed data under
the null hypothesis. In the above example, the p-value is
P = 1 − Φ(Z), where Φ is the cumulative distribution
function (CDF) of a standard Gaussian. When the true
mean µ is exactly zero, the p-value is uniformly distributed;
1
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Carnegie
Mellon University 2 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie
Mellon University.
Correspondence to: Boyan Duan
<boyand@stat.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

which is the probability of making any false rejection. Given
a fixed level α ∈ (0, 1), a good test should have valid error
control that FWER ≤ α, and high power, defined as the
expected proportion of rejected non-nulls:


|R\H0 |
power := E
,
|[n]\H0 |
where [n] := {1, . . . , n} denotes the set of all hypotheses.
Most methods with FWER control follow a prespecified
algorithm (see, for instance, (Holm, 1979; Hochberg, 1988;
Bretz et al., 2009; Goeman & Solari, 2011; Tamhane & Gou,
2018) and references therein). However, in practice, analysts
tend to try out several algorithms or parameters on the same
dataset until results are “satisfying”. When a second group
repeats the same experiments, the outcomes are often not
as good. This problem in reproducibility comes from the
bias in selecting the analysis tool: researchers choose a
promising method after observing the data, which violates
the validity of error control. Nonetheless, data would greatly
help us understand the problem and choose an appropriate
method if it were allowed. This motivates us to propose
an interactive method called the i-FWER test, that (a) can
use observed data in the design of testing algorithm, and
(b) is a multi-step procedure such that a human can monitor
the performance of the current algorithm and is allowed to
adjust it at any step interactively; and still controls FWER.

