Real-Time Optimisation for Online Learning in Auctions

Lorenzo Croissant 1 Marc Abeille 1 Clément Calauzènes 1

Abstract
In display advertising, a small group of sellers
and bidders face each other in up to 1012 auctions a day. In this context, revenue maximisation via monopoly price learning is a high-value
problem for sellers. By nature, these auctions are
online and produce a very high frequency stream
of data. This results in a computational strain that
requires algorithms be real-time. Unfortunately,
existing methods
inherited from the batch setting
√
suffer O( t) time/memory complexity at each
update, prohibiting their use. In this paper, we
provide the first algorithm for online learning of
monopoly prices in online auctions whose update
is constant in time and memory.

Introduction
Over the last two decades, online display advertising has
become a key monetisation stream for many businesses.
The market for the trading of these ads is controlled by
a very small (< 10) number of large intermediaries who
buy and sell at auction, which means that a seller-buyer
pair might trade together in 1010 to 1012 auctions per day.
Repeated auctions on this scale raise the stakes of revenue maximisation, while making computational efficiency
a key consideration. In his 1981 seminal work on revenue
maximisation, Myerson described the revenue-maximising
auction when buyers’ bid distributions are known. In the
context of online display ads these distributions are private,
but the large volume of data collected by sellers on buyers
opens the way to learning revenue maximising auctions.
Optimal vs. tractable. The learning problem associated
with the Myerson auction has infinite pseudo-dimension
(Morgenstern & Roughgarden, 2015), making it unlearnable (Pollard, 1984). 2nd -price auctions with personalised
reserve prices (i.e. different for each bidder) stand as the
1
Criteo AI Lab, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Lorenzo
Croissant <ld.croissant@criteo.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

commonly accepted compromise between optimality and
tractability. They provide a 2-approximation (Roughgarden & Wang, 2016) to the revenue of the Myerson auction
while securing finite pseudo-dimension.
Monopoly prices. 2nd -price auctions with personalised
reserves can be either eager or lazy. In the eager format, the item goes to the highest bidder amongst those who
cleared their reserve prices and goes unsold if none of them
did. In the lazy format, the item goes to the highest bidder if
he cleared his reserve price and goes unsold if he did not.
While an optimised eager version leads to better revenue
than an optimised lazy version, solving the eager auction’s
associated Empirical Risk Minimisation (ERM) problem
is NP-hard (Paes Leme et al., 2016) and even APX-hard
(Roughgarden & Wang, 2016). In contrast, solving the
ERM for the lazy version can be done in polynomial time
(Roughgarden & Wang, 2016): it amounts to computing
a bidder-specific quantity called the monopoly price. Not
only is the monopoly price the optimal reserve in the lazy
2nd -price auction, but it is also a provably good reserve in
the eager one (Roughgarden & Wang, 2016), and the optimal reserve in posted-price (Paes Leme et al., 2016). This
makes learning monopoly prices for revenue maximisation
an important and popular research direction.
Online learning. Finding the monopoly price in a repeated 2nd -price auction is a natural sequential decision
problem based on the incoming bids. All three aforementioned settings relating to the monopoly price have
been studied: posted-price (Amin et al., 2014; Blum et al.,
2004), eager (Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2014; Roughgarden &
Wang, 2016; Kleinberg & Leighton, 2003), and lazy which
we study (Blum & Hartline, 2005; Blum et al., 2004; Mohri
& Medina, 2016; Rudolph et al., 2016; Bubeck et al., 2017;
Shen et al., 2019). Each setting also corresponds to a different observability structure. The offline problems are well
understood, but no online method offers the O(1) efficiency
crucial for real-world settings. We focus, therefore, on the
key problem of learning monopoly prices, online and efficiently, in the stationary and non-stationary cases.
Structure of the paper. We propose a real-time firstorder algorithm which makes online learning of monopoly
prices computationally feasible, when interacting with sta-

