Learning to Rank Learning Curves

Martin Wistuba 1 Tejaswini Pedapati 1

Abstract
Many automated machine learning methods, such
as those for hyperparameter and neural architecture optimization, are computationally expensive because they involve training many different
model configurations. In this work, we present a
new method that saves computational budget by
terminating poor configurations early on in the
training. In contrast to existing methods, we consider this task as a ranking and transfer learning
problem. We qualitatively show that by optimizing a pairwise ranking loss and leveraging learning curves from other datasets, our model is able
to effectively rank learning curves without having to observe many or very long learning curves.
We further demonstrate that our method can be
used to accelerate a neural architecture search by
a factor of up to 100 without a significant performance degradation of the discovered architecture.
In further experiments we analyze the quality of
ranking, the influence of different model components as well as the predictive behavior of the
model.

1. Introduction
A method commonly used by human experts to speed up
the optimization of neural architectures or hyperparameters
is the early termination of iterative training processes that
are unlikely to improve the current solution. A common
technique to determine the likelihood of no improvement is
to compare the learning curve of a new configuration to the
one of the currently best configuration. This idea can also be
used to speed up automated machine learning processes. For
this purpose, it is common practice to extrapolate the partial
learning curve in order to predict the final performance of
the currently investigated model. Current extrapolation techniques have several weaknesses that make them unable to
1
IBM Research. Correspondence to: Martin Wistuba <martin.wistuba@ibm.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

realize their full potential in practice. Many of the methods
require sufficient sample learning curves to make reliable
predictions (Chandrashekaran & Lane, 2017; Klein et al.,
2017; Baker et al., 2018). Thus, the extrapolation method
for the first candidates can not be used yet, which means
more computational effort. Other methods do not have this
disadvantage, but require sufficiently long learning curves
to make reliable predictions which again means unnecessary
overhead (Domhan et al., 2015). Many of these methods
also do not take into account other information such as the
hyperparameters of the model being examined or its network
architecture.
We address the need for sample learning curves by devising
a transfer learning technique that uses learning curves from
other problems. Since the range of accuracy varies from
dataset to dataset, we are forced to consider this in our
modeling. But since we are not interested in predicting the
performance of a model anyway, we use a ranking model
that models the probability that the model currently being
investigated surpasses the best solution so far.
In order to be able to make reliable predictions for short
learning curves, we consider further characteristics of the
model such as its network architecture. We compare our
ranking method with respect to a ranking measure against
different methods on five different image classification and
four tabular regression datasets. We also show that our
method is capable of significantly accelerating neural architecture search (NAS) and hyperparameter optimization.
Furthermore, we conduct several ablation studies to provide
a better motivation of our model and its behavior.

2. Related Work
Most of the prior work for learning curve prediction is based
on the idea of extrapolating the partial learning curve by
using a combination of continuously increasing basic functions.
Domhan et al. (2015) define a set of 11 parametric basic
functions, estimate their parameters and combine them in
an ensemble. Klein et al. (2017) propose a heteroscedastic
Bayesian model which learns a weighted average of the
basic functions. Chandrashekaran & Lane (2017) do not
use basic functions but use previously observed learning

