Input-Sparsity Low Rank Approximation in Schatten Norm

Yi Li * 1 David P. Woodruff * 2

Abstract
We give the first input-sparsity time algorithms
for the rank-k low rank approximation problem
in every Schatten norm. Specifically, for a given
m×n (m ≥ n) matrix A, our algorithm computes
Y ∈ Rm×k , Z ∈ Rn×k , which, with high probability, satisfy kA − Y Z T kp ≤ (1 + ε)kA − Ak kp ,
Pn
1/p
where kM kp = ( i=1 σi (M )p )
is the Schatten p-norm of a matrix M with singular values
σ1 (M ), . . . , σn (M ), and where Ak is the best
rank-k approximation to A. Our algorithm runs
in time Õ(nnz(A) + mnαp poly(k/ε)), where
αp = 0 for p ∈ [1, 2) and αp = (ω − 1)(1 − 2/p)
for p > 2 and ω ≈ 2.374 is the exponent of matrix
multiplication. For the important case of p = 1,
which corresponds to the more “robust” nuclear
norm, we obtain Õ(nnz(A)+m·poly(k/)) time,
which was previously only known for the Frobenius norm (p = 2). Moreover, since αp < ω − 1
for every p, our algorithm has a better dependence
on n than that in the singular value decomposition
for every p. Crucial to our analysis is the use of
dimensionality reduction for Ky-Fan p-norms.

1. Introduction
A common task in processing or analyzing large-scale
datasets is to approximate a large matrix A ∈ Rm×n
(m ≥ n) with a low-rank matrix. Often this is done with
respect to the Frobenius norm, that is, the objective function
is to minimize the error kA − XkF over all rank-k matrices
X ∈ Rm×n for a rank parameter k. It is well-known that
the optimal solution is Ak = PL A = APR , where PL is the
orthogonal projection onto the top k left singular vectors of
A, and PR is the orthogonal projection onto the top k right
singular vectors of A. Typically this is found via the singu*

Equal contribution 1 School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University 2 Department
of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Yi Li <yili@ntu.edu.sg>, David Woodruff
<dwoodruf@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

lar value decomposition (SVD) of A, which is an expensive
operation.
For large matrices A this is too slow, so we instead allow for
randomized approximation algorithms in the hope of achieving a much faster running time. Formally, given an approximation parameter ε > 0, we would like to find a rank-k
matrix X for which kA − XkF ≤ (1 + ε) kA − Ak kF
with large probability. For this relaxed problem, a number of efficient methods are known, which are based on
dimensionality reduction techniques such as random projections, importance sampling, and other sketching methods,
with running times1,2 Õ(nnz(A) + m poly(k/ε)), where
nnz(A) denotes the number of non-zero entries of A. This
is significantly faster than the SVD, which takes Θ̃(mnω−1 )
time, where ω is the exponent of matrix multiplication. See
(Woodruff, 2014) for a survey.
In this work, we consider approximation error with respect
to general matrix norms, i.e., to the Schatten p-norm. The
Schatten p-norm, denoted by k · kp , is defined to be the
`p -norm of the singular values of the matrix. Below is the
formal definition of the problem.
Definition 1.1 (Low-rank Approximation). Let p ≥ 1.
Given a matrix A ∈ Rm×n , find a rank-k matrix X̂ ∈
Rm×n for which
A − X̂

≤ (1 + ε)
p

min
X:rank(X)=k

kA − Xkp .

(1)

It is a well-known fact (Mirsky’s Theorem) that the optimal
solution for general Schatten norms coincides with the optimal rank-k matrix Ak for the Frobenius norm, given by
the SVD. However, approximate solutions for the Frobenius
norm loss function may give horrible approximations for
other Schatten p-norms.
Of particular importance is the Schatten 1-norm, also called
the nuclear norm or the trace norm, which is the sum of the
singular values of a matrix. It is typically considered to be
more robust than the Frobenius norm (Schatten 2-norm) and
has been used in robust PCA applications (see, e.g., (Xu
et al., 2010; Candès et al., 2011; Yi et al., 2016)).
1
We use the notation Õ(f ) to hide the polylogarithmic factors
in O(f poly(log f )).
2
Since outputting X takes O(mn) time, these algorithms usually output X in factored form, where each factor has rank k.

