Learning with Bounded Instance- and Label-dependent Label Noise

Jiacheng Cheng 1 2 Tongliang Liu 1 Kotagiri Ramamohanarao 3 Dacheng Tao 1

Abstract
Instance- and Label-dependent label Noise (ILN)
widely exists in real-world datasets but has been
rarely studied. In this paper, we focus on
Bounded Instance- and Label-dependent label
Noise (BILN), a particular case of ILN where
the label noise rates—the probabilities that the
true labels of examples flip into the corrupted
ones—have upper bound less than 1. Specifically,
we introduce the concept of distilled examples,
i.e. examples whose labels are identical with the
labels assigned for them by the Bayes optimal
classifier, and prove that under certain conditions
classifiers learnt on distilled examples will converge to the Bayes optimal classifier. Inspired
by the idea of learning with distilled examples,
we then propose a learning algorithm with theoretical guarantees for its robustness to BILN. At
last, empirical evaluations on both synthetic and
real-world datasets show effectiveness of our algorithm in learning with BILN.

1. Introduction
In the traditional classification task, we always expect and
assume a perfectly labeled training sample. However, there
is a strong possibility that we will be confronted with label
noise, which means labels in the training sample are likely to
be erroneous, especially in the era of big data. The reasons
are as follows. On the one hand, to circumvent costly human
labeling, many inexpensive approaches are employed to
collect labeled data, such as data mining on social media
and search engines (Fergus et al., 2010; Schroff et al., 2011),
which inevitably involve label noise; on the other hand, even
This work was done when Jiacheng Cheng was a visiting student
at University of Sydney. 1 UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of
Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, University of Sydney,
NSW, Australia. 2 University of Science and Technology of China,
Hefei, China. 3 School of Computing and Information Systems,
University of Melbourne, VIC, Australia. Correspondence to:
Tongliang Liu <tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

labels made by human experts are likely to be noisy due to
confused patterns and perceptual errors. Overall, label noise
is ubiquitous in real-world datasets and will undermine the
performance of many machine learning models (Long &
Servedio, 2010; Frénay & Verleysen, 2014). Therefore,
designing learning algorithms robust to label noise is of
significant value to the machine learning community (Han
et al., 2020; Yao et al., 2020; Liu & Guo, 2020; Xia et al.,
2020; Wu et al., 2020).
There are several methods proposed to model label noise.
The random classification noise (RCN) model, in which
each label is flipped independently with a constant probability ρ, and the class-conditional random label noise
(CCN) model, in which the flip probabilities (noise rates)
ρy are the same for all labels from one certain class y,
have been widely-studied (Angluin & Laird, 1988; Kearns,
1998; Long & Servedio, 2010; Gao et al., 2016; Han et al.,
2018a). A more generalized model is the instance- and
label-dependent noise (ILN), in which the flip rate ρy (x)
is dependent on both the instance x and the corresponding
true label y. Obviously, the ILN model is more realistic and
applicable. For example, in real-world datasets, an instance
whose feature contains less information or is of poorer quality may be more prone to be labeled wrongly. Unfortunately,
the case of ILN has not yet been extensively studied.
In this paper, label noise is defined to be Bounded Instanceand Label- dependent Noise (BILN) if the noise rates for
instances are upper bounded by some values smaller than
1, and we focus on this situation. We propose an algorithm
for learning with BILN and theoretically establish the statistical consistency and a performance bound. To the best
of our knowledge, we are not aware of any other specially
designed algorithms robust to such general label noise with
theoretical guarantees. Empirical evaluations on synthetic
and real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed learning algorithm. In addition, we believe the proposed algorithm is promising to handle instance-dependent
complementary label learning (Ishida et al., 2017; Yu et al.,
2018; Xu et al., 2020; Feng et al., 2020; Chou et al., 2020).
Related Works: Learning with label noise has been widely
investigated (Frénay & Verleysen, 2014). There are lots of
methods designed for learning with label noise. Some methods attempt to identify mislabeled training examples and

