Improving the Gating Mechanism of Recurrent Neural Networks

Albert Gu 1 Caglar Gulcehre 2 Tom Paine 2 Matt Hoffman 2 Razvan Pascanu 2

Abstract
Gating mechanisms are widely used in neural
network models, where they allow gradients to
backpropagate more easily through depth or time.
However, their saturation property introduces
problems of its own. For example, in recurrent
models these gates need to have outputs near 1
to propagate information over long time-delays,
which requires them to operate in their saturation
regime and hinders gradient-based learning of
the gate mechanism. We address this problem by
deriving two synergistic modifications to the standard gating mechanism that are easy to implement,
introduce no additional hyperparameters, and
improve learnability of the gates when they are
close to saturation. We show how these changes
are related to and improve on alternative recently
proposed gating mechanisms such as chrono
initialization and Ordered Neurons. Empirically,
our simple gating mechanisms robustly improve
the performance of recurrent models on a range
of applications, including synthetic memorization
tasks, sequential image classification, language
modeling, and reinforcement learning, particularly
when long-term dependencies are involved.

1. Introduction
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are an established
machine learning tool for learning from sequential data.
However, RNNs are prone to the vanishing gradient problem,
which occurs when the gradients of the recurrent weights become vanishingly small as they get backpropagated through
time (Hochreiter, 1991; Bengio et al., 1994; Hochreiter
et al., 2001). A common approach to alleviate the vanishing
gradient problem is to use gating mechanisms, leading to
models such as the long short term memory (Hochreiter
& Schmidhuber, 1997, LSTM) and gated recurrent units
1

Stanford University, USA 2 DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to: Albert Gu <albertgu@stanford.edu>, Caglar Gulcehre <caglarg@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

(Chung et al., 2014, GRUs). These gated RNNs have been
very successful in several different application areas such
as in reinforcement learning (Kapturowski et al., 2018;
Espeholt et al., 2018) and natural language processing
(Bahdanau et al., 2014; Kočiskỳ et al., 2018).
At every time step, gated recurrent networks use a weighted
combination of the history summarized by the previous state,
and a function of the incoming inputs, to create the next
state. The values of the gates, which are the coefficients of
the weighted combination, control the length of temporal
dependencies that can be addressed. This weighted update
can be seen as an additive or residual connection on the
recurrent state, which helps signals propagate through
time without vanishing. However, the gates themselves
are prone to a saturating property which can also hamper
gradient-based learning. This can be problematic for RNNs,
where carrying information for very long time delays
requires gates to be very close to their saturated states.
We address two particular problems that arise with the
standard gating mechanism of recurrent models. Firstly,
learning when gates are in their saturation regime is difficult
because gradients through the gates vanish as they saturate.
We derive a modification to standard gating mechanisms
that uses an auxiliary refine gate (Section 3.1) to modulate a
main gate. This mechanism allows the gates to have a wider
range of activations without gradients vanishing as quickly.
Secondly, typical initialization of the gates is relatively
concentrated. This restricts the range of timescales the model
can address at initialization, as the timescale of a particular
unit is dictated by its gates. We propose uniform gate initialization (Section 3.2) that addresses this problem by directly
initializing the activations of these gates from a distribution
that captures a wider spread of dependency lengths.
The main contribution of this paper is the refine gate mechanism. As the refine gate works better in tandem with uniform gate initialization, we call this combination the UR
gating mechanism. We focus on comparing the UR gating
mechanism against other approaches in our experiments.
These changes can be applied to any gate (i.e. parameterized
bounded function) and have minimal to no overhead in terms
of speed, memory, code complexity, parameters, or hyper
parameters. We apply them to the forget gate of recurrent
models, and evaluate on several benchmark tasks that re-

