Kinematic State Abstraction and Provably Efficient Rich-Observation
Reinforcement Learning
Dipendra Misra 1 Mikael Henaff 1 Akshay Krishnamurthy 1 John Langford 1

Abstract
We present an algorithm, HOMER, for exploration
and reinforcement learning in rich observation environments that are summarizable by an unknown
latent state space. The algorithm interleaves representation learning to identify a new notion of
kinematic state abstraction with strategic exploration to reach new states using the learned abstraction. The algorithm provably explores the environment with sample complexity polynomial in
the number of latent states and time horizon. Crucially, the observation space could be infinitely
large. This guarantee enables efficient global policy optimization for any reward function. On the
computational side, we show that HOMER can be
implemented efficiently whenever certain supervised learning problems are tractable. Empirically,
we evaluate HOMER on a challenging exploration
problem, where we show that the algorithm is exponentially more sample efficient than standard
reinforcement learning baselines.

1. Introduction
Modern reinforcement learning applications call for agents
that operate directly from rich sensory information such
as megapixel camera images. This rich information enables representation of detailed, high-quality policies and
obviates the need for hand-engineered features. However,
exploration in such settings is notoriously difficult and, in
fact, statistically intractable in general (Jaksch et al., 2010;
Lattimore & Hutter, 2012; Krishnamurthy et al., 2016). Despite this, many environments are highly structured and do
admit sample efficient algorithms (Jiang et al., 2017); indeed, we may be able to summarize the environment with
a simple state space and extract these states from raw observations. With such structure, we can leverage techniques
*

1

Equal contribution Microsoft Research, New York, NY. Correspondence to: Dipendra Misra <dimisra@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

from the well-studied tabular setting to explore the environment (Hazan et al., 2018), efficiently recover the underlying dynamics (Strehl & Littman, 2008), and optimize any
reward function (Kearns & Singh, 2002; Brafman & Tennenholtz, 2002; Strehl et al., 2006; Dann et al., 2017; Azar
et al., 2017; Jin et al., 2018). But can we learn to decode a
simpler state from raw observations alone?
The main difficulty is that learning a state decoder, or a
compact representation, is intrinsically coupled with exploration. On one hand, we cannot learn a high-quality decoder
without gathering comprehensive information from the environment, which may require a sophisticated exploration
strategy. On the other hand, we cannot tractably explore the
environment without an accurate decoder. These interlocking problems constitute a central challenge in reinforcement
learning, and a provably effective solution remains elusive
despite decades of research (Mccallum, 1996; Ravindran,
2004; Jong & Stone, 2005; Li et al., 2006; Bellemare et al.,
2016; Nachum et al., 2019).
In this paper, we provide a solution for a significant subclass of problems known as Block Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) (Du et al., 2019), in which the agent operates
directly on rich observations that are generated from a small
number of unobserved latent states. Our algorithm, HOMER,
learns a new reward-free state abstraction called kinematic
inseparability, which it uses to drive exploration of the environment. Informally, kinematic inseparability aggregates
observations that have the same forward and backward dynamics. When observations have shared backward dynamics, a single policy simultaneously maximizes the probability of reaching them, which is useful for exploration. Shared
forward dynamics is naturally useful for recovering the latent state space and model. Most importantly, we show that
kinematic inseparability can be recovered from a bottleneck
in a regressor trained on a contrastive estimation problem
derived from raw observations.
HOMER performs strategic exploration by training policies to
visit each kinematically inseparable abstract state, resulting
in a policy cover. These policies are constructed via a reduction to contextual bandits (Bagnell et al., 2004), using a
synthetic reward function that incentivizes reaching an abstract state. Crucially, HOMER interleaves learning the state

