Haar Graph Pooling

Yu Guang Wang * 1 2 Ming Li * 3 Zheng Ma * 4 Guido Montúfar * 5 2 Xiaosheng Zhuang 6 Yanan Fan 1

Abstract
Deep Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are useful
models for graph classification and graph-based
regression tasks. In these tasks, graph pooling is a
critical ingredient by which GNNs adapt to input
graphs of varying size and structure. We propose
a new graph pooling operation based on compressive Haar transforms — HaarPooling. HaarPooling implements a cascade of pooling operations;
it is computed by following a sequence of clusterings of the input graph. A HaarPooling layer
transforms a given input graph to an output graph
with a smaller node number and the same feature
dimension; the compressive Haar transform filters
out fine detail information in the Haar wavelet
domain. In this way, all the HaarPooling layers
together synthesize the features of any given input
graph into a feature vector of uniform size. Such
transforms provide a sparse characterization of the
data and preserve the structure information of the
input graph. GNNs implemented with standard
graph convolution layers and HaarPooling layers
achieve state of the art performance on diverse
graph classification and regression problems.

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have demonstrated excellent performance in node classification tasks and are very
promising in graph classification and regression (Bronstein
et al., 2017; Battaglia et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018b; Zhou
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Mathematics and Statistics,
University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia 2 Max Planck
Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, Leipzig, Germany
3
Department of Educational Technology, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, China 4 Department of Physics, Princeton University,
New Jersey, USA 5 Department of Mathematics and Department
of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles 6 Department
of Mathematics, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Ming Li <mingli@zjnu.edu.cn>, Yu Guang
Wang <yuguang.wang@unsw.edu.au>, Guido Montúfar <montufar@math.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2019). In node classification, the
input is a single graph with missing node labels that are to
be predicted from the known node labels. In this problem,
GNNs with appropriate graph convolutions can be trained
based on a single input graph, and achieve state-of-the-art
performance (Defferrard et al., 2016; Kipf & Welling, 2017;
Ma et al., 2019b). Different from node classification, graph
classification is a task where the label of any given graphstructured sample is to be predicted based on a training set
of labeled graph-structured samples. This is similar to the
image classification task tackled by traditional deep convolutional neural networks. The significant difference is that
here each input sample may have an arbitrary adjacency
structure instead of the fixed, regular grids that are used in
standard pixel images. This raises two crucial challenges:
1) How can GNNs exploit the graph structure information
of the input data? 2) How can GNNs handle input graphs
with varying number of nodes and connectivity structures?
These problems have motivated the design of proper graph
convolution and graph pooling to allow GNNs to capture
the geometric information of each data sample (Zhang et al.,
2018a; Ying et al., 2018; Cangea et al., 2018; Gao & Ji,
2019; Knyazev et al., 2019; Ma et al., 2019a; Lee et al.,
2019). Graph convolution plays an important role, especially in question 1).
The following is a widely utilized type of graph convolution
layer, proposed by (Kipf & Welling, 2017):
X out = b
AX in W.

(1)

b=D
e −1/2 (A + I)D
e −1/2 ∈ RN ×N is a normalized
Here A
version of the adjacency matrix A of the input graph, where
e is the degree matrix for A + I.
I is the identity matrix and D
in
N ×d
Further, X ∈ R
is the array of d-dimensional features
on the N nodes of the graph, and W ∈ Rd×m is the filter
parameter matrix. We call the graph convolution of Kipf &
Welling (2017) in Equation (1) the GCN convolution.
The graph convolution in Equation (1) captures the structural information of the input in terms of A (or b
A), and W
transforms the feature dimension from d to m. As the filter
size d × m is independent of the graph size, it allows a
fixed network architecture to process input graphs of varying sizes. The GCN convolution preserves the number of
nodes, and hence the output dimension of the network is

