Tightening Exploration in Upper Confidence Reinforcement Learning

Hippolyte Bourel 1 Odalric-Ambrym Maillard 1 Mohammad Sadegh Talebi 2

Abstract
The upper confidence reinforcement learning
(UCRL2) algorithm introduced in (Jaksch et al.,
2010) is a popular method to perform regret minimization in unknown discrete Markov Decision
Processes under the average-reward criterion. Despite its nice and generic theoretical regret guarantees, this algorithm and its variants have remained
until now mostly theoretical as numerical experiments in simple environments exhibit long burn-in
phases before the learning takes place. In pursuit
of practical efficiency, we present UCRL3, following the lines of UCRL2, but with two key modifications: First, it uses state-of-the-art time-uniform
concentration inequalities to compute confidence
sets on the reward and (component-wise) transition distributions for each state-action pair. Furthermore, to tighten exploration, it uses an adaptive computation of the support of each transition
distribution, which in turn enables us to revisit
the extended value iteration procedure of UCRL2
to optimize over distributions with reduced support by disregarding low probability transitions,
while still ensuring near-optimism. We demonstrate, through numerical experiments in standard
environments, that reducing exploration this way
yields a substantial numerical improvement compared to UCRL2 and its variants. On the theoretical side, these key modifications enable us to
derive a regret bound for UCRL3 improving on
UCRL2, that for the first time makes appear notions of local diameter and local effective support,
thanks to variance-aware concentration bounds.

1

SequeL, Inria Lille – Nord Europe, Villeneuve d’Ascq,
France 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. Correspondence to: Hippolyte
Bourel <hippolyte.bourel@ens-rennes.fr>, Odalric-Ambrym
Maillard <odalric.maillard@inria.fr>, Mohammad Sadegh Talebi
<sadegh.talebi@di.ku.dk>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider Reinforcement Learning (RL) in
an unknown and discrete Markov Decision Process (MDP)
under the average-reward criterion, when the learner interacts with the system in a single, infinite stream of observations, starting from an initial state without any reset.
More formally, let M = (S, A, p, ν) be an undiscounted
MDP, where S denotes the discrete state-space with cardinality S, and A denotes the discrete action-space with
cardinality A. p is the transition kernel such that p(s0 |s, a)
denotes the probability of transiting to state s0 , starting from
state s and executing action a. We denote by Ks,a the
set of successor states of the state-action pair (s, a), that
is Ks,a := {x ∈ S : p(x|s, a) > 0}, and further define
Ks,a := |Ks,a |. Finally, ν is a reward distribution function
supported on [0, 1] with mean function denoted by µ. The
interaction between the learner and the environment proceeds as follows. The learner starts in some state s1 ∈ S
at time t = 1. At each time step t ∈ N, where the learner
is in state st , she chooses an action at ∈ A based on st as
well as her past decisions and observations. When executing
action at in state st , the learner receives a random reward
rt := rt (st , at ) drawn (conditionally) independently from
distribution ν(st , at ), and whose mean is µ(st , at ). The
state then transits to a next state st+1 ∼ p(·|st , at ), and
a new decision step begins. For background material on
MDPs and RL, we refer to standard textbooks (Sutton &
Barto, 1998; Puterman, 2014).
The goal of the learner is to maximize the cumulative reward
gathered in the course of her interaction with the environment. The transition kernel p and the reward function ν are
initially unknown, and so the learner has to learn them by
trying different actions and recording the realized rewards
and state transitions. The performance of the learner can be
assessed through the notion of regret, which compares the
cumulative reward gathered by an oracle, being aware of p
and ν, to that gathered by the learner. Following (Jaksch
et al., 2010), we define the regret of a learning algorithm A
PT
after T steps as R(A, T ) := T g ? − t=1 rt (st , at ), where
g ? denotes the average-reward (or gain) attained by an optimal policy. Alternatively, the objective of the learner is
to minimize the regret, which entails balancing exploration
and exploitation.
To date, several algorithms have been proposed in order to

