Temporal Logic Point Processes
Shuang Li 1 Lu Wang 2 Ruizhi Zhang 3 Xiaofu Chang 4 Xuqin Liu 4 Yao Xie 5 Yuan Qi 4 Le Song 4 6

Abstract
We propose a modeling framework for event data
and aim to answer questions such as when and
why the next event would happen. Our proposed
model excels in small data regime with the ability
to incorporate domain knowledge in terms of logic
rules. We model the dynamics of the event starts
and ends via intensity function with the structures
informed by a set of first-order temporal logic
rules. Using the softened representation of temporal relations, and a weighted combination of
logic rules, our probabilistic model can deal with
uncertainty in events. Furthermore, many wellknown point processes (e.g., Hawkes process, selfcorrecting point process) can be interpreted as
special cases of our model given simple temporal logic rules. Our model, therefore, riches the
family of point processes. We derive a maximum
likelihood estimation procedure for the proposed
temporal logic model and show that it can lead
to accurate predictions when data are sparse and
domain knowledge is critical.

1. Introduction
A diverse range of application domains, such as healthcare (Reynaud-Bouret et al., 2010), finance (Bacry et al.,
2015), smart city, and information networks (Zhao et al.,
2015; Farajtabar et al., 2015; 2014), generate discrete events
in continuous time. For instance, the occurrences of diseases on patients are event data; credit card uses are event
data; the arrivals of passengers in subway systems are event
data; the posting and sharing of articles in online social platforms are also event data. Modeling these continuous-time
1

Department of Statistics, Harvard University; 2 Department of
Computer Science, East China Normal University; 3 Department
of Statistics, University of Nebraska-Lincoln; 4 Ant Group; 5 H.
Milton Stewart School of Industrial & Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology; 6 School of Computational Science &
Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology. Correspondence to:
Shuang Li <shuangli@fas.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

event data becomes increasingly important to understand
the underlying systems, to make accurate predictions, and
to regulate these systems towards desired states. Recently,
sophisticated models such as recurrent Marked point processes (Du et al., 2016), neural Hawkes processes (Mei &
Eisner, 2017) and policy-like generative point processes (Li
et al., 2018) have been proposed, allowing us to model
increasingly complex phenomena.
Although these models are flexible, they require lots of data
to properly fit the models, making them perform poorly in
the regime of small data. Furthermore, these models are
notorious for their difficult-to-interpret prediction results
and have been branded as “black boxes" (Doshi-Velez &
Kim, 2017) – it is difficult to clearly explain or identify the
logic behind the predictions. In some cases, interpretability is more important than predictions. For example, in
medicine, people are more interested in understanding what
treatments contribute to the occurrences and cures of diseases than merely predicting the patients’ health status in
real time (Lee & Yoon, 2017).
Very often, there already exists a rich collection of prior
knowledge from a particular domain, and we want to incorporate them to improve the interpretability and generalizability of the event models. For instance, in medical
areas and for patients with sepsis, we may leverage prior
knowledge such as “if sepsis progresses to septic shock,
the blood pressure may drop dramatically" or “if use drug
Norepinephrine, the blood pressure may be controlled" to
predict the appearance or disappearance of some symptoms
in terms of when and why. We want to utilize knowledge
like this rather than reinvent the wheel and purely relying
on data to come up with the rules. When the amount of data
is small and noisy, it will also be challenging to accurately
recover these rules via data-driven models.
Our interest lies in interpretable event models. We aim to
propose a unified framework for modeling the generative
mechanism of the events by incorporating temporal logic
rules (Smullyan, 2012). The occurrence time of events
often exhibits complicated patterns. Our proposed temporal
logic point processes explicitly model the occurrence rate
of events in continuous time. More specifically, we use
(transition) intensity functions to model the start and end of
the events, and these intensity functions will be informed
via a set of temporal logic rules involving both other types

