XtarNet: Learning to Extract Task-Adaptive Representation
for Incremental Few-Shot Learning

Sung Whan Yoon∗ 1 Do-Yeon Kim∗ 2 Jun Seo 2 Jaekyun Moon 2

Abstract
Learning novel concepts while preserving prior
knowledge is a long-standing challenge in machine learning. The challenge gets greater when a
novel task is given with only a few labeled examples, a problem known as incremental fewshot learning. We propose XtarNet, which learns
to extract task-adaptive representation (TAR) for
facilitating incremental few-shot learning. The
method utilizes a backbone network pretrained
on a set of base categories while also employing
additional modules that are meta-trained across
episodes. Given a new task, the novel feature extracted from the meta-trained modules is mixed
with the base feature obtained from the pretrained
model. The process of combining two different
features provides TAR and is also controlled by
meta-trained modules. The TAR contains effective information for classifying both novel and
base categories. The base and novel classifiers
quickly adapt to a given task by utilizing the TAR.
Experiments on standard image datasets indicate
that XtarNet achieves state-of-the-art incremental
few-shot learning performance. The concept of
TAR can also be used in conjunction with existing
incremental few-shot learning methods; extensive
simulation results in fact show that applying TAR
enhances the known methods significantly.

1. Introduction
Humans can quickly learn novel concepts from limited experience. In contrast, deep learning usually requires a mas*
Equal contribution 1 School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology
(UNIST), Ulsan, South Korea 2 School of Electrical Engineering,
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST),
Daejeon, South Korea. Correspondence to: Sung Whan Yoon
<shyoon8@unist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

sive amount of training data to learn each novel task. Unfortunately, gathering sufficient training samples in many
applications can be highly expensive and impractical. To
tackle this issue in computer vision, many researchers have
dedicated to develop few-shot learning algorithms, which
aim to learn generalized models for classifying unseen categories with only a few labeled images. A popular way
to develop few-shot learners is to adopt meta-training in
episodic form (Vinyals et al., 2016), where the learners
are exposed to widely-varying episodes one by one, each
time with a few-labeled images. Built upon the episodic
training, successful few-shot learning algorithms attempt
to build inductive bias over varying tasks while employing
task-dependent adaptation for each task (Snell et al., 2017;
Finn et al., 2017; Mishra et al., 2017; Oreshkin et al., 2018;
Yoon et al., 2019).
While well-known few-shot learning methods focus mainly
on classifying novel categories, a recent line of works attempts to handle novel categories while retaining the ability
to classify a set of original base categories (Gidaris & Komodakis, 2018; Ren et al., 2019). This more recent problem
is referred to as incremental few-shot learning. Here, based
on a prepared model which is trained on a set of original
base categories, extra novel categories should be quickly
learned within a few shots. To this end, incremental few-shot
learners strive to build a generalized model while preventing
catastrophic forgetting of the base categories. Achieving
this objective is extremely arduous; simple extensions of
existing few-shot learning algorithms to the setting of incremental few-shot learning does not work. Built upon
a pretrained backbone, the recent methods of (Gidaris &
Komodakis, 2018; Ren et al., 2019) focus on learning to
learn a set of new classification weights for novel categories
to balance classification performance on base and novel
categories. The attention-based method of (Gidaris & Komodakis, 2018) learns to leverage the past knowledge by
generating novel class weights with a form of attention over
the pretrained classification weights for base categories. A
more recent method of (Ren et al., 2019) called Attention
Attractor Network employs an inner loop of optimization
for generating a novel classifier for each episode. To be specific, meta-learned modules compute an attractor vector, and
then a regularization term based on the distance between the

