Stochastic Flows and Geometric Optimization on the Orthogonal Group

Krzysztof Choromanski 1 2 David Cheikhi * 3 Jared Davis * 1 Valerii Likhosherstov * 4 Achille Nazaret * 3
Achraf Bahamou * 2 Xingyou Song * 1 Mrugank Akarte 2 Jack Parker-Holder 5 Jacob Bergquist 2 Yuan Gao 2
Aldo Pacchiano 6 Tamas Sarlos 7 Adrian Weller 4 8 Vikas Sindhwani 1

Abstract
We present a new class of stochastic,
geometrically-driven optimization algorithms
on the orthogonal group O(d) and naturally
reductive homogeneous manifolds obtained from
the action of the rotation group SO(d). We
theoretically and experimentally demonstrate that
our methods can be applied in various fields of
machine learning including deep, convolutional
and recurrent neural networks, reinforcement
learning, normalizing flows and metric learning.
We show an intriguing connection between efficient stochastic optimization on the orthogonal
group and graph theory (e.g. matching problem,
partition functions over graphs, graph-coloring).
We leverage the theory of Lie groups and provide
theoretical results for the designed class of algorithms. We demonstrate broad applicability of
our methods by showing strong performance on
the seemingly unrelated tasks of learning world
models to obtain stable policies for the most
difficult Humanoid agent from OpenAI Gym
and improving convolutional neural networks.

1. Introduction and Related Work
Constrained optimization is at the heart of modern machine
learning (ML) (Kavis et al., 2019; Vieillard et al., 2019)
as many fields of ML benefit from methods such as linear,
quadratic, convex or general nonlinear constrained opti*
Equal contribution 1 Google Brain Robotics, New York, USA
Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research,
Columbia University, New York, USA 3 Department of Computer
Science, Columbia University, New York, USA 4 Department of
Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom 5 Department of Engineering, University of Oxford, Oxford,
United Kingdom 6 Department of Computer Science, University
of California, Berkeley, USA 7 Google Research, Mountain View,
USA 8 The Alan Turing Institute, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Krzysztof Choromanski <kchoro@google.com>.
2

th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

mization. Other applications include reinforcement learning with safety constraints (Chow et al., 2018). Our focus in this paper is on-manifold optimization, where constraints require solutions to belong to certain matrix manifolds. We are mainly interested in three spaces: the orthogonal group O(d) = {M ∈ Rd×d : M> M = Id }, its
generalization, the Stiefel manifold ST (d, k) = {M ∈
Rd×k : M> M = Ik } for k ≤ d and its subgroup
SO(d) = {M ∈ Rd×d : M> M = Id , det(M) = 1}
of d-dimensional rotations.
Interestingly, a wide variety of constrained optimization
problems can be rewritten as optimization on matrix manifolds defined by orthogonality constraints. These include:
• metric learning: optimization leveraging the decomposition of k-rank Mahalanobis matrices M = UD+ U> ,
where: U ∈ ST (d, k) and D+ is diagonal with positive
nonzero diagonal entries (Shukla & Anand, 2015);
• synchronization over the special Euclidean group,
where its elements gi ∈ SE(d) = Rd × SO(d) need to
be retrieved from noisy pairwise measurements encoding
the elements gj gi−1 that transform gi to gj ; these algorithms find applications particularly in vision and robotics
(SLAM) (Rosen et al., 2019);
• PSD programs with block-diagonal constraints: optimization on ST (d, k) can be elegantly applied for finding
bounded-rank solutions to positive semidefinite (PSD)
programs, where the PSD matrix Z can be decomposed
as: Z = R> R for a low-rank matrix R ∈ Rr×d (r  d)
and where r can be systematically increased leading effectively to the so-called Riemannian staircase method;
• combinatorial optimization: combinatorial problems involving object-rearrangements such as sorting or graph
isomorphism (Zavlanos & Pappas, 2008) can be cast as
optimization on the orthogonal group O(d) which is a
relaxation of the permutation group Perm(d).
Orthogonal groups are deeply rooted in the theory of manifolds. As noted in (Gallier, 2011) ” ...most familiar spaces
are naturally reductive manifolds. Remarkably, they all
arise from some suitable action of the rotation group SO(d),

