Variance Reduction in Stochastic Particle-Optimization Sampling
Jianyi Zhang 1 Yang Zhao 2 Ruiyi Zhang 1 Lawrence Carin 1 Changyou Chen 2

Abstract
Stochastic particle-optimization sampling (SPOS)
is a recently-developed scalable Bayesian sampling framework unifying stochastic gradient
MCMC (SG-MCMC) and Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD) algorithms based on Wasserstein gradient flows. With a rigorous nonasymptotic convergence theory developed, SPOS
can avoid the particle-collapsing pitfall of SVGD.
However, the variance-reduction effect in SPOS
has not been clear. In this paper, we address this gap by presenting several variancereduction techniques for SPOS. Specifically,
we propose three variants of variance-reduced
SPOS, called SAGA particle-optimization sampling (SAGA-POS), SVRG particle-optimization
sampling (SVRG-POS) and a variant of SVRGPOS which avoids full gradient computations, denoted as SVRG-POS+ . Importantly, we provide
non-asymptotic convergence guarantees for these
algorithms in terms of the 2-Wasserstein metric
and analyze their complexities. The results show
our algorithms yield better convergence rates than
existing variance-reduced variants of stochastic
Langevin dynamics, though more space is required to store the particles in training. Our theory
aligns well with experimental results on both synthetic and real datasets.

1. Introduction
Sampling has been an effective tool for approximate
Bayesian inference, which is becoming increasingly important in modern machine learning. In the setting of big
data, recent research has developed scalable Bayesian sampling algorithms such as stochastic gradient Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (SG-MCMC) (Welling & Teh, 2011) and Stein
variational gradient descent (SVGD) (Liu & Wang, 2016).
1

2

Duke University University at Buffalo, SUNY. Correspondence to: Lawrence Carin <lcarin@duke.edu>, Changyou Chen
<changyou@buffalo.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

These methods have facilitated important real-world applications and achieved impressive results, such as in topic
modeling (Gan et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2016), matrix factorization (Chen et al., 2014; Ding et al., 2014; Şimşekli
et al., 2016), differential privacy (Wang et al., 2015; Li et al.,
2017), Bayesian optimization (Springenberg et al., 2016),
reinforcement learning (Haarnoja et al., 2018; Zhang et al.,
2018a;b; 2019) and deep neural networks (Li et al., 2016).
Generally speaking, these methods use gradient information of a target distribution to generate samples, leading
to more effective algorithms compared to traditional sampling methods. Recently, (Chen et al., 2018) proposed a
particle-optimization Bayesian sampling framework based
on Wasserstein gradient flows, which unified SG-MCMC
and SVGD in a new sampling framework called particleoptimization sampling (POS). Furthermore, Zhang et al.
(2020) discovered that SVGD endows some unintended
pitfalls, i.e., particles tend to collapse under some conditions. As a result, a remedy was proposed to inject random
noise into SVGD update equations in the POS framework,
leading to stochastic particle-optimization sampling (SPOS)
algorithms (Zhang et al., 2020). Remarkably, for the first
time, non-asymptotic convergence theory was developed for
SPOS (SVGD-type algorithms) in (Zhang et al., 2020).
In order to deal with large-scale datasets, many gradientbased methods for optimization and sampling use stochastic
gradients calculated on a mini-batch of a dataset, for computational feasibility. Unfortunately, this has the potential
of adding extra variance into the algorithms, which may
potentially degrade model performance. To address this
issue, variance control has been an important and interesting
direction of research. Efficient solutions such as SAGA
(Defazio et al., 2014) and SVRG (Johnson & Zhang, 2013)
were proposed to reduce variance in stochastic optimization.
Subsequently, (Dubey et al., 2016) introduced these techniques in SG-MCMC for Bayesian sampling, which also
has achieved great success in practice.
Since SPOS has enjoyed the best of both worlds by combining SG-MCMC and SVGD, it is of great value to further
reduce its gradient variance. While both the algorithm and
theory have been developed for SPOS, no work has been
done to investigate its variance-reduction techniques. Compared with research on SG-MCMC, where variance reduction has been well explored by recent work such as (Dubey

