A new regret analysis for Adam-type algorithms

Ahmet Alacaoglu 1 Yura Malitsky 1 Panayotis Mertikopoulos 2 3 Volkan Cevher 1

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on a theory-practice gap
for Adam and its variants (AMSGrad, AdamNC,
etc.). In practice, these algorithms are used with
a constant first-order moment parameter β1 (typically between 0.9 and 0.99). In theory, regret
guarantees for online convex optimization require
a rapidly decaying β1 → 0 schedule. We show
that this is an artifact of the standard analysis, and
we propose a novel framework that allows us to
derive optimal, data-dependent regret bounds with
a constant β1 , without further assumptions. We
also demonstrate the flexibility of our analysis on
a wide range of different algorithms and settings.

1. Introduction
One of the most popular optimization algorithms for training neural networks is A DAM (Kingma & Ba, 2014), which
is a variant of the general class of A DAGRAD-type algorithms (Duchi et al., 2011). The main novelty of A DAM is to
apply an exponential moving average (EMA) to gradient estimate (first-order) and to element-wise square-of-gradients
(second-order), with parameters β1 and β2 , respectively.
In practice, constant β1 and β2 values are used (the default
parameters in P Y T ORCH and T ENSORFLOW, for example,
are β1 = 0.9 and β2 = 0.999). However, the regret analysis
in Kingma & Ba (2014) requires β1 → 0 with a linear rate,
causing a clear discrepancy between theory and practice.
Recently, Reddi et al. (2018) showed that the analysis of
A DAM contains a technical issue. Following this discovery,
many variants of A DAM are proposed with regret guarantees (Reddi et al., 2018; Chen & Gu, 2018; Huang et al.,
2019). Unfortunately, in all these analyses, the requirement
√ β1 → 0 is inherited and needed to derive the optimal
O( T ) regret. In contrast, for favorable practical performance, methods continue to use constant β1 in experiments.
1

EPFL, Switzerland 2 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria,
LIG, France 3 Criteo AI Lab, France. Correspondence to: Ahmet
Alacaoglu <ahmet.alacaoglu@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

One can wonder whether there is an inherent obstacle –
in the proposed methods or the setting – which prohibits
optimal regret bounds with a constant β1 ?
In this work, we show that this specific discrepancy between
the theory and practice is indeed an artifact of the previous
analyses. We point out the shortcomings responsible for
this artifact, and then introduce a new analysis framework
that attains optimal regret bounds with constant β1 at no
additional cost (and even comes with better constants in the
obtained bounds).
Our contributions. In the √
convex
 setting, our technique
obtains data-dependent O T regret bounds for AMSG RAD and A DAM N C (Reddi et al., 2018). Moreover, our
technique can also be applied to a strongly convex variant
of A DAM N C, known as S ADAM (Wang et al., 2020), yielding again data-dependent logarithmic regret with constant
β1 . To the best of our knowledge, these are the first optimal
regret bounds with constant β1 .
Finally, we illustrate the flexibility of our framework by
applying it to zeroth-order (bandit) and nonconvex optimization. In the zeroth-order optimization setting, we improve
on the current best result which requires β1 ∼ 1t , and show
that a constant β1 again suffices. In the non-convex setting, we recover the existing results in the literature, with a
simpler proof and slight improvements in the bounds.
It is worth noting that even though our analysis is more
flexible and it provides better bounds than prior works, it is
not sufficient to explain why nonzero β1 helps in practice.
This is an interesting question requiring further investigation
and is outside the scope of this paper.
1.1. Problem Setup
In online optimization, a loss function ft : X → Rd is
revealed, after a decision vector xt ∈ X is picked by the
algorithm. We then minimize the regret defined as
R(T ) =

T
X
t=1

ft (xt ) − min
x∈X

T
X

ft (x).

(1)

t=1

Our assumptions are summarized below which are the same
as in (Reddi et al., 2018).

