Private Query Release Assisted by Public Data

Raef Bassily 1 Albert Cheu 2 Shay Moran 3 Aleksandar Nikolov 4 Jonathan Ullman 2 Zhiwei Steven Wu 5

Abstract
We study the problem of differentially private
query release assisted by access to public data.
In this problem, the goal is to answer a large
class H of statistical queries with error no more
than α using a combination of public and private
samples. The algorithm is required to satisfy differential privacy only with respect to the private
samples. We study the limits of this task in terms
of the private and public sample complexities.
Our upper and lower bounds on the private sample complexity have matching dependence on the
dual VC-dimension of H. For a large category of
query classes, our bounds on the public sample
complexity have matching dependence on α.

1. Introduction
The ability to answer statistical queries on a sensitive data
set in a privacy-preserving way is one of the most fundamental primitives in private data analysis. In particular,
this task has been at the center of the literature of differential privacy since its emergence (Dinur & Nissim, 2003;
Dwork et al., 2006) and is also central to the upcoming
US Census 2020 release (Dajani et al., 2017). In its basic form, the problem of differentially private query release
can be described as follows. Given a class H of queries
h : X → {±1}1 defined over some domain X , and a
data set ~x of i.i.d. samples from some unknown distribution
D over X , the goal is to construct an (ε, δ)-differentially
private algorithm that, given H and ~x, outputs a mapping
G : H → [−1, 1] such that for every h ∈ H, G(h) gives an
accurate estimate for the true mean E [h(x)] up to some
x∼D

1
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, The Ohio
State University. 2 Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern University 3 Google AI Princeton 4 Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto 5 Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota. Correspondence to: Raef Bassily <rbbassily@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
1
In this work, we focus on classes of binary functions (known
in the literature of DP as counting queries).

error α. A central question in this problem is concerned
with characterizing the private sample complexity, which
is the least amount of private samples required to perform
this task up to some error α. This question has been extensively studied in the literature on differential privacy (Dinur
& Nissim, 2003; Hardt & Rothblum, 2010; Muthukrishnan & Nikolov, 2012; Blum et al., 2013; Bun et al., 2018;
Steinke & Ullman, 2015). For general query classes, it was
shown that the optimal bound on the private sample complexity in terms of |X |, |H, and the privacy parameters is
attained by the Private Multiplicative Weights (PMW) algorithm due to Hardt and Rothblum (Hardt & Rothblum,
2010). This optimality was established by the lower bound
due to Bun et al. (Bun et al., 2018). This result implied the
impossibility of differentially private query release for certain classes of infinite size. Moreover, subsequent results
by (Bun et al., 2015; Alon et al., 2019b) implied that this
impossibility is true even for a simple class such as onedimensional thresholds over R. On the other hand, without
any privacy constraints, the query release problem is equivalent to attaining uniform convergence over H, and hence
the sample complexity is given by d/α2 , where d is the
VC-dimension of H.
In practice, it is often feasible to collect some amount of
“public” data that poses no privacy concerns. For example,
in the language of consumer privacy, there is considerable
amount of data collected from the so-called “opt-in” users,
who voluntarily offer or sell their data to companies or organizations. Such data is deemed by its original owner to
pose no threat to personal privacy. There are also a variety
of other sources of public data that can be harnessed.
Motivated by the above observation, and by the limitations
in the standard model of differentially private query release,
in this work, we study a relaxed setting of this problem,
which we call Public-data-Assisted Private (PAP) query
release. In this setting, the query-release algorithm has
access to two types of samples from the unknown distribution: private samples that contain personal and sensitive
information (as in the standard setting), and public samples. The goal is to design algorithms that can exploit as
little public data as possible to achieve non-trivial savings
in sample complexity over standard DP query-release algorithms, while still providing strong privacy guarantees for
the private dataset.

