Learning Near Optimal Policies with Low Inherent Bellman Error
Andrea Zanette 1 Alessandro Lazaric 2 Mykel Kochenderfer 1 Emma Brunskill 1

Abstract

We study the exploration problem with approximate linear action-value functions in episodic
reinforcement learning under the notion of low
inherent Bellman error, a condition normally employed to show convergence of approximate value
iteration. First we relate this condition to other
common frameworks and show that it is strictly
more general than the low rank (or linear) MDP
assumption of prior work. Second we provide an
algorithm
with
regret bound
? a high probability
?
r ∞H dt K ` ∞H
Op
d
IKq
where
H is the
t
t“1
t“1
horizon, K is the number of episodes, I is the
value if the inherent Bellman error and dt is the
feature dimension at timestep t. In addition, we
show that the result is unimprovable beyond constants and logs by showing a matching lower
bound. This has two important consequences:
1) it shows that exploration is possible using only
batch assumptions with an algorithm that achieves
the optimal statistical rate for the setting we consider, which is more general than prior work on
low-rank MDPs 2) the lack of closedness (measured by the
? inherent Bellman error) is only amplified by dt despite working in the online setting. Finally, the algorithm reduces to the celebrated L IN UCB when H “ 1 but with a different choice of the exploration parameter that allows handling misspecified contextual linear bandits. While computational tractability questions
remain open for the MDP setting, this enriches
the class of MDPs with a linear representation
for the action-value function where statistically
efficient reinforcement learning is possible.

1
Stanford University 2 Facebook Artificial Intelligence Research.
Correspondence to: Andrea Zanette <zanette@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

1. Introduction
Improving the sample efficiency of reinforcement learning
(RL) algorithms through effective exploration-exploitation
strategies is a major focus of the recent theoretical literature. Strong results are available with a generative model
(Azar et al., 2012; Sidford et al., 2018; Agarwal et al., 2019;
Zanette et al., 2019a) as well as in the online setting when
the learning performance is measured by the cumulative
regret, i.e., the difference between the performance of the
optimal policy and the reward accumulated by the learner.
For finite horizon problems, UCBVI (Azar et al., 2017)
achieves worst-case optimal regret, while algorithms with
domain adaptive bounds have been introduced by (Zanette
& Brunskill, 2019) and (Simchowitz & Jamieson, 2019).
Randomized (Russo, 2019) and model-free (Jin et al., 2018)
variants have also been proposed, together with methods
with other beneficial properties (Dann et al., 2019; Efroni
et al., 2019). Similar results are also available in the infinite
horizon setting (Jaksch et al., 2010; Maillard et al., 2014;
Fruit et al., 2018; Zhang & Ji, 2019; Tossou et al., 2019).
Approximate dynamic programming. While the results
for tabular settings are encouraging, function approximation
is normally required to tackle problems where the state or
action spaces may be intractably large. In this case, even
when the Bellman operator can be applied exactly, simple
dynamic programming algorithms coupled with linear architectures may diverge (Baird, 1995; Tsitsiklis & Van Roy,
1996), thus suggesting that effective approximate RL may
not be feasible in the general case.
Convergence guarantees (Lagoudakis & Parr, 2003) and
finite-sample analyses (Lazaric et al., 2012) are available
for the least-squares policy improvement (LSPI) algorithm
under the assumption that the value function of all policies can be well approximated within the chosen function
class (LSPI conditions, for short). For concreteness, let ✏
be the worst-case misspecification error of a d-dimensional
linear function approximator over the policy action-value
functions (i.e., for any policy ⇡, there exists an approximap ⇡ such that }Q
p ⇡ ´ Q⇡ } § ✏). Recently, (Du et al.,
tion Q
2019) showed that
? when using highly misspecified approximators ✏ Ç 1{ d the worst-case sample complexity may
?
be exponential in d. At the same time, when ✏ Æ 1{ d,
(Van Roy & Dong, 2019) and (Lattimore & Szepesvari,

