Informative Dropout for Robust Representation Learning:
A Shape-bias Perspective

Baifeng Shi * 1 Dinghuai Zhang * 2 Qi Dai 3 Zhanxing Zhu 2 4 5 Yadong Mu 6 Jingdong Wang 3

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are
known to rely more on local texture rather than
global shape when making decisions. Recent
work also indicates a close relationship between
CNN’s texture-bias and its robustness against distribution shift, adversarial perturbation, random
corruption, etc. In this work, we attempt at improving various kinds of robustness universally
by alleviating CNN’s texture bias. With inspiration from the human visual system, we propose
a light-weight model-agnostic method, namely
Informative Dropout (InfoDrop), to improve interpretability and reduce texture bias. Specifically, we discriminate texture from shape based
on local self-information in an image, and adopt
a Dropout-like algorithm to decorrelate the model
output from the local texture. Through extensive experiments, we observe enhanced robustness under various scenarios (domain generalization, few-shot classification, image corruption,
and adversarial perturbation). To the best of our
knowledge, this work is one of the earliest attempts to improve different kinds of robustness
in a unified model, shedding new light on the
relationship between shape-bias and robustness,
also on new approaches to trustworthy machine
learning algorithms. Code is available at https:
//github.com/bfshi/InfoDrop.

1. Introduction
Despite the impressive performance in a broad range of
visual tasks, Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is sur*

Equal contribution 1 School of EECS, Peking University, China
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, China
3
Microsoft Research Asia 4 Center for Data Science, Peking University 5 Beijing Institute of Big Data Research 6 Wangxuan Institute
of Computer Technology, Peking University. Correspondence to:
Baifeng Shi <bfshi@pku.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Comparison of different shape-biased methods. (a) Original image of cat and dog. (b) Simple edge detection is susceptible
to complex patterns (e.g. stripes of the cat) and can severely damage image contents. (c) In this work, we reduce texture-bias under
guidance of self-information, which aligns well with human vision.
The definition and computation of self-information are in Sec. 3.

prisingly vulnerable compared with the human visual system. For example, features learned by CNN have trouble
in generalizing across shifted distributions between training and test data (Chen et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019a).
Random image corruptions can also considerably degrade
its performance (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019). CNN is
extremely defenseless under well-designed image perturbation as well (Szegedy et al., 2013). This is opposite to the
human visual system, which is robust to domain gap, noisy
input, etc. (Biederman, 1987; Bisanz et al., 2012; Geirhos
et al., 2017).
Another intriguing property of CNN is its ‘texture bias’,
namely its bias towards texture instead of shape. Despite the
earlier belief that CNN extracts more abstract shapes and
structures layer by layer as human does (Kriegeskorte, 2015;
LeCun et al., 2015), recent works reveal its reliance on the
local texture when making decisions (Geirhos et al., 2019;
Brendel & Bethge, 2019). For instance, given an image with
a cat’s shape filled with an elephant’s skin texture, CNN
tends to classify it as an elephant instead of a cat (Geirhos
et al., 2019).
Supported by some recent works, there seems to be a surprisingly close relationship between CNN’s robustness and
texture-bias. For example, Zhang & Zhu (2019) find that
adversarially trained CNNs are innately less texture-biased.
There are also a few attempts to tackle a specific task by
training a less texture-biased model. Carlucci et al. (2019)
propose to improve robustness against domain gap by training on jigsaw puzzles, which relies more on global structure
information. Geirhos et al. (2019) find that shape-biased

