AR-DAE: Towards Unbiased Neural Entropy Gradient Estimation

Jae Hyun Lim 1 2 Aaron Courville 1 2 3 4 Christopher Pal 1 5 4 Chin-Wei Huang 1 2

Abstract
Entropy is ubiquitous in machine learning, but it
is in general intractable to compute the entropy of
the distribution of an arbitrary continuous random
variable. In this paper, we propose the amortized
residual denoising autoencoder (AR-DAE) to approximate the gradient of the log density function,
which can be used to estimate the gradient of
entropy. Amortization allows us to significantly
reduce the error of the gradient approximator by
approaching asymptotic optimality of a regular
DAE, in which case the estimation is in theory
unbiased. We conduct theoretical and experimental analyses on the approximation error of the
proposed method, as well as extensive studies on
heuristics to ensure its robustness. Finally, using
the proposed gradient approximator to estimate
the gradient of entropy, we demonstrate state-ofthe-art performance on density estimation with
variational autoencoders and continuous control
with soft actor-critic.

1. Introduction
Entropy is an information theoretic measurement of uncertainty that has found many applications in machine learning.
For example, it can be used to incentivize exploration in
reinforcement learning (RL) (Haarnoja et al., 2017; 2018);
prevent mode-collapse of generative adversarial networks
(GANs) (Balaji et al., 2019; Dieng et al., 2019); and calibrate the uncertainty of the variational distribution in approximate Bayesian inference. However, it is in general
intractable to compute the entropy of an arbitrary random
variable.
In most applications, one actually does not care about the
quantity of entropy itself, but rather how to manipulate and
1
Mila 2 Université de Montréal 3 CIFAR fellow 4 Canada CIFAR AI Chair 5 Polytechnique Montréal. Correspondence to: Jae
Hyun Lim <jae.hyun.lim@umontreal.ca>, Chin-Wei Huang <chinwei.huang@umontreal.ca>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

control this quantity as part of the optimization objective. In
light of this, we propose to approximately estimate the gradient of entropy so as to maximize or minimize the entropy
of a data sampler. More concretely, we approximate the
gradient of the log probability density function of the data
sampler. This is sufficient since the gradient of its entropy
can be shown to be the expected value of the path derivative (Roeder et al., 2017). We can then plug in a gradient
approximator to enable stochastic backpropagation.
We propose to use the denoising autoencoder (DAE, Vincent et al. (2008)) to approximate the gradient of the log
density function, which is also known as denoising score
matching (Vincent, 2011). It has been shown that the optimal reconstruction function of the DAE converges to the
gradient of the log density as the noise level σ approaches
zero (Alain & Bengio, 2014). In fact, such an approach
has been successfully applied to recover the gradient field
of the density function of high-dimensional data such as
natural images (Song & Ermon, 2019), which convincingly
shows DAEs can accurately approximate the gradient. However, in the case of entropy maximization (or minimization),
the non-stationarity of the sampler’s distribution poses a
problem for optimization. On the one hand, the log density
gradient is recovered only asymptotically as σ → 0. On the
other hand, the training signal vanishes while a smaller noise
perturbation is applied, which makes it hard to reduce the
approximation error due to suboptimal optimization. The
fact that the sampler’s distribution is changing makes it even
harder to select a noise level that is sufficiently small. Our
work aims at resolving this no-win situation.
In this work, we propose the amortized residual denoising
autoencoder (AR-DAE), which is a conditional DAE of a
residual form that takes in σ as input. We condition the
DAE on σ = 0 at inference time to approximate the log density gradient while sampling non-zero σ at training, which
allows us to train with σ sampled from a distribution that
covers a wide range of values. If AR-DAE is optimal, we
expect to continuously generalize to σ = 0 to recover the
log density gradient, which can be used as an unbiased estimate of the entropy gradient. We perform ablation studies
on the approximation error using a DAE, and show that
our method provides significantly more accurate approximation than the baselines. Finally, we apply our method to
improve distribution-free inference for variational autoen-

