Semi-Supervised Learning with Normalizing Flows

Pavel Izmailov * 1 Polina Kirichenko * 1 Marc Finzi * 1 Andrew Gordon Wilson 1

Abstract
Normalizing flows transform a latent distribution
through an invertible neural network for a flexible and pleasingly simple approach to generative
modelling, while preserving an exact likelihood.
We propose FlowGMM, an end-to-end approach
to generative semi-supervised learning with normalizing flows, using a latent Gaussian mixture
model. FlowGMM is distinct in its simplicity, unified treatment of labeled and unlabeled data with
an exact likelihood, interpretability, and broad applicability beyond image data. We show promising results on a wide range of applications, including AG-News and Yahoo Answers text data,
tabular data, and semi-supervised image classification. We also show that FlowGMM can discover interpretable structure, provide real-time
optimization-free feature visualizations, and specify well calibrated predictive distributions.

1. Introduction
The discriminative approach to classification models the
probability of a class label given an input p(y|x) directly.
The generative approach, by contrast, models the class conditional density for the data p(x|y), and then uses Bayes
rule to find p(y|x). In principle, generative modelling has
long been more alluring, for the effort is focused on creating
an interpretable object of interest, and “what I cannot create,
I do not understand”. In practice, discriminative approaches
typically outperform generative methods, and thus are far
more widely used.
The challenge in generative modelling is that standard approaches to density estimation are often poor descriptions of
high-dimensional natural signals. For example, a Gaussian
mixture directly over images, while highly flexible for estimating densities, would specify similarities between images
as related to Euclidean distances of pixel intensities, which
*
Equal contribution 1 New York University. Correspondence
to: Pavel Izmailov <pi390@nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

would be a poor inductive bias for handling translations or
representing other salient statistical properties. Recently,
generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014),
variational autoencoders (Kingma & Welling, 2013), and
normalizing flows (Dinh et al., 2014), have led to great advances in unsupervised generative modelling, by leveraging
the inductive biases of deep convolutional neural networks.
Normalizing flows are a pleasingly simple approach to generative modelling, which work by transforming a distribution through an invertible neural network. Since the transformation is invertible, it is possible to exactly express the
likelihood over the observed data, to train the neural network mapping. The network provides both useful inductive
biases, and a flexible approach to density estimation. Normalizing flows also admit controllable latent representations
and can be sampled efficiently, unlike auto-regressive models (Papamakarios et al., 2017; Oord et al., 2016). Moreover, recent work (Dinh et al., 2016; Kingma & Dhariwal,
2018; Behrmann et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2019; Song et al.,
2019) demonstrated that normalizing flows can produce
high-fidelity samples for natural image datasets.
Advances in unsupervised generative modelling, such as
normalizing flows, are particularly compelling for semisupervised learning, where we wish to share structure over
labeled and unlabeled data, to make better predictions of
class labels on unseen data. In this paper, we introduce an approach to semi-supervised learning with normalizing flows,
by modelling the density in the latent space as a Gaussian
mixture, with each mixture component corresponding to a
class represented in the labeled data. This Flow Gaussian
Mixture Model (FlowGMM) is to the best of our knowledge
the first approach to semi-supervised learning with normalizing flows that provides an exact joint likelihood over both
labeled and unlabeled data, for end-to-end training.∗
We illustrate FlowGMM with a simple example in Figure 1.
We are solving a binary semi-supervised classification problem on the dataset shown in panel (a): the labeled data are
shown with triangles colored according to their class, and
unlabeled data are shown with blue circles. We introduce
∗

A short version of this work first appeared at the ICML 2019
Normalizing Flows Workshop (Izmailov et al., 2019). At the same
workshop, Atanov et al. (2019) proposed a different approach that
uses a class-conditional normalizing flow as the latent distribution.

