Learning to Encode Position for Transformer
with Continuous Dynamical Model

Xuanqing Liu 1 Hsiang-Fu Yu 2 Inderjit S. Dhillon 3 2 Cho-Jui Hsieh 1

Abstract
We introduce a new way of learning to encode
position information for non-recurrent models,
such as Transformer models. Unlike RNN and
LSTM, which contain inductive bias by loading
the input tokens sequentially, non-recurrent models are less sensitive to position. The main reason
is that position information among input units is
not inherently encoded, i.e., the models are permutation equivalent; this problem justifies why
all of the existing models are accompanied by a
sinusoidal encoding/embedding layer at the input.
However, this solution has clear limitations: the
sinusoidal encoding is not flexible enough as it is
manually designed and does not contain any learnable parameters, whereas the position embedding
restricts the maximum length of input sequences.
It is thus desirable to design a new position layer
that contains learnable parameters to adjust to different datasets and different architectures. At the
same time, we would also like the encodings to
extrapolate in accordance with the variable length
of inputs. In our proposed solution, we borrow
from the recent Neural ODE approach, which may
be viewed as a versatile continuous version of a
ResNet. This model is capable of modeling many
kinds of dynamical systems. We model the evolution of encoded results along position index by
such a dynamical system, thereby overcoming the
above limitations of existing methods. We evaluate our new position layers on a variety of neural
machine translation and language understanding
tasks, the experimental results show consistent
improvements over the baselines.
1
Department of Computer Science, University of California
Los Angeles, CA, USA 2 Amazon.com 3 Department of Computer
Science, University of Texas Austin, TA, USA. Correspondence
to: Xuanqing Liu <xqliu@cs.ucla.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

1. Introduction
Transformer based models (Vaswani et al., 2017; Devlin
et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2019; Lan
et al., 2019; Raffel et al., 2019) have become one of the
most effective approaches to model sequence data of variable lengths. Transformers have shown wide applicability to
many natural language processing (NLP) tasks such as language modeling (Radford et al., 2019), neural machine translation (NMT) (Vaswani et al., 2017), and language understanding (Devlin et al., 2018). Unlike traditional recurrentbased models (e.g., RNN or LSTM), Transformer utilizes a
non-recurrent but self-attentive neural architecture to model
the dependency among elements at different positions in the
sequence, which leads to better parallelization using modern
hardware and alleviates the vanishing/exploding gradient
problem in traditional recurrent models.
It is known that the self-attentive architecture corresponds
to a family of permutation equivalence functions. Thus,
for applications where the ordering of the elements matters,
how to properly encode position information is crucial for
Transformer based models. There have been many attempts
to encode position information for the Transformer. In
the original Transformer paper (Vaswani et al., 2017), a
family of pre-defined sinusoidal functions was adapted to
construct a set of embeddings for each position. These fixed
position embeddings are then added to the word embeddings
of the input sequence accordingly. To further construct
these position embeddings in a more data-driven way, many
recent Transformer variants such as (Devlin et al., 2018;
Liu et al., 2019) include these embeddings as learnable
model parameters in the training stage. This data-driven
approach comes at the cost of limiting the maximum length
of sequence Lmax and the computational/memory overhead
from additional Lmax × d parameters, where Lmax is usually
set to 512 in many applications, and d is the dimension
of the embeddings. (Shaw et al., 2018) propose a relative
position representation to reduce the number of parameters
to (2K + 1)d by dropping the interactions between tokens
with a distance greater than K. In addition to just the input
layer, (Dehghani et al., 2018) and (Lan et al., 2019) suggest
that the injection of position information to every layer
leads to even better performance for the Transformer. More

