Causal Effect Identifiability under Partial-Observability

Sanghack Lee 1 Elias Bareinboim 1

Abstract
Causal effect identifiability is concerned with establishing the effect of intervening on a set of
variables on another set of variables from observational or interventional distributions under causal
assumptions that are usually encoded in the form
of a causal graph. Most of the results of this literature implicitly assume that every variable modeled in the graph is measured in the available
distributions. In practice, however, the data collections of the different studies considered do not
measure the same variables, consistently. In this
paper, we study the causal effect identifiability
problem when the available distributions encompass different sets of variables, which we refer to
as identification under partial-observability. We
study a number of properties of the factors that
comprise a causal effect under various levels of
abstraction, and then characterize the relationship
between them with respect to their status relative
to the identification of a targeted intervention. We
establish a sufficient graphical criterion for determining whether the effects are identifiable from
partially-observed distributions. Finally, building
on these graphical properties, we develop an algorithm that returns a formula for a causal effect in
terms of the available distributions.

1. Introduction
One of the central goals in data sciences (the health and the
social sciences), artificial intelligence, and machine learning
is to discover cause and effect relationships. If the scientific
study is performed appropriately, and causal relations are
eventually discovered, the corresponding effects are more
likely to hold under a broader set of conditions. Causal relations are usually more stable and generalizable across disparate conditions (Pearl, 2000; Pearl & Mackenzie, 2018).
1

Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New
York, NY 10027, USA. Correspondence to: Sanghack Lee <sanghacklee@cs.columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Causal inference provides a collection of principles and
tools to help understand the conditions under which these extrapolations can take place (Pearl, 2000; Spirtes et al., 2001;
Bareinboim & Pearl, 2016). For instance, a scientist may
be able to use an observational study to infer the effect of
a new intervention by leveraging knowledge encoded in its
causal model (Pearl, 1995; Tian & Pearl, 2002; Tian, 2002;
Shpitser & Pearl, 2006; Huang & Valtorta, 2006b). Causal
effects can also be inferred across a broad range of conditions, including across disparate populations (Bareinboim &
Pearl, 2014; Lee et al., 2020), under selection bias (Bareinboim & Pearl, 2012b; Correa & Bareinboim, 2017), missing
data (Mohan & Pearl, 2014), and in the absence of the causal
graph (Jaber et al., 2019), to cite a few. Further, recent advances in causal inference lead to algorithmic solutions to
combine data collected under multiple, disparate regimes
(observational and interventional) to identify a causal effect
(Lee et al., 2019). Despite all the generality and power provided by these results, by and large, they implicitly assume
that every modeled variable is consistently available across
the different data collections. Since each study is usually
designed to fulfill its own objectives, datasets across studies
tend to measure different sets of variables (i.e., the datasets
have different columns). As a consequence, relevant data
available to answer a question about a specific effect may
be not usable in another, possibly very related study.
For concreteness, consider the setting where a researcher
aims to understand the effect of physical exercise (X) on
stroke (Y ), written as Px (y), and is then analyzing two related datasets. The first is based on an experimental study
estimating the effect of physical exercise itself (X) on
blood pressure (C), collected from different age groups
(A); commonly written as PX (A, C). The second dataset
is based on an observational study about the association
among body mass index (BMI, or B), blood pressure (C),
and stroke (Y ), i.e., P (B, C, Y ). The causal graphs representing these two studies are shown in Fig. 1a and 1b,
respectively. After conducting standard causal analysis, the
researcher realizes that Px (y), the effect of interest, cannot be inferred from the two datasets, separately. She then
creates a common representation of their union, which is
summarized in the causal graph shown in Fig. 1c. Unfortunately, the identification algorithms available today assume
full-observability, which means that graphs and datasets

