Implicit Geometric Regularization for Learning Shapes

Amos Gropp 1 Lior Yariv 1 Niv Haim 1 Matan Atzmon 1 Yaron Lipman 1

Abstract
Representing shapes as level sets of neural networks has been recently proved to be useful for
different shape analysis and reconstruction tasks.
So far, such representations were computed using
either: (i) pre-computed implicit shape representations; or (ii) loss functions explicitly defined over
the neural level sets.
In this paper we offer a new paradigm for computing high fidelity implicit neural representations
directly from raw data (i.e., point clouds, with or
without normal information). We observe that a
rather simple loss function, encouraging the neural network to vanish on the input point cloud
and to have a unit norm gradient, possesses an
implicit geometric regularization property that favors smooth and natural zero level set surfaces,
avoiding bad zero-loss solutions.
We provide a theoretical analysis of this property
for the linear case, and show that, in practice, our
method leads to state of the art implicit neural
representations with higher level-of-details and
fidelity compared to previous methods.

1. Introduction
Recently, level sets of neural networks have been used to
represent 3D shapes (Park et al., 2019; Atzmon et al., 2019;
Chen & Zhang, 2019; Mescheder et al., 2019), i.e.,

M = x ∈ R3 | f (x; θ) = 0 ,
(1)
where f : R3 × Rm → R is a multilayer perceptron (MLP);
we call such representations implicit neural representations.
Compared to the more traditional way of representing surfaces via implicit functions defined on volumetric grids (Wu
1

Department of Computer Science & Applied Mathematics,
Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel. Correspondence
to: Amos Gropp <amos.gropp@weizmann.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Learning curves from 2D point clouds (white disks) using
our method; black lines depict the zero level sets of the trained
neural networks, M. The implicit geometric regularization drives
the optimization to reach plausible explanation of the data.

et al., 2016; Choy et al., 2016; Dai et al., 2017; Stutz &
Geiger, 2018), neural implicit representations have the benefit of relating the degrees of freedom of the network (i.e.,
parameters) directly to the shape rather than to the fixed
discretization of the ambient 3D space. So far, most previous works using implicit neural representations computed
f with 3D supervision; that is, by comparing f to a known
(or pre-computed) implicit representation of some shape.
(Park et al., 2019) use a regression loss to approximate a
pre-computed signed distance functions of shapes; (Chen &
Zhang, 2019; Mescheder et al., 2019) use classification loss
with pre-computed occupancy function.
In this work we are interested in working directly with raw
data: Given an input point cloud X = {xi }i∈I ⊂ R3 , with
or without normal data, N = {ni }i∈I ⊂ R3 , our goal is
to compute θ such that f (x; θ) is approximately the signed
distance function to a plausible surface M defined by the
point data X and normals N .
Some previous works are constructing implicit neural representations from raw data. In (Atzmon et al., 2019) no 3D
supervision is required and the loss is formulated directly on
the zero level set M; iterative sampling of the zero level set
is required for formulating the loss. In a more recent work,
(Atzmon & Lipman, 2020) use unsigned regression to introduce good local minima that produces useful implicit neural
representations, with no 3D supervision and no zero level set

