Interpretable, Multidimensional, Multimodal Anomaly Detection
with Negative Sampling for Detection of Device Failure

John Sipple 1

Abstract

In this paper we propose a scalable, unsupervised
approach for detecting anomalies in the Internet
of Things (IoT). Complex devices are connected
daily and eagerly generate vast streams of multidimensional telemetry. These devices often operate
in distinct modes based on external conditions
(day/night, occupied/vacant, etc.), and to prevent
complete or partial system outage, we would like
to recognize as early as possible when these devices begin to operate outside the normal modes.
We propose an unsupervised anomaly detection
method that creates a negative sample from the
positive, observed sample, and trains a classifier
to distinguish between positive and negative samples. Using the Concentration Phenomenon, we
explain why such a classifier ought to establish
suitable decision boundaries between normal and
anomalous regions, and show how Integrated Gradients can attribute the anomaly to specific dimensions within the anomalous state vector. We have
demonstrated that negative sampling with random
forest or neural network classifiers yield significantly higher AUC scores compared to state-ofthe-art approaches against benchmark anomaly
detection datasets, and a multidimensional, multimodal dataset from real climate control devices.
Finally, we describe how negative sampling with
neural network classifiers have been successfully
deployed at large scale to predict failures in real
time in over 15,000 climate-control and power
meter devices in 145 office buildings within the
California Bay Area.

1
Google, Mountain View, California, USA. Correspondence to:
John Sipple <sipple@google.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
In this paper we propose a scalable, unsupervised approach
to detecting anomalies in data streams of Internet of Things
(IoT) connected devices. Complex devices are connected
daily and eagerly generate vast streams of multidimensional
measurements characterizing their momentary state. Occasionally, some devices fail, resulting in a system outage, and
postmortem analysis reveals that these devices generated
unusual states before the outage. Had technical staff been
promptly alerted, they could have preemptively fixed the
device. It is often impractical or impossible to predict failures on fixed rules or supervised machine learning methods,
because failures are too complex, devices are too new to
adequately characterize both normal and failure modes in a
specific environment, or the environment changes and puts
the device into an unpredictable condition. Examples of
such complex networked devices include power and climate
control in commercial buildings, servers and computers in
data centers, badge readers and alarms in physical security
systems, and electromechanical components in powerplants.
In this paper, we explore an approach that automatically
observes a complex system, generates a normal, multidimensional baseline, and detects anomalous measurements
from the incoming data stream.
Anomaly detection refers to the problem of finding patterns
in data that do not conform to expected behavior (Chandola
et al., 2009). Multidimensional data points may be anomalous because, in one or more dimensions, the value lies
outside of an expected range, or because an expected correlation between two or more dimensions is violated. For
example, suppose a thermostat reports periodic updates of
an observed temperature and a setpoint temperature. An
anomaly may occur when the observed temperature exceeds
the normal range (i.e., too hot or too cold), or when the
observed temperature and setpoint temperature values no
longer correlate, even if both values themselves fall within
normal ranges (i.e., the climate control device fails to maintain a desired setpoint temperature).
Anomaly detection algorithms generally proceed in two
steps. The first step is to characterize a normal baseline
model. The second step is to score each new data point
as normal or anomalous. This score may be a simple bi-

