Visual Grounding of Learned Physical Models

Yunzhu Li 1 Toru Lin * 1 Kexin Yi * 2 Daniel M. Bear 3 Daniel L. K. Yamins 3
Jiajun Wu 4 Joshua B. Tenenbaum 5 Antonio Torralba 5

Abstract
Humans intuitively recognize objects’ physical
properties and predict their motion, even when
the objects are engaged in complicated interactions. The abilities to perform physical reasoning
and to adapt to new environments, while intrinsic
to humans, remain challenging to state-of-the-art
computational models. In this work, we present a
neural model that simultaneously reasons about
physics and makes future predictions based on
visual and dynamics priors. The visual prior predicts a particle-based representation of the system
from visual observations. An inference module
operates on those particles, predicting and refining estimates of particle locations, object states,
and physical parameters, subject to the constraints
imposed by the dynamics prior, which we refer
to as visual grounding. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in environments involving rigid objects, deformable materials, and fluids. Experiments show that our model can infer
the physical properties within a few observations,
which allows the model to quickly adapt to unseen
scenarios and make accurate predictions into the
future.

1. Introduction
Understanding the physical properties of interacting objects
has been a long-standing goal in computer vision, robotics,
and artificial intelligence. As humans, by merely watching
objects interact, we are able to distinguish between different object instances, reason about their physical properties,
and make predictions on their future motion. More impressively, our ability to recognize, model, and predict the
*

Equal contribution, listed in alphabetical order. 1 MIT CSAIL
2
Harvard University 3 Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute and Department of Psychology, Stanford University 4 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University 5 MIT BCS, CBMM, CSAIL.
Correspondence to: Yunzhu Li <liyunzhu@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

dynamics of physical systems applies to not only rigid bodies, but also deformable objects such as elastic materials
and fluids (Bates et al., 2019). Given the example shown in
Figure 1, humans can automatically identify the separation
between liquid (water) and solid (floating cube), estimate
their properties such as gravity, density, and viscosity, and
predict key features of their future motion through mental
simulation (Battaglia et al., 2013; Hamrick et al., 2016).
For computational systems, physical reasoning on interacting deformable objects has been a highly challenging task,
due to the diverse dynamical characteristics of different
materials and their interactions. Take fluid as an example:
fluids can deform, separate, merge, compress, and oscillate
into arbitrary shapes, and some are hard to perceive due
to their transparent nature. Prior works on system identification for robotics usually make strong assumptions on
the structure of the underlying system (Ljung, 2001), or require a lot of data to train a forward model (Finn & Levine,
2017), and therefore have a hard time modeling complex deformable objects like fluids and adapting to new scenarios.
On the other hand, particle-based representations have
recently gained attention in physical reasoning and control (Mrowca et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019a).
Particles provide a dense and flexible representation that is
well-suited for representing objects with diverse material
and dynamical properties. Particles also facilitate relational
inductive biases for more generalizable dynamics modeling.
Recently, the DPI-Net (Li et al., 2019a) has achieved strong
results in modeling a variety of rigid and deformable object
dynamics. The network is able to accurately predict the forward dynamics of the particles based on their pre-designated
grouping and physical parameters (stiffness, viscosity, gravity, etc.). However, inference and visual grounding of these
essential properties remain a challenging research problem.
In this work, we focus on the problem of physical reasoning
about interacting deformable objects and propose a particlebased model that jointly refines the particle locations and
estimates their physical properties based on learned visual
and dynamic priors. Our model, named Visually Grounded
Physics Learner (VGPL), first generates a coarse proposal
of particle positions and grouping from raw visual observations (visual prior). It then uses a learned dynamics model

