Message Passing Least Squares Framework
and its Application to Rotation Synchronization

Yunpeng Shi 1 Gilad Lerman 1

Abstract
We propose an efficient algorithm for solving group
synchronization under high levels of corruption and
noise, while we focus on rotation synchronization. We
first describe our recent theoretically guaranteed message passing algorithm that estimates the corruption
levels of the measured group ratios. We then propose a
novel reweighted least squares method to estimate the
group elements, where the weights are initialized and
iteratively updated using the estimated corruption levels. We demonstrate the superior performance of our
algorithm over state-of-the-art methods for rotation
synchronization using both synthetic and real data.

1. Introduction
The problem of group synchronization is critical for various tasks
in data science, including structure from motion (SfM), simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM), Cryo-electron microscopy
imaging, sensor network localization, multi-object matching and
community detection. Rotation synchronization, also known as
rotation averaging, is the most common group synchronization
problems in 3D reconstruction. It asks to recover camera rotations
from measured relative rotations between pairs of cameras. Permutation synchronization, which has applications in multi-object
matching, asks to obtain globally consistent matches of objects
from possibly erroneous measurements of matches between some
pairs of objects. The simplest example of group synchronization
is Z2 synchronization, which appears in community detection.
The general problem of group synchronization can be mathematically formulated as follows. Assume a graph G([n],E)
with n vertices indexed by [n]={1,...,n}, a group G, and a set
of group elements {gi∗}ni=1 ⊆ G. The problem asks to recover
{gi∗}ni=1 from noisy and corrupted measurements {gij }ij∈E
of the group ratios {gi∗gj∗−1}ij∈E . We note that one can only
recover, or approximate, the original group elements {gi∗}i∈[n]
∗
up to a right group action. Indeed, for any g0 ∈ G, gij
can
∗
∗
−1
∗
also be written as gi g0(gj g0) and thus {gi g0}i∈[n] is also
1

School of Mathematics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
MN, USA. Correspondence to: Yunpeng Shi<shixx517@umn.edu>,
Gilad Lerman<lerman@umn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine Learning,
Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

a solution. The above mentioned synchronization problems
(rotation, permutation, and Z2 synchronization) correspond to
the groups SO(3), SN , and Z2, respectively.
The most challenging issue for group synchronization is the
practical scenario of highly corrupted and noisy measurements.
Traditional least squares solvers often fail to produce accurate
results in such a scenario. Moreover, some basic estimators that
seem to be robust to corruption often do not tolerate in practice
high level of noise. We aim to propose a general method for
group synchronization that may tolerate high levels and different
kinds of corruption and noise. While our basic ideas are formally
general, in order to carefully refine and test them, we focus
on the special problem of rotation synchronization, which is
also known as rotation averaging (Hartley et al., 2013). We
choose this problem as it is the most common, and possibly most
difficult, synchronization problem in 3D computer vision.
1.1. Related Works
Most previous group synchronization solvers minimize an energy
function. For the discrete groups Z2 and SN , least squares energy
minimization is commonly used. Relevant robustness results,
under special corruption and noise models, are discussed in Abbe
et al. (2014); Abbe (2017); Bandeira (2018); Chen et al. (2014);
Huang & Guibas (2013); Huroyan (2018); Pachauri et al. (2013).
For Lie groups, such as SO(D), that is, the group of D×D orthogonal matrices with determinant 1, where D ≥2, least squares
minimization was proposed to handle Gaussian noise (Bandeira
et al., 2017; Eriksson et al., 2018; Govindu, 2004). However,
when the measurements are also adversarially corrupted, this
framework does not work well and other corruption-robust energy
functions need to be used (Chatterjee & Govindu, 2013; 2018;
Hartley et al., 2011; Maunu & Lerman, 2020; Wang & Singer,
2013). The most common corruption-robust energy function
uses least absolute deviations. Wang & Singer (2013) prove
that under a very special probabilistic setting with G =SO(D),
the pure minimizer of this energy function can exactly recover
the underlying group elements with high probability. However,
their assumptions are strong and they use convex relaxation,
which changes the original problem and is expensive to compute.
Maunu & Lerman (2020) apply a trimmed averaging procedure
for robustly solving SO(2) synchronization. They are able
to recover the ground truth group elements under a special
deterministic condition on the topology of the corrupted subgraph.
However, the verification of this condition and its extension to

