Graph Structure of Neural Networks

Jiaxuan You 1 Jure Leskovec 1 Kaiming He 2 Saining Xie 2

Abstract

all the way to the output neurons (McClelland et al., 1986).

Neural networks are often represented as graphs
of connections between neurons. However, despite their wide use, there is currently little understanding of the relationship between the graph
structure of the neural network and its predictive
performance. Here we systematically investigate
how does the graph structure of neural networks
affect their predictive performance. To this end,
we develop a novel graph-based representation of
neural networks called relational graph, where
layers of neural network computation correspond
to rounds of message exchange along the graph
structure. Using this representation we show that:
(1) a “sweet spot” of relational graphs leads to
neural networks with significantly improved predictive performance; (2) neural network’s performance is approximately a smooth function of the
clustering coefficient and average path length of
its relational graph; (3) our findings are consistent
across many different tasks and datasets; (4) the
sweet spot can be identified efficiently; (5) topperforming neural networks have graph structure
surprisingly similar to those of real biological neural networks. Our work opens new directions for
the design of neural architectures and the understanding on neural networks in general.

While it has been widely observed that performance of neural networks depends on their architecture (LeCun et al.,
1998; Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Simonyan & Zisserman,
2015; Szegedy et al., 2015; He et al., 2016), there is currently
little systematic understanding on the relation between a
neural network’s accuracy and its underlying graph structure. This is especially important for the neural architecture
search, which today exhaustively searches over all possible
connectivity patterns (Ying et al., 2019). From this perspective, several open questions arise: Is there a systematic
link between the network structure and its predictive performance? What are structural signatures of well-performing
neural networks? How do such structural signatures generalize across tasks and datasets? Is there an efficient way to
check whether a given neural network is promising or not?

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks consist of neurons organized into layers and connections between them. Architecture of a neural
network can be captured by its “computational graph” where
neurons are represented as nodes and directed edges link
neurons in different layers. Such graphical representation
demonstrates how the network passes and transforms the
information from its input neurons, through hidden layers
1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to: Jiaxuan You <jiaxuan@cs.stanford.edu>, Saining Xie <s9xie@fb.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Establishing such a relation is both scientifically and practically important because it would have direct consequences
on designing more efficient and more accurate architectures.
It would also inform the design of new hardware architectures that execute neural networks. Understanding the graph
structures that underlie neural networks would also advance
the science of deep learning.
However, establishing the relation between network architecture and its accuracy is nontrivial, because it is unclear
how to map a neural network to a graph (and vice versa).
The natural choice would be to use computational graph representation but it has many limitations: (1) lack of generality:
Computational graphs are constrained by the allowed graph
properties, e.g., these graphs have to be directed and acyclic
(DAGs), bipartite at the layer level, and single-in-single-out
at the network level (Xie et al., 2019). This limits the use of
the rich tools developed for general graphs. (2) Disconnection with biology/neuroscience: Biological neural networks
have a much richer and less templatized structure (Fornito
et al., 2013). There are information exchanges, rather than
just single-directional flows, in the brain networks (Stringer
et al., 2018). Such biological or neurological models cannot
be simply represented by directed acyclic graphs.
Here we systematically study the relationship between the
graph structure of a neural network and its predictive performance. We develop a new way of representing a neural
network as a graph, which we call relational graph. Our

