Analytic Marching: An Analytic Meshing Solution from
Deep Implicit Surface Networks

Jiabao Lei 1 2 Kui Jia 1 2

Abstract
This paper studies a problem of learning surface mesh via implicit functions in an emerging field of deep learning surface reconstruction,
where implicit functions are popularly implemented as multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) with
rectified linear units (ReLU). To achieve meshing
from learned implicit functions, existing methods
adopt the de-facto standard algorithm of marching cubes; while promising, they suffer from loss
of precision learned in the MLPs, due to the
discretization nature of marching cubes. Motivated by the knowledge that a ReLU based MLP
partitions its input space into a number of linear regions, we identify from these regions analytic cells and analytic faces that are associated
with zero-level isosurface of the implicit function, and characterize the theoretical conditions
under which the identified analytic faces are guaranteed to connect and form a closed, piecewise
planar surface. Based on our theorem, we propose a naturally parallelizable algorithm of analytic marching, which marches among analytic
cells to exactly recover the mesh captured by a
learned MLP. Experiments on deep learning mesh
reconstruction verify the advantages of our algorithm over existing ones.

1. Introduction
This paper studies a geometric notion of object surface
whose nature is a 2-dimensional manifold embedded in the
3D space. In literature, there exist many different ways to
represent an object surface, either explicitly or implicitly
1
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, South China
University of Technology, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China 2 Pazhou
Lab, Guangzhou, 510335, China. Correspondence to: Kui Jia
<kuijia@scut.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

(Botsch et al., 2010). For example, one of the most popular representations is polygonal mesh that approximates a
smooth surface as piecewise linear functions. Mesh representation of object surface plays fundamental roles in many
applications of computer graphics and geometry processing, e.g., computer-aided design, movie production, and
virtual/augmented reality.
As a parametric representation of object surface, the most
typical triangle mesh is explicitly defined as a collection
of connected faces, each of which has three vertices that
uniquely determine plane parameters of the face in the 3D
space. However, parametric surface representations are usually difficult to obtain, especially for topologically complex
surface; queries of points inside or outside the surface are
expensive as well. Instead, one usually resorts to implicit
functions (e.g., signed distance function or SDF (Curless &
Levoy, 1996; Park et al., 2019)), which subsume the surface
as zero-level isosurface in the function field; other implicit
representations include discrete volumes and those based
on algebraic (Blinn, 1982; Nishimura et al., 1985; Wyvill
et al., 1986) and radial basis functions (Carr et al., 2001;
1997; Turk & O’Brien, 1999). To obtain a surface mesh,
the continuous field function is often discretized around the
object as a regular grid of voxels, followed by the de-facto
standard algorithm of marching cubes (Lorensen & Cline,
1987). Efficiency and result regularity of marching cubes
can be improved on a hierarchically sampled structure of
octree via algorithms such as dual contouring (Ju et al.,
2002).
The most popular implicit function of SDF is traditionally
implemented discretely as a regular grid of voxels. More
recently, methods of deep learning surface reconstruction
(Park et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2019) propose to use deep models of Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) to learn continuous
SDFs; given a learned SDF, they typically take a final step
of marching cubes to obtain the mesh reconstruction results.
While promising, the final step of marching cubes recovers
a mesh that is only an approximation of the surface captured by the learned SDF; more specifically, it suffers from
a trade-off of efficiency and precision, due to the discretization nature of the marching cubes algorithm.
Motivated by the established knowledge that an MLP based

