Bridging the Gap Between f -GANs and Wasserstein GANs

Jiaming Song 1 Stefano Ermon 1

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) variants
approximately minimize divergences between the
model and the data distribution using a discriminator. Wasserstein GANs (WGANs) enjoy superior empirical performance, however, unlike in
f -GANs, the discriminator does not provide an
estimate for the ratio between model and data
densities, which is useful in applications such
as inverse reinforcement learning. To overcome
this limitation, we propose an new training objective where we additionally optimize over a set
of importance weights over the generated samples. By suitably constraining the feasible set of
importance weights, we obtain a family of objectives which includes and generalizes the original
f -GAN and WGAN objectives. We show that
a natural extension outperforms WGANs while
providing density ratios as in f -GAN, and demonstrate empirical success on distribution modeling,
density ratio estimation and image generation.

1. Introduction
Learning generative models to sample from complex, highdimensional distributions is an important task in machine
learning with many important applications, such as image generation (Kingma & Welling, 2013), imitation learning (Ho & Ermon, 2016) and representation learning (Chen
et al., 2016). Generative adversarial networks (GANs, Goodfellow et al. (2014)) are likelihood-free deep generative
models (Mohamed & Lakshminarayanan, 2016) based on
finding the equilibrium of a two-player minimax game between a generator and a critic (discriminator). Assuming the
optimal critic is obtained, one can cast the GAN learning
procedure as minimizing a discrepancy measure between
the distribution induced by the generator and the training
data distribution.
1
Stanford University. Correspondence to: Jimaing Song
<tsong@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Various GAN learning procedures have been proposed
for different discrepancy measures. f -GANs (Nowozin
et al., 2016) minimize a variational approximation of the
f -divergence between two distributions (Csiszár, 1964;
Nguyen et al., 2008). In this case, the critic acts as a density
ratio estimator (Uehara et al., 2016; Grover & Ermon, 2017),
i.e., it estimates if points are more likely to be generated
by the data or the generator distribution. This includes the
original GAN approach (Goodfellow et al., 2014) which
can be seen as minimizing a variational approximation to
the Jensen-Shannon divergence. Knowledge of the density
ratio between two distributions can be used for importance
sampling and in a range of practical applications such as
mutual information estimation (Hjelm et al., 2018), offpolicy policy evaluation (Liu et al., 2018), and de-biasing
of generative models (Grover et al., 2019).
Another family of GAN approaches are developed based on
Integral Probability Metrics (IPMs, Müller (1997)), where
the critic (discriminator) is restricted to particular function families. For the family of Lipschitz-1 functions, the
IPM reduces to the Wasserstein-1 or earth mover’s distance (Rubner et al., 2000), which motivates the Wasserstein GAN (WGAN, Arjovsky et al. (2017)) setting. Various approaches have been applied to enforce Lipschitzness,
including weight clipping (Arjovsky et al., 2017), gradient penalty (Gulrajani et al., 2017) and spectral normalization (Miyato et al., 2018). Despite its strong empirical
success in image generation (Karras et al., 2017; Brock et al.,
2018), the learned critic cannot be interpreted as a density
ratio estimator, which limits its usefulness for importance
sampling or other GAN-related applications such as inverse
reinforcement learning (Yu et al., 2019).
In this paper, we address this problem via a generalized
view of f -GANs and WGANs. The generalized view introduces importance weights over the generated samples in the
critic objective, allowing prioritization over the training of
different samples. The algorithm designer can select suitable feasible sets to constrain the importance weights; we
show that both f -GAN and WGAN are special cases to this
generalization when specific feasible sets are considered.
We further discuss cases that select alternative feasible sets
where divergences other than f -divergence and IPMs can
be obtained.

