Parallel Algorithm for Non-Monotone DR-Submodular Maximization
Alina Ene * 1 Huy L. Nguyễn * 2

Abstract
In this work, we give a new parallel algorithm
for the problem of maximizing a non-monotone
diminishing returns submodular function subject
to a cardinality constraint. For any desired accuracy , our algorithm achieves a 1/e −  approximation using O(log n log(1/)/3 ) parallel
rounds of function evaluations. The approximation guarantee nearly matches the best approximation guarantee known for the problem in the sequential setting and the number of parallel rounds
is nearly-optimal for any constant . Previous algorithms achieve worse approximation guarantees
using Ω(log2 n) parallel rounds. Our experimental evaluation suggests that our algorithm obtains
solutions whose objective value nearly matches
the value obtained by the state of the art sequential
algorithms, and it outperforms previous parallel
algorithms in number of parallel rounds, iterations, and solution quality.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we study parallel algorithms for the problem
of maximizing a non-monotone DR-submodular function
subject to a single cardinality constraint. The problem is
a generalization of submodular maximization subject to a
cardinality constraint. Many recent works have shown that
DR-submodular maximization has a wide-range of applications beyond submodular maximization. These applications
include maximum a-posteriori (MAP) inference for determinantal point processes (DPP), mean-field inference in
log-submodular models, quadratic programming, and revenue maximization in social networks (Kulesza et al., 2012;
Gillenwater et al., 2012; Bian et al., 2016; Ito & Fujimaki,
2016; Soma & Yoshida, 2017; Bian et al., 2017; 2018).
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Boston
University 2 Khoury College of Computer and Information Science, Northeastern University. Correspondence to: Alina Ene
<aene@bu.edu>, Huy L. Nguyễn <hu.nguyen@northeastern.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

The problem of maximizing a DR-submodular function
subject to a convex constraint is a notable example of a
non-convex optimization problem that can be solved with
provable approximation guarantees. The continuous Greedy
algorithm (Vondrák, 2008) developed in the context of the
multilinear relaxation framework applies more generally to
maximizing DR-submodular functions that are monotone
increasing (if ~x ≤ ~y coordinate-wise then f (~x) ≤ f (~y )).
Feldman et al. (Feldman et al., 2011) developed a variant of
continuous Greedy for non-monotone objectives. Chekuri
et al. (Chekuri et al., 2015) developed algorithms for both
monotone and non-monotone DR-submodular maximization subject to packing constraints that are based on the
continuous Greedy and multiplicative weights update framework. The work (Bian et al., 2017) generalized continuous
Greedy for submodular functions to the DR-submodular
case and developed Frank-Wolfe-style algorithms for maximimizing non-monotone DR-submodular function subject
to general convex constraints.
A significant drawback of these algorithms is that they
are inherently sequential and adaptive. In fact the highly
adaptive nature of these algorithms goes back to the classical greedy algorithm for submodular functions: the algorithm sequentially selects the next element based on the
marginal gain on top of previous elements. In certain settings such as feature selection (Khanna et al., 2017) evaluating the objective function is a time-consuming procedure
and the main bottleneck of the optimization algorithm and
therefore, parallelization is a must. Recent lines of work
have focused on addressing these shortcomings and understanding the trade-offs between approximation guarantee,
parallelization, and adaptivity. Starting with the work of
Balkanski and Singer (Balkanski & Singer, 2018), there
have been very recent efforts to understand the tradeoff
between approximation guarantee and adaptivity for submodular maximization (Balkanski & Singer, 2018; Ene
& Nguyen, 2019; Balkanski et al., 2019; Fahrbach et al.,
2019; Chekuri & Quanrud, 2019; Balkanski et al., 2018).
The adaptivity of an algorithm is the number of sequential
rounds of queries it makes to the evaluation oracle of the
function, where in every round the algorithm is allowed to
make polynomially-many parallel queries. Recently, the
work (Fahrbach et al., 2018) gave an algorithm for maximizing a submodular function subject to a cardinality constraint

