Adversarial Robustness Against the Union of Multiple Perturbation Models

Pratyush Maini 1 Eric Wong 2 J. Zico Kolter 3 4

Abstract
Owing to the susceptibility of deep learning systems to adversarial attacks, there has been a great
deal of work in developing (both empirically and
certifiably) robust classifiers. While most work
has defended against a single type of attack, recent work has looked at defending against multiple perturbation models using simple aggregations of multiple attacks. However, these methods
can be difficult to tune, and can easily result in
imbalanced degrees of robustness to individual
perturbation models, resulting in a sub-optimal
worst-case loss over the union. In this work, we
develop a natural generalization of the standard
PGD-based procedure to incorporate multiple perturbation models into a single attack, by taking
the worst-case over all steepest descent directions.
This approach has the advantage of directly converging upon a trade-off between different perturbation models which minimizes the worst-case
performance over the union. With this approach,
we are able to train standard architectures which
are simultaneously robust against ℓ∞ , ℓ2 , and ℓ1
attacks, outperforming past approaches on the
MNIST and CIFAR10 datasets and achieving adversarial accuracy of 47.0% against the union of
(ℓ∞ , ℓ2 , ℓ1 ) perturbations with radius = (0.03,
0.5, 12) on the latter, improving upon previous
approaches which achieve 40.6% accuracy.

1. Introduction
Machine learning algorithms have been shown to be susceptible to adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2014) through
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT
Delhi, India 2 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA 3 Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA 4 Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. Correspondence to: Pratyush Maini
<pratyush.maini@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

the existence of data points which can be adversarially perturbed to be misclassified, but are “close enough” to the
original example to be imperceptible to the human eye.
Methods to generate adversarial examples, or “attacks”,
typically rely on gradient information, and most commonly
use variations of projected gradient descent (PGD) to maximize the loss within a small perturbation region, usually
referred to as the adversary’s perturbation model. A number
of heuristic defenses have been proposed to defend against
this phenomenon, e.g. distillation (Papernot et al., 2016) or
logit-pairing (Kannan et al., 2018). However, as time goes
by, the original robustness claims of these defenses typically don’t hold up to more advanced adversaries or more
thorough attacks (Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Engstrom et al.,
2018; Mosbach et al., 2018). One heuristic defense that
seems to have survived (to this day) is to use adversarial
training against a PGD adversary (Madry et al., 2018), and
remains quite popular due to its simplicity and apparent empirical robustness. The method continues to perform well
in empirical benchmarks even when compared to recent
work in provable defenses, though it comes with no formal
guarantees.
While adversarial training has primarily been used to learn
models robust to a single perturbation model, some recent
work has looked at empirically defending against multiple
perturbation models simultaneously. Schott et al. (2019)
proposed a variational autoencoder based architecture to
learn an MNIST classifier which was robust to multiple perturbation models, while Tramèr & Boneh (2019) proposed
simple aggregations of different adversaries for adversarial
training against multiple perturbation models.
While these approaches can achieve varying degrees of robustness to the considered adversarial perturbation models,
in practice it is quite difficult to achieve an optimal trade-off
which minimizes the worst-case error in the union of perturbation models. Rather, these approaches tend to converge
to suboptimal local minima, resulting in a model that is
highly robust to certain perturbation models while failing to
defend against others, and the robust performance can often
vary substantially across datasets. This results in poor and
unpredictable robust performance against the worst-case attack, and indicates that the optimization procedure actually
fails to minimize the worst-case loss in the union of the
perturbation models.

