Multi-Agent Determinantal Q-Learning

Yaodong Yang * 1 2 Ying Wen * 1 2 Liheng Chen 3 Jun Wang 2 Kun Shao 1 David Mguni 1 Weinan Zhang 3

Abstract
Centralized training with decentralized execution
has become an important paradigm in multi-agent
learning. Though practical, current methods rely
on restrictive assumptions to decompose the centralized value function across agents for execution. In this paper, we eliminate this restriction by
proposing multi-agent determinantal Q-learning.
Our method is established on Q-DPP, an extension of determinantal point process (DPP) with
partition-matroid constraint to multi-agent setting.
Q-DPP promotes agents to acquire diverse behavioral models; this allows a natural factorization
of the joint Q-functions with no need for a priori structural constraints on the value function or
special network architectures. We demonstrate
that Q-DPP generalizes major solutions including
VDN, QMIX, and QTRAN on decentralizable cooperative tasks. To efficiently draw samples from
Q-DPP, we adopt an existing linear-time sampler
with theoretical approximation guarantee. The
sampler also benefits exploration by coordinating agents to cover orthogonal directions in the
state space during multi-agent training. We evaluate our algorithm on various cooperative benchmarks; its effectiveness has been demonstrated
when compared with the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) methods hold
great potential to solve a variety of real-world problems,
such as mastering multi-player video games (Peng et al.,
2017), dispatching taxi orders (Li et al., 2019), and studying
population dynamics (Yang et al., 2018). In this work, we
consider the multi-agent cooperative setting (Panait & Luke,
2005) where a team of agents collaborate to achieve one
common goal in a partially observed environment.
*

1
Equal contribution
Huawei Technology R&D UK.
University College London. 3 Shanghai Jiaotong University. Correspondence to: Yaodong Yang <yaodong.yang@huawei.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

A full spectrum of MARL algorithms has been developed
to solve cooperative tasks (Panait & Luke, 2005); the two
endpoints of the spectrum are independent and centralized
learning (see Fig. 1). Independent learning (IL) (Tan, 1993)
merely treats other agents’ influence to the system as part
of the environment. The learning agent not only faces a
non-stationary environment, but also suffers from spurious
rewards (Sunehag et al., 2017; Du et al., 2019). Centralized
learning (CL), at the other end, treats a multi-agent problem
as a single-agent problem despite the fact that many realworld applications require local autonomy. Importantly, the
CL approaches exhibit combinatorial complexity and can
hardly scale to more than tens of agents (Yang et al., 2019).
Another paradigm typically considered is a hybrid of centralized training and decentralized execution (CTDE) (Oliehoek
et al., 2008). For value-based approaches in the framework
of CTDE, a fundamental challenge is how to correctly decompose the centralized value function among agents for decentralized execution. For a cooperative task to be deemed
decentralizable, it is required that local maxima on the value
function per every agent should amount to the global maximum on the joint value function. In enforcing such a condition, current state-of-the-art methods rely on restrictive
structural constraints and/or network architectures. For instance, Value Decomposition Network (VDN) (Sunehag
et al., 2017) and Factorized-Q (Zhou et al., 2019) propose
to directly factorize the joint value function into a summation of individual value functions. QMIX (Rashid et al.,
2018) augments the summation to be non-linear aggregations, while maintaining a monotonic relationship between
centralized and individual value functions. QTRAN (Son
et al., 2019) introduces a refined learning objective on top
of QMIX along with specific network designs.
Unsurprisingly, the structural constraints put forward by
VDN / QMIX / QTRAN inhibit the representational power
of the centralized value function (Son et al., 2019); as a
result, the class of decentralizable cooperative tasks these
methods can tackle is limited. For example, poor empirical
results of QTRAN have been reported on multiple multiagent cooperative benchmarks (Mahajan et al., 2019).
Apart from the aforementioned problems, structural constraints also hinder efficient explorations when applied to
value function decomposition. In fact, since agents behave

