How recurrent networks implement contextual processing in sentiment analysis

Niru Maheswaranathan * 1 David Sussillo * 1

Abstract
Neural networks have a remarkable capacity for
contextual processing—using recent or nearby inputs to modify processing of current input. For
example, in natural language, contextual processing is necessary to correctly interpret negation
(e.g. phrases such as “not bad”). However, our
ability to understand how networks process context is limited. Here, we propose general methods for reverse engineering recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to identify and elucidate contextual
processing. We apply these methods to understand RNNs trained on sentiment classification.
This analysis reveals inputs that induce contextual
effects, quantifies the strength and timescale of
these effects, and identifies sets of these inputs
with similar properties. Additionally, we analyze
contextual effects related to differential processing of the beginning and end of documents. Using
the insights learned from the RNNs we improve
baseline Bag-of-Words models with simple extensions that incorporate contextual modification,
recovering greater than 90% of the RNN’s performance increase over the baseline. This work
yields a new understanding of how RNNs process
contextual information, and provides tools that
should provide similar insight more broadly.

1. Introduction
Neural networks do a remarkable job at learning structure
in natural data. These architectures exploit complex relationships between inputs to perform tasks at state-of-the-art
levels (LeCun et al., 2015). Despite this amazing performance, we still only have a rudimentary understanding of
exactly how these networks work (Castelvecchi, 2016).
*
Equal contribution 1 Google Research, Brain Team, Mountain View, California, USA. Correspondence to: Niru Maheswaranathan <nirum@google.com>, David Sussillo <sussillo@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

Rigorously understanding how networks solve important
tasks is a central challenge in deep learning. This understanding is lacking because we use complex optimization
procedures to set the parameters of ever more complex
network architectures. Our inability to fundamentally understand how a trained system works makes it difficult to
identify biases in the network or training data, control for adversarial input, bracket or bound network behavior, suggest
ways of improving efficiency or accuracy, and elucidate the
(potentially simple) core mechanisms underlying the task.
In this work, we focus on building general tools and analyses to understand how recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
process contextual effects. By contextual effects, we mean
effects where the interpretation of an input depends on surrounding inputs. For example, in natural language, the
interpretation of words is modified by preceding words for
negation (“not bad” vs “bad”) or emphasis (“extremely awesome” vs “awesome”) (Quirk et al., 1985; Horn & Kato,
2000). We analyze networks trained to perform sentiment
classification, a commonly studied natural language processing (NLP) task (Wiegand et al., 2010; Mohammad, 2017;
Zhang et al., 2018).
When interpreting or understanding how recurrent networks
work, one line of research uses attribution methods to analyze sensitivity to particular inputs (Simonyan et al., 2013;
Ribeiro et al., 2016; Li et al., 2015; Arras et al., 2017; Murdoch et al., 2018). These methods utilize gradients of the
network loss or unit activations with respect to inputs. A second line of research uses tools from dynamical systems analysis to decompose RNN trajectories (Zipser, 1991; Tsung &
Cottrell, 1995; Casey, 1996; Rodriguez et al., 1999; Sussillo
& Barak, 2013; Mante et al., 2013; Cueva & Wei, 2018;
Jordan et al., 2019; Maheswaranathan et al., 2019b). Here,
we merge these lines of research to understand contextual
processing of large numbers of inputs in recurrent systems.
In particular, our key insight is that rich contextual processing can be understood as a composition of precisely organized input-driven state deflections combined with highly
organized transient dynamics. Critically, the former can
be as understood using Jacobians with respect to the input,
analogous to attribution methods, while the latter can be
understood through Jacobians with respect to the recurrent
state, analogous to work on RNN dynamics.

