Unlabelled Data Improves Bayesian Uncertainty Calibration
under Covariate Shift
Alex J. Chan 1 Ahmed M. Alaa 2 Zhaozhi Qian 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1 2 3

Abstract
Modern neural networks have proven to be powerful function approximators, providing state-ofthe-art performance in a multitude of applications.
They however fall short in their ability to quantify confidence in their predictions — this is crucial in high-stakes applications that involve critical decision-making. Bayesian neural networks
(BNNs) aim at solving this problem by placing a
prior distribution over the network’s parameters,
thereby inducing a posterior distribution that encapsulates predictive uncertainty. While existing
variants of BNNs based on Monte Carlo dropout
produce reliable (albeit approximate) uncertainty
estimates over in-distribution data, they tend to
exhibit over-confidence in predictions made on
target data whose feature distribution differs from
the training data, i.e., the covariate shift setup. In
this paper, we develop an approximate Bayesian
inference scheme based on posterior regularisation, wherein unlabelled target data are used as
“pseudo-labels” of model confidence that are used
to regularise the model’s loss on labelled source
data. We show that this approach significantly improves the accuracy of uncertainty quantification
on covariate-shifted data sets, with minimal modification to the underlying model architecture. We
demonstrate the utility of our method in the context of transferring prognostic models of prostate
cancer across globally diverse populations.

1. Introduction
Modern neural networks have achieved the state of the art
predictive performance in a wide variety of applications.
They are especially useful in areas where a large quan1

University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 2 University of California, Los Angeles, USA 3 Alan Turing Institute, London, UK.
Correspondence to: Alex J. Chan <ajc340@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

tity of labelled i.i.d data are available (Krizhevsky et al.,
2012). However, neural networks fall short in their ability to
quantify their confidence in the predictions, which leads to
difficulties to apply them to mission critical domains. The
immediate problem is that neural networks may issue erroneous predictions with high confidence (Ovadia et al., 2019).
These over-confident predictions would mislead rather than
inform human experts’ decisions and can lead to severe
consequences in high-stakes applications.
In practice, the task of quantifying predictive uncertainty is
even more challenging because the training and testing data
are typically not i.i.d due to the impact of exogenous factors
over time or the inconsistency in data collection. This situation is known as covariate shift (Shimodaira, 2000) and
various research has indicated that this may cause neural
networks to display unexpected behaviour (Ovadia et al.,
2019). In the extreme case, they may confidently produce
nonsensical predictions for out-of-distribution adversarial
examples (Madry et al., 2017). While in this work we do
not consider the scenario of a targeted adversarial attack,
we would like the network to return a high uncertainty prediction if a test point falls far from any of the training data.
We motivate the need for work in the area with a concrete
example; consider the case of trying to predict the mortality
rate for a group of patients with prostate cancer in a country
where we have no labels due to tight privacy regulations on
medical data. We have access though to labelled examples
from another country which we could use to train the model,
the problem being that the populations of each country may
differ in their distribution so a model purely trained on the
labelled data may perform poorly on the unlabelled data
both in terms of accuracy and uncertainty estimation. This
type of problem is common in the medical setting and errors
here are especially damaging since model predictions may
have a direct impact on the treatment a patient receives.
Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) (Neal, 2012) aim to solve
the uncertainty quantification problem by learning neural
networks via Bayesian inference, a principled way to reason under uncertainty. BNNs encapsulate the prediction
uncertainty in the posterior predictive distribution, which
is typically intractable and has to be approximated (Graves,
2011; Blundell et al., 2015). While existing approximation
methods are able to produce reliable uncertainty estimates

