Fast OSCAR and OWL Regression via Safe Screening Rules

Runxue Bao 1 Bin Gu 2 Heng Huang 1 2

Abstract
Ordered Weighted L1 (OWL) regularized regression is a new regression analysis for highdimensional sparse learning. Proximal gradient
methods are used as standard approaches to solve
OWL regression. However, it is still a burning
issue to solve OWL regression due to considerable computational cost and memory usage when
the feature or sample size is large. In this paper,
we propose the first safe screening rule for OWL
regression by exploring the order of the primal
solution with the unknown order structure via an
iterative strategy, which overcomes the difficulties
of tackling the non-separable regularizer. It effectively avoids the updates of the parameters whose
coefficients must be zero during the learning process. More importantly, the proposed screening
rule can be easily applied to standard and stochastic proximal gradient methods. Moreover, we
prove that the algorithms with our screening rule
are guaranteed to have identical results with the
original algorithms. Experimental results on a
variety of datasets show that our screening rule
leads to a significant computational gain without
any loss of accuracy, compared to existing competitive algorithms.

1. Introduction
OWL regression (Bogdan et al., 2013; Zeng & Figueiredo,
2014; Bogdan et al., 2015; Figueiredo & Nowak, 2016; Bao
et al., 2019) has emerged as a useful procedure for highdimensional sparse regression recently, which can promote
the sparsity and grouping simultaneously. Unlike group
Lasso (Yuan & Lin, 2006) and its variants, OWL regression
can identify precise grouping structures of strongly correlated covariates automatically during the learning process
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA 2 JD Finance America Corporation. Correspondence to: Heng Huang <heng.huang@pitt.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

without any prior information of feature groups. Remarkably, (Bu et al., 2019) concluded that it has two good properties to achieve the minimax estimation from the estimation
side without any prior knowledge of coefficients (Su et al.,
2016; Bellec et al., 2018) and controls the false discovery
rate from the testing side (Bogdan et al., 2015; Brzyski et al.,
2019), which do not simultaneously exist in other models
such as Lasso (Tibshirani, 1996) and knockoffs (Barber
et al., 2015). Owing to its effectiveness, OWL is widely
used in various kinds of applications, e.g., gene expression
(Bogdan et al., 2015), brain networks (Oswal et al., 2016)
and neural networks training (Zhang et al., 2018).
Although proximal gradient methods are used as standard
approaches (Bondell & Reich, 2008; Bogdan et al., 2015)
to solve OWL regression, it still suffers from high computational cost and memory usage when the feature or sample
size is large in practice. The main bottleneck is the computation to update the solution in each iteration depends
on all the data points. The screening technique is an easyto-implement and promising approach for accelerating the
training of sparse learning models by eliminating the features whose coefficients must be zero, which can safely
avoid these useless computation during the whole training
process.
The safe screening rules introduced by (Laurent El Ghaoui,
2012) for generalized l1 regularized problems eliminate features whose associated coefficients are proved to be zero
at the optimum. The screening rule in (Laurent El Ghaoui,
2012) is called static safe rules, which is only performed
once, prior to any optimization algorithm. Relaxing the
safe rules, heuristic strategies, called strong rules (Tibshirani et al., 2012), reduce the computational cost using an
active set strategy at the price of possible mistakes, which
requires difficult post-processing to check for features possibly wrongly discarded. Another road to screening method is
called sequential safe rules (Wang et al., 2013; Xiang et al.,
2016). The sequential screening rule relies on the exact
dual optimal solution, which could be very time-consuming
and lead to be unsafe in practice. Recently, the introduction
of safe dynamic rules (Fercoq et al., 2015) has opened a
promising venue by conducting safe screening not only at
the beginning of the algorithm, but also during the learning process. Following (Fercoq et al., 2015) for Lasso,
many dynamic screening rules relying on the duality gap

