Model Fusion with Kullback–Leibler Divergence

Sebastian Claici * 1 2 Mikhail Yurochkin * 2 3 Soumya Ghosh 2 3 Justin Solomon 1 2

Abstract
We propose a method to fuse posterior distributions learned from heterogeneous datasets. Our
algorithm relies on a mean field assumption for
both the fused model and the individual dataset
posteriors and proceeds using a simple assign-andaverage approach. The components of the dataset
posteriors are assigned to the proposed global
model components by solving a regularized variant of the assignment problem. The global components are then updated based on these assignments by their mean under a KL divergence. For
exponential family variational distributions, our
formulation leads to an efficient non-parametric
algorithm for computing the fused model. Our
algorithm is easy to describe and implement, efficient, and competitive with state-of-the-art on
motion capture analysis, topic modeling, and federated learning of Bayesian neural networks.1

1. Introduction
In this paper, we study model fusion, the problem of learning a unified global model from a collection of pre-trained
local models. Model fusion provides a straightforward and
efficient approach to federated learning (FL), in which a
model is learned from siloed data without direct access.
As a motivating example, any one hospital may be able
to use its patient data to train a model aiding diagnosis or
treatment, but due to limited data and skew the resulting
model may not be effective. To overcome this issue, a
group of hospitals could in principle collaborate to produce
a stronger model by pooling their data, but it is typically not
permissible to share individual patient information between
*
Equal contribution 1 CSAIL, MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
USA 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Laboratory, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA 3 IBM Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
Correspondence to: Sebastian Claici <sclaici@csail.mit.edu>,
Mikhail Yurochkin <mikhail.yurochkin@ibm.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
1
Code link: https://github.com/IBM/KL-fusion

(a) Bayesian neural network trained on biased data

(b) Fused Bayesian neural network
Figure 1. Bayesian neural networks can estimate how certain they
are of each prediction they make. To illustrate this, we train a
network on a subset of the MNIST dataset that mostly contains the
digit 2 and ask the network to predict on all digits; confidence is
predictably low on digits other than 2. However, if we are given
several pre-trained networks that each exhibit certain biases, but
which in aggregate have seen examples of all 10 digits, can we
merge them together into a network that has high accuracy and is
confident on all of MNIST? We propose a model fusion approach
to solve this and other related problems. To illustrate our approach,
we train Bayesian neural networks on subsets of MNIST that are
skewed toward a few digits and fuse the trained networks. To
show that the fused network is confident on all 10 digits, we order
samples by the entropy of the network’s prediction for the fused
model (b), and compare to a local model trained on mostly 2s
(a). These images sort examples about which the networks are
most confident (left) to least confident (right). The fused network
is still unconfident on out-of-sample data not used to train any
of the fused networks—in this case, digits from fonts rather than
handwriting—while the biased Bayesian network is unconfident
on digits different than those seen in its training set.

institutions. Federated learning—including model fusion—
provides a means of generating a stronger or more widely-

