Beyond UCB: Optimal and Efficient Contextual Bandits with Regression Oracles

Dylan J. Foster 1 Alexander Rakhlin 1

Abstract
A fundamental challenge in contextual bandits is
to develop flexible, general-purpose algorithms
with computational requirements no worse than
classical supervised learning tasks such as classification and regression. Algorithms based on
regression have shown promising empirical success, but theoretical guarantees have remained
elusive except in special cases. We provide the
first universal and optimal reduction from contextual bandits to online regression. We show how
to transform any oracle for online regression with
a given value function class into an algorithm for
contextual bandits with the induced policy class,
with no overhead in runtime or memory requirements. We characterize the minimax rates for
contextual bandits with general, potentially nonparametric function classes, and show that our algorithm is minimax optimal whenever the oracle
obtains the optimal rate for regression. Compared
to previous results, our algorithm requires no distributional assumptions beyond realizability, and
works even when contexts are chosen adversarially.

1. Introduction
We consider the design of practical, provably efficient algorithms for contextual bandits, where a learner repeatedly
receives contexts and makes decisions on the fly so as to
learn a policy that maximizes their total reward. Contextual
bandits have been successfully applied in user recommendation systems (Agarwal et al., 2016) and mobile health
applications (Tewari & Murphy, 2017), and in theory they
are perhaps simplest reinforcement learning problem that
embeds the full complexity of statistical learning with function approximation.

ible, general purpose algorithms that work for arbitrary,
user-specified classes of policies and come with strong theoretical guarantees on performance. Depending on the task,
a user might wish to try decision trees, kernels, neural nets,
and beyond to get the best performance. General-purpose
contextual bandit algorithms ensure that the user doesn’t
have to design a new algorithm from scratch every time they
encounter a new task.
Oracle-based algorithms constitute the dominant approach
to general-purpose contextual bandits. Broadly, these algorithms seek to reduce the contextual bandit problem to
basic supervised learning tasks such as classification and
regression so that off-the-shelf algorithms can be applied.
However, essentially all oracle-based contextual bandit algorithms suffer from one or more of the following issues:
1. Difficult-to-implement oracle.
2. Strong assumptions on hypothesis class or distribution.
3. High memory and runtime requirements.
Agnostic oracle-efficient algorithms (Langford & Zhang,
2008; Dudik et al., 2011; Agarwal et al., 2014) require
few assumptions on the distribution, but reduce contextual
bandits to cost-sensitive classification. Cost-sensitive classification is intractable even for simple hypothesis classes
(Klivans & Sherstov, 2009), and in practice implementations
are forced to resort to heuristics to implement the oracle
(Agarwal et al., 2014; Krishnamurthy et al., 2016).

1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to:
Dylan Foster <dylanf@mit.edu>.

Foster et al. (2018) recently showed that a variant of the
UCB algorithm for general function classes (Russo &
Van Roy, 2014) can be made efficient in terms of calls to an
oracle for supervised regression. Regression alleviates some
of the practical issues with classification because it can be
solved in closed form for simple classes and is amenable
to gradient-based methods. Indeed, Foster et al. (2018) and
Bietti et al. (2018) found that this algorithm typically outperformed algorithms based on classification oracles across
a range of datasets. However, the theoretical analysis of
the algorithm relies on strong distributional assumptions
that are difficult to verify in practice, and it can indeed fail
pathologically when these assumptions fail to hold.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

All of the provably optimal general-purpose algorithms described above—both classification- and regression-based—
are memory hungry: they keep the entire dataset in memory

A key challenge in contextual bandits is to develop flex-

