Implicit Euler Skip Connections: Enhancing Adversarial Robustness via
Numerical Stability

Mingjie Li 1 Lingshen He 1 Zhouchen Lin 1

Abstract
Deep neural networks have achieved great success in various areas, but recent works have found
that neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial
attacks, which leads to a hot topic nowadays. Although many approaches have been proposed to
enhance the robustness of neural networks, few
of them explored robust architectures for neural
networks. On this account, we try to address
such an issue from the perspective of dynamic
system in this work. By viewing ResNet as an
explicit Euler discretization of an ordinary differential equation (ODE), for the frst time, we
fnd that the adversarial robustness of ResNet is
connected to the numerical stability of the corresponding dynamic system, i.e., more stable numerical schemes may correspond to more robust
deep networks. Furthermore, inspired by the implicit Euler method for solving numerical ODE
problems, we propose Implicit Euler skip connections (IE-Skips) by modifying the original skip
connection in ResNet or its variants. Then we
theoretically prove its advantages under the adversarial attack and the experimental results show
that our ResNet with IE-Skips can largely improve
the robustness and the generalization ability under adversarial attacks when compared with the
vanilla ResNet of the same parameter size.

1. Introduction
Deep Learning (DL) has achieved great success in many
machine learning problems and has been widely used in
various computer vision and neural language processing
tasks. However, recent works show that Neural Networks
are vulnerable to adversarial attacks (Zügner et al., 2018;
1

Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MoE), School of EECS,
Peking University, Beijing 100871. Correspondence to: Zhouchen
Lin <zlin@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016; Szegedy et al., 2013), i.e.,
adding some human-imperceptible noise to the input may
lead to incorrect predictions even for the state-of-the-art convolution neural networks. Such defect signifcantly hampers
the applications to the safety-critical problems such as those
in medical diagnosis.
In order to handle the problems above, researchers have
proposed many training methods to make the network
more robust recently, such as the Projected Gradient Descent (Madry et al., 2017) method, YOPO (Zhang et al.,
2019a), TRADES (Zhang et al., 2019b), etc.. But few of
them discussed the immanent robustness of a network structure. In this paper, we concentrate on fnding a more robust
and powerful neural architecture via our theoretical analysis.
There have been many works that bridge the dynamic systems and the neural networks especially ResNet (He et al.,
2016a). Under the assumptions that ResNet is a kind of
explicit (forward) Euler discretization, lots of ResNet variants (Zhu et al., 2018) are proposed based on more accurate
low-order numerical schemes for solving the corresponding
ODEs. While the existing works are based on the assumption that higher natural accuracy (i.e., the accuracy without
adversarial attacks) corresponds to more accurate numerical schemes, we are the frst to propose that higher robust
accuracy (i.e., the accuracy under adversarial attacks) corresponds to more stable numerical schemes. This is because
they are both the problem of how sensitive the output is to
the small perturbation of the input.
As shown in Figure 1, the stability of the explicit Euler
method is weak, i.e. a small change on the initial point
leads to a tremendous variation of the output. Accordingly,
the robustness of ResNet, which corresponds to the explicit Euler scheme, is not satisfactory under adversarial
attacks. However, it is widely known that the stability of the
implicit (backward) Euler discretization is outstanding, as
shown in Figure 1. As the stability of the implicit method is
superior to the explicit ones in numerical ODE, we propose
an implicit-Euler architecture by unfolding the implicit Euler method. The architecture can be utilized in any networks
with skip connections. If we use it in the vanilla ResNet, we
can obtain a stable network called IE-ResNet which gains
large improvements on the robustness of the network with

