MoNet3D: Towards Accurate Monocular 3D Object Localization in Real Time

Xichuan Zhou 1 Yicong Peng 1 Chunqiao Long 1 Fengbo Ren 2 Cong Shi 1

Abstract
Monocular multi-object detection and localization in 3D space has been proven to be a
challenging task. The MoNet3D algorithm
is a novel and effective framework that can
predict the 3D position of each object in a
monocular image and draw a 3D bounding
box for each object. The MoNet3D method
incorporates prior knowledge of the spatial
geometric correlation of neighbouring objects
into the deep neural network training process to
improve the accuracy of 3D object localization.
Experiments on the KITTI dataset show that the
accuracy for predicting the depth and horizontal
coordinates of objects in 3D space can reach
96.25% and 94.74%, respectively. Moreover,
the method can realize the real-time image
processing at 27.85 FPS, showing promising
potential for embedded advanced drivingassistance system applications. Our code is
publicly available at https://github.
com/CQUlearningsystemgroup/
YicongPeng.

1. Introduction
In recent years, computer vision-based automated drivingassistance technology has made great progress. The rapid
development of deep learning-based methods has enabled
researchers and engineers to develop accurate and costeffective advanced driving-assistance systems (ADASs), for
which object detection and localization is one of the key
functions. Various methods based on convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) have been proposed for 2D object detection from monocular video images(Girshick et al., 2014;
1
Key Laboratory of Dependable Service Computing in Cyber Physical Society Ministry of Education, College of Microelectronics and Communication Engineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China 400044. 2 Arizona State University,
Tempe, Arizona, United States. Correspondence to: Xichuan Zhou
<zxc@cqu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Redmon et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2016). However, despite
its great advantages in terms of efficiency and cost, 3D
object detection based on monocular vision is still greatly
challenging.
Compared with solutions such as LiDAR and stereo vision,
the accuracy of the monocular method is far from sufficient
for ADAS applications. For example, when using the KITTI
3D object detection benchmark to detect the category of
cars, the average accuracy of the state-of-the-art monocular
vision algorithm is 63.02% lower than that of LiDAR-based
algorithms(Bao et al., 2019; Shi et al., 2020).
Using monocular and single frames of RGB images for 3D
object localization and detection can reduce the hardware
cost of ADAS applications, but it also brings great technical
challenges. First, the images captured by monocular images
lack depth-of-field information, and in principle, it is difficult to achieve 3D object localization. Second, different degrees of vehicle occlusion, lack of image information, inelastic distortion caused by rotating the target object, and distortion caused by lens imaging all make monocular 3D object
localization more challenging. To meet these challenges,
this paper establishes a neural network called MoNet3D
by introducing the geometric relationship of neighbouring
objects in 3D space to improve the accuracy of 3D object
detection and localization.
Specifically, to cope with the 3D localization problem with
severely insufficient constraints, some researchers have recently attempted to use prior knowledge to optimize deep
learning methods. For example, 3D-Deepbox uses prior
knowledge that the predicted 3D bounding box should
closely fit the 2D bounding box(Mousavian et al., 2017).
Mono3D_PLiDAR relaxed this constraint, assuming that
the 2D projection of a 3D object is globally consistent with
the bounding box of the 2D object(Weng & Kitani, 2019).
These studies show that the geometric relationship between
the 2D and 3D bounding boxes associated with detected
objects can help to achieve 3D object localization, but their
assumption of global consistency might not be met in the
face of various types of noise, such as inelastic distortion,
and their experimental results show that the research on
monocular 3D positioning is still in an early stage.
To address this challenge, we relax the assumption of global
geometric consistency. Instead, MoNet3D attempts to incor-

