Random Hypervolume Scalarizations for
Provable Multi-Objective Black Box Optimization

Daniel Golovin 1 Qiuyi (Richard) Zhang 1

Abstract
Single-objective black box optimization (also
known as zeroth-order optimization) is the process of minimizing a scalar objective f (x), given
evaluations at adaptively chosen inputs x. In
this paper, we consider multi-objective optimization, where f (x) outputs a vector of possibly
competing objectives and the goal is to converge
to the Pareto frontier. Quantitatively, we wish
to maximize the standard hypervolume indicator
metric, which measures the dominated hypervolume of the entire set of chosen inputs. In this
paper, we introduce a novel scalarization function, which we term the hypervolume scalarization, and show that drawing random scalarizations from an appropriately chosen distribution can be used to efficiently approximate the
hypervolume indicator metric. We utilize this
connection to show that Bayesian optimization
with our scalarization via common acquisition
functions, such as Thompson Sampling or Upper Confidence Bound, provably converges to the
whole Pareto frontier by deriving tight hyper√
volume regret bounds on the order of e
O( T ).
Furthermore, we highlight the general utility of
our scalarization framework by showing that any
provably convergent single-objective optimization process can be effortlessly converted to a
multi-objective optimization process with provable convergence guarantees.

1. Introduction
Single-objective optimization has traditionally been the focus in the field of machine learning for many practical
and interesting applications, from standard regression objectives (Kutner et al., 2005) to ever-increasingly compli*
Equal contribution 1 Google Brain, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
USA. Correspondence to: Richard Zhang <qiuyiz@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

cated losses used in deep learning (LeCun et al., 2015) and
reinforcement learning (Sutton et al., 1998). However, in
the recent years, there has been a growing need to care
about multiple objectives in learning and understanding
the inherent tradeoffs between these conflicting objectives.
Examples include classical tradeoffs such as bias vs variance (Neal et al., 2018), and accuracy vs calibration (Guo
et al., 2017) but there are increasingly complex tradeoffs
between accuracy and robustness to attack (Zhang et al.,
2019), accuracy and fairness (Zliobaite, 2015), between
multiple correlated tasks in multi-task learning (Kendall
et al., 2018), between network adaptations in meta-learning
(Finn et al., 2017), or any combination of the above.
To understand and visualize a growing number of complex tradeoffs, many turn to multi-objective optimization, which is the maximization of k objectives F (x) :=
(f1 (x), ..., fk (x)) over the parameter space x ∈ X ⊆ Rn .
Since one often cannot simultaneously maximize all fi ,
multi-objective optimization aims to find the entire Pareto
frontier F of the objective space, where intuitively x is on
the Pareto frontier if there is no way to improve on all objectives simultaneously. To measure progress, a natural and
widely used metric to compare Pareto sets is the hypervolume indicator, which is the volume of the dominated portion of the Pareto set (Zitzler & Thiele, 1999). The hypervolume metric is especially desirable because it has strict
Pareto compliance meaning that if a set A ⊆ B ⊂ Rk , then
the hypervolume of B is greater than that of A. While the
hypervolume indicator satisfies strict Pareto compliance,
almost all other unary metrics do not, thereby explaining
the popularity of using hypervolume as the predominant
measure of progress (Zitzler et al., 2003).
While the hypervolume indicator remains the gold standard
in evaluating multi-objective algorithms, note that it is a
function of a set of objective vectors and not just a single
evaluation. This means evolutionary algorithms often cannot use the hypervolume as a fitness score although some
discretized version exist (Emmerich et al., 2005). Furthermore, it is computationally inefficient: the best current asymptotic runtime calculating the hypervolume indicator in Rk is O(nk/2 ) via a reduction to Klee’s Measure
Problem (Beume & Rudolph, 2006). This cannot be sub-

