Agent57: Outperforming the Atari Human Benchmark

Adrià Puigdomènech Badia * 1 Bilal Piot * 1 Steven Kapturowski * 1 Pablo Sprechmann * 1
Alex Vitvitskyi 1 Daniel Guo 1 Charles Blundell 1

Abstract
Atari games have been a long-standing benchmark in the reinforcement learning (RL) community for the past decade. This benchmark was
proposed to test general competency of RL algorithms. Previous work has achieved good average performance by doing outstandingly well
on many games of the set, but very poorly in
several of the most challenging games. We propose Agent57, the first deep RL agent that outperforms the standard human benchmark on all
57 Atari games. To achieve this result, we train a
neural network which parameterizes a family of
policies ranging from very exploratory to purely
exploitative. We propose an adaptive mechanism
to choose which policy to prioritize throughout
the training process. Additionally, we utilize a
novel parameterization of the architecture that allows for more consistent and stable learning.

1. Introduction
The Arcade Learning Environment (ALE; Bellemare et al.,
2013) was proposed as a platform for empirically assessing agents designed for general competency across a wide
range of games. ALE offers an interface to a diverse set
of Atari 2600 game environments designed to be engaging
and challenging for human players. As Bellemare et al.
(2013) put it, the Atari 2600 games are well suited for evaluating general competency in AI agents for three main reasons: (i) varied enough to claim generality, (ii) each interesting enough to be representative of settings that might be
faced in practice, and (iii) each created by an independent
party to be free of experimenter’s bias.
Agents are expected to perform well in as many games as
possible making minimal assumptions about the domain
at hand and without the use of game-specific information.
*
Equal contribution 1 DeepMind. Correspondence to: Adrià
Puigdomènech Badia <adriap@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Number of games where algorithms are better than the
human benchmark throughout training for Agent57 and state-ofthe-art baselines on the 57 Atari games.

Deep Q-Networks (DQN ; Mnih et al., 2015) was the first
algorithm to achieve human-level control in a large number of the Atari 2600 games, measured by human normalized scores (HNS). Subsequently, using HNS to assess
performance on Atari games has become one of the most
widely used benchmarks in deep reinforcement learning
(RL), despite the human baseline scores potentially underestimating human performance relative to what is possible (Toromanoff et al., 2019). Nonetheless, human benchmark performance remains an oracle for “reasonable performance” across the 57 Atari games. Despite all efforts,
no single RL algorithm has been able to achieve over 100%
HNS on all 57 Atari games with one set of hyperparameters. Indeed, state of the art algorithms in model-based
RL, MuZero (Schrittwieser et al., 2019), and in model-free
RL, R2D2 (Kapturowski et al., 2018) surpass 100% HNS
on 51 and 52 games, respectively. While these algorithms
achieve well above average human-level performance on
a large fraction of the games (e.g. achieving more than
1000% HNS), in the games they fail to do so, they often
fail to learn completely. These games showcase particularly important issues that a general RL algorithm should be
able to tackle. Firstly, long-term credit assignment: which
decisions are most deserving of credit for the positive (or
negative) outcomes that follow? This problem is particularly hard when rewards are delayed and credit needs to
be assigned over long sequences of actions, such as in the

