Minimax Rate for Learning From Pairwise Comparisons in the BTL Model

Julien Hendrickx 1 Alex Olshevsky 2 Venkatesh Saligrama 2

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning the qualities w1 , . . . , wn of a collection of items by performing noisy comparisons among them. A standard assumption is that there is a fixed “comparison graph” and every neighboring pair of items
is compared k times. We will study the popular Bradley-Terry-Luce model, where the probability that item i wins a comparison against j
equals wi /(wi + wj ). The goal is to understand
how the expected error in estimating the vector
w = (w1 , . . . , wn ) behaves in the regime when
the number of comparisons k is large. Our contribution is the determination of the minimax rate
up to a constant factor. We show that this rate is
achieved by a simple algorithm based on weighted
least squares, with weights determined from the
empirical outcomes of the comparisons. This algorithm can be implemented in nearly linear time
in the total number of comparisons.

1. Introduction
Estimation of item qualities from user preferences is a
common problem across multiple domains in e-commerce,
health care, and social science. The dominant approach is to
rely on raw scores provided by users; for instance, Amazon
asks customers for ratings on a scale ranging from 1-5 stars,
which are then aggregated to produce an average rating for
each item.
Unfortunately, such user-provided scores can be poorly calibrated. Users could differ substantially in how they reach
the decision to assign scores; worse, different items could
be popular among different classes of users, and these user
classes could have statistical differences in the way they
assign ratings. It is challenging to deal with this disparity in
a principled manner.
1
ICTEAM, UCLouvain 2 Boston University. Correspondence
to: Alex Olshevsky <alexols@bu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

An alternative line of research has explored data fusion
based on better calibrated measures, such as the outcomes
of comparisons among items. In many contexts, comparison
data is readily available. When a user chooses to purchase
one of several items recommended by a webpage, it is natural to view this as the outcome of an implicit comparison.
The outcome of a sports game can be viewed as the result
of a noisy comparison of the strengths of the two teams.
Finally, when users click on a particular webpage in response to a list of sites provided by a search engine, this
may be viewed as the outcome of a comparison between
user estimates of the informativeness of the corresponding
webpages. Many additional examples can be given and we
refer the reader to (Cattelan, 2012) for an extensive overview
of comparison models and their uses.
The simplest and most common model is the Bradley-TerryLuce (BTL) model (Bradley & Terry, 1952; Luce, 2012)
which posits n items with quality measures w1 , . . . , wn ,
with item i winning each comparison against item j independently with probability wi /(wi + wj ). All comparisons
in this model are pairwise. The BTL model is extremely
well-studied; for a sampling of its uses, we mention its applications to an empirical analysis of sports tournaments
(Cattelan et al. , 2013), measurements of pain among patients (Matthews & Morris, 1995), estimating driver crash
risks (Li & Kim, 2000), and testing the power of arguments
in referendums (Loewen et al. , 2012), among many others.
This paper is concerned with estimating the vector w =
(w1 , . . . , wn ) from the outcomes of comparisons carried out
according to the BTL model. It is standard to assume that
there is a given undirected graph G = ({1, . . . , n}, E), and
every pair of neighbors in G is compared k times. The goal
is to recover the vector of true weights vector w. Note, however, that since scaling every entry of w does not change
the probability distribution of the outcomes under the BTL
model, what can actually be recovered is a normalized version of w.
This problem formulation is standard in the literature; in
particular, its analysis has been the subject of a number of
recent papers, e.g., (Negahban et al. , 2012; Rajkumar &
Agarwal, 2014; Negahban et al. , 2016; Agarwal et al. ,
2018; Hendrickx et al. , 2019). One can, of course, introduce a number of complicating factors (e.g., more general

