Understanding and Stabilizing GANs’ Training Dynamics using Control
Theory

Kun Xu 1 Chongxuan Li 1 Jun Zhu 1 Bo Zhang 1

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are effective in generating realistic images but the training is often unstable. There are existing efforts
that model the training dynamics of GANs in the
parameter space but the analysis cannot directly
motivate practically effective stabilizing methods.
To this end, we present a conceptually novel perspective from control theory to directly model
the dynamics of GANs in the function space and
provide simple yet effective methods to stabilize
GANs’ training. We first analyze the training dynamic of a prototypical Dirac GAN and adopt
the widely-used closed-loop control (CLC) to improve its stability. We then extend CLC to stabilize the training dynamic of normal GANs, where
CLC is implemented as a squared L2 regularizer
on the output of the discriminator. Empirical results show that our method can effectively stabilize the training and obtain state-of-the-art performance on data generation tasks.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.,
2014) have shown promise in generating realistic natural
images (Brock et al., 2018) and facilitating unsupervised
and semi-supervised learning (Chen et al., 2016; Li et al.,
2017; Donahue & Simonyan, 2019). In GANs, an implicit
generator G is defined by mapping a noise distribution to
the data space. Since no density function is defined for the
implicit generator, the maximum likelihood estimate is infeasible for GANs. Instead, a discriminator D is introduced
to estimate the density ratio between the data distribution
p and the generating distribution pG by telling the real sam1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center, Tsinghua-Bosch ML Center, THBI Lab, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Jun Zhu <dcszj@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

ples from fake ones. G aims to recover the data distribution
by maximizing this ratio. This framework is formulated as
a minimax optimization problem, which can be solved by
optimizing G and D alternately. In practice, however, GANs
suffers from the instability of training (Goodfellow, 2016),
where divergency and oscillations are often observed (Liang
et al., 2018; Chavdarova & Fleuret, 2018).
Early methods (Mao et al., 2017; Gulrajani et al., 2017;
Arjovsky et al., 2017; Du et al., 2018) introduce different
types of divergences to improve the training process of
GANs. Their theoretical analyses assume that D achieves
its optimum when training G. However, the practical training process (e.g., alternative stochastic gradient descent)
often violates the above assumption and therefore is not
guaranteed to converge to the desired equilibrium. Several
empirical regularizations (Miyato et al., 2018; Gulrajani
et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2019) are used to improve the
training process whereas no stability can be guaranteed.
Recently, Mescheder et al. (2017) and Nagarajan & Kolter
(2017) directly model the training dynamics of GANs, i.e.
how the parameters develop over time. Formally, the dynamic is defined as the gradient flow of the parameters. The
stability of the dynamic is fully determined by the eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrix of the gradient flow. Indeed, the
stability analysis in a linear prototypical GAN (i.e. Dirac
GAN (Mescheder et al., 2018)) is elegant. However, this
analysis does not directly motivate effective algorithms to
stabilize GANs’ training. To our knowledge, such methods
do not report competitive image generation results to the
state-of-the-art GANs (Miyato et al., 2018).
In this paper, we understand and stabilize GANs’ training
dynamics from the perspective of control theory. Based
on the recipe for control theory, we can not only analyze
the dynamics of Dirac GAN formally, but also develop
practically effective stabilizing methods for nonlinear dynamics (Khalil, 2002). Specifically, we start from revisiting
the Dirac GAN example with the WGAN’s objective function in Sec. 3. By utilizing the Laplace transform (Widder,
2015) (LT), the training dynamics of both D and G can be
modeled in the frequency domain instead of the time domain
in previous methods (Mescheder et al., 2017; 2018). These
types of dynamics are well studied in control theory and

