Continuous Graph Neural Networks

Louis-Pascal A. C. Xhonneux * 1 2 Meng Qu * 1 2 Jian Tang 1 3 4

Abstract
This paper builds on the connection between
graph neural networks and traditional dynamical systems. We propose continuous graph neural networks (CGNN), which generalise existing
graph neural networks with discrete dynamics in
that they can be viewed as a specific discretisation
scheme. The key idea is how to characterise the
continuous dynamics of node representations, i.e.
the derivatives of node representations, w.r.t. time.
Inspired by existing diffusion-based methods on
graphs (e.g. PageRank and epidemic models on
social networks), we define the derivatives as a
combination of the current node representations,
the representations of neighbors, and the initial
values of the nodes. We propose and analyse two
possible dynamics on graphs—including each dimension of node representations (a.k.a. the feature channel) change independently or interact
with each other—both with theoretical justification. The proposed continuous graph neural networks are robust to over-smoothing and hence
allow us to build deeper networks, which in turn
are able to capture the long-range dependencies
between nodes. Experimental results on the task
of node classification demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed approach over competitive
baselines.

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have been attracting growing interest due to their simplicity and effectiveness in a
variety of applications such as node classification (Kipf
and Welling, 2016; Veličković et al., 2017), link prediction (Zhang and Chen, 2018), chemical properties predic*

Equal contribution with order determined by flipping a coin.
Mila - Quebec AI Institute, Montréal, Canada 2 University of
Montréal, Montréal, Canada 3 HEC Montréal, Montréal, Canada
4
CIFAR AI Research Chair. Correspondence to: Jian Tang
<jian.tang@hec.ca>.
1

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

tion (Gilmer et al., 2017), and natural language understanding (Marcheggiani and Titov, 2017; Yao et al., 2019). The
essential idea of GNNs is to design multiple graph propagation layers to iteratively update each node representation
by aggregating the node representations from their neighbours and the representation of the node itself. In practice,
a few layers (two or three) are usually sufficient for most
tasks (Qu et al., 2019), and more layers may lead to inferior
performance (Kipf and Welling, 2016; Zhou et al., 2018; Li
et al., 2018b).
A key avenue to improving GNNs is being able to build
deeper networks to learn more complex relationships between the data and the output labels. The GCN propagation
layer smooths the node representations, i.e. nodes near each
other in the graph become more similar (Kipf and Welling,
2016). This can lead to over-smoothing as we stack more
and more layers, meaning that nodes representations converge to the same value leading to worse performance (Kipf
and Welling, 2016; Zhou et al., 2018; Li et al., 2018b). Thus,
it is important to alleviate the node over-smoothing effect,
whereby node representations converge to the same value.
Furthermore, it is crucial to improve our theoretical understanding of GNNs to enable us to characterise what signals
from the graph structure we can learn. Recent work on understanding GCN (Oono and Suzuki, 2020) has considered
GCN as a discrete dynamical system defined by the discrete
layers. In addition, Chen et al. (2018) demonstrated that the
usage of discrete layers is not the only perspective to build
neural networks. They pointed out that discrete layers with
residual connections can be viewed as a discretisation of
a continuous Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE). They
showed that this approach is more memory-efficient and is
able to model the dynamics of hidden layers more smoothly.
We use the continuous perspective inspired by diffusion
based methods to propose a new propagation scheme, which
we analyse using tools from ordinary differential equations
(i.e. continuous dynamical systems). Indeed we are able to
explain what representations our model learns as well as
why it does not suffer from the common over-smoothing
problem observed in GNNs. Allowing us to build ‘deeper’
networks in the sense that our model works well with large
values of time. The key factor for the resilience to oversmoothing is the use of a restart distribution as originally

