One Policy to Control Them All:
Shared Modular Policies for Agent-Agnostic Control

Wenlong Huang 1 Igor Mordatch 2 Deepak Pathak 3 4

Abstract
Reinforcement learning is typically concerned
with learning control policies tailored to a
particular agent. We investigate whether there
exists a single global policy that can generalize
to control a wide variety of agent morphologies
– ones in which even dimensionality of state
and action spaces changes. We propose to
express this global policy as a collection of
identical modular neural networks, dubbed as
Shared Modular Policies (SMP), that correspond
to each of the agent’s actuators. Every module is
only responsible for controlling its corresponding
actuator and receives information from only its
local sensors. In addition, messages are passed
between modules, propagating information
between distant modules. We show that a
single modular policy can successfully generate
locomotion behaviors for several planar agents
with different skeletal structures such as monopod
hoppers, quadrupeds, bipeds, and generalize to
variants not seen during training – a process
that would normally require training and manual
hyperparameter tuning for each morphology. We
observe that a wide variety of drastically diverse
locomotion styles across morphologies as well
as centralized coordination emerges via message
passing between decentralized modules purely
from the reinforcement learning objective.

Figure 1. Our goal in this project is to train a single generalpurpose policy controller that can perform well across many of
these diverse agent morphologies. Our key idea is to represent policy as a collection of identical and locally communicating modular
neural networks shared across all limbs of all agents. Video results
at https://huangwl18.github.io/modular-rl/.

from scratch that is specifically tailored to a particular robot
morphology (i.e., kinematic shape) and characteristics. But
if we are to ever create general, pre-trainable priors for robot
control similar to those for image classification (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012) or natural language (Devlin et al., 2018), it
is imperative for policies to be applicable to agents with
differing morphologies.

1
UC Berkelely 2 Google 3 CMU 4 Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to: Deepak Pathak <dpathak@cs.cmu.edu>.

Can a general-purpose controller be pre-trained for multiple agents by simply reducing to a multi-task RL problem?
This is not easy to manifest for several reasons. Although
deep RL has been proven useful in making these agents
learn from scratch without any priors, their success is limited to learning a separate controller for one agent at a time
with tedious hyperparameter tuning (Henderson et al., 2017).
Moreover, unlike pre-training of vision or language models, it is difficult to contemplate as to what pre-training a
controller means for robots because each agent may have a
different number of limbs, sensory inputs, motor commands,
morphology, and control behaviors, as shown in Figure 1.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

Fortunately, our natural world abounds with examples of
modularity and reuse in sensorimotor systems (d’Avella
et al., 2015; Dickinson et al., 2000; Holmes et al., 2006). In

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has been instrumental to
successful sensorimotor control, either in simulation (Heess
et al., 2017) or on physical robots (Levine et al., 2016). However, state-of-the-art approaches today train a policy network

