Predicting deliberative outcomes

Vikas K. Garg 1 Tommi Jaakkola 1

Abstract
We extend structured prediction to deliberative
outcomes. Specifically, we learn parameterized
games that can map any inputs to equilibria as the
outcomes. Standard structured prediction models rely heavily on global scoring functions and
are therefore unable to model individual player
preferences or how they respond to others asymmetrically. Our games take as input, e.g., UN resolution to be voted on, and map such contexts to
initial strategies, player utilities, and interactions.
Players are then thought to repeatedly update their
strategies in response to weighted aggregates of
other players’ choices towards maximizing their
individual utilities. The output from the game is
a sample from the resulting (near) equilibrium
mixed strategy profile. We characterize conditions under which players’ strategies converge to
an equilibrium in such games and when the game
parameters can be provably recovered from observations. Empirically, we demonstrate on two
real voting datasets that our games can recover
interpretable strategic interactions, and predict
strategies for players in new settings.

1. Introduction
Structured prediction methods (Lafferty et al., 2001; Taskar
et al., 2003; Tsochantaridis et al., 2005; Nowozin and Lampert, 2011) typically operate on parametric scoring functions
whose maximizing assignment is used as the predicted configuration. Since the parameters can be learned directly to
maximize prediction accuracy, often via surrogate losses,
the methods have been successful across areas (Chen et al.,
2015; Globerson et al., 2015; London et al., 2016; Cortes
et al., 2016; Osokin et al., 2017; Pan and Srikumar, 2018).
Not all structured observations can be naturally modeled
1

CSAIL,
MIT.
Correspondence
to:
Garg
<vgarg@csail.mit.edu>,
Tommi
<tommi@csail.mit.edu>.

Vikas
Jaakkola

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

as extrema of scoring functions. For instance, votes cast in
response to a bill in the US Congress likely involve rounds
of negotiations prior to casting the final votes. As a result,
the votes reflect individual utilities of representatives as well
as their interactions with subsets of others. Absent some
unifying scoring function, contentious votes are more naturally modeled in game theoretic terms as an equilibrium
rather than a maximizing assignment (Waugh et al., 2011;
Garg and Jaakkola, 2017). For example, one could consider
the voting outcome directly as a pure strategy Nash equilibrium (PSNE) of some fixed underlying graphical game
(Irfan and Ortiz, 2014; Honorio and Ortiz, 2015; Garg and
Jaakkola, 2016; 2017). The observed votes would be in this
case directly actions in the game, and complete observations
help estimation. However, most games do not permit pure
strategy equilibria (Tardos and Vazirani, 2007). The voting
outcome is therefore best viewed as a sample from a product distribution that represents a mixed strategy equilibrium
(guaranteed to exist for any game).
Our goal is to use games in a predictive sense. We must
therefore explicitly model the game dynamics, i.e., how an
equilibrium outcome is reached from the initial conditions.
Previous methods for estimating game parameters from data
often side-step the issue of game dynamics. It is therefore
not possible in such approaches to directly output an equilibrium as the predicted outcome. For games to be useful
in structured prediction, the game parameters as well as the
initial strategies for the players, prior to deliberation, must
be also conditioned on a common context such as a bill to
be voted on.
Strategic prediction. In this paper, we turn games into
structured prediction methods and call such approaches
strategic prediction methods. At a high level, our model
takes the available context such as the written bill – the input
– and maps it to a mixed strategy equilibrium – the output.
The input-output mapping is obtained via a deliberative process akin to multiple rounds of negotiations between the
countries. The observed actions by players, e.g., how countries voted on the bill, are then viewed as samples from this
mixed strategy equilibrium. We model the impact of context
by parametrically mapping it to each player as player types.
These types are simply learned vectors quantifying what
each player derives from the context so as to guide their
behavior in the game. The types also specify the utility func-

