Combining Differentiable PDE Solvers and
Graph Neural Networks for Fluid Flow Prediction

Filipe de Avila Belbute-Peres 1 † Thomas D. Economon 2 † J. Zico Kolter 1 3

Abstract
Solving large complex partial differential equations (PDEs), such as those that arise in computational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD), is a computationally expensive process. This has motivated
the use of deep learning approaches to approximate the PDE solutions, yet the simulation results predicted from these approaches typically
do not generalize well to truly novel scenarios.
In this work, we develop a hybrid (graph) neural
network that combines a traditional graph convolutional network with an embedded differentiable
ﬂuid dynamics simulator inside the network itself.
By combining an actual CFD simulator (run on
a much coarser resolution representation of the
problem) with the graph network, we show that
we can both generalize well to new situations and
beneﬁt from the substantial speedup of neural network CFD predictions, while also substantially
outperforming the coarse CFD simulation alone.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the many empirical successes of deep learning have motivated scientists to explore its application in
other areas, such as predicting the evolution of physical
systems. In this context, several recent papers have explored
the application of deep models to approximate the solutions
to partial differential equations (PDEs), particularly in the
context of simulating ﬂuid dynamics (Afshar et al., 2019;
Guo et al., 2016; Wiewel et al., 2018; Um et al., 2017). The
behavior of ﬂuids is a well-studied problem in the physical
sciences, and predicting their dynamics involves solving the
nonlinear Navier-Stokes PDEs. In order to perform compu†

Work partly done while at Bosch LLC.
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, PA 2 SU2 Foundation 3 Bosch Center for AI, Pittsburgh, PA. Correspondence to: Filipe de Avila Belbute-Peres
<ﬁliped@cs.cmu.edu>.

1

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

tational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD) simulations, these equations
must be solved numerically. One of the primary bottlenecks in more accurate and advanced CFD simulation is
speciﬁcally the time it takes to run these models. It is not uncommon for a single simulation to take many days to weeks
on massive supercomputing infrastructure. Especially for
the cases where fast iteration time is desired, for example
when iterating over different aerodynamic design prototypes
for a structure, then faster, learning-based surrogate models
have spawned a great deal of interest. However, despite the
recent enthusiasm for this area, most deep learning models
cannot capture the full complexity of the underlying equations, and, as we demonstrate in this work, can quickly start
to produce poor results when testing on settings well outside
the domain of their training data.
In this paper, we explore a hybrid approach that combines
the beneﬁts of (graph) neural networks for fast predictions,
with the physical realism of an industry-grade CFD simulator. Our system has two main components. First, we construct a graph convolution network (Kipf & Welling, 2016)
(GCN), which operates directly upon the non-uniform mesh
used in typical CFD simulation tasks. This use of GCNs is
crucial because all realistic CFD solvers operate on these
unstructured meshes rather than directly on the regular grid
used by most prior work, which has typically used convolutional networks to approximate CFD simulations. Second,
and more fundamentally, we embed a (differentiable) CFD
solver, operating on a much coarser resolution, directly
into the GCN itself. Although typically treated as blackboxes, modern CFD simulators are themselves perfectly
well-suited to act as (costly) “layers” in a deep network.
Using well-studied adjoint methods, modern solvers can
compute gradients of the output quantities of a simulation
with respect to the input mesh. This allows us to integrate a
fast CFD simulation (made fast because it is operating on a
much smaller mesh) into the network itself, and allows us to
jointly train the GCN and the mesh input into the simulation
engine, all in an end-to-end fashion.
We demonstrate that this combined approach performs substantially better than the coarse CFD simulation alone (i.e.,
the network is able to provide higher ﬁdelity results than
simply running a faster simulation to begin with), and gen-

