On Variational Learning of Controllable
Representations for Text without Supervision

Peng Xu 1 Jackie Chi Kit Cheung 1 2 3 Yanshuai Cao 1

Abstract
The variational autoencoder (VAE) can learn the
manifold of natural images on certain datasets, as
evidenced by meaningful interpolation or extrapolation in the continuous latent space. However,
on discrete data such as text, it is unclear if unsupervised learning can discover a similar latent
space that allows controllable manipulation. In
this work, we find that sequence VAEs trained on
text fail to properly decode when the latent codes
are manipulated, because the modified codes often land in holes or vacant regions in the aggregated posterior latent space, where the decoding
network fails to generalize. Both as a validation
of the explanation and as a fix to the problem,
we propose to constrain the posterior mean to a
learned probability simplex, and perform manipulation within this simplex. Our proposed method
mitigates the latent vacancy problem and achieves
the first success in unsupervised learning of controllable representations for text. Empirically, our
method outperforms unsupervised baselines and
strong supervised approaches on text style transfer, and is capable of performing more flexible
fine-grained control over text generation than existing methods.

1. Introduction
High-dimensional data, such as images and text, are often
generated through the interaction of many complex factors,
such as lighting and pose in images or style and content in
texts. Recently, VAEs and other unsupervised generative
models have found successes in modelling the manifold of
natural images (Higgins et al., 2017; Kumar et al., 2017;
Chen et al., 2016). These models often discover controllable
latent factors that allow manipulation of the images through
1
Borealis AI 2 McGill University 3 Canada CIFAR Chair, Mila.
Correspondence to: Peng Xu <peng.z.xu@borealisai.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

conditional generation from interpolated or extrapolated latent codes, often with impressive quality. On the other hand,
while various attributes of text such as sentiment and topic
can be discovered in an unsupervised way, manipulating the
text by changing these learned factors has not been possible with unsupervised generative models, to the best of our
knowledge. Cı́fka et al. (2018); Zhao et al. (2018) observed
that text manipulation is generally more challenging compared to images, and the successes of these models cannot
be directly transferred to texts.
Controllable text generation aims at generating realistic text
with control over various attributes including sentiment,
topic and other high-level properties. The possibility of
unsupervised controllable text generation could help in a
wide range of applications such as dialogues systems (Wen
et al., 2016). Existing approaches (Shen et al., 2017; Fu
et al., 2018; Li et al., 2018; Sudhakar et al., 2019) all rely
on supervised learning from annotated attributes to generate
the text in a controllable fashion. The high cost of labelling
large training corpora with attributes of interest limits the
usage of these models, as pre-existing annotations often do
not align with desired downstream goals. Even if cheap
labels are available, for example, review scores as a proxy
for sentiment, the control is limited to the variation defined
by the attributes.
In this work, we examine the obstacles that prevent sequence
VAEs (Bowman et al., 2015) from performing well in unsupervised controllable text generation. We empirically
discover that manipulating the latent factors for typical semantic variations often leads to latent codes that reside in
some low-density region of the aggregated posterior distribution. In other words, there are vacant regions in the
latent code space (Makhzani et al., 2015; Rezende & Viola,
2018) not being considered by the decoding network, at
least not at convergence. As a result, the decoding network
is unable to process such manipulated latent codes, yielding
unpredictable generation results of low quality. Although
this issue has been raised in prior works, we provide direct
evidence using topological data analysis to show that this
vacancy problem is more severe for VAEs trained on text
than image.
In order to mitigate the latent vacancy problem on text, we

