p-Norm Flow Diffusion for Local Graph Clustering

Kimon Fountoulakis * 1 Di Wang * 2 Shenghao Yang * 1

Abstract

Local graph clustering and the closely related seed
set expansion problem are primitives on graphs
that are central to a wide range of analytic and
learning tasks such as local clustering, community detection, semi-supervised learning, nodes
ranking and feature inference. Prior work on local
graph clustering mostly falls into two categories
with numerical and combinatorial roots respectively, in this work we draw inspiration from both
fields and propose a family of convex optimization formulations based on the idea of diffusion
with p-norm network flow for p ∈ (1, ∞). In the
context of local clustering, we characterize the
optimal solutions for these optimization problems
and show their usefulness in finding low conductance cuts around input seed set. In particular, we
achieve quadratic approximation of conductance
in the case of p = 2 similar to the Cheeger-type
bounds of spectral methods, constant factor approximation when p → ∞ similar to max-flow
based methods, and a smooth transition for general p values in between. Thus, our optimization
formulation can be viewed as bridging the numerical and combinatorial approaches, and we can
achieve the best of both worlds in terms of speed
and noise robustness. We show that the proposed
problem can be solved in strongly local running
time for p ≥ 2 and conduct empirical evaluations on both synthetic and real-world graphs to
illustrate our approach compares favorably with
existing methods.

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science, University
of Waterloo, Canada 2 Google Research, USA. Correspondence
to: Kimon Fountoulakis <kimon.fountoulakis@uwaterloo.ca>,
Di Wang <wadi@google.com>, Shenghao Yang <shenghao.yang@uwaterloo.ca>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Graphs are ubiquitous when it comes to modeling relationships among entities, e.g. social (Traud et al., 2012) and
biology (Tuncbag et al., 2016) networks, and graphs arising
from modern applications are massive yet rich in small-scale
local structures (Leskovec et al., 2009; Jeub et al., 2015;
Fortunato & Hric, 2016). Exploiting such local structures
is of central importance in many areas of machine learning
and applied mathematics, e.g. community detection in networks (Ng et al., 2001; White & Smyth, 2005; Leskovec
et al., 2009; Jeub et al., 2015) and PageRank-based spectral
ranking in web ranking (Page et al., 1999; Gleich, 2015).
Somewhat more formally, we consider local graph clustering as the task of finding a community-like cluster around
a given set of seed nodes, where nodes in the cluster are
densely connected to each other while relatively isolated
to the rest of the graph. Moreover, an algorithm is called
strongly local if it runs in time proportional to the size of
the output cluster rather than the size of the whole graph.
Strongly local algorithms for local graph clustering are predominantly based on the idea of diffusion, which is the
generic process of spreading mass among vertices by sending mass along edges. This connection has been formalized
in many previous results (Spielman & Teng, 2013; Andersen
et al., 2006; Wang et al., 2017). Historically, the most popular diffusion methods are spectral methods (e.g. random
walks) based on the connection between graph structures
and the algebraic properties of the spectrum of matrices associated with the graph (Lovász & Simonovits, 1990; 1993;
Chung, 2007b; Tsiatas, 2012). Spectral diffusion methods
are widely applied in practice due to the ease of implementation, efficient running time and good performances in many
contexts. However, it is also known in theory and in practice
that spectral methods can spread mass too aggressively and
not find the right cluster when structural heterogeneities exist, and thus are not robust on real-world graphs constructed
from very noisy data (Guattery & Miller, 1998; von Luxburg,
2006; Leskovec et al., 2009; Jeub et al., 2015). A more recent line of work on diffusion is based on the combinatorial
idea of max flow exploiting the canonical duality between
flow and cut (Wang et al., 2017; Fountoulakis et al., 2017a;
Orecchia & Zhu, 2014). These methods offer improved theoretical guarantees in terms of locating local cuts, and have
been shown to be important for pathological cases where

