Computational-Statistical Tradeoffs
in Inferring Combinatorial Structures of Ising Model
Ying Jin 1 Zhaoran Wang 2 Junwei Lu 3

Abstract
We study the computational and statistical tradeoffs in inferring combinatorial structures of high
dimensional simple zero-field ferromagnetic Ising
model. Under the framework of oracle computational model where an algorithm interacts
with an oracle that discourses a randomized version of truth, we characterize the computational
lower bounds of learning combinatorial structures
in polynomial-time, under which no algorithms
within polynomial-time can distinguish between
graphs with and without certain structures. This
hardness of learning with limited computational
budget is shown to be characterized by a novel
quantity called vertex overlap ratio. Such quantity is universally valid for many specific graph
structures including cliques and nearest neighbors. On the other side, we attain the optimal
rates for testing these structures against empty
graph by proposing the quadratic testing statistics
to match the lower bounds. We also investigate
the relationship between computational bounds
and information-theoretic bounds for such problems, and found gaps between the two boundaries
in inferring some particular structures, especially
for those with dense edges.

1. Introduction
In various problems, data are presented and interpreted in
the form of a graph G = (V, E), where we observe features Xv for each vertex v 2 V representing an individual,
and the inter-dependency among them are encoded by the
graph edges in E. For example, in bioinformatics, (Fried1

Department of Statistics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA,
USA 2 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA 3 Department of
Biostatistics, Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Junwei Lu <junweilu@hsph.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

man, 2004) studies relationships among observed cellulars
using graphical models, and in social network analysis like
(Lazega et al., 1995), (Grabowski & Kosiński, 2006), relationships of people are encoded by a graph. To represent
probablity structures of observations, or features of the individuals (vertices) in graphical models, Markov random
field (MRF) family is widely used, among which Gaussian
graphical model and Ising model are the most popular.
The main focus of this paper is to test whether the underlying graph has a certain structure property. There have been
a lot of work on algorithms and information-theoretic limits
for such structural inference for graphical model, especially
for Gaussian graphical model and Ising model, which are
fundamental models in the Markov random field family.
See (Louigi et al., 2010), (Ery & Verzelen, 2014), (Bresler
et al., 2014), (Neykov et al., 2016), (Neykov & Liu, 2017).
However, to the best of our knowledge, it remains unclear
whether it is possible and how to achieve the informationtheoretic limits by efficient algorithms with certain computational budgets under the Ising model. Due to the discrete
nature of the Ising model, the theoretical analysis is more
challenging than the Gaussian distribution.
Our paper aims to solve this problem from two major perspectives: (1) the theoretical gap between the computational
and statistical rates for recovering various combinatorial
structures in Ising model; and (2) polynomial-time algorithms to detect these structures efficiently. When considering the computational budgets, we employ the computational oracle model developed and explored in (Kearns,
1998), (Feldman et al., 2013), (Wang et al., 2015), etc.
Related work: Our work follows the nature of recent work
on computational-statistical tradeoffs for various problems
like PCA, sparse linear regression, etc., see (Feldman et al.,
2013), (Hajek et al., 2014), (Zhang et al., 2014), (Chen &
Xu, 2014), (Wang et al., 2016), (Wang et al., 2015), (Cai
et al., 2017), (Fan et al., 2018). In comparison, we focus
on a family of structural property testing problems in undirected graphical models. (Neykov et al., 2016) provides
the information-theoretic limits while (Lu et al., 2018) provides the computation-efficient limits for Gaussian graphical
model. But for Ising model, another fundamental model in
the family of Markov random field, there are only results re-

