InstaHide: Instance-hiding Schemes for Private Distributed Learning
Yangsibo Huang 1 Zhao Song 2 Kai Li 1 Sanjeev Arora 2

Abstract
How can multiple distributed entities collaboratively train a shared deep net on their private data
while preserving privacy? This paper introduces
InstaHide, a simple encryption of training images, which can be plugged into an existing distributed deep learning pipeline. The encryption
is efficient and has minor effect on test accuracy.
InstaHide encrypts each training image with a
“one-time secret key” which consists of mixing
a number of randomly chosen images and applying a random pixel-wise mask. Other contributions of this paper include: (a) Using a large public dataset (e.g. ImageNet) for mixing during its
encryption, which improves security. (b) Experimental results to show effectiveness in preserving privacy against known attacks with only minor effects on accuracy. (c) Theoretical analysis
showing that successfully attacking privacy requires attackers to solve a difficult computational
problem. (d) Demonstrating that Mixup alone is
insecure (as contrary to recent proposals), by presenting some efficient attacks. (e) Release of a
challenge dataset1 to encourage new attacks.

1. Introduction
In many applications, multiple parties or clients with sensitive data want to collaboratively train a neural network.
For instance, hospitals may wish to train a model on their
patient data. However, aggregating data to a central server
may violate regulations such as Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) (Act, 1996) and General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) (Voigt & Von dem
Bussche, 2018).
Federated learning (McMahan et al., 2016; Konečnỳ et al.,
2016) proposes letting participants train on their own data
1
Princeton University 2 Princeton University and Institute
for Advanced Study. Correspondence to: Yangsibo Huang
<yangsibo@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).
1
https://github.com/Hazelsuko07/InstaHide Challenge.

in a distributed fashion and share only model updates —
i.e., gradients—with the central server. The server aggregates these updates (typically by averaging) to improve a
global model and then sends updates to participants. This
process runs iteratively until the global model converges.
Merging information from individual data points into aggregated gradients intuitively preserves privacy to some degree. On top of that, it is possible to add noise to gradients in accordance with Differential Privacy (DP) (Dwork
et al., 2006; Dwork & Roth, 2014), though careful calculations are needed to compute the amount of noise to be
added (Abadi et al., 2016; Papernot et al., 2019). However, the privacy guarantee of DP only applies to the trained
model (i.e., approved use of data) and does not apply to
side-channel computations performed by curious/malicious
parties who are privy to the communicated gradients. Recent work (Zhu et al., 2019) suggests that eavesdropping
attackers can recover private inputs from shared model updates, even when DP was used. A more serious issue
with DP is that meaningful guarantees involve adding so
much noise that test accuracy reduces by over 20% even on
CIFAR-10 (Papernot et al., 2019).
Cryptographic methods such as secure multiparty computation of (Yao, 1982) and fully-homomorphic encryption (Gentry, 2009) can ensure privacy against arbitrary
side-computations by adversary during training. Unfortunately it is a challenge to use them in modern deep learning settings, owing to their high computational overheads
and their needs for special setups (e.g finite field arithmetic,
public-key infrastructure).
Here we introduce a new method InstaHide, inspired
by a weaker cryptographic idea of instance hiding
schemes (Abadi et al., 1987). We only apply it to image
data in this paper and leave other data types (e.g., text) for
future work. InstaHide gives a way to transform input x
to a hidden/encrypted input x
e in each epoch such that: (a)
Training deep nets using the x
e’s instead of x’s gives nets
almost as good in terms of final accuracy; (b) Known methods for recovering information about x out of x
e are computationally very expensive. In other words, x
e effectively
hides information contained in x except for its label.

InstaHide encryption has two key components. The first is
inspired by Mixup data augmentation method (Zhang et al.,

