AutoGAN-Distiller: Searching to Compress Generative Adversarial Networks

Yonggan Fu 1 Wuyang Chen 2 Haotao Wang 2 Haoran Li 1 Yingyan Lin 1 Zhangyang Wang 2

Abstract
The compression of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) has lately drawn attention, due to
the increasing demand for deploying GANs into
mobile devices for numerous applications such as
image translation, enhancement and editing. However, compared to the substantial efforts to compressing other deep models, the research on compressing GANs (usually the generators) remains
at its infancy stage. Existing GAN compression algorithms are limited to handling specific GAN architectures and losses. Inspired by the recent success of AutoML in deep compression, we introduce AutoML to GAN compression and develop
an AutoGAN-Distiller (AGD) framework. Starting with a specifically designed efficient search
space, AGD performs an end-to-end discovery for
new efficient generators, given the target computational resource constraints. The search is guided
by the original GAN model via knowledge distillation, therefore fulfilling the compression. AGD
is fully automatic, standalone (i.e., needing no
trained discriminators), and generically applicable to various GAN models. We evaluate AGD
in two representative GAN tasks: image translation and super resolution. Without bells and
whistles, AGD yields remarkably lightweight yet
more competitive compressed models, that largely
outperform existing alternatives. Our codes and
pretrained models are available at: https://
github.com/TAMU-VITA/AGD.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.,
2014; Zhu et al., 2017) nowadays have empowered many
real applications such as image stylization, image editing
1
Rice University, Houston, Texas, USA 2 Texas A&M
University, College Station, Texas, USA. Correspondence
to: Zhangyang Wang <atlaswang@tamu.edu >, Yingyan Lin
<yingyan.lin@rice.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

and enhancement. Those applications have driven the growing demand to deploy GANs, usually their trained generators, on resource-constrained platforms, e.g., for real-time
style transfer and super resolution (Shi et al., 2016) in mobile APPs. However, just like other deep models, GAN generators require heavy memory and computation resources
to run, which challenge most mobile devices. For example,
the renowned image-to-image translation network, CycleGAN (Zhu et al., 2017), would cost 54 GFLOPs to process
one 256×256 image. For most mobile phones, that latency
would notably degrade user experience, if ever feasible.
To reduce this gap, it is a natural motive to refer to model
compression techniques (Han et al., 2015). The current
mainstream of model compression focuses on deep image
classification or segmentation, which, as demonstrated in
(Shu et al., 2019), cannot be easily extended to compress
GANs (by default, defined as compressing their trained generators), That is mainly due to the vulnerability of their
learned mappings (i.e., between high-dimensional structured image spaces), and the notoriously training instability
(that challenges the re-training practice in compression).
To our best knowledge, at the time of submission, (Shu
et al., 2019) is the only published algorithm in GAN compression. They specifically focus on GANs with the cycleconsistency loss, and simultaneously compress generators
of both directions. Despite the promising performance, their
algorithm cannot be straightforwardly extended to other
popular GAN types, such as encoder-decoder GANs (Wang
et al., 2018a; Chen et al., 2018b) which are widely used
in image editing/enhancement. Moreover, the proposed coevolution algorithm was built on pruning only, while many
other compression techniques, such as quantization (Jacob
et al., 2018), knowledge distillation (Polino et al., 2018),
and even AutoML (He et al., 2018), were left unexplored.
Besides, their algorithm’s loss function relied on the original
trained discriminator to be available. Yet in practice, this
might not always be realistic: as most applications only use
trained generators, the discriminators might often have been
discarded or no longer available after training.
This paper aims to significantly push forward the application frontier of GAN compression. For this new problem,
we extensively refer to the state-of-the-art compression techniques including AutoML and knowledge distillation, while
striving for more general techniques that can compress any

