Growing Adaptive Multi-Hyperplane Machines

Nemanja Djuric 1 Zhuang Wang 2 Slobodan Vucetic 3

Abstract
Adaptive Multi-hyperplane Machine (AMM)
is an online algorithm for learning Multihyperplane Machine (MM), a classification
model which allows multiple hyperplanes per
class. AMM is based on Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), with training time comparable to
linear Support Vector Machine (SVM) and significantly higher accuracy. On the other hand,
empirical results indicate there is a large accuracy gap between AMM and non-linear SVMs.
In this paper we show that this performance gap
is not due to limited representability of the MM
model, as it can represent arbitrary concepts. We
set to explain the connection between the AMM
and Learning Vector Quantization (LVQ) algorithms, and introduce a novel Growing AMM
(GAMM) classifier motivated by Growing LVQ,
that imputes duplicate hyperplanes into the MM
model during SGD training. We provide theoretical results showing that GAMM has favorable
convergence properties, and analyze the generalization bound of the MM models. Experiments
indicate that GAMM achieves significantly improved accuracy on non-linear problems, with
only slightly slower training compared to AMM.
On some tasks GAMM comes close to non-linear
SVM, and outperforms other popular classifiers
such as Neural Networks and Random Forests.

1. Introduction
Support Vector Machines (SVMs) with non-linear kernels (Cortes & Vapnik, 1995) can solve very complex,
highly non-linear problems. Unfortunately, this strength of
SVM is offset by high computational cost of SVM training, which led to development of a number of methods
1

Uber ATG, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 2 Facebook, Menlo Park,
CA, USA 3 Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Nemanja Djuric <nemanja@temple.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

to make SVM more scalable, either by proposing algorithmic speed-ups (Platt, 1998; Kivinen et al., 2002; Vishwanathan et al., 2003; Tsang et al., 2005; Rai et al., 2009),
or through parallelization approaches (Graf et al., 2004;
Chang et al., 2007; Zhu et al., 2009). Representing kernel matrix through low-rank approximations is a popular
line of research (Si et al., 2017; Horn et al., 2018), with a
number of recent methods using Nÿstrom-based approximations to speed up training and inference time (Hsieh
et al., 2014; Musco & Musco, 2017). However, scalability of non-linear SVM training is inherently constrained
by the linear growth of model size with training data size
(Steinwart, 2003), making the methods not easily applicable to extremely large problems. This is a seriously limiting
constraint, and the trend of ever-growing data collections
will further continue to pose new algorithmic challenges to
large-scale machine learning.
Linear SVMs, which have a single hyperplane per class
in multi-class classification, have been very popular when
working with large-scale data (Joachims, 2006; ShalevShwartz et al., 2007). This is due to their very favorable properties of linear training time and constant memory scaling. However, scalability of linear SVMs comes
at a price of limited representational power. While linear SVMs have been successfully applied to many largescale problems, there are many applications where learning a single separating hyperplane per class may not be
sufficient. Thus, there is a significant gap in scalability
and representational power between linear and non-linear
SVMs. Multi-hyperplane Machine (MM) (Aiolli & Sperduti, 2005), which allows several hyperplanes per class,
provides an intriguing avenue towards closing this gap.
Along similar lines, Kantchelian et al. (2014) proposed
a large-margin variant of the algorithm. The MM methods can be trained very efficiently, as described in the
Adaptive MM (AMM) algorithm (Wang et al., 2011) that
learns MMs in linear time using Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). The authors showed that the approach is only
slightly slower than linear SVM, while achieving significantly higher accuracies (Wang et al., 2011).
In Wang et al. (2011) the authors showed that the AMM
algorithm converges to an optimal solution and proved the
generalization bounds for separable problems. However,
empirical results indicate that there is still a significant gap

