Entropy Minimization In Emergent Languages

Eugene Kharitonov 1 Rahma Chaabouni 1 2 Diane Bouchacourt 1 Marco Baroni 1 3

Abstract
There is growing interest in studying the languages that emerge when neural agents are jointly
trained to solve tasks requiring communication
through a discrete channel. We investigate here
the information-theoretic complexity of such languages, focusing on the basic two-agent, oneexchange setup. We find that, under common
training procedures, the emergent languages are
subject to an entropy minimization pressure
that has also been detected in human language,
whereby the mutual information between the communicating agent’s inputs and the messages is
minimized, within the range afforded by the need
for successful communication. That is, emergent languages are (nearly) as simple as the task
they are developed for allow them to be. This
pressure is amplified as we increase communication channel discreteness. Further, we observe
that stronger discrete-channel-driven entropy minimization leads to representations with increased
robustness to overfitting and adversarial attacks.
We conclude by discussing the implications of
our findings for the study of natural and artificial
communication systems.

1. Introduction
There has recently been much interest in the analysis of the
communication systems arising when deep network agents
that interact to accomplish a goal are allowed to exchange
language-like discrete messages (Lazaridou et al., 2016;
Havrylov & Titov, 2017; Choi et al., 2018; Lazaridou et al.,
2018; Li & Bowling, 2019; Chaabouni et al., 2020). Understanding the emergent protocol is important if we want to
eventually develop agents capable of interacting with each
other and with us through language (Mikolov et al., 2016;
1
Facebook AI Research, Paris, France 2 Cognitive Machine
Learning (ENS - EHESS - PSL - CNRS - INRIA) 3 Catalan Institute for Research and Advanced Studies, Barcelona, Spain. Correspondence to: Eugene Kharitonov <kharitonov@fb.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2019). The pursuit might also
provide comparative evidence about how core properties
of human language have evolved (Kirby, 2002; Hurford,
2014; Harding Graesser et al., 2019). While earlier studies reported ways in which deep agent protocols radically
depart from human language (Kottur et al., 2017; Bouchacourt & Baroni, 2018; Chaabouni et al., 2019; Lowe et al.,
2019), we show here that emergent communication shares
an important property of the latter, namely a tendency towards entropy minimization.
Converging evidence shows that efficiency pressures are
at work in language and other biological communication
systems (Ferrer i Cancho et al., 2013; Gibson et al., 2019).
One particular aspect of communicative efficiency, robustly
observed across many semantic domains, is the tendency to
minimize lexicon entropy, to the extent allowed by the counteracting need for accuracy (Zaslavsky et al., 2018; 2019).
For example, while most languages distinguish grandmothers from grandfathers, few have separate words for motherand father-side grandmothers, as the latter distinction makes
communication only slightly more accurate at the cost of an
increase in lexicon complexity (Kemp & Regier, 2012). We
show here, in two separate games designed to precisely measure such property, that the protocol evolved by interacting
deep agents is subject to the same complexity minimization pressure.
Entropy minimization in natural language has been connected to the Information Bottleneck principle (Tishby et al.,
1999). In turn, complexity reduction due to the Information
Bottleneck provides a beneficial regularization effect on
learned representations (Fischer, 2019; Alemi et al., 2016;
Achille & Soatto, 2018a;b). It is difficult to experimentally
verify the presence of such effect in human language, but
we can look for it in our computational simulations. We
confirm that, when relaxing channel discreteness, the entropy minimization property no longer holds, and the system
becomes less robust against overfitting and adversarial noise.
This in turn raises intriguing questions about the origin of
discreteness in human language, that we return to in the
conclusion.

