Soft Threshold Weight Reparameterization for Learnable Sparsity

Aditya Kusupati 1
Vivek Ramanujan
Raghav Somani * 1 Mitchell Wortsman * 1
Prateek Jain 3 Sham Kakade 1 Ali Farhadi 1
*2

Abstract
Sparsity in Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) is
studied extensively with the focus of maximizing prediction accuracy given an overall parameter budget. Existing methods rely on uniform
or heuristic non-uniform sparsity budgets which
have sub-optimal layer-wise parameter allocation
resulting in a) lower prediction accuracy or b)
higher inference cost (FLOPs). This work proposes Soft Threshold Reparameterization (STR),
a novel use of the soft-threshold operator on
DNN weights. STR smoothly induces sparsity while learning pruning thresholds thereby
obtaining a non-uniform sparsity budget. Our
method achieves state-of-the-art accuracy for unstructured sparsity in CNNs (ResNet50 and MobileNetV1 on ImageNet-1K), and, additionally,
learns non-uniform budgets that empirically reduce the FLOPs by up to 50%. Notably, STR
boosts the accuracy over existing results by up
to 10% in the ultra sparse (99%) regime and
can also be used to induce low-rank (structured
sparsity) in RNNs. In short, STR is a simple
mechanism which learns effective sparsity budgets that contrast with popular heuristics. Code,
pretrained models and sparsity budgets are at
https://github.com/RAIVNLab/STR.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are the state-of-the-art models for many important tasks in the domains of Computer
Vision, Natural Language Processing, etc. To enable highly
accurate solutions, DNNs require large model sizes resulting
in huge inference costs, which many times become the main
*
1
Equal contribution
University of Washington, USA
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence, USA 3 Microsoft Research, India. Correspondence to: Aditya Kusupati <kusupati@cs.washington.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

bottleneck in the real-world deployment of the solutions.
During inference, a typical DNN model stresses the following aspects of the compute environment: 1) RAM - working
memory, 2) Processor compute - Floating Point Operations
(FLOPs1 ), and 3) Flash - model size. Various techniques are
proposed to make DNNs efficient including model pruning
(sparsity) (Han et al., 2015), knowledge distillation (Buciluǎ
et al., 2006), model architectures (Howard et al., 2017) and
quantization (Rastegari et al., 2016).
Sparsity of the model, in particular, has potential for impact
across a variety of inference settings as it reduces the model
size and inference cost (FLOPs) without significant change
in training pipelines. Naturally, several interesting projects
address inference speed-ups via sparsity on existing frameworks (Liu et al., 2015; Elsen et al., 2019) and commodity
hardware (Ashby et al.). On-premise or Edge computing
is another domain where sparse DNNs have potential for
deep impact as it is governed by billions of battery limited
devices with single-core CPUs. These devices, including
mobile phones (Anguita et al., 2012) and IoT sensors (Patil
et al., 2019; Roy et al., 2019), can benefit significantly from
sparsity as it can enable real-time on-device solutions.
Sparsity in DNNs, surveyed extensively in Section 2, has
been the subject of several papers where new algorithms
are designed to obtain models with a given parameter budget. But state-of-the-art DNN models tend to have a large
number of layers with highly non-uniform distribution both
in terms of the number of parameters as well as FLOPs
required per layer. Most existing methods rely either on
uniform sparsity across all parameter tensors (layers) or
on heuristic non-uniform sparsity budgets leading to a suboptimal weight allocation across layers and can lead to a
significant loss in accuracy. Furthermore, if the budget is
set at a global level, some of the layers with a small number
of parameters would be fully dense as their contribution to
the budget is insignificant. However, those layers can have
significant FLOPs, e.g., in an initial convolution layer, a
simple tiny 3×3 kernel would be applied to the entire image.
Hence, while such models might decrease the number of
non-zeroes significantly, their FLOPs could still be large.
1

One Multiply-Add is counted as one FLOP

