TASK N ORM: Rethinking Batch Normalization for Meta-Learning

John Bronskill * 1 Jonathan Gordon * 1 James Requeima 1 2 Sebastian Nowozin 3 Richard E. Turner 1 3

Abstract
Modern meta-learning approaches for image classification rely on increasingly deep networks
to achieve state-of-the-art performance, making
batch normalization an essential component of
meta-learning pipelines. However, the hierarchical nature of the meta-learning setting presents
several challenges that can render conventional
batch normalization ineffective, giving rise to the
need to rethink normalization in this setting. We
evaluate a range of approaches to batch normalization for meta-learning scenarios, and develop
a novel approach that we call TASK N ORM. Experiments on fourteen datasets demonstrate that
the choice of batch normalization has a dramatic
effect on both classification accuracy and training time for both gradient based- and gradientfree meta-learning approaches. Importantly, TAS K N ORM is found to consistently improve performance. Finally, we provide a set of best practices
for normalization that will allow fair comparison
of meta-learning algorithms.

1. Introduction
Meta-learning, or learning to learn (Thrun & Pratt, 2012;
Schmidhuber, 1987), is an appealing approach for designing learning systems. It enables practitioners to construct
models and training procedures that explicitly target desirable charateristics such as sample-efficiency and out-ofdistribution generalization. Meta-learning systems have
been demonstrated to excel at complex learning tasks such
as few-shot learning (Snell et al., 2017; Finn et al., 2017)
and continual learning (Nagabandi et al., 2019; Requeima
et al., 2019a; Jerfel et al., 2019).
Recent approaches to meta-learning rely on increasingly
deep neural network based architectures to achieve state-of*

Equal contribution 1 University of Cambridge 2 Invenia Labs
Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: John Bronskill
<jfb54@cam.ac.uk>.
3

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

the-art performance in a range of benchmark tasks (Finn
et al., 2017; Mishra et al., 2018; Triantafillou et al., 2020;
Requeima et al., 2019a). When constructing very deep networks, a standard component is the use of normalization
layers (NL). In particular, in the image-classification domain, batch normalization (BN; Ioffe, 2017) is crucial to the
successful training of very deep convolutional networks.
However, as we discuss in Section 3, standard assumptions
of the meta-learning scenario violate the assumptions of
BN and vice-versa, complicating the deployment of BN in
meta-learning. Many papers proposing novel meta-learning
approaches employ different forms of BN for the proposed
models, and some forms make implicit assumptions that,
while improving benchmark performance, may result in
potentially undesirable behaviours. Moreover, as we demonstrate in Section 5, performance of the trained models can
vary significantly based on the form of BN employed, confounding comparisons across methods. Further, naive adoption of BN for meta-learning does not reflect the statistical
structure of the data-distribution in this scenario. In contrast,
we propose a novel variant of BN – TASK N ORM – that
explicitly accounts for the statistical structure of the data
distribution. We demonstrate that by doing so, TASK N ORM
further accelerates training of models using meta-learning
while achieving improved test-time performance. Our main
contributions are as follows:
• We identify and highlight several issues with BN schemes
used in the recent meta-learning literature.
• We propose TASK N ORM, a novel variant of BN which is
tailored for the meta-learning setting.
• In experiments with fourteen datasets, we demonstrate
that TASK N ORM consistently outperforms competing methods, while making less restrictive assumptions than its
strongest competitor.

2. Background and Related Work
In this section we lay the necessary groundwork for our
investigation of batch normalization in the meta-learning
scenario. Our focus in this work is on image classification.
We denote images x ∈ RC×W ×H where W is the image
width, H the image height, C the number of image channels.
Each image is associated with a label y ∈ {1, . . . , M }

