Towards Understanding the Dynamics of the First-Order Adversaries

Zhun Deng 1 Hangfeng He 2 Jiaoyang Huang 3 Weijie J. Su 2

Abstract
An acknowledged weakness of neural networks
is their vulnerability to adversarial perturbations
to the inputs. To improve the robustness of these
models, one of the most popular defense mechanisms is to alternatively maximize the loss over
the constrained perturbations (or called adversaries) on the inputs using projected gradient ascent and minimize over weights. In this paper, we
analyze the dynamics of the maximization step towards understanding the experimentally observed
effectiveness of this defense mechanism. Specifically, we investigate the non-concave landscape
of the adversaries for a two-layer neural network
with a quadratic loss. Our main result proves that
projected gradient ascent finds a local maximum
of this non-concave problem in a polynomial number of iterations with high probability. To our
knowledge, this is the first work that provides a
convergence analysis of the first-order adversaries.
Moreover, our analysis demonstrates that, in the
initial phase of adversarial training, the scale of
the inputs matters in the sense that a smaller input
scale leads to faster convergence of adversarial
training and a “more regular” landscape. Finally,
we show that these theoretical findings are in excellent agreement with a series of experiments.

1. Introduction
Neural networks have achieved remarkable success in many
fields such as image recognition (He et al., 2016) and natural
language processing (Devlin et al., 2018). However, it has
been recognized that neural networks are not robust against
adversarial examples – prediction labels can be easily manipulated by human imperceptible perturbations (Goodfellow
et al., 2014; Szegedy et al., 2013). In response, many defense mechanisms have been proposed against adversarial
1

Harvard University 2 University of Pennsylvania 3 Institute
of Advanced Study. Correspondence to: Zhun Deng <zhundeng@g.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

attacks such as input de-noising (Guo et al., 2017), randomized smoothing (Ilyas et al., 2019), gradient regularization
(Papernot et al., 2017), and adversarial training (Madry et al.,
2017). Among these, one of the most popular techniques
is adversarial training, which proposes to add adversarial
examples into the training set as a way of improving the
robustness.
As oppose to earlier work that only adds adversarial examples several times during the training phase, more recently,
Madry et al. (2017) propose to formulate adversarial training
through the lens of robust optimization, showing substantial
improvement. More precisely, robust optimization for a loss
function L in its simples setting takes the form
min E(x,y)∼D max L(θ, x + δ, y),
θ∈Θ

kδkp ⩽ε

where θ ∈ Θ is the parameter and (x, y) are the input
and label following some unknown joint distribution D.
The inner maximization problem is to find an adversarial
example, where δ is an adversarial perturbation with lp
norm constraint for some integer 1 ⩽ p ⩽ ∞.
For neural networks, the inner maximization problem is typically non-concave and the most commonly used method in
implementation is through the first-order method – projected
gradient ascent. However, as pointed out by (Wang et al.,
2019), the degree to which it solves the inner maximization
problem has not been thoroughly understood. While there
are several papers providing great theoretical insights to the
convergence of adversarial training, they either formulate
the inner maximization problem as maximizing the first
order taylor expansion of the loss (Wang et al., 2019), or
treat the inner maximization problem abstractly as a general
function of data and study the convergence in the neural
tangent kernel regime (Gao et al., 2019). In our paper, we
make the first step to analyze the dynamics of projected
gradient ascent of neural networks.
The first question is about the effectiveness of projected gradient ascent. To prove the effectiveness, we need to consider
the time cost of using projected gradient ascent in the inner
maximization problem. In (Madry et al., 2017), one claim
is that using projected gradient ascent can find the adversaries rapidly. That claim is very important since adversarial
training usually takes much longer than usual training due
to the inner maximization problem. Specifically, if we use

