Adversarial Neural Pruning with Latent Vulnerability Suppression

Divyam Madaan 1 Jinwoo Shin 2 3 Sung Ju Hwang 1 3 4

Abstract
Despite the remarkable performance of deep neural networks on various computer vision tasks,
they are known to be susceptible to adversarial
perturbations, which makes it challenging to deploy them in real-world safety-critical applications. In this paper, we conjecture that the leading
cause of adversarial vulnerability is the distortion
in the latent feature space, and provide methods
to suppress them effectively. Explicitly, we define vulnerability for each latent feature and then
propose a new loss for adversarial learning, Vulnerability Suppression (VS) loss, that aims to minimize the feature-level vulnerability during training. We further propose a Bayesian framework to
prune features with high vulnerability to reduce
both vulnerability and loss on adversarial samples.
We validate our Adversarial Neural Pruning with
Vulnerability Suppression (ANP-VS) method on
multiple benchmark datasets, on which it not only
obtains state-of-the-art adversarial robustness but
also improves the performance on clean examples,
using only a fraction of the parameters used by the
full network. Further qualitative analysis suggests
that the improvements come from the suppression
of feature-level vulnerability.

1. Introduction
In the last many years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have
achieved impressive results on various computer vision
tasks, e.g., image classification (Krizhevsky et al., 2012),
face/object recognition (He et al., 2015; Deng et al., 2019),
and semantic segmentation (He et al., 2017). The groundbreaking success of DNNs has motivated their use in safetycritical environments such as medical imaging (Esteva et al.,
2017) and autonomous driving (Bojarski et al., 2016). How1
School of Computing, KAIST, South Korea 2 School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, South Korea 3 Graduate School of AI,
KAIST, South Korea 4 AITRICS, South Korea. Correspondence to:
Divyam Madaan <dmadaan@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

ever, DNNs are extremely brittle to carefully crafted imperceptible adversarial perturbations intentionally optimized
to cause miss-prediction (Szegedy et al., 2013; Goodfellow
et al., 2014).
While the field has primarily focused on the development
of new attacks and defenses, a ‘cat-and-mouse’ game between attacker and defender has arisen. There has been
a long list of proposed defenses to mitigate the effect of
adversarial examples, e.g., defenses (Papernot et al., 2016;
Xu et al., 2017b; Buckman et al., 2018; Dhillon et al., 2018),
followed by successful attacks (Carlini & Wagner, 2016;
Athalye et al., 2018; Uesato et al., 2018). This shows that
any defense mechanism that once looks successful could
be circumvented with the invention of new attacks. In this
paper, we tackle the problem by identifying a more fundamental cause of the adversarial vulnerability of DNNs.
What makes DNNs vulnerable to adversarial attacks? Our intuition is that the adversarial vulnerability of a DNN comes
from the distortion in the latent feature space incurred by the
adversarial perturbation. If a perturbation at the input level
is suppressed successfully at any layers of the DNN, then it
would not cause miss-prediction. However, not all latent features will contribute equally to the distortion; some features
may have more substantial distortion, by amplifying the
perturbations at the input level, while others will remain relatively static. Under this motivation, we first formally define
the vulnerability of the latent features and show that sparse
networks can have a much smaller degree of network-level
vulnerability in Figure 2(a). Then, we propose an effective
way to suppress vulnerability by pruning the latent features
with high vulnerability. We refer to this defense mechanism
as Adversarial Neural Pruning (ANP). Further, we propose
a novel loss, which we refer to as Vulnerability Suppression
(VS) loss, that directly suppresses the vulnerability in the
feature space by minimizing the feature-level vulnerability.
To this end, we propose a novel defense mechanism coined,
Adversarial Neural Pruning with Vulnerability Suppression
(ANP-VS), that learns pruning masks for the features in a
Bayesian framework to minimize both the adversarial loss
and the feature-level vulnerability, as illustrated in Figure 1.
It effectively suppresses the distortion in the latent feature
space with almost no extra cost relative to adversarial training and yields light-weighted networks that are more robust
to adversarial perturbations.

