Parametric Gaussian Process Regressors

Martin Jankowiak 1 Geoff Pleiss 2 Jacob R. Gardner 3

Abstract
The combination of inducing point methods with
stochastic variational inference has enabled approximate Gaussian Process (GP) inference on
large datasets. Unfortunately, the resulting predictive distributions often exhibit substantially underestimated uncertainties. Notably, in the regression
case the predictive variance is typically dominated
by observation noise, yielding uncertainty estimates that make little use of the input-dependent
function uncertainty that makes GP priors attractive. In this work we propose two simple methods
for scalable GP regression that address this issue
and thus yield substantially improved predictive
uncertainties. The first applies variational inference to FITC (Fully Independent Training Conditional; Snelson et. al. 2006). The second bypasses
posterior approximations and instead directly targets the posterior predictive distribution. In an
extensive empirical comparison with a number of
alternative methods for scalable GP regression,
we find that the resulting predictive distributions
exhibit significantly better calibrated uncertainties
and higher log likelihoods—often by as much as
half a nat per datapoint.

1. Introduction
Machine learning is finding increasing use in applications
where autonomous decisions are driven by predictive models. For example, machine learning can be used to steer
dynamic load balancing in critical electrical systems, and
autonomous vehicles use machine learning algorithms to
detect and classify objects in unpredictable weather conditions and decide whether to brake. As machine learning
models increasingly become deployed as components in
1

The Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 Dept. of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA 3 Dept. of
Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA . Correspondence to: Martin Jankowiak
<jankowiak@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. We depict GP regressors fit to a heteroscedastic dataset
using two different inference algorithms. Solid lines depict mean
predictions and 2-σ uncertainty bands are in blue. In the lower
panel, fit with the PPGPR approach described in Sec. 3.2, significant use is made of input-dependent function uncertainty (dark
blue), while in the upper panel, fit with variational inference (see
Sec. 2.3.1), the predictive uncertainty is dominated by the observa2
tion noise σobs
(light blue) and the kernel scale σk is smaller.

larger decision making pipelines, it is essential that models
be able to reason about uncertainty and risk. Techniques
drawn from probabilistic machine learning offer the ability
to deal with these challenges by offering predictive models
with simple and interpretable probabilistic outputs.
Recent years have seen extensive use of variational inference
(Jordan et al., 1999) as a workhorse inference algorithm for a
variety of probabilistic models. The popularity of variational
inference has been been driven by a number of different
factors, including: i) its amenability to data subsampling
(Hoffman et al., 2013); ii) its applicability to black-box nonconjugate models (Kingma and Welling, 2013; Rezende
et al., 2014); and iii) its suitability for GPU acceleration.
The many practical successes of variational inference
notwithstanding, it has long been recognized that variational inference often results in overconfident uncertainty
estimates.1 This problem can be especially acute for Gaussian Process (GP) models (Bauer et al., 2016). In particular
1
For example see Turner and Sahani (2011) for a discussion of
this point in the context of time series models.

