Predictive Multiplicity in Classification
Charles T. Marx 1 Flavio du Pin Calmon 2 Berk Ustun 3

Abstract
Prediction problems often admit competing models that perform almost equally well. This effect
challenges key assumptions in machine learning
when competing models assign conflicting predictions. In this paper, we define predictive multiplicity as the ability of a prediction problem to
admit competing models with conflicting predictions. We introduce formal measures to evaluate
the severity of predictive multiplicity and develop
integer programming tools to compute them exactly for linear classification problems. We apply our tools to measure predictive multiplicity
in recidivism prediction problems. Our results
show that real-world datasets may admit competing models that assign wildly conflicting predictions, and motivate the need to measure and report
predictive multiplicity in model development.

1 Introduction
Machine learning algorithms are often designed to fit a best
model from data. For example, modern methods for empirical risk minimization fit a model by optimizing a specific
objective (e.g., error rate) over models that obey a specific
set of constraints (e.g., linear classifiers with equal TPR
between groups). In an ideal scenario where stakeholders
agree on such a problem formulation (Passi & Barocas,
2019) and we are given a large dataset of representative examples, the use of machine learning may still lead to ethical
challenges if there are multiple best-fitting models.
In machine learning, multiplicity refers to the ability of a
prediction problem to admit multiple competing models that
perform almost equally well. Several works mention that
prediction problems can exhibit multiplicity (see e.g., Mountain & Hsiao, 1989; McCullagh & Nelder, 1989), but few
discuss its implications. The work of Breiman (2001) is
1

2

3

Haverford College Harvard SEAS UC San Diego. Correspondence to: Charles T. Marx <cmarx@haverford.edu>, Berk
Ustun <berk@ucsd.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

a major exception. In a seminal position paper, Breiman
describes how multiplicity challenges explanations derived
from a single predictive model: if one can fit multiple competing models – each of which provides a different explanation of the data-generating process – how can we tell which
explanation is correct?
Drawing parallels between the discordant explanations of
competing models and the discordant testimonies of witnesses in the motion picture “Rashomon,” Breiman refers
to this dilemma the Rashomon effect. In the context of
his work, the Rashomon effect is – in fact – an argument
against the misuse of explanations. Seeing how prediction
problems can exhibit multiplicity, we should not use the
explanations of a single model to draw conclusions about
the broader data-generating process, at least until we can
rule out multiplicity.
Machine learning has changed drastically since Breiman
coined the Rashomon effect. Many models are now exclusively built for prediction (Kleinberg et al., 2015). In applications like lending and recidivism prediction, predictions
affect people (Binns et al., 2018), and multiplicity raises
new challenges when competing models assign conflicting
predictions. Consider the following examples:
Recidivism Prediction: Say that a recidivism prediction
problem admits competing models with conflicting predictions. In this case, a person who is predicted to recidivate by
one model may be predicted not to recidivate by a competing model that performs equally well. If so, we may want to
ignore predictions for this person or even forgo deployment.
Lending: Consider explaining the prediction of a loan approval model to an applicant who is denied a loan (e.g., by
producing a counterfactual explanation for the prediction
Martens & Provost, 2014). If competing models assign
conflicting predictions, then these predictions may lead to
contradictory explanations. In this case, reporting evidence
of competing models with conflicting predictions would
mitigate unwarranted rationalization of the model resulting
from fairwashing (Aı̈vodji et al., 2019; Laugel et al., 2019;
Slack et al., 2020) or explanation bias (Koehler, 1991).
In this work, we define predictive multiplicity as the ability
of a prediction problem to admit competing models that
assign conflicting predictions. Predictive multiplicity af-

