Transformer Hawkes Process
Simiao Zuo 1 Haoming Jiang 1 Zichong Li 2 Tuo Zhao 1 3 Hongyuan Zha 4 5

Abstract
Modern data acquisition routinely produce massive amounts of event sequence data in various
domains, such as social media, healthcare, and
financial markets. These data often exhibit complicated short-term and long-term temporal dependencies. However, most of the existing recurrent neural network based point process models
fail to capture such dependencies, and yield unreliable prediction performance. To address this
issue, we propose a Transformer Hawkes Process
(THP) model, which leverages the self-attention
mechanism to capture long-term dependencies
and meanwhile enjoys computational efficiency.
Numerical experiments on various datasets show
that THP outperforms existing models in terms of
both likelihood and event prediction accuracy by
a notable margin. Moreover, THP is quite general
and can incorporate additional structural knowledge. We provide a concrete example, where
THP achieves improved prediction performance
for learning multiple point processes when incorporating their relational information.

which are essentially sequences of events at different time
stamps. Besides social media, event data also exist in domains like financial transactions (Bacry et al., 2015) and
personalized healthcare (Wang et al., 2018). For example,
in electronic medical records, tests and diagnoses of each
patient can be treated as a sequence of events. Unlike other
sequential data such as time series, event sequences tend
to be asynchronous (Ross et al., 1996), which means time
intervals between events are just as important as the order
of them to describe their dynamics. Also, depending on specific application requirements, event data show sophisticated
dependencies on their history.
Point process is a powerful tool for modeling sequences
of discrete events in continuous time, and the technique
has been widely applied. Hawkes process (Hawkes, 1971;
Isham & Westcott, 1979) and Poisson point process are
traditionally used as examples of point processes. However,
the simplified assumptions of the complicated dynamics
of point processes limit the models’ practicality. As an
example, Hawkes process states that all past events should
have positive influences on the occurrence of current events.
However, a user on Twitter may initiate tweets on different
topics, and these events should be considered as unrelated
instead of mutually-excited.

1
Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA; 2 School of the Gifted Young, University of
Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China; 3 Computational
Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA; 4 School of Data Science, Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China; 5 Currently on leave from Georgia Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Simiao Zuo
<simiaozuo@gatech.edu>, Tuo Zhao <tourzhao@gatech.edu>,
Hongyuan Zha <zhahy@cuhk.edu.cn>.

To alleviate the over-simplifications, likelihood-free methods (Xiao et al., 2017a; Li et al., 2018) and non-parametric
models like kernel methods and splines (Vere-Jones et al.,
1990) have been proposed, but the increasing complexity
and quantity of collected data crave for more powerful models. With the development of neural networks, in particular
deep neural networks, focuses have been placed on incorporating these flexible models into classical point processes.
Because of the sequential nature of event steams, existing methods rely heavily on Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs). Neural networks are known for their ability to
capture complicated high-level features, in particular, RNNs
have the representation power to model the dynamics of
event sequence data. In previous works, either vanilla RNN
(Du et al., 2016) or its variants (Mei & Eisner, 2017; Xiao
et al., 2017b) have been used and significant progress in
terms of likelihood and event prediction have been achieved.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

However, there are two significant drawbacks with RNNbased models. First, recurrent neural networks, even those
equipped with forget gates, such as Long Short-Term Mem-

1. Introduction
Event sequence data are naturally observed in our daily life.
Through social media such as Twitter and Facebook, we
share our experiences and respond to other users’ information (Yang et al., 2011). In these websites, each user has a
sequence of events such as tweets and interactions. Hundreds of millions of users generate large amounts of tweets,

