Convergence Rates of Variational Inference in Sparse Deep Learning

Badr-Eddine Chérief-Abdellatif 1

Abstract
Variational inference is becoming more and more
popular for approximating intractable posterior
distributions in Bayesian statistics and machine
learning. Meanwhile, a few recent works have
provided theoretical justification and new insights
on deep neural networks for estimating smooth
functions in usual settings such as nonparametric regression. In this paper, we show that variational inference for sparse deep learning retains
precisely the same generalization properties than
exact Bayesian inference. In particular, we show
that a wise choice of the neural network architecture leads to near-minimax rates of convergence
for Hölder smooth functions. Additionally, we
show that the model selection framework over the
architecture of the network via ELBO maximization does not overfit and adaptively achieves the
optimal rate of convergence.

1. Introduction
The Bayesian approach to learning in neural networks has
a long history. Bayesian Neural Networks have been first
proposed in the 90s and widely studied since then (MacKay,
1992a; Neal, 1995). They offer a probabilistic interpretation
and a measure of uncertainty for deep learning models. They
are more robust to overfitting than classical neural networks
and still achieve great performance even on small datasets.
A prior distribution is put on the parameters of the network,
namely the weight matrices and the bias vectors, for instance
a Gaussian or a uniform distribution, and Bayesian inference
is done through the likelihood specification. Nevertheless,
state-of-the-art neural networks may contain millions of
parameters and the form of a neural network is not adapted
to exact integration, which makes the posterior distribution
be intractable in practice.
1

CREST - ENSAE - Institut Polytechnique de Paris.
Correspondence to:
Badr-Eddine Chérief-Abdellatif
<badr.eddine.cherief.abdellatif@ensae.fr>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Modern approximate inference mainly relies on variational
inference (VI), with sometimes a flavor of sampling techniques. A lot of recent papers have investigated variational
inference for Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) (Hinton &
van Camp, 1993; Graves, 2011; Blundell et al., 2015) to
fit an approximate posterior that maximizes the Evidence
Lower Bound (ELBO). For instance, (Blundell et al., 2015)
introduced Bayes by Backprop, one of the most famous
techniques of VI applied to neural networks, which derives
a fully factorized Gaussian approximation to the posterior:
using the reparameterization trick (Opper & Archambeau,
2008), the gradients of ELBO towards parameters of the
Gaussian approximation can be computed by backpropagation, and then be used for updates. Another point of interest
in DNNs is the choice of the prior. (Blundell et al., 2015)
introduced a mixture of Gaussians prior on the weights, with
one component tightly concentrated around zero, imitating
the sparsity-inducing spike-and-slab prior. This offers a
Bayesian alternative to the dropout regularization procedure (Srivastava et al., 2014) which injects sparsity in the
network by switching off randomly some of the weights
of the network. This idea goes back to David MacKay
who discussed in his thesis the possibility of choosing a
spike-and-slab prior over the weights of the neural network (MacKay, 1992b). More recently, (Rockova & Polson,
2018) introduced Spike-and-Slab Deep Learning (SS-DL),
a fully Bayesian alternative to dropout for improving generalizability of deep ReLU networks.
1.1. Related work
Although deep learning is extremely popular, the study of
generalization properties of DNNs is still an open problem.
Some works have been conducted in order to investigate
the theoretical properties of neural networks from different points of view. The literature developed in the past
decades can be mainly shared in three parts. First, the approximation theory wonders how well a function can be
approximated by neural networks. The first studies were
mostly conducted to obtain approximation guarantees for
shallow neural nets with a single hidden layer (Cybenko,
1989; Barron, 1993). Since then, modern research has focused on the expressive power of depth and extended the
previous results to deep neural networks with a larger number of layers (Bengio & Delalleau, 2011; Yarotsky, 2016;

