Variable Skipping for Autoregressive Range Density Estimation

Eric Liang* 1 Zongheng Yang* 1 Ion Stoica 1 Pieter Abbeel 1 2 Yan Duan 2 Xi Chen 2
Baseline

Deep autoregressive models compute point likelihood estimates of individual data points. However, many applications (i.e., database cardinality
estimation) require estimating range densities, a
capability that is under-explored by current neural
density estimation literature. In these applications, fast and accurate range density estimates
over high-dimensional data directly impact userperceived performance. In this paper, we explore
a technique, variable skipping, for accelerating
range density estimation over deep autoregressive
models. This technique exploits the sparse structure of range density queries to avoid sampling unnecessary variables during approximate inference.
We show that variable skipping provides 10-100×
efficiency improvements when targeting challenging high-quantile error metrics, enables complex
applications such as text pattern matching, and
can be realized via a simple data augmentation
procedure without changing the usual maximum
likelihood objective.

1. Introduction
Deep autoregressive (AR) models have achieved state-ofthe-art density estimation results in image, video, and audio (Salimans et al., 2017; van den Oord et al., 2016; Van den
Oord et al., 2016; Child et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2019;
Weissenborn et al., 2019). Recent work has applied them to
domains traditionally outside of machine learning, such
as physics (Sharir et al., 2020), protein modeling (Rao
et al., 2019), and database query optimization (Yang et al.,
2019b; 2020). These use cases have surfaced the need
for complex inference capabilities from deep AR models. For example, the database cardinality estimation task
reduces to estimating the density mass occupied by sets
*
Equal contribution 1 EECS, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, California, USA 2 covariant.ai, Berkeley, California, USA. Correspondence to: Eric Liang <ericliang@berkeley.edu>, Zongheng Yang
<zongheng@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Forward Passes Required

Abstract

MultiOrder

Skipping

MultiOrder + Skipping

100000

10000

1000

100
DMV-Full

Census

KDD

Dataset

Figure 1. Approximate number of model forward passes required
to achieve single-digit inference error at the 99th quantile. Y-axis
shown in log scale, lower is better. Variable skipping provides 10100× compute savings for challenging high-quantile error targets.
Refer to the Evaluation section for full results.

of variables under sparse range constraints. In this problem, the database optimizer probes the fraction of records
satisfying a query of high-dimensional constraints, e.g.,
Pr(age > 35 && salary < 50K), and relies on accurate
estimates to pick performant query execution strategies.
In this paper, we call for attention to such range density
estimation problems in the context of deep AR models.
Given rapid advances in model capabilities, fast and accurate
range density estimation has broad potential applicability to
a number of domains, including databases, text processing,
and inpainting (Section 1.1).
Range density estimation involves two related challenges:
• Marginalization: the handling of unconstrained variables, and
• Range Constraints: variables that are constrained to
a specific range or subset of values.
Exact inference or integration over the query region takes
time exponential in the number of dimensions—a cost too
high for all but the tiniest problems. Further, both marginalization and range constraints are difficult to implement on
top of AR models since they are only trained to provide
point density estimates. This motivates the use of approximate inference algorithms such as recently proposed by
(Yang et al., 2019b), which show that AR models can significantly improve on the state-of-the-art in range estimation
accuracy while remaining competitive in latency.

