Prediction-Guided Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning
for Continuous Robot Control
Jie Xu 1 Yunsheng Tian 1 Pingchuan Ma 1 Daniela Rus 1 Shinjiro Sueda 2 Wojciech Matusik 1

Abstract
Many real-world control problems involve conflicting objectives where we desire a dense and
high-quality set of control policies that are optimal for different objective preferences (called
Pareto-optimal). While extensive research in
multi-objective reinforcement learning (MORL)
has been conducted to tackle such problems,
multi-objective optimization for complex continuous robot control is still under-explored. In this
work, we propose an efficient evolutionary learning algorithm to find the Pareto set approximation
for continuous robot control problems, by extending a state-of-the-art RL algorithm and presenting
a novel prediction model to guide the learning
process. In addition to efficiently discovering
the individual policies on the Pareto front, we
construct a continuous set of Pareto-optimal solutions by Pareto analysis and interpolation. Furthermore, we design seven multi-objective RL environments with continuous action space, which
is the first benchmark platform to evaluate MORL
algorithms on various robot control problems. We
test the previous methods on the proposed benchmark problems, and the experiments show that
our approach is able to find a much denser and
higher-quality set of Pareto policies than the existing algorithms.

1. Introduction
Multi-objective problems have received significant attention
because most real-world scenarios involve making tradeoffs with respect to different performance metrics. This is
especially true in robotic control, in which the notion of performance usually involves different conflicting objectives.
1

Computer Science & Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
(CSAIL), Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 Texas A&M
University. Correspondence to: Jie Xu <jiex@csail.mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

RN

f2

Parameter Space

Performance Space

f1

Figure 1. Parameter space and performance space of the
Pareto policies. (Left) The Pareto set is composed from a disjoint set of policy families in the N dimensional parameter space.
(Right) The policies from each family map to a continuous segment
on the Pareto front in the performance space.

For example, when designing a control policy for a running
quadruped robot, we need to consider two conflicting objectives: running speed and energy efficiency. In contrast
to a single-objective environment, which measures performance using a single scalar value and where a single best
solution exists, with a multi-objective problem, performance
is measured using multiple objectives, and multiple optimal solutions exist. One optimal policy may prefer high
speed at the cost of lower energy efficiency, whereas another optimal policy might prefer high energy efficiency at
the cost of lower speed. In general, many optimal policies
exist depending on the chosen trade-off between these two
metrics. In the end, a human is responsible for selecting the
preference among different metrics, and this determines the
corresponding optimal policy.
One popular way of solving multi-objective control problems is to compute a meta policy (Chen et al., 2018). A meta
policy is a general policy that is not necessarily optimal but
can be relatively quickly adapted to different trade-offs between performance objectives. Unfortunately, such adapted
control policies are not necessarily optimal. For instance,
adapting a general meta control policy for a quadruped robot
to run as fast as possible will often result in a suboptimal
policy for this metric.
In this work, we show that an effective representation for obtaining the best performance trade-offs for multi-objective
robot control is a Pareto set of control policies. We empirically show that a Pareto set cannot be effectively represented
using a single continuous policy family. Rather, a Pareto
set is composed from a set of disjoint policy families, each

