Adversarial Robustness via Runtime Masking and Cleansing
Yi-Hsuan Wu 1 Chia-Hung Yuan 1 Shan-Hung Wu 1

Abstract
Deep neural networks are shown to be vulnerable
to adversarial attacks. This motivates robust learning techniques, such as the adversarial training,
whose goal is to learn a network that is robust
against adversarial attacks. However, the sample
complexity of robust learning can be significantly
larger than that of “standard” learning. In this
paper, we propose improving the adversarial robustness of a network by leveraging the potentially large test data seen at runtime. We devise a
new defense method, called runtime masking and
cleansing (RMC), that adapts the network at runtime before making a prediction to dynamically
mask network gradients and cleanse the model
of the non-robust features inevitably learned during the training process due to the size limit of
the training set. We conduct experiments on realworld datasets and the results demonstrate the
effectiveness of RMC empirically.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs), despite achieving remarkable performance in many applications, have shown to be
vulnerable to adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2014;
Goodfellow et al., 2014), i.e., examples that are intentionally
designed to be misclassified by the models but nearly indistinguishable from regular examples in human eyes or some
distance measures in the input space. Typically, an adversarial example is generated by slightly perturbing the input of a
regular example in directions where the output of the model
gives the highest loss (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow
et al., 2014; Kurakin et al., 2016; Papernot et al., 2016a;
Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016; Carlini & Wagner, 2017b).
The existence of such adversarial examples raises concerns
about the security-critical machine learning systems, such
as autonomous cars and speech recognition authorization.
1

Department of Computer Science, National Tsing Hua
University, Taiwan.
Correspondence to: Shan-Hung Wu
<shwu@cs.nthu.edu.tw>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

A plethora of defenses has been proposed, aiming to increase the robustness of a network to adversarial perturbations. Based on different hypotheses about the cause of
adversarial examples, some works change the model architecture (Krotov & Hopfield, 2018), distill a large network
into a small network (Papernot et al., 2016b), use regularization (Gu & Rigazio, 2014; Hein & Andriushchenko,
2017; Cisse et al., 2017; Jakubovitz & Giryes, 2018; Ross
& Doshi-Velez, 2018), or statistically detect adversarial examples (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2016; Grosse et al., 2017;
Gong et al., 2017; Metzen et al., 2017; Feinman et al., 2017).
Many of these methods, however, have been shown to fail
(Carlini & Wagner, 2017a;b; Athalye et al., 2018).
Recent studies (Fawzi et al., 2018; Gilmer et al., 2018;
Shafahi et al., 2018; Mahloujifar et al., 2019) show that
adversarial examples can be an unavoidable consequence
of learning high-dimensional geometry of data manifold
in a statistical setting. In this vein, the study (Schmidt
et al., 2018) proved that, for any training algorithm or model
class, the sample complexity of robust learning can be significantly larger than that of “standard” learning. In other
words, one theoretically grounded way to increase adversarial robustness is to acquire more data. This partially explains
why the adversarial training (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Kurakin et al., 2016; Madry et al., 2017), a data augmentation
technique, is empirically strong and also motivates a new
defense approach (Dubey et al., 2019) for convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) that relies on a web-scale amount
of external images.
In this paper, we study whether it is possible to improve
the adversarial robustness of a DNN by leveraging the potentially large test data seen at runtime. Currently, most
existing defenses use only data known at training time. A
key challenge of learning from test data is that they are unlabeled, so one cannot simply apply the adversarial training in
an online manner. We devise a new defense method, called
runtime masking and cleansing (RMC), that fine-tunes the
network weights for several gradient-descent steps before
making a prediction using precomputed adversarial examples residing near the test instance in the input space. This
dynamically masks the network gradients and cleanses the
model of the non-robust patterns inevitably learned during
the training process due to the size limit of the training set.
The following summarizes our contributions:

