Invertible generative models for inverse problems: mitigating representation
error and dataset bias
Muhammad Asim * 1 Mara Daniels * 2 Oscar Leong 3 Ali Ahmed † 1 Paul Hand † 2

Abstract
Trained generative models have shown remarkable performance as priors for inverse problems
in imaging – for example, Generative Adversarial Network priors permit recovery of test images
from 5-10x fewer measurements than sparsity priors. Unfortunately, these models may be unable
to represent any particular image because of architectural choices, mode collapse, and bias in the
training dataset. In this paper, we demonstrate
that invertible neural networks, which have zero
representation error by design, can be effective
natural signal priors at inverse problems such as
denoising, compressive sensing, and inpainting.
Given a trained generative model, we study the
empirical risk formulation of the desired inverse
problem under a regularization that promotes high
likelihood images, either directly by penalization
or algorithmically by initialization. For compressive sensing, invertible priors can yield higher
accuracy than sparsity priors across almost all
undersampling ratios, and due to their lack of representation error, invertible priors can yield better
reconstructions than GAN priors for images that
have rare features of variation within the biased
training set, including out-of-distribution natural
images. We additionally compare performance
for compressive sensing to unlearned methods,
such as the deep decoder, and we establish theoretical bounds on expected recovery error in the
case of a linear invertible model.

Equal contributions are denoted by * and † . 1 Department
of Electrical Engineering, Information Technology University,
Lahore, Pakistan 2 Department of Mathematics and Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern University, Boston,
MA 3 Department of Computational and Applied Mathematics,
Rice University, Houston, TX. Correspondence to: Mara Daniels
<daniels.g@northeastern.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

1. Introduction

Figure 1. We train an invertible generative model with CelebA
images (including those shown). When used as a prior for compressive sensing, it can yield higher quality image reconstructions
than Lasso and a trained DCGAN, even on out-of-distribution images. Note that the DCGAN reflects biases of the training set by
removing the man’s glasses and beard, whereas our invertible prior
does not.

Generative deep neural networks have shown remarkable
performance as natural signal priors in imaging inverse problems, such as denoising, inpainting, compressive sensing,
blind deconvolution, and phase retrieval. These generative
models can be trained from datasets consisting of images of
particular natural signal classes, such as faces, fingerprints,
MRIs, and more (Karras et al., 2018; Minaee & Abdolrashidi, 2018; Shin et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2018). Some
such models, including variational autoencoders (VAEs)
and generative adversarial networks (GANs), learn an explicit low-dimensional manifold that approximates a natural
signal class (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Kingma & Welling,
2014; Rezende et al., 2014). We will refer to such models as GAN priors. These priors can be used for inverse
problems by attempting to find the signal in the range of

