Hierarchical Generation of Molecular Graphs using Structural Motifs

Wengong Jin 1 Regina Barzilay 1 Tommi Jaakkola 1

Abstract
Graph generation techniques are increasingly being adopted for drug discovery. Previous graph
generation approaches have utilized relatively
small molecular building blocks such as atoms
or simple cycles, limiting their effectiveness to
smaller molecules. Indeed, as we demonstrate,
their performance degrades significantly for larger
molecules. In this paper, we propose a new hierarchical graph encoder-decoder that employs significantly larger and more flexible graph motifs
as basic building blocks. Our encoder produces a
multi-resolution representation for each molecule
in a fine-to-coarse fashion, from atoms to connected motifs. Each level integrates the encoding
of constituents below with the graph at that level.
Our autoregressive coarse-to-fine decoder adds
one motif at a time, interleaving the decision of
selecting a new motif with the process of resolving its attachments to the emerging molecule. We
evaluate our model on multiple molecule generation tasks, including polymers, and show that our
model significantly outperforms previous state-ofthe-art baselines.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models for molecule property prediction and
molecule generation are improving at a fast pace. Work to
date has adopted primarily two types of building blocks for
representing and building molecules: atom-by-atom strategies (Li et al., 2018; You et al., 2018a; Liu et al., 2018),
or substructure based (either rings or bonds) (Jin et al.,
2018; 2019). While these methods have been successful for
small molecules, their performance degrades significantly
for larger molecules such as polymers (see Figure 1). The
failure is likely due to many generation steps required to
realize larger molecules and the associated challenges with
1
MIT CSAIL. Correspondence to: Wengong Jin <wengong@csail.mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

gradients across the iterative steps.
Large molecules such as polymers exhibit clear hierarchical structure, being built from repeated structural motifs.
We hypothesize that explicitly incorporating such motifs
as building blocks in the generation process can significantly improve reconstruction and generation accuracy, as
already illustrated in Figure 1. While different substructures
as building blocks were considered in previous work (Jin
et al., 2018), their approach could not scale to larger motifs.
Indeed, their decoding process required each substructure
neighborhood to be assembled in one go, making it combinatorially challenging to handle large components with
many possible attachment points.
In this paper, we propose a motif-based hierarchical encoderdecoder for graph generation. The motifs themselves are
extracted separately at the outset from frequently occurring substructures, regardless of size. During generation,
molecules are built step by step by attaching motifs, large
or small, to the emerging molecule. The decoder operates
hierarchically, in a coarse-to-fine manner, and makes three
key consecutive predictions in each pass: new motif selection, which part of it attaches, and the points of contact with
the current molecule. These decisions are highly coupled
and naturally modeled auto-regressively. Moreover, each
decision is directly guided by the information explicated in
the associated layer of the mirroring hierarchical encoder.
The feed-forward fine-to-coarse encoding performs iterative
graph convolutions at each level, conditioned on the results
from layer below.
The proposed model is evaluated on various tasks ranging
from polymer generative modeling to graph translation for
molecule property optimization.1 Our baselines include
state-of-the-art graph generation methods (You et al., 2018a;
Liu et al., 2018; Jin et al., 2019). On polymer generation,
our model achieved state-of-the art results under various
metrics, outperforming the best baselines with 20% absolute improvement in reconstruction accuracy. On graph
translation tasks, our model outperformed all the baselines,
yielding 3.3% and 8.1% improvement on QED and DRD2
optimization tasks. We further conduct ablation studies to
validate the advantage of using larger motifs and the proposed hierarchical architecture.
1

https://github.com/wengong-jin/hgraph2graph

