Deep k-NN for Noisy Labels

Dara Bahri 1 Heinrich Jiang 1 Maya Gupta 1

Abstract
Modern machine learning models are often
trained on examples with noisy labels that hurt
performance and are hard to identify. In this paper, we provide an empirical study showing that
a simple k-nearest neighbor-based filtering approach on the logit layer of a preliminary model
can remove mislabeled training data and produce
more accurate models than many recently proposed methods. We also provide new statistical
guarantees into its efficacy.

1. Introduction
Machine learned models can only be as good as the data
they were used to train on. With increasingly large modern
datasets and automated and indirect labels like clicks, it is
becoming ever more important to investigate and provide
effective techniques to handle noisy labels.
We revisit the classic method of filtering out suspicious training examples using k-nearest neighbors (k-NN) (Wilson,
1972). Like Papernot & McDaniel (2018), we use a deep
k-NN, in that we use a k-NN on learned intermediate representations of a preliminary model to identify suspicious
examples for filtering. Recently, k-NN methods have been
receiving renewed attention for their usefulness (Wang et al.,
2018; Reeve & Kaban, 2019). Here, like Jiang et al. (2018),
we use k-NN as an auxiliary method to improve modern
deep learning.
The main contributions of this paper are both experimental
and theoretical. Experimentally, we show that deep k-NN
works as well or better than state-of-art methods for handling noisy labels, and it is robust to the choice of k. Furthermore, we show the method is effective both with and without
access to a set of known cleanly labeled training examples.
Theoretically, we show that k-NN’s predictions will, asymptotically, only identify a training example as clean if its label
1

Google Research.
Correspondence to:
Bahri <dbahri@google.com>, Heinrich Jiang
richj@google.com>.

Dara
<hein-

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

is the Bayes-optimal label. We also provide finite-sample
analysis in terms of the margin and how spread-out the corrupted labels are (Theorem 1), rates of convergence for the
margin (Theorem 2) and rates under Tsybakov’s noise condition (Theorem 3) with all rates matching minimax-optimal
rates in the noiseless setting.
Our work shows that even though the preliminary neural
network is trained with corrupted labels, it still yields intermediate representations that are useful for deep k-NN
filtering. After identifying examples whose labels disagree
with their neighbors, one can either automatically remove
them, or send them to a human operator for further review.
This strategy can also be useful in human-in-the-loop systems where one can warn the human annotator that a label
is suspicious and automatically propose new labels based
on its nearest neighbors.
In addition to strong empirical performance, deep k-NN
filtering has a few advantages. Firstly, many methods require a clean set of samples whose labels can be trusted. We
show that the k-NN based method is effective both in the
presence and absence of a clean set of samples. Secondly,
while k-NN does introduce the hyperparameter k, we will
show that deep k-NN filtering is stable to the choice of k:
such robustness to hyperparameters is highly desirable as
optimal tuning for is often challenging for this problem.

2. Related Work
We review relevant prior work for training on noisy labels
in Sec. 2.1 and related k-NN theory in 2.2.
2.1. Training with Noisy Labels
Methods to handle label noise can be classified into two
main strategies: (1) explicitly identify and remove the noisy
examples, and (2) indirectly handle the noise with robust
training methods.
Data Cleaning: The proposed deep k-NN filtering fits into
the broad family of data cleaning methods, in that our proposal detects and filters dirty data (Chu et al., 2016). Using
k-NN to “edit” training data has been popular since Wilson
(1972) used it to throw away training examples that were
not consistent with their k = 3 nearest neighbors. The idea
of using a preliminary model to help identify mislabeled ex-

