Circuit-Based Intrinsic Methods to Detect Overfitting
Satrajit Chatterjee 1 Alan Mishchenko 2

Abstract
The focus of this paper is on intrinsic methods to
detect overfitting. By intrinsic methods, we mean
methods that rely only on the model and the training data, as opposed to traditional methods (we
call them extrinsic methods) that rely on performance on a test set or on bounds from model complexity. We propose a family of intrinsic methods
called Counterfactual Simulation (CFS) which
analyze the flow of training examples through
the model by identifying and perturbing rare patterns. By applying CFS to logic circuits we get a
method that has no hyper-parameters and works
uniformly across different types of models such
as neural networks, random forests and lookup
tables. Experimentally, CFS can separate models
with different levels of overfit using only their
logic circuit representations without any access
to the high level structure. By comparing lookup
tables, neural networks, and random forests using CFS, we get insight into why neural networks
generalize. In particular, we find that stochastic
gradient descent in neural nets does not lead to
“brute force” memorization, but finds common patterns (whether we train with actual or randomized
labels), and neural networks are not unlike forests
in this regard. Finally, we identify a limitation
with our proposal that makes it unsuitable in an
adversarial setting, but points the way to future
work on robust intrinsic methods.

1. Introduction
This paper considers methods to detect overfitting of a model
based only on the model and the training data. In terminology that we introduce, we call such methods intrinsic,
in contrast to extrinsic methods, which rely on additional
1

Google, Mountain View, California, USA 2 Department of
EECS, University of California, Berkeley, California, USA. Correspondence to: Satrajit Chatterjee <schatter@google.com>, Alan
Mishchenko <alanmi@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

knowledge, such as, the performance of the model on examples held out from the training process, details of the process
used to find the model (e.g., multiple hypothesis testing with
registration), or limitations of the function family to which
the model belongs (e.g., VC dimension, Rademacher complexity) or those of the size of the parameter space of the
model (e.g., Akaike Information Criterion).
We classify methods relying on the knowledge of the function family as extrinsic because often the information relevant to overfitting is not directly represented in a given
model. For example, a model could have been found by
searching a much smaller space than that implied naïvely by
the function family to which it belongs, due to either explicit
regularization or the regularization implicit in the optimization or search procedure. Conversely, the given model could
have been found by searching a much larger space of models through hyper-parameter search, or by picking the best
model from a number of different model families, but the
specific final model itself does not carry any vestiges of the
larger space that was searched over. Both of these situations
are common in modern machine learning.
Intrinsic methods are of practical interest since with modern
deep learning models, we find that extrinsic estimates based
on model complexity are typically vacuous since these models are powerful enough to fit arbitrary data (Zhang et al.,
2017). Consequently, practitioners resort to studying performance on a hold out dataset (or cross validation), but this is
unsatisfactory for a couple of reasons. First, this means that,
in a low data setting, we cannot use all the data for training,
but have to keep significant portions aside for validation
(e.g., see discussion in Dietterich (1998)). Second, it may
be difficult to ensure a pristine hold out that is not touched
during the research process particularly if the project is long
running. Even with a few queries to the hold out during
the research process, it is possible to start fitting to the hold
out (Dwork et al., 2015).
Intrinsic methods are also interesting from a theoretical perspective. Imagine that we have sufficient computing power
to, say, enumerate all neural networks (and their weights)
up to a certain size. Among all the networks that fit the
data well, intrinsic methods could distinguish between those
networks that generalize well from those that do not, and we

