Sparsified Linear Programming for Zero-Sum Equilibrium Finding

Brian Hu Zhang 1 Tuomas Sandholm 1 2 3 4

Abstract
Computational equilibrium finding in large zerosum extensive-form imperfect-information games
has led to significant recent AI breakthroughs.
The fastest algorithms for the problem are
new forms of counterfactual regret minimization (Brown & Sandholm, 2019). In this paper we
present a totally different approach to the problem,
which is competitive and often orders of magnitude better than the prior state of the art. The
equilibrium-finding problem can be formulated
as a linear program (LP) (Koller et al., 1994), but
solving it as an LP has not been scalable due to the
memory requirements of LP solvers, which can
often be quadratically worse than CFR-based algorithms. We give an efficient practical algorithm
that factors a large payoff matrix into a product
of two matrices that are typically dramatically
sparser. This allows us to express the equilibriumfinding problem as a linear program with size only
a logarithmic factor worse than CFR, and thus allows linear program solvers to run on such games.
With experiments on poker endgames, we demonstrate in practice, for the first time, that modern
linear program solvers are competitive against
even game-specific modern variants of CFR in
solving large extensive-form games, and can be
used to compute exact solutions unlike iterative
algorithms like CFR.

1. Introduction
Imperfect-information games model strategic interactions
between agents that do not have perfect knowledge of their
current situation, such as auctions, negotiations, and recreational games such as poker and battleship. Linear pro1

Department of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 2 Strategic Machine, Inc. 3 Strategy
Robot, Inc. 4 Optimized Markets, Inc.. Correspondence to: Brian
Hu Zhang <bhzhang@cs.cmu.edu>, Tuomas Sandholm <sandholm@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

gramming (LP) can be used to solve—that is, to find a Nash
equilibrium in—imperfect-information two-player zero-sum
perfect-recall games (Koller et al., 1994). However, due
mostly to memory usage (see e.g., Zinkevich et al., 2007
or Brown & Sandholm, 2019), it has generally been thought
of as impractical for solving large games. Thus, a series of
other techniques has been developed for solving such games.
Most prominent among these is the counterfactual regret
minimization (CFR) family of algorithms (Zinkevich et al.,
2007). These algorithms work by iteratively improving both
player’s strategies until their time averages converge to an
equilibrium. They have a worst-case bound of O(1/ε2 )
iterations needed to reach accuracy ε, and more recent improvements, most notably CFR+ (Tammelin, 2014) and
discounted CFR (DCFR) (Brown & Sandholm, 2019) mean
that algorithms from the CFR family remain the state of
the art in practice for solving large games, and have been
used as an important part of the computational pipelines to
achieve superhuman performance in benchmark cases such
as heads-up limit (Bowling et al., 2015) and no-limit (Brown
& Sandholm, 2017) Texas hold’em.
Several families of algorithms have theoretically faster convergence rates than those of the CFR family. First-order
methods (Hoda et al., 2010; Kroer et al., 2015) have a theoretically better convergence guarantee of O(1/ε) (or even
log(1/ε) with a condition number (Gilpin et al., 2012)), but
in practice perform worse than the newest algorithms in
the CFR family (Kroer et al., 2018; Brown & Sandholm,
2019). Standard algorithms for LP are known that converge
at rate O(log(1/ε)), but for the most part, these algorithms
require storage of the whole payoff matrix explicitly, which
the CFR family does not, and often require superlinear time
per iteration (with respect to the number of nonzero entries
of the LP constraint matrix), which is prohibitive when the
game is extremely large.
In this paper we investigate how to reduce the space requirements of LP solvers by factoring the possibly dense payoff
matrix of an extensive-form game. A long body of work
investigates the problem of decomposing, or factoring, a
given matrix A as the product of other matrices, with some
objective in mind. Studied objectives include the speedup of
certain operations, as in the LU or Cholesky factorizations,
and approximation of the matrix A in a certain norm, as in
the singular value decomposition (SVD). Our objective in

