Undirected Graphical Models as Approximate Posteriors
Arash Vahdat 1 Evgeny Andriyash 2 William G. Macready 2

Abstract
The representation of the approximate posterior
is a critical aspect of effective variational autoencoders (VAEs). Poor choices for the approximate
posterior have a detrimental impact on the generative performance of VAEs due to the mismatch
with the true posterior. We extend the class of
posterior models that may be learned by using
undirected graphical models. We develop an efficient method to train undirected approximate
posteriors by showing that the gradient of the
training objective with respect to the parameters
of the undirected posterior can be computed by
backpropagation through Markov chain Monte
Carlo updates. We apply these gradient estimators for training discrete VAEs with Boltzmann
machines as approximate posteriors and demonstrate that undirected models outperform previous
results obtained using directed graphical models.
Our implementation is available here.

1. Introduction
Training of likelihood-based deep generative models has
advanced rapidly in recent years. These advances have been
enabled by amortized inference (Hinton et al., 1995; Mnih &
Gregor, 2014; Gregor et al., 2013), which scales up training
of variational models, the reparameterization trick (Kingma
& Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014), which provides lowvariance gradient estimates, and increasingly expressive
neural networks. Combinations of these techniques have
resulted in many different forms of variational autoencoders
(VAEs) (Kingma et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2016).
It is also widely recognized that flexible approximate posterior distributions improve the generative quality of variational autoencoders (VAEs) by more faithfully modeling true posterior distributions. More accurate approxi1

NVIDIA, USA 2 Sanctuary AI, Canada, Work done at
D-Wave Systems. Correspondence to: Arash Vahdat <avahdat@nvidia.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

mate posterior models have been realized by reducing the
gap between true and approximate posteriors with tighter
bounds (Burda et al., 2015), and using auto-regressive architectures (Gregor et al., 2013; 2015) or flow models (Rezende
& Mohamed, 2015).
A complementary (but unexplored) direction for further improving the richness of approximate posteriors is available
through the use of undirected graphical models (UGMs). In
this approach, the approximate posterior over latent variables is formed using UGMs whose parameters are inferred
for each observed sample in an amortized fashion similar to
VAEs. This is compelling as UGMs can succinctly capture
complex relationships between variables. However, there
are three challenges when training UGMs as approximate
posteriors: i) There is no known low-variance path-wise gradient estimator (like the reparameterization trick) for learning parameters of UGMs. ii) Sampling from general UGMs
is intractable and approximate sampling is computationally
expensive. iii) Evaluating the probability of a sample under
a UGM can require an intractable partition function. These
two latter costs are particularly acute when UGMs are used
as posterior approximators because the number of UGMs
grows with the size of the dataset.
However, we note that posterior1 UGMs conditioned on observed data points are often simple as there are usually only
a small number of modes in latent space explaining an observation. We expect then, that sampling and partition function
estimation (challenges ii and iii) can be solved efficiently
using parallelizable Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
methods. In fact, we observe that UGM posteriors trained in
a VAE model tend to be unimodal but with a mode structure
that is not necessarily well-captured by mean-field posteriors. Nevertheless, in this case, MCMC-based sampling
methods quickly equilibrate.
To address challenge i) we estimate the gradient by reparameterized sampling in the MCMC updates. Although an
infinite number of MCMC updates are theoretically required
to obtain an unbiased gradient estimator, we observe that a
single MCMC update provides a low-variance but biased
gradient estimation that is sufficient for training UGMs.
1
We may use “posterior” when referring to “approximate posterior” for brevity. To disambiguate, we always refer to “true
posterior” explicitly.

