When are Non-Parametric Methods Robust?
Robi Bhattacharjee * 1 Kamalika Chaudhuri * 1

Abstract
A growing body of research has shown that many
classiﬁers are susceptible to adversarial examples – small strategic modiﬁcations to test inputs
that lead to misclassiﬁcation. In this work, we
study general non-parametric methods, with a
view towards understanding when they are robust to these modiﬁcations. We establish general
conditions under which non-parametric methods
are r-consistent – in the sense that they converge
to optimally robust and accurate classiﬁers in the
large sample limit.
Concretely, our results show that when data is
well-separated, nearest neighbors and kernel classiﬁers are r-consistent, while histograms are not.
For general data distributions, we prove that preprocessing by Adversarial Pruning (Yang et al.,
2019) – that makes data well-separated – followed
by nearest neighbors or kernel classiﬁers also
leads to r-consistency.

1. Introduction
Recent work has shown that many classiﬁers tend to be
highly non-robust and that small strategic modiﬁcations to
regular test inputs can cause them to misclassify (Szegedy
et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2014; Lowd & Meek, 2005).
Motivated by the use of machine learning in safety-critical
applications, this phenomenon has recently received considerable interest; however, what exactly causes this phenomenon – known in the literature as adversarial examples
– still remains a mystery.
Prior work has looked at three plausible reasons why adversarial examples might exist. The ﬁrst, of course, is the
possibility that in real data distributions, different classes are
very close together in space – which does not seem plausible
in practice. Another possibility is that classiﬁcation algo*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of California, San Diego. Correspondence to: Robi <rcbhatta@eng.ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

rithms may require more data to be robust than to be merely
accurate; some prior work (Schmidt et al., 2018; Wang et al.,
2018; Montasser et al., 2019) suggests that this might be true
for certain classiﬁers or algorithms. Finally, others (Salman
et al., 2019; Avdiukhin et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2018) have
suggested that better training algorithms may give rise to
more robust classiﬁers – and that in some cases, ﬁnding
robust classiﬁers may even be computationally challenging.
In this work, we consider this problem in the context of
general non-parametric classiﬁers. Contrary to parametrics,
non-parametric methods are a form of local classiﬁers, and
include a large number of pattern recognition methods such
as nearest neighbors, decision trees, random forests and
kernel classiﬁers. There is a richly developed statistical
theory of non-parametric methods (Devroye et al., 1996),
which focuses on accuracy, and provides very general conditions under which these methods converge to the Bayes
optimal with growing number of samples. We, in contrast,
analyze robustness properties of these methods, and ask
instead when they converge to the classiﬁer with the highest
astuteness at a desired radius r. Recall that the astuteness of
a classiﬁer at radius r is the fraction of points from the distribution on which it is accurate and has the same prediction
up to a distance r (Wang et al., 2018; Schmidt et al., 2018).
We begin by looking at the very simple case when data from
different classes is well-separated – by at least a distance
2r. Although achieving astuteness in this case may appear
trivial, we show that even in this highly favorable case,
not all non-parametric methods provide robust classiﬁers –
and this even holds for methods that converge to the Bayes
optimal in the large sample limit.
This raises the natural question – when do non-parametric
methods produce astute classiﬁers? We next provide conditions under which a non-parametric method converges to the
most astute classiﬁer in the large sample limit under wellseparated data. Our conditions are analogous to the classical
conditions for convergence to the Bayes optimal (Devroye
et al., 1996; Stone, 1977), but a little stronger. We show
that nearest neighbors and kernel classiﬁers whose kernel
functions decay fast enough, satisfy these conditions, and
hence converge to astute classiﬁers in the large sample limit.
In constrast, histogram classiﬁers, which do converge to the
Bayes optimal in the large sample limit, may not converge
to the most astute classiﬁer. This indicates that there may

