Subspace Fitting Meets Regression: The Effects of Supervision and
Orthonormality Constraints on Double Descent of Generalization Errors

Yehuda Dar 1 Paul Mayer 1 Lorenzo Luzi 1 Richard G. Baraniuk 1

Abstract
We study the linear subspace fitting problem in the
overparameterized setting, where the estimated
subspace can perfectly interpolate the training
examples. Our scope includes the least-squares
solutions to subspace fitting tasks with varying
levels of supervision in the training data (i.e., the
proportion of input-output examples of the desired
low-dimensional mapping) and orthonormality of
the vectors defining the learned operator. This
flexible family of problems connects standard,
unsupervised subspace fitting that enforces strict
orthonormality with a corresponding regression
task that is fully supervised and does not constrain
the linear operator structure. This class of problems is defined over a supervision-orthonormality
plane, where each coordinate induces a problem
instance with a unique pair of supervision level
and softness of orthonormality constraints. We explore this plane and show that the generalization
errors of the corresponding subspace fitting problems follow double descent trends as the settings
become more supervised and less orthonormally
constrained.

1. Introduction
Learning processes are naturally limited by the amount of
data available for making inferences according to the chosen
model. In particular, the interplay between the number of
training examples and the complexity of the model (the
number of parameters) is fundamental to successful learning
in terms of generalization ability.
The classical problem of linear regression, where one learns
a linear mapping from a given set of input-output pairs,
has been addressed for many years from the bias-variance
1
ECE Department, Rice University, Houston, TX, USA. Correspondence to: Yehuda Dar <ydar@rice.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. The supervision-orthonormality plane of subspace fitting
problems.

tradeoff perspective. This design approach requires the number of parameters of the learned mapping to be sufficiently
high, to avoid errors due to model bias, yet sufficiently low,
to prevent overfitting to the training data. The established
guideline (Breiman & Freedman, 1983) is that highly parameterized models, which lead to very low (or even zero)
training error, are bad design choices that result in poor
generalization performance.
The incredible success of highly overparameterized, deep
neural networks has recently revived scientific interest in
understanding the generalization errors induced by overparameterized models that are learned without explicit regularization mechanisms. One such prominent research line in
(Spigler et al., 2018; Geiger et al., 2019; Belkin et al., 2019a)
shows that the generalization error actually decreases as the
learned model is more overparameterized, even though all
such models perfectly interpolate the training data (i.e., have
zero training error). This generalization-error behavior (as
a function of the number of model parameters) has been
termed double descent, due to the second decrease in the
generalization error after entering the range of interpolating
models. This finding has motivated an impressive series

