Online Multi-Kernel Learning with Graph-Structured Feedback

Pouya M Ghari 1 Yanning Shen 1

Abstract
Multi-kernel learning (MKL) exhibits reliable performance in nonlinear function approximation
tasks. Instead of using one kernel, it learns the
optimal kernel from a pre-selected dictionary of
kernels. The selection of the dictionary has crucial
impact on both the performance and complexity
of MKL. Specifcally, inclusion of a large number of irrelevant kernels may impair the accuracy,
and increase the complexity of MKL algorithms.
To enhance the accuracy, and alleviate the computational burden, the present paper develops a
novel scheme which actively chooses relevant kernels. The proposed framework models the pruned
kernel combination as feedback collected from
a graph, that is refned ‘on the fy.’ Leveraging
the random feature approximation, we propose
an online scalable multi-kernel learning approach
with graph feedback, and prove that the proposed
algorithm enjoys sublinear regret. Numerical tests
on real datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of
the novel approach.

1. Introduction
Function approximation emerges in various machine learning tasks such as classifcation, regression and clustering. In
present paper, we will focus on supervised function learning
tasks, i.e., given samples {(x1 , y1 ), ..., (xT , yT )}Tt=1 such
that xt ∈ Rd and yt ∈ R, the goal is to fnd a function
f (.) such that the discrepancy between f (xt ) and yt is minimized. To this end, a cost function C(f (xt ), yt ) can be
employed to measure the difference between f (xt ) and yt
PT
and t=1 C(f (xt ), yt ) is minimized. Upon assuming that
f (.) belongs to a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS),
the problem becomes tractable (Scholkopf & Smola, 2001).
Most of kernel based learning relies on a preselected kernel,
while the data-driven multi-kernel learning (MKL) approach
1
University of California, Irvine, CA, USA. Correspondence
to: Yanning Shen <yannings@uci.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

is more powerful, as it learns the optimal kernel from a dictionary of kernels, see e.g., (Cortes et al., 2010).
In a number of tasks, it is also required to carry out function learning in an online fashion, especially when data is
collected sequentially. Moreover, the sheer volume of data
makes it impossible to store it in batch. In these cases, it is
imperative to perform learning tasks in an online fashion.
However, kernel based learning also suffers from the wellknown “curse of dimensionality” (Shawe-Taylor & Cristianini, 2004; Wahba, 1990), which makes it not amenable
for sequential processing. In order to address this issue,
online single kernel-based learning has attracted increasing attention, see e.g., (Bouboulis et al., 2018; Lu et al.,
2016; Zhang & Liao, 2019), where (Zhang & Liao, 2019)
developed a random sketching based framework. Kernels
can be approximated using fnite-dimensional feature maps
which can effectively make the learning task scalable, see
e.g., (Rahimi & Recht, 2007; Shahrampour & Tarokh, 2018;
Williams & Seeger, 2000). Employing fnite feature mapping, (Bouboulis et al., 2018; Lu et al., 2016) developed
online kernel learning approach based on random feature
(RF) approximation (Rahimi & Recht, 2007) . Building
upon the online RF-based single kernel learning framework,
multi-kernel variants have also been developed in (Lu et al.,
2020; Sahoo et al., 2019; Shen et al., 2018; 2019).
A largely overlooked issue for most of the MKL approaches
is the proper selection of the kernel dictionary, which has
pivotal impact on both accuracy and complexity of MKL.
Specifcally, inclusion of a large number of irrelevant kernels may impair the accuracy, and increase the complexity
of the MKL algorithm. Faced with these challenges, the
present paper aims at developing an OMKL framework,
which can actively choose relevant kernels from the dictionary, and refne the selection ‘on the fy’. The proposed
framework can alleviate the computational burden of online MKL due to the reduced number of kernels used at
each time instant. Specifcally, the online kernel selection is
modeled as graph-structured feedback (henceforth termed
(OMKL-GF)), where each kernel can be viewed as an expert
lying in a graph. At each time slot, instead of collecting
feedback from all kernel nodes at each time, the graph is
updated and refned so that only a subset of kernels are
employed at each time slot. Relative to existing OMKL
approaches, our novelty can be summarized as follows:

