Reliable Evaluation of Adversarial Robustness with an Ensemble of Diverse
Parameter-free Attacks
Francesco Croce 1 Matthias Hein 1

Abstract
The feld of defense strategies against adversarial
attacks has signifcantly grown over the last years,
but progress is hampered as the evaluation of adversarial defenses is often insuffcient and thus
gives a wrong impression of robustness. Many
promising defenses could be broken later on, making it diffcult to identify the state-of-the-art. Frequent pitfalls in the evaluation are improper tuning of hyperparameters of the attacks, gradient
obfuscation or masking. In this paper we frst
propose two extensions of the PGD-attack overcoming failures due to suboptimal step size and
problems of the objective function. We then combine our novel attacks with two complementary
existing ones to form a parameter-free, computationally affordable and user-independent ensemble of attacks to test adversarial robustness. We
apply our ensemble to over 50 models from papers published at recent top machine learning and
computer vision venues. In all except one of the
cases we achieve lower robust test accuracy than
reported in these papers, often by more than 10%,
identifying several broken defenses.

1. Introduction
Adversarial samples, small perturbations of the input, with
respect to some distance measure, which change the decision of a classifer, are a problem for safe and robust machine
learning. In particular, they are a major concern when it
comes to safety-critical applications. In recent years many
defenses have been proposed but with more powerful or
adapted attacks most of them could be broken (Carlini &
Wagner, 2017b; Athalye et al., 2018; Mosbach et al., 2018).
Adversarial training (Madry et al., 2018) is one of the few
approaches which could not be defeated so far. Recent
1
University of Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to: F.
Croce <francesco.croce@uni-tuebingen.de>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

variations are using other losses (Zhang et al., 2019b) and
boost robustness via generation of additional training data
(Carmon et al., 2019; Alayrac et al., 2019) or pre-training
(Hendrycks et al., 2019). Another line of work are provable
defenses, either deterministic (Wong et al., 2018; Croce
et al., 2019a; Mirman et al., 2018; Gowal et al., 2019) or
based on randomized smoothing (Li et al., 2019; Lecuyer
et al., 2019; Cohen et al., 2019). However, these are not
yet competitive with the empirical robustness of adversarial
training for datasets like CIFAR-10 with large perturbations.
Due to the many broken defenses, the feld is currently in
a state where it is very diffcult to judge the value of a new
defense without an independent test. This limits the progress
as it is not clear how to distinguish bad from good ideas.
A seminal work to mitigate this issue are the guidelines
for assessing adversarial defenses by (Carlini et al., 2019).
However, as we see in our experiments, even papers trying
to follow these guidelines can fail in obtaining a proper
evaluation. In our opinion the reason is that at the moment
there is no protocol which works reliably and autonomously,
and does not need the fne-tuning of parameters for every
new defense. Such protocol is what we aim at in this work.
The most popular method to test adversarial robustness is
the PGD (Projected Gradient Descent) attack (Madry et al.,
2018), as it is computationally cheap and performs well in
many cases. However, it has been shown that even PGD can
fail (Mosbach et al., 2018; Croce et al., 2019b) leading to
signifcant overestimation of robustness: we identify i) the
fxed step size and ii) the widely used cross-entropy loss as
two reasons for potential failure. As remedies we propose i)
a new gradient-based scheme, Auto-PGD, which does not
require a step size to be chosen (Sec. 3), and ii) an alternative loss function (Sec. 4). These novel tools lead to two
variants of PGD whose only free parameter is the number of
iterations, while everything else is adjusted automatically:
this is the frst piece of the proposed evaluation protocol.
Another cause of poor evaluations is the lack of diversity among the attacks used, as most papers rely solely
on the results given by PGD or weaker versions of it like
FGSM (Goodfellow et al., 2015). Of different nature are
for example two existing attacks: the white-box FAB-attack
(Croce & Hein, 2020) and the black-box Square Attack

