Quantum Boosting

Srinivasan Arunachalam 1 Reevu Maity 2

Abstract
Boosting is a technique that boosts a weak and
inaccurate machine learning algorithm into a
strong accurate learning algorithm. The AdaBoost algorithm by Freund and Schapire (for
which they were awarded the Gödel prize in
2003) is one of the widely used boosting algorithms, with many applications in theory and practice. Suppose we have a γ-weak learner for a
Boolean concept class C that takes time R(C),
then the time complexity of AdaBoost scales as
VC(C)·poly(R(C), 1/γ), where VC(C) is the VCdimension of C. In this paper, we show how quantum techniques can improve the time complexity
of classical AdaBoost. To this end, suppose we
have a γ-weak quantum learning algorithm for a
Boolean concept class C that takes time Q(C), we
introduce a quantumpboosting algorithm whose
complexity scales as VC(C) · poly(Q(C), 1/γ);
thereby achieving quadratic quantum improvement over classical AdaBoost in terms of VC(C).

1. Introduction
In the last decade, machine learning (ML) has received
tremendous attention due to its success in practice. Given
the broad applications of ML, there has been a lot of interest
in understanding what are the learning tasks for which quantum computers could provide a speedup. In this direction,
there has been a flurry of quantum algorithms for practically
relevant machine learning tasks that theoretically promise
either exponential or polynomial quantum speed-ups over
classical computers. In the past, theoretical works on quantum machine learning (QML) have focused on developing
efficient quantum algorithms with favourable quantum complexities to solve interesting learning problems. Recently
1
IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, USA. 2 Clarendon
Laboratory,
University of Oxford..
Correspondence to:
<Srinivasan.Arunachalam@ibm.com>,
<reevu.maity@physics.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

there have been efforts in understanding the interplay between learning algorithms and noisy quantum devices.
The field of QML has given us algorithms for various quantum and classical learning tasks such as (i) quantum improvements to classical algorithms for practically-motivated
machine learning tasks such as perceptron learning (Kapoor
et al., 2016), support vector machines (Rebentrost et al.,
2013), kernel-based classifiers (Havlı́c̆ek et al., 2019; Li
et al., 2019), algorithms to compute gradients (Rebentrost
et al., 2019; Gilyén et al., 2019), clustering (Kerenidis
et al., 2019; Aı̈meur et al., 2007), linear algebra (Prakash,
2014); (ii) learnability of quantum objects (Rocchetto, 2018;
Yoganathan, 2019; Aaronson, 2007), shadow tomography
of quantum states (Aaronson, 2018; Apeldoorn & Gilyén,
2019); (iii) a quantum framework to learn Boolean-valued
concept classes (Bernstein & Vazirani, 1993; Bshouty &
Jackson, 1999; Atıcı & Servedio, 2005; Arunachalam et al.,
2019); (iv) quantum algorithms for optimization (Harrow
et al., 2009; Apeldoorn et al., 2020; Chakrabarti et al., 2018);
(v) quantum algorithms for machine learning based on generative models (Lloyd & Weedbrook, 2018; Gao et al., 2017).
While these results are promising and establish that quantum
computers can indeed provide an improvement for interesting machine learning tasks, there are still several challenges
that remain. One important question is whether the assumptions made in some quantum machine learning algorithms
are practically feasible? Recently, a couple of works (Chia
et al., 2019; Jethwani et al., 2019) demonstrated that under
certain assumptions QML algorithms can be dequantized,
i.e., they showed the existence of efficient classical algorithms for machine learning tasks which were previously
believed to provide exponential quantum speedups. In this
paper we address another important question:
Suppose we implement a QML algorithm A on a
quantum device and due to noise in the device, the
performance of A is weak, i.e., the output of A
is correct on a slightly better-than-half fraction of
the inputs. Can we boost the performance of A
so that As output is correct on 99% of the inputs?
Inspired by the classical Adaptive Boosting algorithm (also
referred to as AdaBoost) due to (Freund & Schapire, 1999),
the classical AdaBoost can be used immediately to convert

