Learning Flat Latent Manifolds with VAEs

Nutan Chen 1 Alexej Klushyn 1 Francesco Ferroni 2 Justin Bayer 1 Patrick van der Smagt 1

Abstract
Measuring the similarity between data points often requires domain knowledge, which can in
parts be compensated by relying on unsupervised
methods such as latent-variable models, where
similarity/distance is estimated in a more compact
latent space. Prevalent is the use of the Euclidean
metric, which has the drawback of ignoring information about similarity of data stored in the
decoder, as captured by the framework of Riemannian geometry. We propose an extension to
the framework of variational auto-encoders allows
learning fat latent manifolds, where the Euclidean
metric is a proxy for the similarity between data
points. This is achieved by defning the latent
space as a Riemannian manifold and by regularising the metric tensor to be a scaled identity matrix.
Additionally, we replace the compact prior typically used in variational auto-encoders with a
recently presented, more expressive hierarchical
one—and formulate the learning problem as a constrained optimisation problem. We evaluate our
method on a range of data-sets, including a videotracking benchmark, where the performance of
our unsupervised approach nears that of state-ofthe-art supervised approaches, while retaining the
computational effciency of straight-line-based approaches.

1. Introduction
Measuring the distance between data points is a central
ingredient of many data analysis and machine learning applications. Several kernel methods (KernelPCA (Schölkopf
et al., 1997), KernelNMF (Li & Ding, 2006), etc.), and other
non-parametric approaches such as k-nearest neighbours
(Altman, 1992) rely on the availability of a suitable distance
1
Machine Learning Research Lab, Volkswagen Group,
Munich, Germany 2 Autonomous Intelligent Driving GmbH,
Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Nutan Chen <nutan.chen@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

function. Computer vision pipelines, e.g. tracking over time,
perform matching based on similarity scores.
But designing a distance function can be challenging: it is
not always obvious to write down mathematical formulae
that accurately express a notion of similarity. Learning such
functions has hence been proven as a viable alternative to
manual engineering in this respect (NCA (Goldberger et al.,
2005), metric learning (Xing et al., 2003), etc.). Often, these
methods rely on the availability of pairs labelled as similar or dissimilar. A different route is that of exploiting the
structure that latent-variable models learn. The assumption
that a set of high-dimensional observations is explained by
points in a much simpler latent space underpins these approaches. In their respective probabilistic versions, a latent
prior distribution is transformed non-linearly to give rise
to a distribution of observations. The hope is that simple
distances, such as the Euclidean distance measured in latent space, implement a function of similarity. Yet, these
approaches do not incorporate the variation of the observations with respect to the latent points. For example, the
observations will vary much more when a path in latent
space will cross a class boundary.
In fact, recent approaches to non-linear latent variable models, such as the generative adversarial network (Goodfellow
et al., 2014) or the variational auto-encoder (VAE) (Kingma
& Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014), regularise the latent
space to be compact, i.e. to remove low-density regions.
This is in contrast to the aforementioned hope that Euclidean
distances appropriately refect similarity.
The above insight leads us to the development of fat manifold variational auto-encoders. This class of VAEs defnes
the latent space as Riemannian manifold and regularises
the Riemannian metric tensor to be a scaled identity matrix.
In this context, a fat manifold is a Riemannian manifold,
which is isometric to the Euclidean space. To not compromise the expressiveness, we relax the compactness assumption and make use of a recently introduced hierarchical prior
(Klushyn et al., 2019). As a consequence, the model is capable of learning a latent representation, where the Euclidean
metric is a proxy for the similarity between data points. This
results in a computational effcient distance metric which is
practical for applications in real-time scenarios.

