Flexible and Efficient Long-Range Planning Through Curious Exploration

Aidan Curtis 1 Minjian Xin 2 Dilip Arumugam 3 Kevin Feigelis 3 Daniel Yamins 3

Abstract
Identifying algorithms that flexibly and efficiently
discover temporally-extended multi-phase plans
is an essential step for the advancement of
robotics and model-based reinforcement learning. The core problem of long-range planning
is finding an efficient way to search through the
tree of possible action sequences. Existing nonlearned planning solutions from the Task and
Motion Planning (TAMP) literature rely on the
existence of logical descriptions for the effects
and preconditions for actions. This constraint allows TAMP methods to efficiently reduce the tree
search problem but limits their ability to generalize to unseen and complex physical environments.
In contrast, deep reinforcement learning (DRL)
methods use flexible neural-network-based function approximators to discover policies that generalize naturally to unseen circumstances. However, DRL methods struggle to handle the very
sparse reward landscapes inherent to long-range
multi-step planning situations. Here, we propose
the Curious Sample Planner (CSP), which fuses
elements of TAMP and DRL by combining a
curiosity-guided sampling strategy with imitation
learning to accelerate planning. We show that
CSP can efficiently discover interesting and complex temporally-extended plans for solving a wide
range of physically realistic 3D tasks. In contrast,
standard planning and learning methods often fail
to solve these tasks at all or do so only with a
huge and highly variable number of training samples. We explore the use of a variety of curiosity
metrics with CSP and analyze the types of solutions that CSP discovers. Finally, we show that
CSP supports task transfer so that the exploration
policies learned during experience with one task
can help improve efficiency on related tasks.
1
Rice University 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 Stanford University. Correspondence to: Aidan Curtis <curtisa@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Many complex behaviors such as cleaning a kitchen, organizing a drawer, or cooking a meal require plans that
are a combination of low-level geometric manipulation and
high-level action sequencing. Boiling water requires sequencing high-level actions such as fetching a pot, pouring
water into the pot, and turning on the stove. In turn, each
of these high-level steps consists of many low-level taskspecific geometric action primitives. For instance, grabbing
a pot requires intricate motor manipulation and physical
considerations such as friction, force, etc. The process of
combining low-level geometric decisions and high-level
action sequences is often referred to as multi-step planning.
While high-level task planning and low-level geometric
planning are difficult problems on their own, integrating
them presents unique challenges that add further complexity.
Task and Motion Planning (TAMP) is a powerful approach
to the problem which constructs plans in logical terms that
execute a sequence of macro-actions that are composed of
geometric motion plans (Fikes & Nilsson, 1971; Dantam
et al., 2016). While TAMP has been successful at generating temporally-extended multi-step plans that conform to
geometric constraints, it requires actions to have defined
preconditions and effects that modify the logical description
of the world state. This is an unreasonable assumption for
complex physical tasks because real-world effects and preconditions are often unknown or difficult to describe with
logical predicates. These assumptions limit the flexibility
and robustness of the TAMP approach. In addition, TAMP is
computationally costly because it requires geometric motion
planning for each macro-action sample.
In contrast, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) (Arulkumaran et al., 2017) methods have shown success at learning
flexible policies for a variety of complex tasks in unstructured domains (Mnih et al., 2015; Lillicrap et al., 2015;
Silver et al., 2016; Hessel et al., 2017; Vinyals et al., 2019).
Central to the problem of reinforcement learning is the issue
of exploration (Thrun, 1992; Kakade, 2003), whereby how
an agent chooses to navigate its environment and acquire
feedback signals has strong implications on the sampleefficiency of learning. Indeed, recent work in DRL has been
plagued by large sample complexity stemming, in large part,
from the challenge of exploration in sparse reward environ-

