Logistic Regression for Massive Data with Rare Events

HaiYing Wang 1

Abstract
This paper studies binary logistic regression for
rare events data, or imbalanced data, where the
number of events (observations in one class, often called cases) is significantly smaller than the
number of nonevents (observations in the other
class, often called controls). We first derive the
asymptotic distribution of the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) of the unknown parameter,
which shows that the asymptotic variance convergences to zero in a rate of the inverse of the
number of the events instead of the inverse of the
full data sample size, indicating that the available
information in rare events data is at the scale of the
number of events instead of the full data sample
size. Furthermore, we prove that under-sampling
a small proportion of the nonevents, the resulting under-sampled estimator may have identical
asymptotic distribution to the full data MLE. This
demonstrates the advantage of under-sampling
nonevents for rare events data, because this procedure may significantly reduce the computation
and/or data collection costs. Another common
practice in analyzing rare events data is to oversample (replicate) the events, which has a higher
computational cost. We show that this procedure
may even result in efficiency loss in terms of parameter estimation.

1. Introduction
Big data with rare events in binary responses, also called
imbalanced data, are data in which the number of events
(observations for one class of the binary response) is much
smaller than the number of non-events (observations for the
other class of the binary response). In this paper we also
call the events “cases” and call the nonevents “controls”.
Rare events data are common in many scientific fields and
1

Department of Statistics. Correspondence to: HaiYing Wang
<haiying.wang@uconn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

applications. However, several important questions remain
unanswered that are essential for valid data analysis and
appropriate decision-making. For example, should we consider the amount of information contained in the data to
be at the scale of the full-data sample size (very large) or
the number of cases (relatively small)? Rare events data
provide unique challenges and opportunities for sampling.
On the one hand, sampling will not work without looking
at responses because the probability of not selecting a rare
case is high. On the other hand, since the rare cases are
more informative than the controls, is it possible to use a
small proportion of the full data to preserve most or all of
the relevant information in the data about unknown parameters? A common practice when analyzing rare events data
is to under-sample the controls and/or over-sample (replicate) the cases. Is there any information loss when using
this approach? This paper provides a rigorous theoretical
analysis on the aforementioned questions in the context of
parameter estimation, which is critical in practical applications such as classification and statistical inference. Some
answers may be counter-intuitive. For example, keeping all
the cases, there may be no efficiency loss at all for undersampling controls; on the other hand, using all the controls
and over-sampling cases may reduce estimation efficiency.
Rare events data, or imbalanced data, have attracted a lot of
attentions in machine learning and other quantitative fields,
such as (Japkowicz, 2000; King & Zeng, 2001; Chawla
et al., 2004; Estabrooks et al., 2004; Owen, 2007; Sun et al.,
2007; Chawla, 2009; Rahman & Davis, 2013; Fithian &
Hastie, 2014; Lemaı̂tre et al., 2017). A commonly implemented approach in practice is to try balancing the data by
under-sampling controls (Drummond et al., 2003; Liu et al.,
2009) and/or over-sampling cases (Chawla et al., 2002; Han
et al., 2005; Mathew et al., 2017; Douzas & Bacao, 2017).
However, most existing investigations focus on algorithms
and methodologies for classification. Theoretical analyses
of the effects of under-sampling and over-sampling in terms
of parameter estimation are still rare.
(King & Zeng, 2001) considered logistic regression in rare
events data and focused on correcting the biases in estimating the regression coefficients and probabilities. (Fithian &
Hastie, 2014) utilized the special structure of logistic regression models to design a novel local case-control sampling
method. These investigations obtained theoretical results

