On the Consistency of Top-k Surrogate Losses

Forest Yang 1 2 Sanmi Koyejo 1 3

Abstract
The top-k error is often employed to evaluate
performance for challenging classification tasks
in computer vision as it is designed to compensate for ambiguity in ground truth labels. This
practical success motivates our theoretical analysis of consistent top-k classification. Surprisingly, it is not rigorously understood when taking
the k-argmax of a vector is guaranteed to return
the k-argmax of another vector, though doing so
is crucial to describe Bayes optimality; we do
both tasks. Then, we define top-k calibration
and show it is necessary and sufficient for consistency. Based on the top-k calibration analysis,
we propose a class of top-k calibrated Bregman
divergence surrogates. Our analysis continues by
showing previously proposed hinge-like top-k surrogate losses are not top-k calibrated and suggests
no convex hinge loss is top-k calibrated. On the
other hand, we propose a new hinge loss which
is consistent. We explore further, showing our
hinge loss remains consistent under a restriction
to linear functions, while cross entropy does not.
Finally, we exhibit a differentiable, convex loss
function which is top-k calibrated for specific k.

1. Introduction
Consider a multiclass classifier which is granted k guesses,
so its prediction is declared error-free only if any one of
the guesses is correct. This conceptually defines the topk error (Akata et al., 2012). Top-k error1 is popular in
computer vision, natural language processing, and other
applied problems where there are a large number of possible
classes, along with potential ambiguity regarding the label of
1
Google Research Accra 2 University of California, Berkeley
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Correspondence
to: Forest Yang <forestyang@berkeley.edu>, Sanmi Koyejo
<sanmi@illinois.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
1
The top-k error is simply 1 - top-k accuracy, thus the metrics
are equivalent.

a sample and/or when a sample may correspond to multiple
labels, e.g., when an image of a park containing a pond may
be correctly labeled as either a park or a pond Russakovsky
et al. (2015); Xiao et al. (2010); Zhou et al. (2018).
Like the zero-one loss for binary classification, the top-k
error is computationally hard to minimize directly because
it is discontinuous and only has zero gradients. Instead,
practical algorithms depend on minimizing a surrogate loss,
often a convex upper bound (Lapin et al., 2015; 2016). To
this end, the corresponding predictive model is most often
trained to output a continuous-valued score vector, and the
classes corresponding to the top k entries of the score vector
constitute the classification prediction (Lapin et al., 2018).
While popular in practice, there is limited work on the theoretical properties of top-k error and its surrogate losses. We
are particularly interested in the consistency of surrogate
losses, which states whether the learned classifier converges
to the population optimal prediction (commonly known as
the Bayes optimal) in the infinite sample limit.
Main Contributions. Our contributions are primarily theoretical, and are outlined as follows:
• We characterize Bayes-optimal scorers for the
weighted top-k error, i.e., a slight generalization topk error with class-specific weights. The scorers are
functions which predict continuous vectors, so the k
maximum arguments define the prediction. Our analysis highlights the top-k preserving property as fundamental to top-k consistency, then outlines the notion
of calibration which is necessary and sufficient to construct consistent top-k surrogate losses.
• We propose a family of consistent (weighted) top-k
surrogate losses based on Bregman divergences. We
show the inconsistency of previously proposed top-k
hinge-like surrogate losses and propose new ones, one
of which is (weighted) top-k consistent. Since any
convex hinge loss must have form similar to the ones
proved inconsistent, this suggests that consistent hinge
losses must be nonconvex.
• We further prove the consistency of the new hinge
loss when given top-k separable data and restricted to
linear predictors. On the other hand, we also show

