Pretrained Generalized Autoregressive Model with Adaptive Probabilistic
Label Clusters for Extreme Multi-label Text Classification
Hui Ye 1 Zhiyu Chen 1 Da-Han Wang 2 Brian D. Davison 1

Abstract
Extreme multi-label text classification (XMTC)
is a task for tagging a given text with the most
relevant labels from an extremely large label set.
We propose a novel deep learning method called
APLC-XLNet. Our approach fine-tunes the recently released generalized autoregressive pretrained model (XLNet) to learn a dense representation for the input text. We propose Adaptive Probabilistic Label Clusters (APLC) to approximate the cross entropy loss by exploiting
the unbalanced label distribution to form clusters that explicitly reduce the computational time.
Our experiments, carried out on five benchmark
datasets, show that our approach has achieved new
state-of-the-art results on four benchmark datasets.
Our source code is available publicly at https:
//github.com/huiyegit/APLC_XLNet.

1. Introduction
Extreme classification is the problem of learning a classifier to annotate each instance with the most relevant labels
from an extremely large label set. Extreme classification has
found applications in diverse areas, such as estimation of
word representations for millions of words (Mikolov et al.,
2013), tagging of a Wikipedia article with the most relevant labels (Dekel & Shamir, 2010), and providing a product description or an ad-landing page in Dynamic Search
Advertising (Jain et al., 2019). Extreme multi-label text
classification (XMTC) is a fundamental task of extreme
classification where both the instances and labels are in text
format.
The first challenge of XMTC is how to get effective features
to represent the text. One traditional approach to represent
1
Computer Science and Engineering Department, Lehigh University, PA, USA 2 School of Computer and Information Engineering, Xiamen University of Technology, Fujian, China. Correspondence to: Hui Ye <yehui20080414@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

text features is bag-of-words (BOW), where a vector represents the frequency of a word in a predefined vocabulary.
Then, the machine learning algorithm is fed with training
data that consists of pairs of features and labels to train
a classification model. Nevertheless, the traditional methods based on BOW or its variants, ignoring the location
information of the words, cannot capture the contextual and
semantic information of the text.
On the other hand, with the recent development of word embedding techniques, deep learning methods have achieved
great success for learning text representation from raw text.
These effective models include the Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) (Kim, 2014), the Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) (Liu et al., 2016), the combination of CNN and
RNN (Lai et al., 2015) , the CNN with Attention mechanism
(Yin & Schütze, 2018), the RNN with Attention mechanism
(Yang et al., 2016) and the Transformer (Vaswani et al.,
2017; Guo et al., 2019).
Over the last two years, several transfer learning methods
and architectures (Devlin et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2018;
Conneau & Lample, 2019; Yang et al., 2019b) have been proposed, and have achieved state-of-the-art results on a wide
range of natural language processing (NLP) tasks, including
question answering (Yang et al., 2019a), sentiment analysis
(Xu et al., 2019), text classification (Sun et al., 2019) and
information retrieval (Chen et al., 2020). The basic mechanism of transfer learning is to transfer the knowledge of a
pretrained model, generally trained on very large corpora,
into a new downstream task. The generalized autoregressive
pretraining method (XLNet) (Yang et al., 2019b) represents
the latest development in this field. XLNet adopts the permutation language modeling objective to train the model
on several large corpora. Then the pretrained model can be
fine-tuned to deal with various NLP tasks.
Another challenge of XMTC is how to handle the extreme
outputs efficiently. In particular, for extreme classification,
the distribution of the labels notoriously follows Zipf’s Law.
Most of the probability mass is covered by only a small
fraction of the label set. To train parametric models for language modeling with very large vocabularies, many methods
have been proposed to approximate the softmax efficiently,
including Hierarchical Softmax (HSM) (Morin & Bengio,

