Missing Data Imputation using Optimal Transport
Boris Muzellec 1 Julie Josse 2 3 * Claire Boyer 4 Marco Cuturi 5 1

Abstract
Missing data is a crucial issue when applying machine learning algorithms to real-world datasets.
Starting from the simple assumption that two
batches extracted randomly from the same dataset
should share the same distribution, we leverage
optimal transport distances to quantify that criterion and turn it into a loss function to impute missing data values. We propose practical methods to
minimize these losses using end-to-end learning,
that can exploit or not parametric assumptions
on the underlying distributions of values. We
evaluate our methods on datasets from the UCI
repository, in MCAR, MAR and MNAR settings.
These experiments show that OT-based methods
match or out-perform state-of-the-art imputation
methods, even for high percentages of missing
values.

1. Introduction
Data collection is usually a messy process, resulting in
datasets that have many missing values. This has been an
issue for as long as data scientists have prepared, curated
and obtained data, and is all the more inevitable given the
vast amounts of data currently collected. The literature on
the subject is therefore abundant (Little & Rubin, 2002;
van Buuren, 2018): a recent survey indicates that there are
more than 150 implementations available to handle missing data (Mayer et al., 2019). These methods differ on the
objectives of their analysis (estimation of parameters and
their variance, matrix completion, prediction), the nature of
the variables considered (categorical, mixed, etc.), the assumptions about the data, and the missing data mechanisms.
Imputation methods, which consist in filling missing entries
This research was done while JJ was a visiting researcher at
Google Brain Paris. 1 CREST-ENSAE, IP Paris, Palaiseau, France
2
XPOP, INRIA Saclay, France 3 CMAP, UMR7641, École Polytechnique, IP Paris, Palaiseau, France 4 LPSM, Sorbonne Université, ENS Paris, France 5 Google Brain, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Boris Muzellec <boris.muzellec@ensae.fr>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

with plausible values, are very appealing as they allow to
both get a guess for the missing entries as well as to perform (with care) downstream machine learning methods on
the completed data. Efficient methods include, among others, methods based on low-rank assumptions (Hastie et al.,
2015), iterative random forests (Stekhoven & Buhlmann,
2011) and imputation using variational autoencoders (Mattei
& Frellsen, 2019; Ivanov et al., 2019). A desirable property for imputation methods is that they should preserve the
joint and marginal distributions of the data. Non-parametric
Bayesian strategies (Murray & Reiter, 2016) or recent approaches based on generative adversarial networks (Yoon
et al., 2018) are attempts in this direction. However, they
can be quite cumbersome to implement in practice.
We argue in this work that the optimal transport (OT) toolbox constitutes a natural, sound and straightforward alternative. Indeed, optimal transport provides geometrically
meaningful distances to compare discrete distributions, and
therefore data. Furthermore, thanks to recent computational
advances grounded on regularization (Cuturi, 2013), OTbased divergences can be computed in a scalable and differentiable way (Peyré et al., 2019). Those advances have
allowed to successfully use OT as a loss function in many
applications, including multi-label classification (Frogner
et al., 2015), inference of pathways (Schiebinger et al., 2019)
and generative modeling (Arjovsky et al., 2017; Genevay
et al., 2018; Salimans et al., 2018). Considering the similarities between generative modeling and missing data imputation, it is therefore quite natural to use OT as a loss for the
latter.
Contributions. This paper presents two main contributions.
First, we leverage OT to define a loss function for missing
value imputation. This loss function is the mathematical
translation of the simple intuition that two random batches
from the same dataset should follow the same distribution.
Next, we provide algorithms for imputing missing values
according to this loss. Two types of algorithms are presented, the first (i) being non-parametric, and the second (ii)
defining a class of parametric models. The non-parametric
algorithm (i) enjoys the most degrees of freedom, and can
therefore output imputations which respect the global shape
of the data while taking into account its local features. The
parametric algorithm (ii) is trained in a round-robin fashion
similar to iterative conditional imputation techniques, as

