Fair Learning with Private Demographic Data

Hussein Mozannar 1 Mesrob I. Ohannessian 2 Nathan Srebro 3

Abstract
Sensitive attributes such as race are rarely available to learners in real world settings as their collection is often restricted by laws and regulations.
We give a scheme that allows individuals to release their sensitive information privately while
still allowing any downstream entity to learn nondiscriminatory predictors. We show how to adapt
non-discriminatory learners to work with privatized protected attributes giving theoretical guarantees on performance. Finally, we highlight how
the methodology could apply to learning fair predictors in settings where protected attributes are
only available for a subset of the data.

1. Introduction
As algorithmic systems driven by machine learning start
to play an increasingly important role in society, concerns
arise over their compliance with laws, regulations and societal norms. In particular, machine learning systems have
been found to be discriminating against certain demographic
groups in applications of criminal assessment, lending and
facial recognition (Barocas et al., 2019). To ensure nondiscrimination in learning tasks, knowledge of the sensitive
attributes is essential, however, laws and regulation often
prohibit access and use of this sensitive data. As an example, credit card companies do not have the right to ask
about an individual’s race when applying for credit, while
at the same time they have to prove that their decisions are
non-discriminatory (Commission, 2013; Chen et al., 2019).
Apple Card, a credit card offered by Apple and Goldman
Sachs, was recently accused of being discriminatory
(Vigdor, 2019). Married couples rushed to Twitter to report
that there were significant differences in the credit limit
given individually to each of them even though they had
1

IDSS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MA, USA
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at Chicago, IL, USA 3 Toyota Technological Institute, IL, USA. Correspondence to: Hussein Mozannar <mozannar@mit.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

shared finances and similar income levels. Supposing
Apple was trying to make sure its learned model was non
discriminatory, it would have been forced to use proxies
for gender and recent work has shown that proxies can be
problematic by potentially underestimating discrimination
(Kallus et al., 2019). We are then faced with what seems
to be two opposing societal notions to satisfy: we want
our system to be non-discriminatory while maintaining
the privacy of our sensitive attributes. Note that even if
the features that our model uses are independent of the
sensitive attributes, it is not enough to guarantee notions of
non-discrimination that further condition on the truth, e.g.
equalized odds. One potential workaround to this problem,
ignoring legal feasibility, is to allow the individuals to
release their data in a locally differentially private manner
Dwork et al. (2006) and then try to learn from this privatized
data a non-discriminatory predictor. This allows us to
guarantee that our decisions are fair while maintaining a
degree of individual privacy to each user.
In this work, we consider a binary classification framework where we have access to non-sensitive features X
and locally-private versions of the sensitive attributes A
denoted by Z. The details of the problem formulation are
given in Section 3. Our contributions are as follows:
• We first give sufficient conditions on our predictor for
non-discrimination to be equivalent under A and Z and
derive estimators to measure discrimination using the
private attributes Z. (Section 4)
• We give a learning algorithm based on the two-step procedure of Woodworth et al. (2017) and provide statistical
guarantees for both the error and discrimination of the
resulting predictor. The main innovation in terms of both
the algorithm and its analysis is in accessing properties of
the sensitive attribute A by carefully inverting the sample
statistics of the private attributes Z. (Section 5)
• We highlight how some of the same approach can handle
other forms of deficiency in demographic information,
by giving an auditing algorithm with guarantees, when
protected attributes are available only for a subset of the
data. (Section 6)
Beyond the original motivation, this work conveys additional insight on the subtle trade-offs between error and

