Optimistic Bounds for Multi-output Prediction

Henry W.J. Reeve 1 Ata Kabán 1

Abstract
We investigate the challenge of multi-output learning, where the goal is to learn a vector-valued
function based on a supervised data set. This
includes a range of important problems in Machine Learning including multi-target regression,
multi-class classification and multi-label classification. We begin our analysis by introducing
the self-bounding Lipschitz condition for multioutput loss functions, which interpolates continuously between a classical Lipschitz condition and
a multi-dimensional analogue of a smoothness
condition. We then show that the self-bounding
Lipschitz condition gives rise to optimistic bounds
for multi-output learning, which attain the minimax optimal rate up to logarithmic factors. The
proof exploits local Rademacher complexity combined with a powerful minoration inequality due
to Srebro, Sridharan and Tewari. As an application we derive a state-of-the-art generalisation
bound for multi-class gradient boosting.

1. Introduction
Multi-output prediction represents an important class of
problems that includes multi-class classification (Crammer & Singer, 2001), multi-label learning (Tsoumakas &
Katakis, 2007; Zhang & Zhou, 2013), multi-target regression (Borchani et al., 2015), label distribution learning
(Geng, 2016), structured regression (Cortes et al., 2016)
and others, with a wide range of practical applications (Xu
et al., 2019).
Our objective is to provide a general framework for establishing guarantees for multi-output prediction problems. A
fundamental challenge in the statistical learning theory of
multi-output prediction is to obtain bounds that allow for
(i) favourable convergence rate with the sample size, and
(ii) favourable dependence of the risk on the dimensionality
1
School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham. Correspondence to: Henry W.J. Reeve <henrywjreeve@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

of the output space. Whilst modern applications of multioutput prediction deal with increasingly large data sets, they
also include problems where the target dimensionality is
increasingly large. For example, the number of categories in
multi-label learning is often of the order of tens of thousands,
an emergent problem referred to as extreme classification
(Agrawal et al., 2013; Babbar & Schölkopf, 2017; Bhatia
et al., 2015; Jain et al., 2019).
Formally, the task of multi-output prediction is to learn a
vector-valued function from a labelled training set. A common tool in the theoretical analysis of this problem has been
a vector-valued extension of Talagrand’s contraction inequality for Lipschitz losses (Ledoux & Talagrand, 2013). Both
(Maurer, 2016) and (Cortes et al., 2016) established vectorcontraction inequalities for Rademacher complexity that
gave rise to learning guarantees for multi-output prediction
problems with a linear dependence on the dimensionality of
the output space. More recently, (Lei et al., 2019) has provided more refined vector-contraction inequalities for both
Gaussian and Rademacher complexity. This approach leads
to a highly favourable sub-linear dependence on the output
dimensionality, which can even be logarithmic, depending
on the degree of regularisation. These structural results lead
to a slow convergence rate O(n−1/2 ). Guermeur (2017)
and Musayeva et al. (2019) explore an alternative approach
based on covering numbers. (Chzhen et al., 2017) derived a
bound for multi-label classification based on Rademacher
complexities. Each of these bounds give rise to favourable
dependence on the dimensionality of the output space, but
with a slow rate of order O(n−1/2 ).
Local Rademacher complexities provide a crucial tool in
establishing faster rates of convergence (Bousquet, 2002;
Bartlett et al., 2005; Koltchinskii et al., 2006; Lei et al.,
2016). By leveraging local Rademacher complexities, Liu
et al. (2019) have derived guarantees for multi-class learning
with function classes that are linear in an RKHS, building
on their previous margin based guarantees (Lei et al., 2015;
Li et al., 2019). This gives rise to fast rates under suitable
spectral conditions. Fast rates of convergence have also been
derived by Xu et al. (2016) for multi-label classification with
linear function spaces. On the other hand, Chzhen (2019)
have derived fast rates of convergence by exploiting an
analogue of the margin assumption.

