Deep Reasoning Networks for Unsupervised Pattern De-mixing
with Constraint Reasoning

Di Chen 1 Yiwei Bai 1 Wenting Zhao 1 Sebastian Ament 1 John M. Gregoire 2 Carla P. Gomes 1

Abstract
We introduce Deep Reasoning Networks (DRNets), an end-to-end framework that combines
deep learning with constraint reasoning for solving pattern de-mixing problems, typically in
an unsupervised or very-weakly-supervised setting. DRNets exploit problem structure and prior
knowledge by tightly combining constraint reasoning with stochastic-gradient-based neural network optimization. Our motivating task is from
materials discovery and concerns inferring crystal
structures of materials from X-ray diffraction data
(Crystal-Structure-Phase-Mapping). Given the
complexity of its underlying scientific domain, we
start by introducing DRNets on an analogous but
much simpler task: de-mixing overlapping handwritten Sudokus (Multi-MNIST-Sudoku). On
Multi-MNIST-Sudoku, DRNets almost perfectly
recovered the mixed Sudokus’ digits, with 100%
digit accuracy, outperforming the supervised stateof-the-art MNIST de-mixing models. On CrystalStructure-Phase-Mapping, DRNets significantly
outperform the state of the art and experts’ capabilities, recovering more precise and physically
meaningful crystal structures.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved tremendous success in areas
such as vision, speech recognition, language translation,
and autonomous driving. Nevertheless, certain limitations
of deep learning are generally recognized, in particular, limitations due to the fact that deep learning approaches heavily
depend on the availability of large amounts of labeled data.
In certain domains, such as scientific discovery, it is often the case that scientists do not have large amounts of
1

Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca,
New York, USA 2 California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California, USA. Correspondence to: Di Chen <di@cs.cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

(a) The two ground-truth Sudokus (b) Input mixture

(c) DRNets de-mixed Sudokus (d) Reconstructed mixture

Figure 1. (a) Two 4x4 Sudokus: The cells in each row, column,
and any of the four 2x2 boxes involving the corner cells have nonrepeating digits. (b) Two overlapping Sudokus, with a mixture
of two digits in each cell: one from 1 to 4 and the other from 5
to 8. (c) In Multi-MNIST-Sudoku, the digits of two overlapping
hand written Sudokus (b) are de-mixed by DRNets. (d) DRNets’
reconstructed overlapping hand written Sudokus.

labeled data and instead have to rely on prior knowledge to
make sense of the data. One grand challenge in scientific
discovery is to perform high-throughput unsupervised interpretation of scientific data, given its exponential growth in
generation rates, dramatically outpacing humans’ ability to
analyze them. Herein we consider pattern de-mixing problems, which involve decomposing a mixed signal into the
collection of source patterns, such as separating mixtures of
X-ray diffraction (XRD) signals into the source XRD signals of the corresponding crystal structures, a key challenge
in materials discovery (Stanev et al., 2018; Gomes et al.,
2019). More generally, pattern de-mixing problems are pervasive in scientific areas as diverse as biology, astronomy,
and materials science, as well as in commercial applications,
e.g., healthcare and music.
We propose Deep Reasoning Networks (DRNets), an endto-end framework that combines deep learning with constraint reasoning for solving unsupervised or very-weaklysupervised pattern de-mixing tasks. DRNets are greatly
motivated by a complex scientific discovery task that concerns inferring crystal structures of materials from X-ray
diffraction data (Crystal-Structure-Phase-Mapping). Given
the scientific complexity of this domain, we start by intro-

