Normalized Flat Minima:
Exploring Scale Invariant Deﬁnition of Flat Minima
for Neural Networks Using PAC-Bayesian Analysis

Yusuke Tsuzuku 1 2 * Issei Sato 1 2 Masashi Sugiyama 2 1

Abstract
The notion of ﬂat minima has gained attention as
a key metric of the generalization ability of deep
learning models. However, current deﬁnitions of
ﬂatness are known to be sensitive to parameter
rescaling. While some previous studies have proposed to rescale ﬂatness metrics using parameter
scales to avoid the scale dependence, the normalized metrics lose the direct theoretical connections
between ﬂat minima and generalization. We ﬁrst
provide generalization error bounds using existing normalized ﬂatness measures for smooth and
stochastic networks using second-order approximation. Using the analysis, we then propose a
novel normalized ﬂatness metric. The proposed
metric enjoys both direct theoretical connections
and better empirical correlation to generalization
error.

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods have achieved signiﬁcant performance improvement in many domains, such as computer vision, language processing, and speech processing (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Devlin et al., 2019; van den
Oord et al., 2018). However, we are still on the way to
understand when they perform well on unseen data. Better
understanding of the generalization performance of deep
learning methods would help improve their performance.
Deep learning community has made tremendous effort to
understand generalization of neural networks, both theoretically and empirically (Zhang et al., 2017; Neyshabur et al.,
2017; Arora et al., 2018).
The notion of “ﬂat minima” has gained attention as a possi*Author is currently working at Preferred Networks, Inc.
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan 2 RIKEN AIP, Tokyo,
Japan. Correspondence to: Yusuke Tsuzuku <tsuzuku@ms.k.utokyo.ac.jp>.

1

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

ble explanation for the generalization ability of deep learning methods (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997). Many empirical studies have supported the usefulness of this notion. For example, the notion shed light on the reason for
larger generalization gaps in large-batch training (Keskar
et al., 2017; Yao et al., 2018), and also inspired various
training methods (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Chaudhari et al., 2017; Hoffer et al., 2017). Notably, Jiang et al.
(2020) suggested that PAC-Bayes based generalization metrics, which have deep connections with ﬂatness, are effective
and promising among many other generalization metrics.
As measures of ﬂatness, previous studies proposed the volume of the region in which a network keeps roughly the
same loss value (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), the
maximum loss value around minima (Keskar et al., 2017),
and the spectral norm of the Hessian (Yao et al., 2018).
Despite the empirical connections of “ﬂatness” to generalization, current deﬁnitions of ﬂatness suffer from unnecessary
scale dependence. Dinh et al. (2017) showed that we can
arbitrarily change the ﬂatness of the loss-landscape for some
networks without changing the functions represented by the
networks. Such scale dependence appears in networks with
ReLU activation functions or normalization layers such as
batch-normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015) and weightnormalization (Salimans & Kingma, 2016). A major counterargument to the scale dependence is that ﬂatness provides
valid generalization error bounds when parameter scales are
taken into account (Dziugaite & Roy, 2017; Neyshabur et al.,
2017). However, both the ﬂatness and parameter scales have
weak correlations with the generalization error in practical
settings (Sec. 8).
Previous studies have tried to make ﬂatness metrics invariant with respect to parameter scaling. Li et al. (2018)
has successfully visualized connections between empirical
performances and ﬂatness hypotheses by scaling the losslandscape using parameter scales. The success suggests
that the normalized loss-landscape better captures networks’
generalization and motivates us to provide their theoretical
interpretations. Neyshabur et al. (2017), Achille & Soatto
(2018), and Liang et al. (2019) also suggested scaling ﬂatness metrics by parameter scales. While these metrics are

