Amortized Finite Element Analysis for Fast PDE-Constrained Optimization

Tianju Xue 1 Alex Beatson 2 Sigrid Adriaenssens 1 Ryan P. Adams 2

Abstract
Optimizing the parameters of partial differential
equations (PDEs), i.e., PDE-constrained optimization (PDE-CO), allows us to model natural systems from observations or perform rational design of structures with complicated mechanical,
thermal, or electromagnetic properties. However,
PDE-CO is often computationally prohibitive due
to the need to solve the PDE—typically via finite
element analysis (FEA)—at each step of the optimization procedure. In this paper we propose
amortized finite element analysis (AmorFEA), in
which a neural network learns to produce accurate PDE solutions, while preserving many of the
advantages of traditional finite element methods.
This network is trained to directly minimize the
potential energy from which the PDE and finite
element method are derived, avoiding the need to
generate costly supervised training data by solving PDEs with traditional FEA. As FEA is a variational procedure, AmorFEA is a direct analogue
to popular amortized inference approaches in latent variable models, with the finite element basis
acting as the variational family. AmorFEA can
perform PDE-CO without the need to repeatedly
solve the associated PDE, accelerating optimization when compared to a traditional workflow
using FEA and the adjoint method.

1. Introduction

by PDEs. Common examples include optimal design, optimal control, and the identification of parameters to relate
a simulation to observed data (Rees et al., 2010; Ulbrich
& van Bloemen Waanders, 2018). PDE-CO can be computationally challenging, however, for even moderately sized
problems, as it is usually necessary to solve the associated
PDE at every iteration of the outer-loop optimization.
As a motivating example, consider a heat conduction problem on a unit disk. The physical system is governed by a
Poisson’s equation:

2

−∆u = λ

in Ω,

u = ub

on Γ,

(1)

2

∂
∂
where ∆ = ∂x
2 + ∂x2 is the Laplace differential opera1
2
tor, u(x) is the temperature field and λ(x) is the heat source
field (see Fig. 1). Finite element analysis (FEA) is arguably the most powerful method known for computing
numerical solutions to this kind of PDE problems. With
a given source field λ(x), FEA identifies the best approximate solution field u(x) in a piece-wise polynomial function
space (Hughes, 2012).

PDE-CO poses a higher level problem, seeking to optimize
an objective functional jointly over u(x) and λ(x), under
the constraint imposed by the governing PDE. In the example problem above, one may reasonably ask: how can
we design a source field λ(x) so that a desired temperature
field ud (x) is fulfilled while the cost of λ(x) is minimized?
Such PDE-CO problems are typically high-dimensional
(e.g., # of input parameters = 811 in the model problem)

Partial differential equations (PDEs) are widely used to describe the properties of physical systems, including heat
transfer, electromagnetics, and elasticity. PDE-constrained
optimization (PDE-CO) addresses the situation in which an
objective function must be minimized or maximized, subject to the constraints of real-world physics as expressed
1
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA 2 Department of Computer
Science, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA. Correspondence to: Tianju Xue <txue@princeton.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

FEA mesh

source (control parameter)

solution (state variable)

Figure 1. The heat equation on a disk of unit radius. Left: the finite
element mesh. Middle: an example source field λ(x) = x21 + x22 .
Right: the solution field u(x) associated with the source field
solved by FEA. x = (x1 , x2 ) ∈ R2 denote the spatial coordinates.

