Improved Sleeping Bandits with Stochastic Actions Sets
and Adversarial Rewards
Aadirupa Saha 1 Pierre Gaillard 2 Michal Valko 3

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the problem of sleeping
bandits with stochastic action sets and adversarial
rewards. In this setting, in contrast to most work
in bandits, the actions may not be available at all
times. For instance, some products might be out
of stock in item recommendation. The best existing efficient (i.e., polynomial-time) algorithms for
this problem only guarantee an O(T 2/3 ) upperbound on the regret. Yet, inefficient
√ algorithms
based on EXP4 can achieve O( T ). In this paper, we provide a new computationally efficient
algorithm inspired
by EXP3 satisfying a regret
√
of order O( T ) when the availabilities of each
action i ∈ A are independent. We then study
the most general version of the problem where
at each round available sets are generated from
some unknown arbitrary distribution (i.e., without the independence assumption)
and propose an
√
efficient algorithm with O( 2K T ) regret guarantee. Our theoretical results are corroborated with
experimental evaluations.

1. Introduction
The problem of standard multiarmed bandit (MAB) is well
studied in machine learning (Auer, 2000; Vermorel & Mohri,
2005) and used to model online decision-making problems
under uncertainty. Due to their implicit exploration-vsexploitation tradeoff, bandits are able to model clinical trials,
movie recommendations, retail management job scheduling etc., where the goal is to keep pulling the ‘best-item’
in hindsight through sequentially querying one item at a
time and subsequently observing a noisy reward feedback
of the queried arm (Even-Dar et al., 2006; Auer et al., 2002a;
Auer, 2002; Agrawal & Goyal, 2012; Bubeck et al., 2012).
1

Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India. 2 Sierra Team,
Inria, Paris, France. 3 DeepMind, Paris, France. Correspondence
to: Aadirupa Saha <aadirupa@iisc.ac.in>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

However, in various real world applications, the decision
space (set of arms A) often changes over time due to unavailability of some items etc. For instance, in retail stores
some items might go out of stock, on a certain day some
websites could be down, some restaurants might be closed
etc. This setting is known as sleeping bandits in online
learning (Kanade et al., 2009; Neu & Valko, 2014; Kanade
& Steinke, 2014; Kale et al., 2016), where at any round the
set of available actions could vary stochastically based on
some unknown distributions over A (Neu & Valko, 2014;
Cortes et al., 2019) or adversarially (Kale et al., 2016; Kleinberg et al., 2010; Kanade & Steinke, 2014). Besides the
reward model, the set of available actions could also vary
stochastically or adversarially (Kanade et al., 2009; Neu &
Valko, 2014). The problem is known to be NP-hard when
both rewards and availabilities are adversarial (Kleinberg
et al., 2010; Kanade & Steinke, 2014; Kale et al., 2016). In
case of stochastic rewards and adversarial availabilities
the
√
achievable regret lower bound is known to be Ω( KT ), K
being the number of actions in the decision space A = [K].
The well studied EXP4 algorithm does achieve the above optimal regret bound, although it is computationally inefficient
(Kleinberg et al., 2010; Kale et al., 2016). However, the best
known efficient algorithm only guarantees an Õ((T K)2/3 )
regret,1 which is not matching the lower bound both in K
and T (Neu & Valko, 2014).
In this paper√we aim to give computationally efficient and
optimal O( T ) algorithms for the problem of sleeping
bandits with adversarial rewards and stochastic availabilities.
Our specific contributions are as follows:
Contributions
• We identified a drawback in the (sleeping) loss estimates in the prior work for this setting and gave an
insight and margin for improvement over the best know
rate (Section 3).
• We first study the setting when the availabilities of each
item i ∈ A are independent and propose√an EXP3based algorithm (Alg. 1) with an O(K 2 T ) regret
guarantee (Theorem 2, Sec. 3).
• We next study the problem when availabilities are not
1

Õ(·) notation hides the logarithmic dependencies.

