Randomized Smoothing of All Shapes and Sizes

Greg Yang * 1 Tony Duan * 1 2 J. Edward Hu 1 2 Hadi Salman 1 Ilya Razenshteyn 1 Jerry Li 1

Abstract
Randomized smoothing is the current state-of-theart defense with provable robustness against `2
adversarial attacks. Many works have devised
new randomized smoothing schemes for other
metrics, such as `1 or `∞ ; however, substantial
effort was needed to derive such new guarantees.
This begs the question: can we find a general
theory for randomized smoothing?
We propose a novel framework for devising and
analyzing randomized smoothing schemes, and
validate its effectiveness in practice. Our theoretical contributions are: (1) we show that for an appropriate notion of “optimal”, the optimal smoothing distributions for any “nice” norms have level
sets given by the norm’s Wulff Crystal; (2) we propose two novel and complementary methods for
deriving provably robust radii for any smoothing
distribution; and, (3) we show fundamental limits to current randomized smoothing techniques
via the theory of Banach space cotypes. By combining (1) and (2), we significantly improve the
state-of-the-art certified accuracy in `1 on standard datasets. Meanwhile, we show using (3)
that with only label statistics under random input perturbations, randomized smoothing cannot
achieve nontrivial certified accuracy against per1
1
turbations of `p -norm Ω(min(1, d p − 2 )), when
the input dimension d is large. We provide code
in github.com/tonyduan/rs4a.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models are vulnerable to adversarial examples – small imperceptible perturbations to their inputs that
lead to misclassification (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Szegedy
et al., 2014). To solve this problem, recent works proposed
heuristic defenses that are robust to specific classes of per*

Equal contribution 1 Microsoft Research AI 2 Work done
as part of the Microsoft AI Residency Program. Correspondence to: Greg Yang <gregyang@microsoft.com>,
Tony Duan <tony.duan@microsoft.com>, Jerry Li
<jerrl@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

turbations, but many would later be broken by stronger attacking algorithms (Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Athalye et al.,
2018; Uesato et al., 2018). This led the community to both
strengthen empirical defenses (Kurakin et al., 2016; Madry
et al., 2017) as well as build certified defenses that provide
robustness guarantees, i.e., models whose predictions are
constant within a neighborhood of their inputs (Wong &
Kolter, 2018; Raghunathan et al., 2018a). In particular, randomized smoothing is a recent method that has achieved
state-of-the-art provable robustness (Lecuyer et al., 2018;
Li et al., 2019; Cohen et al., 2019). In short, given an input,
it outputs the class most likely to be returned by a base
classifier, typically a neural network, under random noise
perturbation of the input. This mechanism confers stability of the output against `p perturbations, even if the base
classifier itself is highly non-Lipschitz. Canonically, this
noise has been Gaussian, and the adversarial perturbation
it protects against has been `2 (Cohen et al., 2019; Salman
et al., 2019a; Zhai et al., 2020), but some have explored other
kinds of noises and adversaries as well (Lecuyer et al., 2018;
Li et al., 2019; Dvijotham et al., 2019). In this paper, we
seek to comprehensively understand the interaction between
the choice of smoothing distribution and the perturbation
norm.1
1. We propose two new methods to compute robust certificates for additive randomized smoothing against
different norms.
2. We show that, for `1 , `2 , `∞ adversaries, the optimal
smoothing distributions have level sets that are their respective Wulff Crystals — a kind of equilibrated crystal
structure studied in physics since 1901 (Wulff).
3. Using the above advances, we obtain state-of-the-art `1
certified accuracy on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet. With
stability training (Li et al., 2019), semi-supervised
learning (Carmon et al., 2019), and pre-training in the
fashion of Hendrycks et al. (2019), we further improve
CIFAR-10 certified accuracies, with > 30% advantage
over prior SOTA for `1 radius ≥ 1.5. See Table 1.
4. Finally, we leverage the classical theory of Banach
space cotypes (Wojtaszczyk, 1996) to show that current
techniques for randomized smoothing cannot certify
1
1
nontrivial accuracy at more than Ω(min(1, d p − 2 )) `p radius, if all one uses are the probabilities of labels
when classifying randomly perturbed input.
1
V2 update: we added results using stability training, semisupervised learning, and ImageNet pre-training. See Table 1.

