VideoOneNet: Bidirectional Convolutional Recurrent OneNet with Trainable
Data Steps for Video Processing

´ Milacski 1 Barnabas
´ A.
´ ´
´ ˝
Zoltan
Poczos 2 Andras
Lorincz 1

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) achieve the stateof-the-art results on a wide range of image processing tasks, however, the majority of such solutions are problem-specific, like most AI algorithms. The One Network to Solve Them All
(‘OneNet’) procedure has been suggested to resolve this issue by exploiting a DNN as the proximal operator in Alternating Direction Method of
Multipliers (ADMM) solvers for various imaging
problems. In this work, we make two contributions, both facilitating end-to-end learning using
backpropagation. First, we generalize OneNet
to videos by augmenting its convolutional prior
network with bidirectional recurrent connections;
second, we extend the fixed fully connected linear ADMM data step with another trainable bidirectional convolutional recurrent network. In
our computational experiments on the Rotated
MNIST, Scanned CIFAR-10 and UCF-101 data
sets, the proposed modifications improve performance by a large margin compared to end-to-end
convolutional OneNet and 3D Wavelet sparsity
on several video processing problems: pixelwise
inpainting-denoising, blockwise inpainting, scattered inpainting, super resolution, compressive
sensing, deblurring, frame interpolation, frame
prediction and colorization. Our two contributions are complementary, and using them together
yields the best results.

1. Introduction
In previous years, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs, see LeCun et al. (2015) and the references therein) have become
1
Department of Artificial Intelligence, ELTE Eötvös Loránd
University, Budapest, Hungary 2 Machine Learning Department,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA. Correspondence to:
Zoltán Á. Milacski <srph25@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

the state-of-the-art on many data processing tasks, including image (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He et al., 2016; 2017;
Sabour et al., 2017), text (Peters et al., 2018; Howard &
Ruder, 2018; Devlin et al., 2018), speech (Xiong et al.,
2018; Chiu et al., 2018) problems, among many others.
These results mostly rely on large data sets and applying
Supervised Learning or Unsupervised Learning via gradient
descent with minimal feature engineering for each task independently. One imminent downside of this practice is the
lack of Multi-Task Learning (Ruder, 2017): the regularization effects of feature and weight sharing across the various
tasks are ignored, while training individual problem-specific
networks from scratch is computationally expensive and
time consuming. Recently, the One Network to Solve Them
All (OneNet) (Chang et al., 2017) procedure emerged as
a possible solution for images, which involves using the
same Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) as the prior
proximal operator of Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM) (Boyd et al., 2011) solvers for various
linear inverse restoration problems. The original procedure
used a pretrained adversarial denoising autoencoder, but
lately, it was extended as an end-to-end trained architecture to prevent ADMM convergence issues (Milacski et al.,
2019a).
In contrast to the image case addressed by OneNet, linear inverse problems for videos are more challenging: one has to
deal with larger tensors, exploit temporal correlations, while
the measurement process can involve bigger and more complex linear operators acting between-frames (e.g., temporal
convolutions, dropping frames) or both within- and betweenframes (e.g., video compressive sensing (Zheng & Jacobs,
2009)). Therefore it is unlikely that the straightfoward time
distributed (i.e., framewise repeated) extension of OneNet
may be optimal under such circumstances, due to the lack of
temporal propagation. Furthermore, it is also questionable
whether the mappings in the OneNet data step, which are
kept from the original ADMM algorithm to leverage the
measurement and the corresponding linear operator (i.e.,
the proximal operator of the reconstruction loss and dual
ascent), are optimal. Although the ADMM update rules are
theoretically motivated, they are still manually engineered,
fully-connected and linear, hence they may not fully take
advantage of all available features, especially when the mea-

