Optimal Randomized First-Order Methods for Least-Squares Problems

Jonathan Lacotte 1 Mert Pilanci 1

Abstract
We provide an exact analysis of a class of randomized algorithms for solving overdetermined
least-squares problems. We consider first-order
methods, where the gradients are pre-conditioned
by an approximation of the Hessian, based on
a subspace embedding of the data matrix. This
class of algorithms encompasses several randomized methods among the fastest solvers for leastsquares problems. We focus on two classical
embeddings, namely, Gaussian projections and
subsampled randomized Hadamard transforms
(SRHT). Our key technical innovation is the
derivation of the limiting spectral density of
SRHT embeddings. Leveraging this novel result,
we derive the family of normalized orthogonal
polynomials of the SRHT density and we find
the optimal pre-conditioned first-order method
along with its rate of convergence. Our analysis
of Gaussian embeddings proceeds similarly, and
leverages classical random matrix theory results.
In particular, we show that for a given sketch
size, SRHT embeddings exhibits a faster rate of
convergence than Gaussian embeddings. Then,
we propose a new algorithm by optimizing the
computational complexity over the choice of the
sketching dimension. To our knowledge, our resulting algorithm yields the best known complexity for solving least-squares problems with no
condition number dependence.

1. Introduction
We study the performance of a randomized method, namely,
the Hessian sketch (Pilanci & Wainwright, 2016), in the
context of (overdetermined) least-squares problems,


1
∗
2
x : = argmin f (x) : = kAx − bk
,
(1)
2
x∈Rd
1
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University.
Correspondence to: Jonathan Lacotte <lacotte@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

where A ∈ Rn×d is a given data matrix with n ⩾ d and b ∈
Rn is a vector of observations. For simplicity of notations,
we will assume throughout this work that rank(A) = d.
Many works have developed randomized algorithms (Avron
et al., 2010; Rokhlin & Tygert, 2008; Drineas et al., 2011; Pilanci & Wainwright, 2015) for solving (1), based on sketching methods. The latter involve using a random matrix
S ∈ Rm×n to project the data A and/or b to a lower dimensional space (m  n), and then approximately solving
the least-squares problem using the sketch SA and/or Sb.
The most classical sketch is a matrix S ∈ Rm×n with independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) Gaussian entries N (0, m−1 ), for which forming SA requires in general
O(mnd) basic operations (using classical matrix multiplication). This is larger than the cost O(nd2 ) of solving (1)
through standard matrix factorization methods, provided
that m ⩾ d. Another well-studied embedding is the (truncated) m × n Haar matrix S, whose rows are orthonormal and with range uniformly distributed among the subspaces of Rn with dimension m. However, it requires time
O(nm2 ) to be formed, through a Gram-Schmidt procedure,
which is also larger than O(nd2 ). An alternative embedding
which verifies orthogonality properties is the SRHT (Ailon
& Chazelle, 2006), which is based on the Walsh-Hadamard
transform. Due to the recursive structure of the latter, the
sketch SA can be formed in O(nd log m) time, so that the
SRHT is often viewed as a standard reference point for
comparing sketching algorithms.
Using the standard prediction (semi-)norm kA(e
x − x∗ )k2
as the evaluation criterion for an approximate solution x
e,
iterative methods (e.g., gradient descent or the conjugate
gradient algorithm) have time complexity which usually
scales proportionally to the condition number κ of the matrix
A – defined as the ratio between the largest and smallest
singular values of A –, and this becomes prohibitively large
when κ  1. To address the latter issue, we introduce a preconditioning method, namely, the Hessian sketch (Pilanci &
Wainwright, 2016), which approximates the Hessian H =
A> A of f (x) by HS = A> S > SA. This pre-conditioning
technique has become widespread in the sketching literature
for solving least-squares. For instance, it has been recently
shown by (Ozaslan et al., 2019; Lacotte & Pilanci, 2019)

