Concept Bottleneck Models

Pang Wei Koh * 1 Thao Nguyen * 1 2 Yew Siang Tang * 1
Stephen Mussmann 1 Emma Pierson 1 Been Kim 2 Percy Liang 1

Abstract
We seek to learn models that we can interact with
using high-level concepts: if the model did not
think there was a bone spur in the x-ray, would
it still predict severe arthritis? State-of-the-art
models today do not typically support the manipulation of concepts like “the existence of bone
spurs”, as they are trained end-to-end to go directly from raw input (e.g., pixels) to output (e.g.,
arthritis severity). We revisit the classic idea of
first predicting concepts that are provided at training time, and then using these concepts to predict
the label. By construction, we can intervene on
these concept bottleneck models by editing their
predicted concept values and propagating these
changes to the final prediction. On x-ray grading
and bird identification, concept bottleneck models achieve competitive accuracy with standard
end-to-end models, while enabling interpretation
in terms of high-level clinical concepts (“bone
spurs”) or bird attributes (“wing color”). These
models also allow for richer human-model interaction: accuracy improves significantly if we can
correct model mistakes on concepts at test time.

1. Introduction
Suppose that a radiologist is collaborating with a machine
learning model to grade the severity of knee osteoarthritis.
She might ask why the model made its prediction—did it
deem the space between the knee joints too narrow? Or she
might seek to intervene on the model—if she told it that the
x-ray showed a bone spur, would its prediction change?
State-of-the-art models today do not typically support such
queries: they are end-to-end models that go directly from
raw input x (e.g., pixels) to target y (e.g., arthritis severity),
*
Equal contribution 1 Stanford University 2 Google Research.
Correspondence to: Pang Wei Koh <pangwei@cs.stanford.edu>,
Been Kim <beenkim@google.com>, Percy Liang <pliang@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. We study concept bottleneck models that first predict
an intermediate set of human-specified concepts c, then use c to
predict the final output y. We illustrate the two applications we
consider: knee x-ray grading and bird identification.

and we cannot easily interact with them using the same
high-level concepts that practitioners reason with, like “joint
space narrowing” or “bone spurs”.
We approach this problem by revisiting the simple, classic idea of first predicting an intermediate set of humanspecified concepts c like “joint space narrowing” and “bone
spurs”, then using c to predict the target y. In this paper, we
refer to such models as concept bottleneck models. These
models are trained on data points (x, c, y), where the input
x is annotated with both concepts c and target y. At test
time, they take in an input x, predict concepts ĉ, and then
use those concepts to predict the target ŷ (Figure 1).
Earlier versions of concept bottleneck models were overtaken in predictive accuracy by end-to-end neural networks
(e.g., Kumar et al. (2009) for face recognition and Lampert et al. (2009) for animal identification), leading to a
perceived tradeoff between accuracy and interpretability in
terms of concepts. In this paper, we propose a straightforward method for turning any end-to-end neural network
into a concept bottleneck model, given concept annotations at training time: we simply resize one of the layers

