Efficiently Sampling Functions from Gaussian Process Posteriors

James T. Wilson * 1 Viacheslav Borovitskiy * 2 3 Alexander Terenin * 1
Peter Mostowsky * 2 Marc Peter Deisenroth 4

Abstract
Gaussian processes are the gold standard for many
real-world modeling problems, especially in cases
where a model’s success hinges upon its ability to faithfully represent predictive uncertainty.
These problems typically exist as parts of larger
frameworks, wherein quantities of interest are
ultimately defined by integrating over posterior
distributions. These quantities are frequently intractable, motivating the use of Monte Carlo methods. Despite substantial progress in scaling up
Gaussian processes to large training sets, methods
for accurately generating draws from their posterior distributions still scale cubically in the number of test locations. We identify a decomposition
of Gaussian processes that naturally lends itself
to scalable sampling by separating out the prior
from the data. Building off of this factorization,
we propose an easy-to-use and general-purpose
approach for fast posterior sampling, which seamlessly pairs with sparse approximations to afford
scalability both during training and at test time. In
a series of experiments designed to test competing
sampling schemes’ statistical properties and practical ramifications, we demonstrate how decoupled sample paths accurately represent Gaussian
process posteriors at a fraction of the usual cost.

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes (GPs) are a powerful framework for
reasoning about unknown functions f given partial knowledge of their behaviors. In decision-making scenarios, wellcalibrated predictive uncertainty is crucial for balancing
important tradeoffs, such as exploration versus exploita*
Equal contribution 1 Imperial College London 2 St. Petersburg
State University 3 St. Petersburg Department of Steklov Mathematical Institute of Russian Academy of Sciences 4 University
College London. Correspondence to: j.wilson17@imperial.ac.uk,
viacheslav.borovitskiy@gmail.com, a.terenin17@imperial.ac.uk,
and pmostowsky@gmail.com.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

tion and long-term versus short-term rewards. Bayesian
methods naturally strike this balance (Ghavamzadeh et al.,
2015; Shahriari et al., 2015). While many quantities of
interest defined with respect to Bayesian posteriors cannot
be computed analytically (such as expectations of nonlinear
functionals), they may be readily estimated via Monte Carlo
methods. Depending on this sample-based estimator’s relative cost and statistical behavior, its performance may vary
from state-of-the-art to method-of-last-resort.
Unlike methods for scalable training (Hensman et al., 2013;
Wang et al., 2019), techniques for efficiently sampling from
GP posteriors have received relatively little attention in
the machine learning literature. On the one hand, naı̈ve
approaches to sampling are statistically well-behaved, but
scale poorly owing to their need to solve for increasingly
large linear systems at test time. On the other hand, fast
approximation strategies using Fourier features (Rahimi and
Recht, 2008) avoid costly matrix operations, but are prone
to misrepresenting predictive posteriors (Wang et al., 2018;
Mutny and Krause, 2018; Calandriello et al., 2019). Investigating their respective behaviors, we find that many
of these strategies are complementary, with one often excelling where others falter. Motivated by this comparison
of strengths and weaknesses, we leverage a lesser known
decomposition of GP posteriors that allows us to incorporate
the best of both worlds.
Our approach centers on the observation that we may implicitly condition Gaussian random variables by combining
them with an explicit corrective term. Translating this intuition to GPs, we may decompose the posterior as the sum of
a prior and an update. By doing so, we are able to separately
represent each of these terms using a basis well-suited for
sampling. This notion of “conditioning by kriging” was
first presented by Matheron in the early 1970s, with various
applications to geostatistics (Journel and Huijbregts, 1978;
de Fouquet, 1994; Chiles and Delfiner, 2009). The concept
was later rediscovered in astrophysics (Hoffman and Ribak,
1991; Van de Weygaert and Bertschinger, 1996), where it
has been used to help simulate the universe as we know it.
We unite these ideas with techniques from the growing
literature on approximate GPs to obtain an easy-to-use and
general-purpose approach for accurately sampling from GP
posteriors in linear time.

