Fast Adaptation to New Environments via Policy-Dynamics Value Functions

Roberta Raileanu 1 Max Goldstein 1 Arthur Szlam 2 Rob Fergus 1

Abstract
Standard RL algorithms assume fixed environment dynamics and require a significant amount
of interaction to adapt to new environments. We
introduce Policy-Dynamics Value Functions (PDVF), a novel approach for rapidly adapting to
dynamics different from those previously seen
in training. PD-VF explicitly estimates the cumulative reward in a space of policies and environments. An ensemble of conventional RL
policies is used to gather experience on training
environments, from which embeddings of both
policies and environments can be learned. Then,
a value function conditioned on both embeddings
is trained. At test time, a few actions are sufficient to infer the environment embedding, enabling a policy to be selected by maximizing the
learned value function (which requires no additional environment interaction). We show that
our method can rapidly adapt to new dynamics
on a set of MuJoCo domains. Code available at
policy-dynamics-value-functions.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved impressive
results on a wide range of complex tasks (Mnih et al., 2015;
Silver et al., 2016; 2017; 2018; Jaderberg et al., 2019; Berner
et al., 2019; Vinyals et al., 2019). However, recent studies
have pointed out that RL agents trained and tested on the
same environment tend to overfit to that environment’s idiosyncracies and are unable to generalize to even small perturbations (Whiteson et al., 2011; Rajeswaran et al., 2017;
Zhang et al., 2018c;a; Henderson et al., 2018; Cobbe et al.,
2019; Raileanu & Rocktäschel, 2020; Song et al., 2020). It
is often the case that besides the test environments being
different from the train environments, they will also have
1

Department of Computer Science, New York University, New
York, USA 2 Facebook AI Research, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Roberta Raileanu <raileanu@cs.nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

costly interactions, scarce or unavailable feedback, and irreversible consequences. For example, a self-driving car
might have to adjust its behavior depending on weather conditions, or a prosthetic control system might have to adapt
to a new human. In these cases it is crucial for RL agents to
find and execute appropriate policies as quickly as possible.
Our approach is inspired by Sutton et al. (2011) who introduced the notion of general value functions (GVFs), which
can be used to gather knowledge about the world in the
form of predictions. A GVF estimates the expected return
of an arbitrary policy on a certain task (as defined by a reward function, a termination function and a terminal-reward
function). Similarly, in this work, we aim to learn a value
function conditioned on elements of a space of policies
and tasks, but here, a “task” is specified by the transition
function of the MDP instead of the reward function.
More specifically, we propose PD-VF, a novel framework
for rapid adaptation to new environment dynamics. PD-VF
consists of four phases: (i) a reinforcement learning phase
in which individual policies are learned for each environment in our training set using standard RL algorithms, (ii) a
self-supervised phase in which trajectories generated by
these policies are used to learn embeddings for both policies
and environments, (iii) a supervised training phase in which
a neural network is used to learn the value function of a
certain policy acting in some environment. The network
takes as inputs the initial state of the environment, as well
as the corresponding policy and environment embeddings
(as learned in the previous phase) and is trained with supervision of the cumulative reward obtained during an episode,
and finally (iv) an evaluation phase in which, given a new
environment, its dynamics embedding is inferred using the
first few steps of an episode. Then, a policy is selected by
finding the policy embedding that maximizes the learned
value function. The selected policy is used to act in the
environment until the episode ends.
Our framework uses self-supervised interactions with the
environment to learn an embedding space of both dynamics
and policies. By learning a value function in the policydynamics space, PD-VF can discover useful patterns in the
complex relation between a family of environment dynamics, various behaviors, and the expected return. The value
function is designed to model non-optimal policies along

