Improved Optimistic Algorithms for Logistic Bandits

Louis Faury * 1 2 Marc Abeille * 1 Clément Calauzènes 1 Olivier Fercoq 2

Abstract
The generalized linear bandit framework has attracted a lot of attention in recent years by extending the well-understood linear setting and
allowing to model richer reward structures. It
notably covers the logistic model, widely used
when rewards are binary. For logistic bandits,
the frequentist regret
√ guarantees of existing algorithms are Õ(κ T ), where κ is a problemdependent constant. Unfortunately, κ can be arbitrarily large as it scales exponentially with the
size of the decision set. This may lead to significantly loose regret bounds and poor empirical
performance. In this work, we study the logistic bandit with a focus on the prohibitive dependencies introduced by κ. We propose a new optimistic algorithm based on a finer examination
of the non-linearities of the
√ reward function. We
show that it enjoys a Õ( T ) regret with no dependency in κ, but for a second order term. Our
analysis is based on a new tail-inequality for selfnormalized martingales, of independent interest.

Introduction
Parametric stochastic bandits is a framework for sequential
decision making where the reward distributions associated
to each arm are assumed to share a structured relationship
through a common unknown parameter. It extends the standard Multi-Armed Bandit framework and allows one to address the exploration-exploitation dilemma in settings with
large or infinite action space. The Linear Bandit (LB) is the
most famous instance of parametrized bandits, where the
value of an arm is given as the inner product between the
arm feature vector and the unknown parameter. While the
theoretical challenges in LB are relatively well understood
and addressed (Dani et al., 2008; Rusmevichientong and
Tsitsiklis, 2010; Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011; Abeille and

Lazaric, 2017, and references therein), its practical interest
is limited by the linear structure of the reward, which may
fail to model real-world problems. As a result, extending
LB to allow for richer reward structures and go beyond linearity has attracted a lot of attention from the bandit community in recent years. To this end, two main approaches
have been investigated. Following (Valko et al., 2013), the
linearity of the reward structure has been relaxed to hold
only in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space. Another line of
research relies on Generalized Linear Models (GLMs) to
encode non-linearity through a link function. We focus in
this work on the second approach.
Generalized Linear Bandits. The use of generalized linear models for the bandit setting was first studied by Filippi et al. (2010). They introduced GLM-UCB,
a generic
√
optimistic algorithm that achieves a Õ(d T ) frequentist
regret. In the finite-arm case, Li et al. (2017)
√
√ proposed
SupCB-GLM for which they proved a Õ( d log K T )
regret bound. Similar regret guarantees were also demonstrated for Thompson Sampling, both in the frequentist
(Abeille and Lazaric, 2017) and Bayesian (Russo and
Van Roy, 2013; 2014; Dong and Van Roy, 2018) settings.
In parallel, Jun et al. (2017) focused on improving the
time and memory complexity of Generalized Linear Bandit
(GLB) algorithms while Dumitrascu et al. (2018) improved
posterior sampling for a Bayesian version of Thompson
Sampling in the specific logistic bandits setting.

Equal contribution 1 Criteo AI Lab, Paris, France 2 LTCI,
Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Palaiseau, France.
Correspondence to: Louis Faury <l.faury@criteo.com>.

Limitations. At a first glance, existing performance
guarantees for GLB seem to coincide with the state-of-theart regret bounds for LB w.r.t. the dimension d and the horizon T . However, a careful examination of the regret bounds
shows that they all depend in an “unpleasant manner on
the form of the link function of the GLM, and it seems
there may be significant room for improvement” (Lattimore
and Szepesvári, 2018, §19.4.5). More in detail, they scale
linearly with a multiplicative factor κ which characterizes
the degree of non-linearity of the link function. As such,
for highly non-linear models, κ can be prohibitively large,
which drastically worsens the regret guarantees as well as
the practical performances of the algorithms.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Logistic bandit. The magnitude of the constant κ is particularly significant for one GLB of crucial practical in-

*

