Cautious Adaptation For Reinforcement Learning in Safety-Critical Settings

Jesse Zhang 1 Brian Cheung 1 Chelsea Finn 2 Sergey Levine 1 Dinesh Jayaraman 3

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) in real-world safetycritical target settings like urban driving is hazardous, imperiling the RL agent, other agents,
and the environment. To overcome this difficulty,
we propose a “safety-critical adaptation” task setting: an agent first trains in non-safety-critical
“source” environments such as in a simulator, before it adapts to the target environment where
failures carry heavy costs. We propose a solution
approach, CARL, that builds on the intuition that
prior experience in diverse environments equips
an agent to estimate risk, which in turn enables
relative safety through risk-averse, cautious adaptation. CARL first employs model-based RL to
train a probabilistic model to capture uncertainty
about transition dynamics and catastrophic states
across varied source environments. Then, when
exploring a new safety-critical environment with
unknown dynamics, the CARL agent plans to
avoid actions that could lead to catastrophic states.
In experiments on car driving, cartpole balancing, half-cheetah locomotion, and robotic object
manipulation, CARL successfully acquires cautious exploration behaviors, yielding higher rewards with fewer failures than strong RL adaptation baselines. Website at https://sites.
google.com/berkeley.edu/carl.

1. Introduction
An experienced human driving a rental car for the first time
is initially very aware of her lack of familiarity with the car.
How sensitive is it to acceleration and braking? How does
it respond to steering? How wide is the vehicle and what
is its turning radius? She drives mindfully, at low speeds
and making wide turns, all the while observing the car’s
1

UC Berkeley, CA, USA 2 Stanford, CA, USA 3 University
of Pennsylvania, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Jesse Zhang
<jessezhang@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. The Safety-Critical Adaptation (SCA) task framework.
In an initial “pretraining” phase, an agent is trained in various
sandbox source environments without safety concerns, such as in
a simulator. In the second “adaptation” phase, it aims to adapt to a
safety-critical target environment, producing high rewards quickly
and safely.

responses and adapting to it. Within minutes, once she is
familiar with the car, she begins to drive more fluently and
efficiently. Humans draw upon their prior experiences to
perform this kind of safe, quick adaptation to unfamiliar
situations all the time, such as when playing with a new
tennis racquet, or walking on a new slippery surface.
Such problems are critical to address in autonomous systems: such as when a self-driving car must learn to drive
in a new country, or when a planetary rover might have
to learn to explore a harsh new environment. Missteps in
real-world situations can cause real damage to robots and
their environments. An important bottleneck in applying
today’s standard machine learning approaches to control in
these real-world situations is that they are trained without
any notion of safe behavior under uncertainty. Recent works
have attempted to address this by proposing methods for
safe exploration during reinforcement learning — in other
words, how might an agent avoid risky actions during training time? This still requires that the robot acquire its notions
of uncertainty and risks at the same time as it is learning to
perform tasks in the new environment, which is difficult and
hazardous.
Could we instead rely on transferring notions of uncertainty

