A Sample Complexity Separation between Non-Convex and Convex
Meta-Learning
Nikunj Saunshi 1 Yi Zhang 1 Mikhail Khodak 2 Sanjeev Arora 1 3

Abstract
One popular trend in meta-learning is to learn
from many training tasks a common initialization
that a gradient-based method can use to solve a
new task with few samples. The theory of metalearning is still in its early stages, with several recent learning-theoretic analyses of methods such
as Reptile (Nichol et al., 2018) being for convex
models. This work shows that convex-case analysis might be insufficient to understand the success
of meta-learning, and that even for non-convex
models it is important to look inside the optimization black-box, specifically at properties of the
optimization trajectory. We construct a simple
meta-learning instance that captures the problem
of one-dimensional subspace learning. For the
convex formulation of linear regression on this
instance, we show that the new task sample complexity of any initialization-based meta-learning
algorithm is ⌦(d), where d is the input dimension.
In contrast, for the non-convex formulation of a
two layer linear network on the same instance,
we show that both Reptile and multi-task representation learning can have new task sample
complexity of O(1), demonstrating a separation
from convex meta-learning. Crucially, analyses
of the training dynamics of these methods reveal
that they can meta-learn the correct subspace onto
which the data should be projected.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of meta-learning, or learning-tolearn (Thrun & Pratt, 1998), in which the goal is to use
the data from numerous training tasks to reduce the sample
1
Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, USA 2 Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA 3 Institute for
Advanced Study, Princeton, New Jersey, USA. Correspondence to:
Nikunj Saunshi <nsaunshi@cs.princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

complexity of an unseen but related test task. Although there
is a long history of successful methods in meta-learning
and the related areas of multi-task and lifelong learning
(Evgeniou & Pontil, 2004; Ruvolo & Eaton, 2013), recent
approaches have been developed with the diversity and scale
of modern applications in mind. This has given rise to
simple, model-agnostic methods that focus on learning a
good initialization for some gradient-based method such as
stochastic gradient descent (SGD), to be run on samples
from a new task (Finn et al., 2017; Nichol et al., 2018).
These methods have found widespread applications in a
variety of areas such as computer vision (Nichol et al., 2018),
reinforcement learning (Finn et al., 2017), and federated
learning (McMahan et al., 2017).
Inspired by their popularity, several recent learning-theoretic
analyses of meta-learning have followed suit, eschewing customization to specific hypothesis classes such as halfspaces
(Maurer & Pontil, 2013; Balcan et al., 2015) and instead
favoring the convex-case study of gradient-based algorithms
that could potentially be applied to deep neural networks
(Denevi et al., 2019; Khodak et al., 2019). This has yielded
results showing that meta-learning an initialization by using
methods similar to Reptile (Nichol et al., 2018) for convex models leads to a reduction in sample complexity of
unseen tasks. These benefits are shown using natural notions of task-similarity like the average distance between
the risk minimizers of tasks drawn from an underlying metadistribution. A good initialization in these models is one
that is close to the population risk minimizers for tasks in
this meta-distribution.
In this paper we argue that, even in some simple settings,
such convex-case analyses are insufficient to understand
the success of initialization-based meta-learning algorithms.
For this purpose, we pose a simple instance for metalearning linear regressors that share a one-dimensional subspace, for which we prove a sample complexity separation between convex and non-convex methods. In the process, we provide a first theoretical demonstration of how
initialization-based meta-learning methods can learn good
representations, as observed empirically (Raghu et al., 2019).
Specifically, our contributions are the following:

