Variational Autoencoders with Riemannian Brownian Motion Priors
Dimitris Kalatzis 1 David Eklund 2 Georgios Arvanitidis 3 Søren Hauberg 1

Abstract
Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) represent the
given data in a low-dimensional latent space,
which is generally assumed to be Euclidean. This
assumption naturally leads to the common choice
of a standard Gaussian prior over continuous latent variables. Recent work has, however, shown
that this prior has a detrimental effect on model
capacity, leading to subpar performance. We propose that the Euclidean assumption lies at the
heart of this failure mode. To counter this, we assume a Riemannian structure over the latent space,
which constitutes a more principled geometric
view of the latent codes, and replace the standard Gaussian prior with a Riemannian Brownian
motion prior. We propose an efficient inference
scheme that does not rely on the unknown normalizing factor of this prior. Finally, we demonstrate
that this prior significantly increases model capacity using only one additional scalar parameter.

1. Introduction
Variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2014;
Rezende et al., 2014) simultaneously learn a conditional
density p(x|z) of high dimensional observations and low
dimensional representations z giving rise to these observations. In VAEs, a prior distribution p(z) is assigned to the
latent variables which is typically a standard Gaussian. It
has, unfortunately, turned out that this choice of distribution
is limiting the modelling capacity of VAEs and richer priors
have been proposed instead (Tomczak & Welling, 2017;
van den Oord et al., 2017; Bauer & Mnih, 2018; Klushyn
et al., 2019). In contrast to this popular view, we will argue that the limitations of the prior are not due to lack of
1
Section for Cognitive Systems, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark
2
Research Institutes of Sweden, Isafjordsgatan 22, 164 40 Kista,
Sweden 3 Empirical Inference Department, Max Planck Institute
for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to:
Dimitris Kalatzis <dika@dtu.dk>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. The latent space priors of two VAEs trained on the digit
1 from MNIST. Left: Using a unit Gaussian prior. Right: Using a Riemannian Brownian motion (ours) with trainable (scalar)
variance.

capacity, but rather lack of principle.
Informally, the Gaussian prior has two key problems.
1.
The Euclidean representation is arbitrary. Behind
the Gaussian prior lies the assumption that the latent space
Z is Euclidean. However, if the decoder pθ (x|z) is of sufficiently high capacity, then it is always possible to reparameterize the latent space from z to h(z), h : Z → Z, and
then let the decoder invert this reparameterization as part
of its decoding process (Arvanitidis et al., 2018; Hauberg,
2018b). This implies that we cannot assign any meaning
to specific instantiations of the latent variables, and that
Euclidean distances carry limited meaning in Z. This is an
identifiability problem and it is well-known that even the
most elementary latent variable models are subject to such.
For example, Gaussian mixtures can be reparameterized by
permuting cluster indices, and principal components can be
arbitrarily rotated (Bishop, 2006).
2. Latent manifolds are mismapped onto Z. In all but
the simplest cases, the latent manifold M giving rise to data
observations is embedded in Z. An encoder with adequate
capacity will always recover some smoothened form of M,
which will either result in the latent space containing “holes”
of low density or, in M being mapped to the whole of Z
under the influence of the prior. Both cases will lead to
bad samples or convergence problems. This problem is
called manifold mismatch (Davidson et al., 2018; Falorsi
et al., 2018) and is closely related to distribution mismatch
(Hoffman & Johnson, 2016; Bauer & Mnih, 2018; Rosca
et al., 2018) where the prior samples from regions to which
the variational posterior (or encoder) does not assign any
density. A graphical illustration of this situation can be

