Thompson Sampling Algorithms for Mean-Variance Bandits

Qiuyu Zhu 1 Vincent Y. F. Tan 1 2 3

Abstract
The multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is
a classical learning task that exemplifies the
exploration-exploitation tradeoff. However, standard formulations do not take into account risk.
In online decision making systems, risk is a primary concern. In this regard, the mean-variance
risk measure is one of the most common objective functions. Existing algorithms for meanvariance optimization in the context of MAB problems have unrealistic assumptions on the reward
distributions. We develop Thompson Samplingstyle algorithms for mean-variance MAB and provide comprehensive regret analyses for Gaussian
and Bernoulli bandits with fewer assumptions.
Our algorithms achieve the best known regret
bounds for mean-variance MABs and also attain
the information-theoretic bounds in some parameter regimes. Empirical simulations show that
our algorithms significantly outperform existing
LCB-based algorithms for all risk tolerances.

1. Introduction
The MAB problem studies the problem of online learning
with partial feedback. This problem has a large number of
real-world applications, such as online advertising, clinical
trials, and financial portfolio design. The most widely-used
MAB model is the stochastic MAB model. A player chooses
among several arms, each defined by an independent reward
distribution. In each period, the player plays one arm and
obtains a random reward observation from that arm. The
player faces a dilemma between exploiting the current information by playing the arm with highest estimated reward
and exploring all arms to collecting reward information.
1

Institute of Operations Research and Analytics, National
University of Singapore, Singapore 2 Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore,
Singapore 3 Department of Mathematics, National University of
Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Qiuyu Zhu <qiuyu zhu@u.nus.edu>, Vincent Y. F. Tan <vtan@nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

The primary concern of this body of literature is to find a
learning algorithm which can maximize the expected cumulative reward. However, scant attention has been paid
to risk. In many practical problems, such as clinical trials,
an algorithm that yields a lower expected payout but is less
risky may be preferable.
To date, there has been little agreement on the definition
of risk. For example, under the MAB setting, a solution
with guarantees over multiple runs of an algorithm may not
satisfy the desire for a solution with low variability over
a single implementation of an algorithm. Indeed, there
are various risk modeling paradigms, such as, the expected
utility theory and the mean-variance paradigm. In this
paper, we focus on the mean-variance paradigm, which was
introduced by Markowitz (1952). We seek to understand the
role of risk in the mean-variance MAB problem.
1.1. Related Work
Although problems involving bandits have a long history,
dating back to Thompson (1933), risk-aware bandits problem have been studied only recently. Even-Dar et al. (2006)
incorporated risk into online learning problem. They initiated the investigation of explicit risk considerations in
the standard models of worst-case online learning by considering the Sharpe ratio and the mean-variance criterion.
Audibert et al. (2009) analyzed the expected regret and
its distribution, showed that an anytime UCB and UCB-V
might have large regret with non-negligible probability. Salomon & Audibert (2011) further extended this result by
showing that no anytime algorithm can achieve a regret with
both a small expected regret and exponential tails. These result are important steps towards the analysis of risk in MAB
problems, but they are limited to the case that an algorithm’s
objective is to find the arm with the highest expectation.
Sani et al. (2012) considered risk-aversion in MAB problems. In particular, they studied the mean-variance risk criteria and presented the MV-LCB algorithm. Vakili & Zhao
(2015) and Vakili & Zhao (2016) considered mean-variance
minimization under a regret minimization framework and
completed the regret analysis of Sani et al. (2012). In the
best arm identification setting, David & Shimkin (2016) and
David et al. (2018) studied VaR-based risk criteria. Moreover, some coherent risk measures—for example CVaR—

