(Locally) Differentially Private Combinatorial Semi-Bandits

Xiaoyu Chen * 1 Kai Zheng * 1 2 Zixin Zhou 3 Yunchang Yang 4 Wei Chen 5 Liwei Wang 1 4

Abstract
In this paper, we study Combinatorial SemiBandits (CSB) that is an extension of classic
Multi-Armed Bandits (MAB) under Differential
Privacy (DP) and stronger Local Differential Privacy (LDP) setting. Since the server receives
more information from users in CSB, it usually
causes additional dependence on the dimension
of data, which is a notorious side-effect for privacy preserving learning. However for CSB under
two common smoothness assumptions (Kveton
et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2016), we show it is possible to remove this side-effect. In detail, for B∞ bounded smooth CSB under either ε-LDP or ε-DP,
2
mB∞
ln T
we prove the optimal regret bound is Θ( ∆ε
)
2
mB 2 ln T

∞
or Θ̃( ∆ε
) respectively, where T is time period, ∆ is the gap of rewards and m is the number
of base arms, by proposing novel algorithms and
matching lower bounds. For B1 -bounded smooth
CSB under ε-DP, we also prove the optimal regret
mKB12 ln T
bound is Θ̃(
) with both upper bound
∆ε
and lower bound, where K is the maximum number of feedback in each round. All above results
nearly match corresponding non-private optimal
rates, which imply there is no additional price
for (locally) differentially private CSB in above
common settings.

1. Introduction
Stochastic Multi-Armed Bandits (MAB) (Bubeck et al.,
2012) is a fundamental problem in machine learning with
wide applications in real world. In stochastic MAB, there
is an unknown underlying distribution over [0, 1]m for m
*

Equal contribution 1 Key Laboratory of Machine Perception,
MOE, School of EECS, Peking University 2 Work done while interned at Microsoft Research Asia 3 School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University 4 Center for Data
Science, Peking University 5 Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing,
China. Correspondence to: Xiaoyu Chen <cxy30@pku.edu.cn>,
Kai Zheng <zhengk92@pku.edu.cn>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

base arms and a learner (or called a server) interacts with
the environment for T rounds. At each round, the environment draws random rewards from the distribution for m
base arms. At the same time, the learner chooses one of m
base arms based on previously collected information, and
receives the reward of chosen arm. The goal of the learner is
to minimize the regret, measured as the difference between
the reward of best fixed base arm and the learner’s total
reward in expectation. Multi-Armed Bandits has been used
in recommendation systems, clinical trial, etc. However,
many of these applications rely heavily on users’ sensitive
data, which raise great concerns about data privacy. For
example, in recommendation systems, observations at each
round represent some preferences of the user over the recommended item set, which is the personal information of
user t and should be protected.
Since first proposed in 2006, Differential Privacy (DP)
(Dwork et al., 2006) has become a gold-standard in privacy preserving machine learning (Dwork & Roth, 2014).
We say an algorithm protects differential privacy if there
is not much difference between outputs of this algorithm
over two datasets with Hamming distance 1 (see Section 2
for the rigorous definition in the streaming setting). For εdifferentially private stochastic Multi-Armed Bandits, there
has already been extensive studies (Mishra & Thakurta,
2015; Tossou & Dimitrakakis, 2016; Sajed & Sheffet, 2019).
Based on classic non-private optimal UCB algorithm (Auer
et al., 2002), as well as the tree-based aggregation technique to calculate private summation (Dwork et al., 2010),
both Mishra & Thakurta (2015) and Tossou & Dimitrakakis
(2016) designed algorithms under DP guarantee but with
sub-optimal guarantee 1 . Recently, Sajed & Sheffet (2019)
proposed a complex algorithm based on non-private Successive Elimination (Even-Dar et al., 2002) and sparse vector
technique (Dwork & Roth, 2014) to achieve the optimal
ln T
O( mε∆
) regret bound, where ∆ is the minimum gap of rewards, and it matches both the non-private lower bound (Lai
& Robbins, 1985) and the differentially private lower bound
(Shariff & Sheffet, 2018) in common parameter regimes.
However, stochastic MAB is the simplest model for sequen1

In fact, (Tossou & Dimitrakakis, 2016) achieved a better utility bound but under a weaker privacy guarantee compared with
common differential privacy in the streaming setting.

