Online Learning with Dependent Stochastic Feedback Graphs
Corinna Cortes 1 Giulia DeSalvo 1 Claudio Gentile 1 Mehryar Mohri 1 Ningshan Zhang 2

Abstract
A general framework for online learning with partial information is one where feedback graphs
specify which losses can be observed by the
learner. We study a challenging scenario where
feedback graphs vary stochastically with time and,
more importantly, where graphs and losses are
dependent. This scenario appears in several realworld applications that we describe where the
outcome of actions are correlated. We devise a
new algorithm for this setting that exploits the
stochastic properties of the graphs and that benefits from favorable regret guarantees. We present
a detailed theoretical analysis of this algorithm,
and also report the results of a series of experiments on real-world datasets, which show that
our algorithm outperforms standard baselines for
online learning with feedback graphs.

1. Introduction
Prediction with expert advice is a classical framework for
modeling the repeated interactions between a learner and the
environment (Littlestone & Warmuth, 1994; Cesa-Bianchi
& Lugosi, 2006). In this framework, the learner maintains
performance estimates for a set of experts (or actions), based
on their past behavior. At each round, she uses those estimates to select an action, which incurs a loss determined by
the environment, and subsequently updates her estimates.
The learner’s objective is to minimize her regret, that is the
difference between her cumulative loss over a finite number
of interactions and that of the best expert in hindsight.
The two most standard settings in this framework are the
full information setting, where the learner is informed of the
loss incurred by all actions, and the bandit setting, where
she can only observe the loss incurred by the selected action.
These settings are both special instances of a general model
*

1

2

Equal contribution Google Research, New York, NY Hudson
River Trading, New York, NY. Correspondence to: Giulia DeSalvo
<giuliad@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

of online learning introduced by Mannor & Shamir (2011),
where loss observability is specified by a feedback graph. In
a directed feedback graph, each vertex represents an action
and an edge from vertex i to vertex j indicates that the
loss of action j is observed when action i is selected. The
bandit setting corresponds to a feedback graph reduced to
only self-loops at each vertex, the full information setting
corresponds to a fully connected graph. Online learning
with feedback graphs has been further extensively analyzed
by Alon et al. (2013; 2017) and by a series of other recent
publications (Caron et al., 2012; Alon et al., 2015; Kocák
et al., 2014; Neu, 2015; Cohen et al., 2016; Buccapatnam
et al., 2014b; Wu et al., 2015a; Tossou et al., 2017; Liu et al.,
2018; Yun et al., 2018; Cortes et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020).
In the scenarios of online learning with feedback graphs
studied by some authors, the feedback graph G is assumed
to be fixed over time (Caron et al., 2012; Buccapatnam et al.,
2014b; Neu, 2015), while others allow a time-varying feedback graph Gt , chosen adversarially at each round t (Alon
et al., 2013; 2017; 2015; Kocák et al., 2014; Cohen et al.,
2016; Kocák et al., 2016). This paper considers a scenario
commonly appearing in practice where feedback graphs
are time-varying but are stochastic, that is, at each round
t, the feedback graph Gt is drawn i.i.d. according to some
unknown distribution. Crucially, we will not assume that the
losses and feedback graphs are statistically independent, a
key assumption adopted by many authors, including Cohen
et al. (2016); Tossou et al. (2017); Liu et al. (2018); Li et al.
(2020), in their analysis of (partially accessible) feedback
graphs. The novelty of the setting presented in this paper is
thus not just to study stochastic feedback graphs, but more
importantly, to allow for an underlying dependence between
the feedback graphs and the losses, which as we will see
makes the analysis intrinsically harder. We call this new
setting online learning with dependent stochastic feedback
graphs highlighting that losses and graphs are dependent
stochastic variables.
Our scenario of online learning with dependent stochastic
graphs is relevant to many real-world problems. As an
example, consider the problem of a doctor selecting an
appropriate treatment (action) for a patient, based on his
symptoms. The patient can be modeled by a feature vector
xt representing his health history and other characteristics
and we assume a fixed distribution over the patients xt

