Coresets for Clustering in Graphs of Bounded Treewidth

Daniel Baker 1 Vladimir Braverman 1 Lingxiao Huang 2 Shaofeng H.-C. Jiang 3 Robert Krauthgamer 3
Xuan Wu 1

Abstract
We initiate the study of coresets for clustering
in graph metrics, i.e., the shortest-path metric of
edge-weighted graphs. Such clustering problems
are essential to data analysis and used for example in road networks and data visualization. A
coreset is a compact summary of the data that
approximately preserves the clustering objective
for every possible center set, and it offers significant efficiency improvements in terms of running
time, storage, and communication, including in
streaming and distributed settings. Our main result is a near-linear time construction of a coreset for k-M EDIAN in a general graph G, with
size O,k (tw(G)) where tw(G) is the treewidth
of G, and we complement the construction with a
nearly-tight size lower bound. The construction is
based on the framework of Feldman and Langberg
[STOC 2011], and our main technical contribution, as required by this framework, is a uniform
bound of O(tw(G)) on the shattering dimension
under any point weights. We validate our coreset on real-world road networks, and our scalable
algorithm constructs tiny coresets with high accuracy, which translates to a massive speedup of
existing approximation algorithms such as local
search for graph k-M EDIAN.

1. Introduction
We initiate the study of coresets for clustering in graph
metrics, i.e., the shortest-path metrics of graphs. As usual in
Authors are listed in alphabetical order. Full version: (Baker
et al., 2019) 1 Johns Hopkins University, USA 2 Yale University, USA 3 Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel.
Correspondence to:
Daniel Baker <dnb@cs.jhu.edu>,
Vladimir
Braverman
<vova@cs.jhu.edu>,
Lingxiao
Huang <huanglingxiao1990@126.com>,
Shaofeng H.C.
Jiang
<shaofeng.jiang@weizmann.ac.il>,
Robert
Krauthgamer <robert.krauthgamer@weizmann.ac.il>, Xuan Wu
<wu3412790@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

these contexts, the focus is on edge-weighted graphs G =
(V, E) with a restricted topology, and in our case bounded
treewidth. Previously, coresets were studied extensively
but mostly under geometric restrictions, e.g., for Euclidean
metrics.
Coresets for k-Clustering We consider the metric kM EDIAN problem, whose input is a metric space M =
(V, d) and an n-point data set X ⊆ V , and the goal is to find
a set C ⊆ V of k points, called center set, that minimizes
the objective function
X
cost(X, C) :=
d(x, C),
x∈X

where d(x, C) := min{d(x, c) : c ∈ C}. The metric kM EDIAN generalizes the well-known Euclidean case, in
which V = Rd and d(x, y) = kx − yk2 . k-M EDIAN
problem and relatedP
k-clustering problems (like k-M EANS,
whose objective is x∈X (d(x, C))2 ), are essential tools
in data analysis and are used in many application domains,
such as genetics, information retrieval, and pattern recognition. However, finding an optimal clustering is a nontrivial
task, and even in settings where polynomial-time algorithms
are known, it is often challenging in practice because data
sets are huge, and potentially distributed or arriving over
time. To this end, a powerful data-reduction technique,
called coresets, is of key importance.
Roughly speaking, a coreset is a compact summary of the
data points by weighted points, that approximates the clustering objective for every possible choice of the center set.
Formally, an -coreset for k-M EDIAN is a subset D ⊆ V
with weight w : D → R+ , such that for every k-subset
C ⊆V,
X
w(x) · d(x, C) ∈ (1 ± ) · cost(X, C).
x∈D

This notion, sometimes called a strong coreset, was proposed in (Har-Peled & Mazumdar, 2004), following a
weaker notion of (Agarwal et al., 2004). Small-size coresets
(where size is defined as |D|) often translate to faster algorithms, more efficient storage/communication of data, and
streaming/distributed algorithms via the merge-and-reduce
framework, see e.g. (Har-Peled & Mazumdar, 2004; Fichtenberger et al., 2013; Balcan et al., 2013; Huang et al., 2018;

