Scalable Identification of Partially Observed Systems with
Certainty-Equivalent EM

Kunal Menda * 1 Jean de Becdelièvre * 1 Jayesh K. Gupta * 1
Ilan Kroo 1 Mykel J. Kochenderfer 1 Zachary Manchester 1

Abstract

xt

···

yt
System
Identification

System identification is a key step for modelbased control, estimator design, and output prediction. This work considers the offline identification of partially observed nonlinear systems.
We empirically show that the certainty-equivalent
approximation to expectation-maximization can
be a reliable and scalable approach for highdimensional deterministic systems, which are
common in robotics. We formulate certaintyequivalent expectation-maximization as block
coordinate-ascent, and provide an efficient implementation. The algorithm is tested on a simulated system of coupled Lorenz attractors, demonstrating its ability to identify high-dimensional
systems that can be intractable for particle-based
approaches. Our approach is also used to identify the dynamics of an aerobatic helicopter. By
augmenting the state with unobserved fluid states,
a model is learned that predicts the acceleration
of the helicopter better than state-of-the-art approaches. The codebase for this work is available
at https://github.com/sisl/CEEM.

ut

gθ (x̂, u, t)

···

x̂t

xt+1

···

yt+1

···

gθ (x̂, u, t + 1)

fθ (x̂, u, t)

x̂t+1

···

Figure 1. A graphical model representing a partially observed dynamical system. Gray-box identification algorithms attempt to
search a model class of dynamics and observation models for the
model that maximizes the likelihood of the observations.

in Figure 1) that are high-dimensional and nonlinear. We
consider situations in which the system’s state cannot be
inferred from a single observation, but instead requires inference over time-series of observations.

*
Equal contribution 1 Stanford University, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Kunal Menda <kmenda@stanford.edu>, Jean
de Becdelièvre <jeandb@stanford.edu>, Jayesh K. Gupta
<jkg@cs.stanford.edu>.

The problem of identifying systems from partial observations arises in robotics (Punjani & Abbeel, 2015; Cory &
Tedrake, 2008; Ordonez et al., 2017) as well as domains
such as chemistry (Gustavsson, 1975) and biology (Sun
et al., 2008). In many robotic settings, we have direct measurements of a robot’s pose and velocity, but in many cases
we cannot directly observe relevant quantities such as the
temperature of actuators, the state the environment around
the robot, or the intentions of other agents. For example,
Abbeel et al. (2010) attempted to map the pose and velocity
of an aerobatic helicopter to its acceleration. They found
their model to be inaccurate when predicting aggressive
maneuvers because of the substantial airflow generated by
the helicopter that affected the dynamics. Since it is often impossible to directly measure the state of the airflow
around a vehicle, identification must be with only partial
observability.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

System identification is a mature field with a rich history (Ljung, 1999; 2010). A variety of techniques have
been proposed to learn predictive models from time-series

1. Introduction
The performance of controllers and state-estimators for
nonlinear systems depends heavily on the quality of the
model of system dynamics (Hou & Wang, 2013). Systemidentification addresses the problem of learning or calibrating dynamics models from data (Ljung, 1999), which is
often a time-history of observations of the system and control inputs. In this work, we address the problem of learning dynamics models of partially observed systems (shown

