Optimization Theory for ReLU Neural Networks
Trained with Normalization Layers
Yonatan Dukler 1 Quanquan Gu 2 Guido Montúfar 1 3 4

Abstract
The success of deep neural networks is in part
due to the use of normalization layers. Normalization layers like Batch Normalization, Layer Normalization and Weight Normalization are ubiquitous in practice, as they improve generalization
performance and speed up training significantly.
Nonetheless, the vast majority of current deep
learning theory and non-convex optimization literature focuses on the un-normalized setting, where
the functions under consideration do not exhibit
the properties of commonly normalized neural networks. In this paper, we bridge this gap by giving
the first global convergence result for two-layer
neural networks with ReLU activations trained
with a normalization layer, namely Weight Normalization. Our analysis shows how the introduction of normalization layers changes the optimization landscape and can enable faster convergence
as compared with un-normalized neural networks.

1. Introduction
Dynamic normalization in the training of neural networks
amounts to the application of an intermediate normalization procedure between layers of the network. Such methods have become ubiquitous in the training of neural nets
since in practice they significantly improve the convergence
speed and stability. This type of approach was popularized with the introduction of Batch Normalization (BN)
(Ioffe and Szegedy, 2015) which implements a dynamic
re-parametrization normalizing the first two moments of
the outputs at each layer over mini-batches. A plethora
1

Department of Mathematics, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095.
2
Department of Computer Science, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA
90095. 3 Department of Statistics, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095.
4
Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, 04103
Leipzig, Germany. Correspondence to: Yonatan Dukler <ydukler@math.ucla.edu>, Quanquan Gu <qgu@cs.ucla.edu>, Guido
Montúfar <montufar@math.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

of additional normalization methods followed BN, notably
including Layer Normalization (LN) (Ba et al., 2016) and
Weight Normalization (WN) (Salimans and Kingma, 2016).
Despite the impressive empirical results and massive popularity of dynamic normalization methods, explaining their
utility and proving that they converge when training with
non-smooth, non-convex loss functions has remained an
unsolved problem. In this paper we provide sufficient conditions on the data, initialization, and over-parametrization
for dynamically normalized ReLU networks to converge
to a global minimum of the loss function. For the theory
we present we focus on WN, which is a widely used normalization layer in training of neural networks. WN was
proposed as a method that emulates BN. It normalizes the
input weight vector of each unit and separates the scale into
an independent parameter. The WN re-parametrization is
very similar to BN (see Section 2) and benefits from similar
stability and convergence properties. Moreover, WN has the
advantage of not requiring a batch setting, therefore considerably reducing the computational overhead that is imposed
by BN (Gitman and Ginsburg, 2017).
When introducing normalization methods, the function
parametrization defined by the network becomes scale invariant in the sense that re-scaling of the weights does not
change the represented function. This re-scaling invariance changes the geometry of the optimization landscape
drastically. To better understand this we analyze weight
normalization in a given layer.
We consider the class of 2-layer ReLU neural networks
which represent functions f : Rd ! R parameterized by
(W, c) 2 Rm⇥d ⇥ Rm as
m

1 X
f (x; W, c) = p
ck (wk> x).
m

(1.1)

k=1

Here we use the ReLU activation function (s) =
max{s, 0} (Nair and Hinton, 2010), m denotes the width of
the hidden layer,
p and the output is normalized accordingly
by a factor m. We investigate gradient descent training
with WN for (1.1), which re-parametrizes the functions in

