Finite-Time Convergence in Continuous-Time Optimization

Orlando Romero 1 Mouhacine Benosman 2

Abstract

smooth Banach space X (typically a Euclidean or otherwise
finite-dimensional real vector space in nonlinear programming, but infinite-dimensional in optimal control, calculus
of variations, and trajectory optimization). Indeed, this
system has been long studied in the mathematical community due to its provable asymptotic stability (in the sense
of Lyapunov), and thus its ability for solutions x(t) to converge, as t → ∞, to a minimum of f . This idea dates back
to at least Hadamard (1908), as noted by Courant (1943),
where solving the differential equation (1) as an optimization method is referred to as the “method of gradients.” For
a modern instances of papers dealing with the GF in abstract and infinite-dimensional (or otherwise non-Euclidean)
spaces, see (Ambrosio et al., 2005), (Danieri & Savaré,
2014), and (Feehan, 2016). On the other hand, the standard
gradient descent (GD) algorithm

In this paper, we investigate a Lyapunov-like
differential inequality that allows us to establish finite-time stability of a continuous-time
state-space dynamical system represented via a
multivariate ordinary differential equation or differential inclusion. Equipped with this condition, we synthesize first and second-order (in
an optimization variable) dynamical systems that
achieve finite-time convergence to the minima of
a given sufficiently regular cost function. As a
byproduct, we show that the q-rescaled gradient
flow (q-RGF) proposed by Wibisono et al. (2016)
is indeed finite-time convergent, provided the cost
function is gradient dominated of order p ∈ (1, q).
This way, we effectively bridge a gap between the
q-RGF and the finite-time convergent normalized
gradient flow (NGF) (q = ∞) proposed by Cortés
(2006) in his seminal paper in the context of multiagent systems. We discuss strategies to discretize
our proposed flows and conclude by conducting
some numerical experiments to illustrate our results.

xk+1 = xk − η∇f (xk )

(2)

with fixed step size η > 0 (also known as learning rate
in deep learning) is likely to be older even. Its origin, or
at least its main inspiration, is often attributed to Cauchy
(1847). Clearly, the GF and GD methods are connected
since the GD (2) is nothing more than the forward-Euler
discretization of the GF (1). Likewise, the backward-Euler
discretization (also known as implicit discretization)

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been a surge of research papers
aiming to leverage ideas from dynamical systems and control theory (both in continuous and discrete time) into optimization and machine learning. As a simple example to
illustrate the connection between these fields, consider the
gradient flow (GF)

xk+1 = xk − η∇f (xk+1 ),
of the GF (1) can be readily rewritten as1


1
2
xk+1 = arg min f (x) + kx − xk k ,
2η
x∈Rn

(3)

(4)

(1)

which is simply the usual proximal point algorithm (PPA).

where ẋ(t) , dx(t)
dt , for a given convex and differentiable
cost function (or functional) f : X → R defined over a

In continuous-time optimization, an ordinary differential
equation (ODE), partial differential equation (PDE), or differential inclusion is designed to be explicitly computable
under assumed oracles of a cost function or some surrogate
of it, in such a way to lead their solutions to converge to a
minimizer or extremum of the cost function. The gradient
flow (1) naturally becomes the archetype gradient-based system. To achieve this, tools from Lyapunov stability theory
are often employed, mainly due to the rich body of work

ẋ(t) = −∇f (x(t)),

1

Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 2 Mitsubishi Electric
Research Laboratories, Cambridge, MA, USA.. Correspondence
to: Orlando Romero <oromero@seas.upenn.edu>, Mouhacine
Benosman <benosman@merl.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

1

In this paper, k.k denotes the `2 -norm.

