Latent Space Factorisation and Manipulation via Matrix Subspace Projection

Xiao Li 1 2 Chenghua Lin 2 Ruizhe Li 2 Chaozheng Wang 1 Frank Guerin 3

Abstract
We tackle the problem disentangling the latent
space of an autoencoder in order to separate labelled attribute information from other characteristic information. This then allows us to change
selected attributes while preserving other information. Our method, matrix subspace projection, is
much simpler than previous approaches to latent
space factorisation, for example not requiring multiple discriminators or a careful weighting among
their loss functions. Furthermore our new model
can be applied to autoencoders as a plugin, and
works across diverse domains such as images or
text. We demonstrate the utility of our method
for attribute manipulation in autoencoders trained
across varied domains, using both human evaluation and automated methods. The quality of
generation of our new model (e.g. reconstruction,
conditional generation) is highly competitive to a
number of strong baselines.

1. Introduction
We investigate the problem of manipulating multiple attributes of data samples. This can be applied to image data,
for example to manipulate a picture of a face to add a beard,
change gender, or age. It can also be applied to text, for example to change the style or sentiment of a text. We assume
that we have a training dataset where attributes are labelled.
However there is an unsupervised aspect because we do
not have samples of the same individual with different attribute combinations, e.g., the same person with and without
a beard. Furthermore the training samples have some attribute combinations that are highly correlated, while other
combinations are completely absent; e.g., in the CelebA
dataset blond hair and earrings are highly correlated with
female (Torfason et al., 2016), while a female with beard is
1
Department of Computing Science, University of Aberdeen,
UK 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Sheffield,
UK 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Surrey, UK.
Correspondence to: Chenghua Lin <c.lin@sheffield.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

absent. Nevertheless we would like our system to somehow
isolate the explanatory factors in pixel space, to understand,
e.g., that blond hair corresponds only to colour changes to
hair pixels, and no change elsewhere in the face.
This challenge of isolating multiple explanatory factors
poses interesting problems for generative models. In images of faces for example, even if the training data has no
bearded lady, a good generative model should be able to
‘imagine’ novel examples that combine attributes in ways
not present in training data. As noted by Higgins et al.
(2016) “Models are unable to generalise to data outside of
the convex hull of the training distribution . . . unless they
learn about the data generative factors and recombine them
in novel ways.” Ideally we should fully disentangle and
isolate the data generative factors, so that we can represent
the generative factors of a sample with a vector that has one
part labelled attribute information, and another part with
the other characteristic information of the sample. This is
in a small way part of a general trend to try to move deep
neural network research towards explanatory models of the
world (LeCun, 2013; Lake et al., 2016; Yuille & Liu, 2018),
which requires disentanglement. The problem is important
because isolating explanatory factors is a way to overcome
the combinatorial explosion of required training examples
if such factors are not isolated (Yuille & Liu, 2018).
A typical approach to the problem uses an autoencoder (AE)
which encodes a given input (e.g. picture, text, etc.) into a
latent vector, and then restores (decodes) the latent vector to
the given input (Lample et al., 2017; Hu et al., 2017; Xiao
et al., 2018; Li et al., 2019). The latent vector contains the
attribute information as well as other characteristic information of the input. If one can change the attribute information
in the latent space, then one can generate examples with the
altered attributes. The difficulty here is twofold: (1) learn
a latent space representation which separates the attributes
from all other characteristic information, and (2) fully disentangle the attributes. If we fail in the separation part,
then efforts to generate with specific attributes may conflict
with other information in the latent space (as in Kingma
et al. (2014) etc., see §2). If we fail in the second part then
examples generated with specified attributes will also be
contaminated with spurious attributes (see Fig. 1 Left).
Many recent approaches make use of auxiliary neural net-

