Robust Learning with the Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion

Daniel Greenfeld 1 Uri Shalit 1

Abstract
We investigate the use of a non-parametric independence measure, the Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC), as a loss-function for
learning robust regression and classification models. This loss-function encourages learning models where the distribution of the residuals between
the label and the model prediction is statistically
independent of the distribution of the instances
themselves. This loss-function was first proposed
by Mooij et al. (2009) in the context of learning
causal graphs. We adapt it to the task of learning for unsupervised covariate shift: learning on
a source domain without access to any instances
or labels from the unknown target domain, but
with the assumption that p(y|x) (the conditional
probability of labels given instances) remains the
same in the target domain. We show that the proposed loss is expected to give rise to models that
generalize well on a class of target domains characterised by the complexity of their description
within a reproducing kernel Hilbert space. Experiments on unsupervised covariate shift tasks
demonstrate that models learned with the proposed loss-function outperform models learned
with standard loss functions, achieving state-ofthe-art results on a challenging cell-microscopy
unsupervised covariate shift task.

1. Introduction
In recent years there has been much interest in methods
for learning robust models: models that are learned using
certain data but perform well even on data drawn from a
distribution which is different from the training distribution. This interest stems from demand for models which can
perform under conditions of transfer learning and domain
adaptation (Rosenfeld et al., 2018). This is especially rele1

Technion Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israe. Correspondence to: Daniel Greenfeld <danielgreenfeld3@gmail.com>, Uri
Shalit <urishalit@technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

vant as training sets such as labeled image collections are
often restricted to a certain setting, time or place, while the
learned models are expected to generalize to cases which are
beyond the specifics of how the training data was collected.
More specifically, we consider the following learning problem, called unsupervised covariate shift. Let (X, Y ) be a
pair of random variables such that X ∈ X and Y ∈ Y ⊂ R,
with a joint distribution Psource (X, Y ), such that X are the
instances and Y the labels. Our goal is, given a training set
drawn from Psource (X, Y ), to learn a model predicting Y
from X that works well on a different, a-priori unknown target distribution Ptarget (X, Y ). In a covariate shift scenario,
the assumption is that Ptarget (Y | X) = Psource (Y | X)
but the marginal distribution Ptarget (X) can change between
source and target. We focus on unsupervised covariate shift,
where we have no access to samples X or Y from the target
domain.
In this paper we propose using a loss function inspired by
work in the causal inference community. We consider a
model in which the relation between the instance X and its
label Y is of the form:
Y = f ? (X) + ε,

ε⊥
⊥ X,

(1)

where the variable ε denotes noise which is independent of
the distribution of the random variable X.
Given a well-specified model family and enough samples,
one can learn f ? , in which case there is no need to worry
about covariate shift. However, in many realistic cases we
cannot expect to have the true model in our model class,
nor can we expect to have enough samples to learn the true
model even if it is in our model class. While traditional
methods rely on unlabeld data from the target domain to
reason about Ptarget (X), throughout this work we do not
assume that we have any samples from a test distribution,
nor that the model is well-specified.
The basic idea presented in this paper is as follows: by Eq.
(1) we have Y −f ? (X)⊥
⊥X. Standard loss functions aim to
learn a model fˆ such that fˆ(X) ≈ Y , or such that p̂(Y |X)
is high. We follow a different approach: learning a model
fˆ such that Y − fˆ(X) is approximately independent of the
distribution of X. Specifically, we propose measuring independence using the Hilbert Schmidt Independence Criterion
(HSIC): a non-parametric method that does not assume a

