Reducing Sampling Error in Batch Temporal Difference Learning
Brahma S. Pavse 1 Ishan Durugkar 1 Josiah P. Hanna 2 3 Peter Stone 1 4

Abstract
Temporal difference (TD) learning is one of the
main foundations of modern reinforcement learning. This paper studies the use of TD(0), a canonical TD algorithm, to estimate the value function
of a given policy from a batch of data. In this
batch setting, we show that TD(0) may converge
to an inaccurate value function because the update following an action is weighted according to
the number of times that action occurred in the
batch – not the true probability of the action under
the given policy. To address this limitation, we
introduce policy sampling error corrected-TD(0)
(PSEC-TD(0)). PSEC-TD(0) first estimates the
empirical distribution of actions in each state in
the batch and then uses importance sampling to
correct for the mismatch between the empirical
weighting and the correct weighting for updates
following each action. We refine the concept of
a certainty-equivalence estimate and argue that
PSEC-TD(0) is a more data efficient estimator
than TD(0) for a fixed batch of data. Finally, we
conduct an empirical evaluation of PSEC-TD(0)
on three batch value function learning tasks, with
a hyperparameter sensitivity analysis, and show
that PSEC-TD(0) produces value function estimates with lower mean squared error than TD(0).

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) algorithms have been applied to a variety of sequential-decision
making problems such as robot manipulation (Kober et al.,
2013; Gu et al., 2016) and autonomous driving (Sallab et al.,
2017). Many RL algorithms learn an optimal control policy
by estimating the value function, a function that gives the
expected return from each state when following a particular
1
The University of Texas at Austin 2 School of Informatics,
University of Edinburgh 3 To be joining the Computer Sciences
Department, University of Wisconsin–Madison 4 Sony AI. Correspondence to: Brahma S. Pavse <brahmasp@cs.utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

policy (Puterman & Shin, 1978; Bertsekas, 1987; Konda &
Tsitsiklis, 2000). These algorithms require accurate value
function estimation with finite data. A fundamental approach to value function learning is the temporal difference
(TD) algorithm (Sutton, 1988).
In this work, we focus on improving the accuracy of the
value function learned by batch TD, where TD updates for
a value function are computed from a fixed batch of data.
We show that batch TD(0) may converge to an inaccurate
value function since it ignores the known action probabilities of the policy it is evaluating. For example, consider a
single state in which the evaluation policy selects between
action a1 or a2 with probability 0.5. If, in the finite batch
of observed data, a1 actually happens to occur twice as often as a2 then TD updates following a1 will receive twice
as much weight as updates following a2 , even though in
expectation they should receive the same weight. We describe this finite-sample error in the value function estimate
as policy sampling error. To correct for policy sampling
error we propose to first estimate the maximum likelihood
policy from the observed data and then use importance sampling (Precup et al., 2000a) to account for the mismatch
between the frequency of sampled actions and their true
probability under the evaluation policy. Variants of this technique have been successful in multi-armed bandits (Li et al.,
2015; Narita et al., 2018; Xie et al., 2018), policy evaluation
(Hanna et al., 2019), and policy gradient learning (Hanna
& Stone, 2019). However, we are the first to show that this
technique can be used to correct for policy sampling error in
value function estimation and the first to show the benefit of
importance sampling in on-policy value function estimation.
We show that by using the available policy information, our
approach is more data efficient than vanilla batch TD(0).
We call our new value function learning algorithm batch
policy sampling error corrected-TD(0) (PSEC-TD(0)).
The contributions of the paper are the following:
1. Show that the fixed point that batch TD(0) converges
to for a given policy is inaccurate with respect to the
true value function.
2. Introduce the batch PSEC-TD(0) algorithm that reduces the policy sampling error in batch TD(0).
3. Refine the concept of a certainty-equivalence estimate

