Divide and Conquer: Leveraging Intermediate Feature Representations for
Quantized Training of Neural Networks

Ahmed T. Elthakeb 1 Prannoy Pilligundla 2 Fatemehsadat Mireshghallah 2
Alexander Cloninger 3 Hadi Esmaeilzadeh 2

Abstract
The deep layers of modern neural networks extract
a rather rich set of features as an input propagates
through the network, this paper sets out to harvest
these rich intermediate representations for quantization with minimal accuracy loss while significantly
reducing the memory footprint and compute
intensity of the DNN. This paper utilizes knowledge
distillation through teacher-student paradigm (Hinton et al., 2015) in a novel setting that exploits the
feature extraction capability of DNNs for higheraccuracy quantization. As such, our algorithm
logically divides a pretrained full-precision DNN to
multiple sections, each of which exposes intermediate features to train a team of students independently
in the quantized domain. This divide and conquer
strategy, makes the training of each student section
possible in isolation, which offers additional speedup
through enabling parallelization, while all these independently trained sections are later stitched together
to form the equivalent fully quantized network.
Experiments on various DNNs (AlexNet, LeNet,
MobileNet, ResNet-18, ResNet-20, SVHN and
VGG-11) show that, this approach—called DCQ
(Divide and Conquer Quantization)—on average,
improves the performance of a state-of-the-art
quantized training technique, DoReFa-Net (Zhou
et al., 2016) by 21.6% and 9.3% for binary and
ternary quantization, respectively. Additionally, we
show that incorporating DCQ to existing quantized
training methods leads to improved accuracies
as compared to previously reported by multiple
state-of-the-art quantized training methods.
1 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of
California San Diego. 2 Department of Computer Science, University
of California San Diego. 3 Department of Mathematics, University

of California San Diego. Correspondence to: Ahmed T. Elthakeb
<elthakeb@ucsd.com>.
Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1: Overview of Divide and Conquer Quantization.

1. Introduction
Today deep learning, with its superior performance, dominates a wide range of real life inference tasks including image recognition, voice assistants, and natural language processing (Hauswald et al., 2015; Krizhevsky et al., 2012; LeCun et al.,
2015; 1989). However, the shear complexity of deep learning
models and the associated heavy compute and memory requirement appears as a major challenge as the demand for such
services rapidly scale. Quantization, which can reduce the complexity of each operation as well as the overall storage requirements of the DNN, has proven to be a promising path forward.
Nevertheless, quantization requires carefully tailored training
and recovery algorithms (Courbariaux et al., 2015; Gupta et al.,
2015; Hubara et al., 2017a; Zhou et al., 2017; 2016) to even partially overcome its losses in accuracy. In this paper, we set out to
devise an algorithm that enables quantization with much less accuracy degradation. The key insight is that the intermediate layers of a deep network already extract a very rich set of features
and these intermediate representations can be used to train/teach
a quantized network more effectively. To that end, we define a
new approach towards knowledge distillation through teacherstudent paradigm (Hinton et al., 2015; Bucila et al., 2006) focusing on teaching the knowledge of intermediate features to a corresponding quantized student. Knowledge distillation (Hinton
et al., 2015) is a generic approach to reduce a large model down
to a simpler or smaller distilled model. At a high level, a softened version of the final output is used to train a small model
(student) to mimic the behavior of the original large model

