Negative sampling in semi-supervised learning

John Chen 1 Vatsal Shah 2 Anastasios Kyrillidis 1

Abstract
We introduce Negative Sampling in SemiSupervised Learning (NS3 L), a simple, fast, easy
to tune algorithm for semi-supervised learning
(SSL). NS3 L is motivated by the success of negative sampling/contrastive estimation. We demonstrate that adding the NS3 L loss to state-of-theart SSL algorithms, such as the Virtual Adversarial Training (VAT), significantly improves upon
vanilla VAT and its variant, VAT with Entropy
Minimization. By adding the NS3 L loss to MixMatch, the current state-of-the-art approach on
semi-supervised tasks, we observe significant improvements over vanilla MixMatch. We conduct extensive experiments on the CIFAR10, CIFAR100, SVHN and STL10 benchmark datasets.
Finally, we perform an ablation study for NS3 L
regarding its hyperparameter tuning.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has been hugely successful in areas such
as image classification (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He et al.,
2016; Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016; Huang et al., 2017)
and speech recognition (Sak et al., 2014; Sercu et al., 2016),
where a large amount of labeled data is available. However,
in practice it is often prohibitively expensive to create a large,
high quality labeled dataset, due to lack of time, resources,
or other factors. For example, the ImageNet dataset—which
consists of 3.2 million labeled images in 5247 categories—
took nearly two and half years to complete with the aid
of Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (Deng et al., 2009). Some
medical tasks may require months of preparation, expensive
hardware, the collaboration of many experts, and often are
limited by the number of participants (Miotto et al., 2016).
As a result, it is desirable to exploit unlabeled data to aid
the training of deep learning models.
1
Department of Computer Science, Rice University, Houston,
Texas USA 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas USA. Correspondence
to: John Chen <johnchen@rice.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

This form of learning is semi-supervised learning (Chapelle
& Scholkopf, 2006) (SSL). Unlike supervised learning, the
aim of SSL is to leverage unlabeled data, in conjunction
with labeled data, to improve performance. SSL is typically
evaluated on labeled datasets where a certain proportion of
labels have been discarded. There have been a number of
instances in which SSL is reported to achieve performance
close to purely supervised learning (Laine & Aila, 2017;
Miyato et al., 2017; Tarvainen & Valpola, 2017; Berthelot
et al., 2019), where the purely supervised learning model is
trained on the much larger whole dataset. However, despite
significant progress in this field, it is still difficult to quantify
when unlabeled data may aid the performance except in a
handful of cases (Balcan & Blum, 2005; Ben-David et al.,
2008; Kääriäinen, 2005; Niyogi, 2013; Rigollet, 2007; Singh
et al., 2009; Wasserman & Lafferty, 2008).
In this work, we restrict our attention to SSL algorithms
which add a loss term to the neural network loss. These
algorithms are the most flexible and practical given the
difficulties in hyperparameter tuning in the entire model
training process, in addition to achieving the state-of-the-art
performance.
We introduce Negative Sampling in Semi-Supervised Learning (NS3 L): a simple, fast, easy to tune SSL algorithm, motivated by negative sampling/contrastive estimation (Mikolov
et al., 2013; Smith & Eisner, 2005). In negative sampling/contrastive estimation, in order to train a model on unlabeled data, we exploit implicit negative evidence, originating from the unlabeled samples: Using negative sampling,
we seek for good models that discriminate a supervised example from its neighborhood, comprised of unsupervised
examples, assigned with a random (and potentially wrong)
class. Stated differently, the learner learns that not only the
supervised example is good, but that the same example is
locally optimal in the space of examples, and that alternative
examples are inferior. With negative sampling/contrastive
estimation, instead of explaining and exploiting all of the
data (that is not available during training), the model implicitly must only explain why the observed, supervised
example is better than its unsupervised neighbors.
Overall, NS3 L adds a loss term to the learning objective,
and is shown to improve performance simply by doing so to
other state-of-the-art SSL objectives. Since modern datasets

