Deep Reinforcement Learning with Robust and Smooth Policy

Qianli Shen * 1 Yan Li * 2 Haoming Jiang 2 Zhaoran Wang 3 Tuo Zhao 2

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved
great empirical successes in various domains.
However, the large search space of neural networks requires a large amount of data, which
makes the current RL algorithms not sample efficient. Motivated by the fact that many environments with continuous state space have smooth
transitions, we propose to learn a smooth policy
that behaves smoothly with respect to states. We
develop a new framework — Smooth Regularized
Reinforcement Learning (SR2 L), where the policy is trained with smoothness-inducing regularization. Such regularization effectively constrains
the search space, and enforces smoothness in the
learned policy. Moreover, our proposed framework can also improve the robustness of policy
against measurement error in the state space, and
can be naturally extended to distribubutionally robust setting. We apply the proposed framework
to both on-policy (TRPO) and off-policy algorithm (DDPG). Through extensive experiments,
we demonstrate that our method achieves improved sample efficiency and robustness.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning has enjoyed great empirical
successes in various domains, including robotics, personalized recommendations, bidding, advertising and games
(Levine et al., 2018; Zheng et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2018;
Silver et al., 2017; Jin et al., 2018). At the backbone of its
success is the superior approximation power of deep neural networks, which parameterize complex policy, value or
state-action value functions, etc. However, the high complexity of deep neural networks makes the search space
of the learning algorithm prohibitively large, thus often re*
Equal contribution 1 Peking University, Beijing, China. 2
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA. 3 Northwestern
University, Evanston, USA.. Correspondence to: Tuo Zhao
<tourzhao@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

quires a significant amount of training data, and suffers from
numerous training difficulties such as overfitting and training instability (Thrun & Schwartz, 1993; Boyan & Moore,
1995; Zhang et al., 2016).
Reducing the size of the search space while maintaining the
network’s performance requires special treatment. While
one can simply switch to a network of smaller size, numerous empirical evidences have shown that small network
often leads to performance degradation and training difficulties. It is widely believed that training a sufficiently large
network (also known as over-parameterization) with suitable
regularization (e.g., dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014), orthogonality parameter constraints (Huang et al., 2018)) is the
most effective way to adaptively constrain the search space,
while maintaining the performance of a large network.
For reinforcement learning problems, entropy regularization
is one commonly adopted regularization, which is believed
to help facilitate exploration in the learning process. Yet
in the presence of high uncertainty in the environment and
large noise, such regularization might yield poor performances. More recently, Pinto et al. (2017) propose robust
adversarial reinforcement learning (RARL) that aims to
perform well under uncertainties by training the agent to
be robust against the adversarially perturbed environment.
However, in addition to the marginal performance gain, the
requirement of learning the additional adversarial policy
makes the update of RARL computationally expensive and
less sample efficient than traditional learning algorithms.
Cheng et al. (2019) on the other hand propose a control
regularization that enforces the behavior of the deep policy
to be similar to a policy prior, yet designing a good prior
often requires a significant amount of domain knowledge.
Different from previous works, we propose a new training framework – Smoothness Regularized Reinforcement
Learning (SR2 L) for training reinforcement algorithms.
Through promoting smoothness, we effectively reduce the
size of the search space when learning the policy network
and achieve state-of-the-art sample efficiency. Our goal of
promoting smoothness in the policy is motivated by the fact
that natural environments with continuous state space often
have smooth transitions from state to state, which favors
a smooth policy – similar states leading to similar actions.
As a concrete example, for MuJoCo environment (Todorov

