Sparse Sinkhorn Attention

Yi Tay 1 Dara Bahri 1 Liu Yang 1 Donald Metzler 1 Da-Cheng Juan 1

Abstract
We propose Sparse Sinkhorn Attention, a new efficient and sparse method for learning to attend.
Our method is based on differentiable sorting of
internal representations. Concretely, we introduce a meta sorting network that learns to generate latent permutations over sequences. Given
sorted sequences, we are then able to compute
quasi-global attention with only local windows,
improving the memory efficiency of the attention module. To this end, we propose new algorithmic innovations such as Causal Sinkhorn
Balancing and SortCut, a dynamic sequence truncation method for tailoring Sinkhorn Attention
for encoding and/or decoding purposes. Via extensive experiments on algorithmic seq2seq sorting, language modeling, pixel-wise image generation, document classification and natural language inference, we demonstrate that our memory
efficient Sinkhorn Attention method is competitive with vanilla attention and consistently outperforms recently proposed efficient Transformer
models such as Sparse Transformers.

1. Introduction
Learning sparse and efficient attention mechanisms has recently garnered considerable interest (Child et al., 2019;
Kitaev et al., 2020). While existing state-of-the-art attention models have typically relied on dense, fully-connected
attention graphs (Vaswani et al., 2017), these methods are
often sub-optimal for two key reasons. First, large memory costs are incurred due to the quadratic complexity at
the attention layer. Second, soft dense attention may suffer
when `, the sequence length, is large and noisy. Hence, at
times, sparse attentive outputs that are reminiscent of hard
attention methods, may serve as a desirable inductive bias
(Xu et al., 2015).
1
Google Research. Correspondence to: Yi Tay <yitay@
google.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

This paper proposes a new method for (1) reducing the memory complexity of the dot-product attention mechanism and
(2) learning sparse attention outputs. Our method is based
on a novel idea of differentiable sorting of internal representations within the self-attention module. Our method,
which we call Sparse Sinkhorn Attention, incorporates a
meta sorting network that learns to re arrange and sort input sequences. With this new sorted sequence, attention
computation is reduced substantially even when considering
computation only within the local neighborhood, emulating
a global effect even with solely local computation of context
windows.
Our method is comprised of (1) a parameterized meta sorting
network S for dynamically generating block-wise permutation matrices and (2) a standard local attention module
that receives block-wise permuted input sequences for attention computation. Concretely, at the heart of our sorting
network lives a differentiable Sinkhorn balancing mechanism (Adams & Zemel, 2011; Mena et al., 2018), which
normalizes permutation matrices to belong to the Birkhoff
polytope, the set of doubly stochastic matrices (Sinkhorn,
1964).
As such, given the block-sorted input sequences, the local attention module is able to compute attention weights
beyond the default local neighborhood without incurring additional computation costs. Extensive experimental results
across a potpourri of language, vision and arithmetic tasks
demonstrate that Sparse Sinkhorn Attention outperforms
strong baselines such as standard local attention and sparse
attention Transformers (Child et al., 2019).
Notably, our proposed method is general purpose in nature
and is applicable to sequence encoding, sequence decoding
or seq2seq tasks (Sutskever et al., 2014). In order to adapt
Sinkhorn balancing to decoding tasks, we propose a causal
variant, i.e., Causal Sinkhorn Balancing. Moreover, for
further improvement to encoding efficiency, we propose an
additional S ORT C UT variant of our proposed method, which
dynamically truncates sequences in a data-driven manner
based on a user-defined budget hyperparameter. Finally,
we propose a Mixture model between the Sparse Sinkhorn
Attention and standard vanilla attention, leading to further
performance improvements.
Our method reduces the memory complexity from O(`2 ) to

