Goal-Aware Prediction: Learning to Model What Matters

Suraj Nair 1 Silvio Savarese 1 Chelsea Finn 1

Abstract
Learned dynamics models combined with both
planning and policy learning algorithms have
shown promise in enabling artificial agents to
learn to perform many diverse tasks with limited
supervision. However, one of the fundamental
challenges in using a learned forward dynamics
model is the mismatch between the objective of
the learned model (future state reconstruction),
and that of the downstream planner or policy
(completing a specified task). This issue is exacerbated by vision-based control tasks in diverse
real-world environments, where the complexity
of the real world dwarfs model capacity. In this
paper, we propose to direct prediction towards
task relevant information, enabling the model to
be aware of the current task and encouraging it to
only model relevant quantities of the state space,
resulting in a learning objective that more closely
matches the downstream task. Further, we do so
in an entirely self-supervised manner, without the
need for a reward function or image labels. We
find that our method more effectively models the
relevant parts of the scene conditioned on the goal,
and as a result outperforms standard task-agnostic
dynamics models and model-free reinforcement
learning.

1

Introduction

Enabling artificial agents to learn from their prior experience
and generalize their knowledge to new tasks and environments remains an open and challenging problem. Unlike
humans, who have the remarkable ability to quickly generalize skills to new objects and task variations, current
methods in multi-task reinforcement learning require heavy
supervision across many tasks before they can even begin
to generalize well. One way to reduce the dependence on
1

Stanford University.
<surajn@stanford.edu>.

Correspondence to:

Suraj Nair

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

heavy supervision is to leverage data that the agent can
collect autonomously without rewards or labels, termed
self-supervision. One of the more promising directions in
learning transferable knowledge from this unlabeled data
lies in learning the dynamics of the environment, as the
physics underlying the world are often consistent across
scenes and tasks. However learned dynamics models do not
always translate to good downstream task performance, an
issue which we study and attempt to mitigate in this work.
While learning dynamics in low-dimensional state spaces
has shown promising results (McAllister and Rasmussen,
2016; Deisenroth and Rasmussen, 2011; Chua et al., 2018;
Amos et al., 2018a), scaling to high dimensional states, such
as image observations, poses numerous challenges. One key
challenge is that, in high dimensional spaces, learning a perfect model is often impossible due to limited model capacity,
and as a result downstream task-specific planners/policies
struggle from inaccurate model predictions. Specifically, a
learned planner/policy will often exploit errors in the model
that make it drastically overestimate its performance. Furthermore, depending on the nature of the downstream task,
prediction accuracy on certain states may be more important, which is not captured by the next state reconstruction
objective used to train forward dynamics models.
Our primary hypothesis is that this “objective mismatch”
between the training objective of the learned model (future state reconstruction), and the downstream planner or
policy (completing a specified task) is one of the primary
limitations in learning models of high dimensional states.
In other words, the learned model is encouraged to predict
large portions of the state which may be irrelevant to the
task at hand. Consider for example the task of picking up a
pen from a cluttered desk. The standard training objective
of the learned model would encourage it to equally weigh
modeling the pen and all objects on the table, when given
the downstream task, modeling the pen and adjacent objects
precisely is clearly the most critical.
To that end, we propose goal-aware prediction (GAP), a
framework for learning forward dynamics models that direct
their capacity differently conditioned on the task, resulting
in a model that is more accurate on trajectories most relevant
Videos/code can be found at https://sites.google.
com/stanford.edu/gap

