The Implicit and Explicit Regularization Effects of Dropout

Colin Wei 1 Sham Kakade 2 Tengyu Ma 1

Abstract
Dropout is a widely-used regularization technique,
often required to obtain state-of-the-art for a number of architectures. This work demonstrates that
dropout introduces two distinct but entangled regularization effects: an explicit effect (also studied
in prior work) which occurs since dropout modifies the expected training objective, and, perhaps
surprisingly, an additional implicit effect from the
stochasticity in the dropout training update. This
implicit regularization effect is analogous to the
effect of stochasticity in small mini-batch stochastic gradient descent. We disentangle these two
effects through controlled experiments. We then
derive analytic simplifications which characterize each effect in terms of the derivatives of the
model and the loss, for deep neural networks. We
demonstrate these simplified, analytic regularizers accurately capture the important aspects of
dropout, showing they faithfully replace dropout
in practice.

1. Introduction
Dropout is a commonly used regularization technique for
neural nets (Hinton et al., 2012; Srivastava et al., 2014). In
NLP, dropout is the norm on both small and large models, as
it is much more effective than methods such as `2 regularization (Merity et al., 2017a). In vision, dropout is often used to
train extremely large models such as EfficientNet-B7 (Tan
& Le, 2019).
At training time, dropout sets a random subset of activations
to zero, perturbing the network output with a remarkable
amount of noise. Testing is performed on the full model,
and it is somewhat mysterious that dropout works so well
despite this difference between train and test. The esoteric
nature of dropout has inspired a large body of work studying
1

2
Stanford University.
Microsoft Research & University of Washington. Correspondence to: Colin Wei <colinwei@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

its regularization effects: Wager et al. (2013); Helmbold &
Long (2015); Cavazza et al. (2017); Mianjy et al. (2018);
Mianjy & Arora (2019) study dropout for linear models,
matrix factorization, and linearized networks; Arora et al.
(2020) study deep networks with dropout only at the last
layer. These works primarily study simpler settings than
those used in practice, and, as we demonstrate, there is an
implicit regularization effect of dropout that is not adressed
by prior work.
A large body of recent work has studied implicit, or algorithmic regularization in deep learning, defined to be a
regularization effect imposed by the training algorithm, not
by the objective (see for example (Gunasekar et al., 2017;
Li et al., 2017; Gunasekar et al., 2018b; Arora et al., 2019)
and references therein). One notable example of this is in
comparing the generalization performance of SGD vs GD:
the implicit regularization effect of stochasticity in SGD has
been empirically studied in the context of small v.s. large
batch training Keskar et al. (2016), where it is observed
that noisier small-batch SGD converges to “flatter” local
minima which generalize better, whereas large-batch SGD
converges “sharper” local minima which generalize more
poorly. The starting point of this work is observing that
in practice, dropout also introduces an implicit source of
regularization because it adds noise to the gradient updates
(somewhat analogous to the small v.s. large batch training).
Prior studies of dropout only analyze its explicit regularization effect, focusing on how it modifies the expected
loss.1 Understanding dropout in practical settings requires
studying both regularization effects.
This paper focuses on a sharp characterization of the regularization effects in dropout, where we:
• disentangle and analytically characterize the explicit
and implicit regularization effects of dropout.
• derive simplified, analytical, and interpretable regularizers which completely replace dropout for language
modeling tasks.
1
Prior work (Mianjy et al., 2018) refers to this as the “implicit
bias” of dropout. We refer to this as explicit regularization and
reserve the term “implicit” to mean algorithmic regularization
effect which does not change the objective.

