Maximum-and-Concatenation Networks
Xingyu Xie 1 Hao Kong 1 Jianlong Wu 2 Wayne Zhang 3 Guangcan Liu 4 Zhouchen Lin 1

Abstract

number of training samples; namely,

While successful in many fields, deep neural networks (DNNs) still suffer from some open problems such as bad local minima and unsatisfactory
generalization performance. In this work, we propose a novel architecture called Maximum-andConcatenation Networks (MCN) to try eliminating bad local minima and improving generalization ability as well. Remarkably, we prove that
MCN has a very nice property; that is, every local
minimum of an (l + 1)-layer MCN can be better
than, at least as good as, the global minima of
the network consisting of its first l layers. In other
words, by increasing the network depth, MCN can
autonomously improve its local minima’s goodness, what is more, it is easy to plug MCN into an
existing deep model to make it also have this property. Finally, under mild conditions, we show that
MCN can approximate certain continuous functions arbitrarily well with high efficiency; that is,
the covering number of MCN is much smaller
than most existing DNNs such as deep ReLU.
Based on this, we further provide a tight generalization bound to guarantee the inference ability of
MCN when dealing with testing samples.

min L(θ) :=

n

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been showing superior performance in various fields such as computer vision,
speech recognition, natural language processing, and so on.
At the first glance, DNN learning is not an enigmatic technique, as its basic idea is quite simple and mostly about
learning a possibly over-parameterized DNN from a huge
1
Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MoE), School of EECS,
Peking University 2 School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University 3 SenseTime Research 4 B-DAT and CICAEET, School of Automation, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Correspondence to: Guangcan Liu
<gcliu@nuist.edu.cn>, Zhouchen Lin <zlin@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

θ

1X
`(fθ (xi ), yi ),
n i=1

(1)

where xi ∈ Rdx and yi ∈ Rdy denote an input and a target,
respectively, fθ (·) standards for a DNN with parameters θ,
and `(·) is some loss function. Notice that, some kind of
regularization schema has already been implanted into the
network to constrain the parameter space, though there is no
explicit regularizer imposed on θ (Arora et al., 2019a). Despite its ordinary appearance, DNN learning is meanwhile
quite complicated in many ways, and the current DNNs still
suffer from several weaknesses, e.g., the training procedure
may easily get stuck in bad local minima (i.e., the local minima with large training error), the learnt model may be prone
to over-fit the training data (i.e., the testing error is large
when small training error is obtained), etc. Overcoming
these difficulties are crucial for DNNs to solve the realworld problems that are more challenging and significant,
but they are still open problems.
To address the issue of bad local minima, many heuristic techniques have been proposed, e.g., batch normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015), group normalization (Wu &
He, 2018), dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014), etc. These techniques would be useful under certain context, but may not be
generally helpful and, even worse, it is hard to know when
and which method should be used. In fact, the elimination of
bad local minima, i.e., having small empirical training error
at all local minima, is really important for DNN learning.
Some recent theories (Zhang et al., 2017; Wei & Ma, 2019;
Cao & Gu, 2019; Li & Liang, 2018; Allen-Zhu et al., 2018;
Arora et al., 2019c) have revealed that, whenever the local minima produces only small training error, DNNs have
probably good generalization performance at these local
minima. That is to say, in some cases, good local minima
mean good predictors which are the ultimate goal of supervised learning. With the hope of pursuing the property of
no bad local minima, some learning theories (Kawaguchi,
2016; Arora et al., 2018; Hardt & Ma, 2016; Liang et al.,
2018a;b) have been established to prove that, under certain
conditions, any local minima of a certain DNN are also
global minima. While impressive, existing studies are still
unsatisfactory in some aspects:
• Most existing theories about “all local minima are

