On a Projective Ensemble Approach
to Two Sample Test for Equality of Distributions

Zhimei Li 1 Yaowu Zhang 1

Abstract
In this work, we propose a robust test for the multivariate two-sample problem through projective
ensemble, which is a generalization of the Cramérvon Mises statistic. The proposed test statistic has
a simple closed-form expression without any tuning parameters involved, it is easy to implement
and can be computed in quadratic time. Moreover, our test is insensitive to the dimension and
consistent against all fixed alternatives, it does
not require the moment assumption and is robust
to the presence of outliers. We study the asymptotic behaviors of the test statistic under the null
and two kinds of alternative hypotheses. We also
suggest a permutation procedure to approximate
critical values and establish its consistency. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of our test through
extensive simulation studies and a real data application.

1. Introduction
We study the problem of testing for homogeneity of two
random samples, i.e., testing whether two samples come
from the same population, which is one of the most fundamental problems in statistics and has applications in
a wide range of areas (see, e.g., Lehmann & Romano,
T
2006). Specifically, suppose x = (X1 , . . . , Xp ) ∈ Rp and
T
p
y = (Y1 , . . . , Yp ) ∈ R are two p-dimensional random
vectors whose distribution functions are F and G, respectively. {xi , i = 1, . . . , m} and {yi , i = 1, . . . , n} are two
mutually independent random samples drawn from F and
G, with sample size m and n, respectively. The problem of
testing for whether x and y are homogeneous amounts to
1
Research Institute for Interdisciplinary Sciences, School of
Information Management and Engineering, Shanghai University
of Finance and Economics, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to:
Yaowu Zhang <zhang.yaowu@mail.shufe.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

testing for the equality of two distributions, i.e.,
H0 : F = G

versus

H1 : F 6= G.

In the past decades, the problem of distribution testing has
received much attention in the literature. Under the normality assumption, it suffices to compare the differences
in mean vectors, or covariance matrices, or both. For example, the Student’s t test and Hotelling’s T 2 test are the
most well-known tests in this circumstance. Other examples
include Bai & Saranadasa (1996); Li & Chen (2012); Cai
et al. (2014); Cai & Liu (2016), etc. However, it is commonly known that the first two moments are not sufficient to
characterize the distribution and these kinds of methods may
be inconsistent when the normality assumption violates.
To overcome this issue, several nonparametric approaches have been developed in the literature. It is natural to
use a measure of difference between Fm and Gn as the
test statistic, where Fm and Gn are the empirical distribution functions of F and G, respectively. For example, the
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test statistic (Smirnov, 1939) is given
p
by nm/(n + m) supt∈R |Fm (t) − Gn (t)|, Cramér-von
Mises (CvM) test statistic (Anderson, 1962) and AndersonDarling statistic (Darling, 1957) can both be written in the
following formula,
Z ∞
mn
2
{Fm (t) − Gn (t)} ω {Hm+n (t)} dHm,n (t),
m + n −∞
with different choices of the weight function ω(·), where
Hm+n is the pooled empirical distribution function. Although these methods have several advantages when p = 1,
i.e., consistent against any fixed alternatives, distribution
free under the null, no moment conditions are required, and
free of tuning parameters, it may be difficult to generalize
them to multivariate cases (Kim et al., 2020). For example, Darling (1957) generalized the Kolmogorov-Smirnov
test by directly using the multivariate empirical distribution
function, which suffers from significant power loss when
p increases. In the multivariate case, i.e., p ≥ 2, there
is a number of literature about two-sample testing procedures. We roughly classify them into two classes. The first
category is graph-based tests. For example, Friedman &
Rafsky (1979) constructed k minimum spanning tree graphs

