Towards Adaptive Residual Network Training: A Neural-ODE Perspective

Chengyu Dong 1 Liyuan Liu 2 Zichao Li 1 Jingbo Shang 1

Abstract
In pursuit of resource-economical machine learning, attempts have been made to dynamically adjust computation workloads in different training
stages, i.e., starting with a shallow network and
gradually increasing the model depth (and computation workloads) during training. However, there
is neither guarantee nor guidance on designing
such network grow, due to the lack of its theoretical underpinnings. In this work, to explore the
theory behind, we conduct theoretical analyses
from an ordinary differential equation perspective.
Specifically, we illustrate the dynamics of network
growth and propose a novel performance measure
specific to the depth increase. Illuminated by our
analyses, we move towards theoretically sound
growing operations and schedulers, giving rise
to an adaptive training algorithm for residual networks, LipGrow, which automatically increases
network depth thus accelerates training. In our
experiments, it achieves comparable performance
while reducing ∼ 50% of training time.

1. Introduction
Residual networks have been advancing the state of the art
with deeper and deeper models (He et al., 2016a;b; Devlin
et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2020). The increasingly heavy training cost is impeding efficient iterations in both research and
industrial applications, thus ensuing as a major challenge.
To accelerate the training, various strategies have been proposed (Chen et al., 2015; Huang et al., 2016; Chang et al.,
2017; Istrate et al., 2018) but mostly are heuristic.
In this paper, we present adaptive residual network training, which starts from optimizing a shallow network, and
gradually increases the depth as the training proceeds. The
network growing scheme in a residual architecture setting
1

University of California, San Diego 2 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Correspondence to: Jingbo Shang
<jshang@eng.ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

is not new (Chang et al., 2017; Wen et al., 2019), but the
dynamics of growing is poorly understood. In particular, the
following questions, of our major interests but not exhaustively enumerated, remain unclear: (1) Why the functions in
a shallow network can be successfully inherited by a deeper
network? In other words, why the network growing can be
feasible in the first place? (2) How the increasing depth and
continual optimization simultaneously affect the growing
performance? (3) What consequences will different transformations of the network make? (4) When is an appropriate
timing to grow the network?
In this work, we conduct theoretical analyses to explore
the dynamics of network grow, and make a step forward to
clarify these intriguing questions. Specifically, we view a
network with N residual blocks as an ordinary differential
equation (ODE) solver with N time steps. Inspired by the
global truncation error and embedded error introduced in
classic ODE theory (Ascher & Petzold, 1998), we align a
finite and discrete residual network with the optimal ODE
solution, and with a deeper network respectively, in order
to bound the growing performance both globally and locally. Analyses of the bounds shed insights on the design of
effective growing operator and scheduler.
In light of our analysis, we propose LipGrow, an adaptive
training algorithm for residual networks. After each epoch,
it calculates the Lipschitz constant of the residual blocks
and then decides whether it is the right timing to increase the
depth. Such process is completely automated and requires
no excessive and meticulous parameter tuning. In our experiments on the CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and Tiny-ImageNet,
LipGrow1 reduces ∼ 50% of training time, while achieving
competitive or even better accuracy.
In summary, our major contributions are:
• We conduct theoretical analyses on the dynamics of network growing, describe a novel performance measure,
and clarify the reason that such growing can be feasible.
• We propose an effective adaptive training algorithm for
residual networks, LipGrow, in light of our analyses;
• We empirically verified that LipGrow leads to about 50%
training time reduction while retaining the competitive or
even better performance.
1

https://github.com/shwinshaker/LipGrow

