Do GANs always have Nash equilibria?

Farzan Farnia 1 Asuman Ozdaglar 1

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) represent a zero-sum game between two machine players, a generator and a discriminator, designed to
learn the distribution of data. While GANs have
achieved state-of-the-art performance in several
benchmark learning tasks, GAN minimax optimization still poses great theoretical and empirical challenges. GANs trained using first-order
optimization methods commonly fail to converge
to a stable solution where the players cannot improve their objective, i.e., the Nash equilibrium of
the underlying game. Such issues raise the question of the existence of Nash equilibria in GAN
zero-sum games. In this work, we show through
theoretical and numerical results that indeed GAN
zero-sum games may have no Nash equilibria. To
characterize an equilibrium notion applicable to
GANs, we consider the equilibrium of a new zerosum game with an objective function given by a
proximal operator applied to the original objective, a solution we call the proximal equilibrium.
Unlike the Nash equilibrium, the proximal equilibrium captures the sequential nature of GANs,
in which the generator moves first followed by
the discriminator. We prove that the optimal generative model in Wasserstein GAN problems provides a proximal equilibrium. Inspired by these
results, we propose a new approach, which we call
proximal training, for solving GAN problems. We
perform several numerical experiments indicating
the existence of proximal equilibria in GANs.

1. Introduction
Since their introduction in (Goodfellow et al., 2014), generative adversarial networks (GANs) have gained great success
1
Laboratory for Information & Decision Systems, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Farzan Farnia <farnia@mit.edu>, Asuman Ozdaglar
<asuman@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

in many tasks of learning the distribution of observed samples. Unlike the traditional approaches to distribution learning, GANs view the learning problem as a zero-sum game
between the following two players: 1) generator G aiming
to generate real-like samples from a random noise input, 2)
discriminator D trying to distinguish G’s generated samples
from real training data. This game is commonly formulated
through a minimax optimization problem as follows:
min max V (G, D).

G∈G D∈D

(1)

Here, G and D are respectively the generator and discriminator function spaces, commonly chosen as two deep neural
nets, and V (G, D) denotes the minimax objective for generator G and discriminator D capturing how dissimilar G’s
produced samples and real training data are.
GAN optimization problems are commonly solved by alternating gradient methods, which under proper regularization
have resulted in state-of-the-art generative models for various benchmark datasets (Goodfellow, 2016). However,
GAN minimax optimization has introduced several theoretical and empirical challenges to the machine learning community. Training GANs is widely known as a challenging
optimization task requiring an exhaustive hyper-parameter
and architecture search and demonstrating an unstable behavior. While a few regularization schemes have led to
empirical success in training GANs (Salimans et al., 2016;
Arjovsky et al., 2017; Gulrajani et al., 2017; Miyato et al.,
2018), still little is known about the conditions under which
GAN minimax optimization can be successfully solved by
first-order optimization methods.
To better understand the minimax optimization in GANs,
one needs to first answer the following question: What is
the proper notion of equilibrium in GAN zero-sum games?
In other words, what should be the optimality criteria in
the GAN’s minimax optimization problem? A classical
notion of equilibrium in the game theory literature is the
Nash equilibrium, a state in which no player can improve its
individual gain by choosing a different strategy. According
to this definition, a Nash equilibrium (G∗ , D∗ ) for the GAN
minimax problem (1) must satisfy the following for every
G ∈ G and D ∈ D:
V (G∗ , D) ≤ V (G∗ , D∗ ) ≤ V (G, D∗ ).

(2)

