Bayesian Sparsiﬁcation of Deep C-valued Networks

Ivan Nazarov 1 Evgeny Burnaev 1

Abstract
With continual miniaturization ever more applications of deep learning can be found in embedded
systems, where it is common to encounter data
with natural representation in the complex domain.
To this end we extend Sparse Variational Dropout
to complex-valued neural networks and verify
the proposed Bayesian technique by conducting a large numerical study of the performancecompression trade-off of C-valued networks on
two tasks: image recognition on MNIST-like and
CIFAR10 datasets and music transcription on MusicNet. We replicate the state-of-the-art result by
Trabelsi et al. (2018) on MusicNet with a complexvalued network compressed by 50 − 100× at a
small performance penalty.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are an integral part of machine learning and data science toolset for practical data-driven problem solving. With continual miniaturization ever more applications can be found in embedded systems. Common
embedded applications include on-device image recognition
and signal processing. Despite recent advances in generalization and optimization theory speciﬁc to deep networks,
deploying in actual embedded hardware remains a challenge due to storage, real-time throughput, and arithmetic
complexity restrictions (Han et al., 2015). Therefore, compression methods for achieving high model sparsity and
numerical efﬁciency without losing much in performance
are especially relevant.
Complex-valued nature of the data in acoustic and radio signal processing has been the main driver behind the adoption
of C-valued neural networks (CVNN). Hirose (2009) argues that the combined phase-magnitude effect of C-valued
transformations removes the excess degrees of freedom,
1

Centre for Data Intensive Sciecne and Engineering, Skolkovo
Insitiute of Science and Technology, Msocow, Russia . Correspondence to: Ivan Nazarov <ivan.nazarov@skolkovotech.ru>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

that cause degenerate transformations in R-valued networks
with twice the feature dimensions. Their study demonstrates superiority of CVNN in landmine detection using
ground penetrating radar imaging. Other examples, where
C-valued networks have outperformed R-valued networks,
include magnetic resonance (Hui and Smith, 1995; Wang
et al., 2020) and radar imaging (Haensch and Hellwich,
2010; Zhang et al., 2017), music transcription and spectral speech modelling (Trabelsi et al., 2018; Wisdom et al.,
2016), and wireless signal classiﬁcation (Yang et al., 2020).
Tarver et al. (2019) have lowered the out-of-band power
leakage with a C-valued network for digital signal predistortion. The networks have also been applied to non-Cvalued domains, such as image classiﬁcation (Popa, 2017),
sequence modelling (Danihelka et al., 2016), and motion
prediction (Wolter and Yao, 2018), and for stabilizing backpropagation in RNN (Wisdom et al., 2016).
Despite promising results for embedded signal processing
applications, C-valued networks remain a niche in deep
learning, and as such little attention has been paid to compression methods speciﬁc to CVNN. Yet there is an abundance of research related to real-valued network compression, and many results can be applied to CVNN. Methods such as knowledge distillation (Hinton et al., 2015),
which trains a small network to replicate a large well-trained
teacher, low-rank matrix (Denton et al., 2014) and tensor
decomposition (Novikov et al., 2015), or magnitude-based
parameter pruning (Zhu and Gupta, 2018) can be adapted
to CVNN without modiﬁcations. Parameter quantization
and conversion from ﬂoating to ﬁxed point arithmetic (Courbariaux et al., 2015; Uhlich et al., 2020), appear to be readily
applicable as well. For example, Wu et al. (2019) adapt kmeans quantization to C ≃ R2 parameters and successfully
compress CVNN with the “prune-quantize-code” procedure
of Han et al. (2016).
Other methods cannot be translated to CVNN this straightforwardly. Probabilistic ℓ0 regularization of Louizos et al.
(2018) prune networks using multiplicative [0, 1]-valued
stochastic masks with distributions having an atom at 0, yet
differentiable via the reparameterization trick (Kingma and
Welling, 2014). By sharing a single mask value within a
group of parameters their approach can be adapted to C
parameters. However, methods such as Hessian-based parameter pruning (LeCun et al., 1990) or Sparse Variational

