Adaptive Estimator Selection for Off-Policy Evaluation
Yi Su 1 Pavithra Srinath 2 Akshay Krishnamurthy 2

Abstract
We develop a generic data-driven method for estimator selection in off-policy policy evaluation
settings. We establish a strong performance guarantee for the method, showing that it is competitive with the oracle estimator, up to a constant
factor. Via in-depth case studies in contextual bandits and reinforcement learning, we demonstrate
the generality and applicability of the method. We
also perform comprehensive experiments, demonstrating the empirical efficacy of our approach
and comparing with related approaches. In both
case studies, our method compares favorably with
existing methods.

1. Introduction
In practical scenarios where safety, reliability, or performance is a concern, it is typically infeasible to directly
deploy a reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm, as it may
compromise these desiderata. This motivates research on
off-policy evaluation, where we use data collected by a (presumably safe) logging policy to estimate the performance of
a given target policy, without ever deploying it. These methods help determine if a policy is suitable for deployment at
minimal cost and, in addition, serve as the statistical foundations of sample-efficient policy optimization algorithms. In
light of the fundamental role off-policy evaluation plays in
RL, it has been the subject of intense research over the last
several decades (Horvitz & Thompson, 1952; Dudı́k et al.,
2014; Swaminathan et al., 2017; Kallus & Zhou, 2018; Sutton, 1988; Bradtke & Barto, 1996; Precup et al., 2000; Jiang
& Li, 2016; Thomas & Brunskill, 2016; Farajtabar et al.,
2018; Liu et al., 2018; Voloshin et al., 2019).
As many off-policy estimators have been developed, practitioners face a new challenge of choosing the best estimator
for their application. This selection problem is critical to
1

Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 2 Microsoft Research, New
York, NY. Correspondence to: Akshay Krishnamurthy <akshaykr@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

high quality estimation as has been demonstrated in recent
empirical studies (Voloshin et al., 2019). However, datadriven estimator selection in these settings is fundamentally
different from hyperparameter optimization or model selection for supervised learning. In particular, cross validation
or bound minimization approaches fail because there is no
unbiased and low variance approach to compare estimators.
As such, the current best practice for estimator selection is
to leverage domain expertise or follow guidelines from the
literature (Voloshin et al., 2019).
Domain knowledge can suggest a particular form of estimator, but a second selection problem arises, as many estimators themselves have hyperparameters that must be tuned. In
most cases, these hyperparameters modulate a bias-variance
tradeoff, where at one extreme the estimator is unbiased but
has high variance, and at the other extreme the estimator has
low variance but potentially high bias. Hyperparameter selection is critical to performance, but high-level prescriptive
guidelines are less informative for these low-level selection
problems. We seek a data-driven approach.
In this paper, we study the estimator-selection question for
off-policy evaluation. We provide a general technique, that
we call S LOPE, that applies to a broad family of estimators,
across several distinct problem settings. On the theoretical
side, we prove that the selection procedure is competitive
with oracle tuning, establishing an oracle inequality. To
demonstrate the generality of our approach, we study two
applications in detail: (1) bandwidth selection in contextual
bandits with continuous actions, and (2) horizon selection
for “partial importance weighting estimators” in RL. In
both examples, we prove that our theoretical results apply, and we provide a comprehensive empirical evaluation.
In the contextual bandits application, our selection procedure is competitive with the skyline oracle tuning (which
is unimplementable in practice) and outperforms any fixed
parameter in aggregate across experimental conditions. In
the RL application, our approach substantially outperforms
standard baselines including M AGIC (Thomas & Brunskill,
2016), the only comparable estimator selection method.
A representative experimental result for the RL setting is displayed in Figure 1. Here we consider two different domains
from Voloshin et al. (2019) and compare our new estimator,
S LOPE, with well-known baselines. Our method selects

