BINOCULARS for Efficient, Nonmyopic Sequential Experimental Design

Shali Jiang * 1 Henry Chai * 1 Javier González 2 Roman Garnett 1

Abstract
Finite-horizon sequential experimental design
(SED) arises naturally in many contexts, including hyperparameter tuning in machine learning
among more traditional settings. Computing the
optimal policy for such problems requires solving Bellman equations, which are generally intractable. Most existing work resorts to severely
myopic approximations by limiting the decision
horizon to only a single time-step, which can
underweight exploration in favor of exploitation. We present BINOCULARS: Batch-Informed
NO nmyopic C hoices, U sing L ong-horizons for
A daptive, R apid SED, a general framework for deriving efficient, nonmyopic approximations to the
optimal experimental policy. Our key idea is simple and surprisingly effective: we first compute a
one-step optimal batch of experiments, then select
a single point from this batch to evaluate. We realize BINOCULARS for Bayesian optimization and
Bayesian quadrature – two notable SED problems
with radically different objectives – and demonstrate that BINOCULARS significantly outperforms
myopic alternatives in real-world scenarios.

1. Introduction
Many real-world problems can be framed as finite-horizon
sequential experimental design (SED), wherein an agent
adaptively designs a prespecified number of experiments
seeking to maximize some data-dependent utility function.
The optimal policy for SED can be formulated as dynamic
programming (DP), which balances the inherent tradeoff
between exploitation (immediately advancing the goal) and
exploration (learning for the future). However, this optimal policy is intractable even for simple problems (Powell,
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Washington University in Saint Louis, Saint Louis,
Missouri, USA 2 Microsoft Research Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
Correspondence to: Shali Jiang <jiang.s@wustl.edu>, Henry Chai
<hchai@wustl.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

2010). Common approximation schemes include rollout,
Monte Carlo tree search (Bertsekas, 2017; Powell, 2010), or
simply artificially limiting the horizon, known as a myopic
approximation.
In this work, we propose a novel method for efficient and
nonmyopic SED, called BINOCULARS: Batch-Informed
NO nmyopic C hoices, U sing L ong-horizons for A daptive,
R apid SED . BINOCULARS is inspired by the fact that the
optimal batch (or non-adaptive) design is an approximation
to the optimal sequential (or adaptive) design. In fact, the
optimal adaptive and non-adaptive designs are exactly the
same in some notable cases where the data utility does not
depend on the observed outcomes, such as maximizing information gain for a fixed Gaussian process (GP) (Krause
and Guestrin, 2007). Even when this is not the case, we
show that the optimal batch expected utility is a lower bound
of the optimal sequential expected utility. Furthermore, it is
always as tight as the one-step optimal policy’s implied expected utility. Motivated by this insight, BINOCULARS iteratively computes an optimal batch of designs, then chooses
one point from this batch. While many existing methods
construct batch policies by simulating a sequential policy
(Ginsbourger et al., 2010; Desautels et al., 2014; Jiang et al.,
2018), BINOCULARS goes the other way and “reduces” sequential design to batch design.
BINOCULARS is a general framework applicable to any SED
problem. In this paper, we realize this framework on two
important yet fundamentally different SED tasks: Bayesian
optimization (BO) (Kushner, 1964; Močkus, 1974; Shahriari
et al., 2016) and Bayesian quadrature (BQ) (Larkin, 1972;
Diaconis, 1988; O’Hagan, 1991). In BO, an agent repeatedly
queries an expensive function seeking its global optimum,
whereas in BQ the goal is to estimate an intractable integral
of the function.

For both problems, many popular policies are myopic: examples include expected improvement (EI) for BO (Močkus,
1974) and uncertainty sampling (UNCT) for BQ (Gunter
et al., 2014). These are all one-step optimal for maximizing particular utility functions in expectation. While they
are computationally efficient and give reasonable empirical results, they are liable to suffer from myopia and overexploitation. Nonmyopic alternatives have recently been
applied to BO (González et al., 2016b; Lam et al., 2016; Yue

