Is There a Trade-Off Between Fairness and Accuracy?
A Perspective Using Mismatched Hypothesis Testing

Sanghamitra Dutta 1 2 Dennis Wei 1 Hazar Yueksel 1 Pin-Yu Chen 1 Sijia Liu 1 Kush R. Varshney 1

Abstract
A trade-off between accuracy and fairness is almost taken as a given in the existing literature
on fairness in machine learning. Yet, it is not
preordained that accuracy should decrease with
increased fairness. Novel to this work, we examine fair classification through the lens of mismatched hypothesis testing: trying to find a classifier that distinguishes between two ideal distributions when given two mismatched distributions that are biased. Using Chernoff information, a tool in information theory, we theoretically demonstrate that, contrary to popular belief,
there always exist ideal distributions such that optimal fairness and accuracy (with respect to the
ideal distributions) are achieved simultaneously:
there is no trade-off. Moreover, the same classifier yields the lack of a trade-off with respect
to ideal distributions while yielding a trade-off
when accuracy is measured with respect to the
given (possibly biased) dataset. To complement
our main result, we formulate an optimization
to find ideal distributions and derive fundamental limits to explain why a trade-off exists on the
given biased dataset. We also derive conditions
under which active data collection can alleviate
the fairness-accuracy trade-off in the real world.
Our results lead us to contend that it is problematic to measure accuracy with respect to data that
reflects bias, and instead, we should be considering accuracy with respect to ideal, unbiased data.

1. Introduction
This work addresses a fundamental question in the field
of algorithmic fairness (Calmon et al., 2017; Dwork et al.,
1

IBM Research 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Sanghamitra Dutta <sanghamd@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

2012; Agarwal et al., 2018; Hardt et al., 2016; Ghassami
et al., 2018; Kusner et al., 2017; Kilbertus et al., 2017;
Zemel et al., 2013):
Is there a trade-off between fairness and accuracy?
The existence of this trade-off has been pointed out in several existing works (Menon & Williamson, 2018; Chen et al.,
2018; Zhao & Gordon, 2019) that also propose different
theoretical approaches to characterize it. Yet, it is not preordained as to why such a trade-off should exist between fairness and accuracy. For instance, Friedler et al. (2016) and
Yeom & Tschantz (2018) suggest that the observed features
in a machine learning model (e.g., test scores) are a possibly
noisy mapping from features in an abstract construct space
(e.g., true ability) where there is no such trade-off. Then,
why does correcting for biases worsen predictive accuracy
in the real world? We believe there is value in stepping back
and reposing the fundamental question.
In this work, our main assertion is that the trade-off between accuracy and fairness (in particular, equal opportunity (Hardt et al., 2016)) in the real world is due to noisier
(and hence biased) mappings for the unprivileged group due
to historic differences in opportunity, representation, etc.,
making their positive and negative labels “less separable.”
To concretize this idea, we adopt a novel viewpoint on fair
classification: the perspective of mismatched hypothesis
testing. In mismatched hypothesis testing, the goal is to find
a classifier that distinguishes between two “ideal” distributions, but instead, one only has access to two mismatched
distributions that are biased. Our most important result is to
theoretically show that for a fair classifier with sub-optimal
accuracy on the given biased data distributions, there always
exist ideal distributions such that fairness and accuracy are
in accord when accuracy is measured with respect to the
ideal distributions. Through this perspective, there is no
trade-off between fairness and accuracy.
Our contributions in this work are as follows:
Concept of separability to quantify accuracy-fairness tradeoff in the real world: For a group of people in an observed dataset, we quantify the “separability” into positive
and negative class labels using Chernoff information, an
information-theoretic approximation to the best exponent of

