Minimax-Optimal Off-Policy Evaluation with Linear Function Approximation
Yaqi Duan 1 Zeyu Jia 2 Mengdi Wang 3 4

Abstract

value) to be earned by a new policy based on logged history.

This paper studies the statistical theory of offpolicy policy evaluation with function approximation in batch data reinforcement learning problem.
We consider a regression-based fitted Q iteration
method, and show that it is equivalent to a modelbased method that estimates a conditional mean
embedding of the transition operator. We prove
that this method is information-theoretically optimal and has nearly minimal estimation error. In
particular, by leveraging contraction property of
Markov processes and martingale concentration,
we establish a finite-sample instance-dependent
error upper bound and a nearly-matching minimax lower bound. The policy evaluation error
depends sharply on a restricted 2 -divergence
over the function class between the long-term distribution of target policy and the distribution of
past data. This restricted 2 -divergence characterizes the statistical limit of off-policy evaluation,
and is both instance-dependent and function-classdependent. Further, we provide an easily computable confidence bound for the policy evaluator,
which may be useful for optimistic planning and
safe policy improvement.

In this paper, we study the off-policy evaluation using linear
function approximation. We assume that the Q-functions of
interests belong to a known function class Q with d basis
functions. We adopt a direct regression-based approach and
investigate the basic fitted Q iteration (FQI) (Bertsekas et al.,
1995; Sutton & Barto, 2018). It works by iteratively estimating Q-functions via supervised learning using the batch
data. This approach turns out to be equivalent to the modelbased plug-in estimator where one estimates the conditional
mean embedding of the unknown transition model and uses
it to compute a plug-in value estimator. It is also related to
variants of importance sampling methods (see discussions
in Sections 1.1 and 3.3).

1. Introduction
Batch data reinforcement learning (RL) is common in
decision-making applications where rich experiences are
available but new experiments are costly. A first-order question is how much one can learn from existing experiences to
predict and improve the performance of new policies. This
is known as the off-policy policy evaluation (OPE) problem,
where one needs to estimate the cumulative rewards (aka
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Operations Research and
Financial Engineering, Princeton University, NJ, USA 2 School of
Mathematics, Peking University, Beijing, China 3 Department of
Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton University, NJ, USA 4 DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to:
Mengdi Wang <mengdiw@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

We provide a finite-sample error upper bound for this
policy evaluator, as well as a nearly matching minimaxoptimal lower bound. Putting them together, we see that
the regression-based policy evaluator is nearly statistically
optimal. For RL with horizon H, the minimax-optimal OPE
error takes the form
s
p
1 + 2Q (µ⇡ , µ̄)
|b
v⇡ v⇡ | ⇣ H 2
+ o(1/ N ),
N
where µ⇡ is some long-term state-action occupancy measure
of the target policy ⇡ and µ is the data distribution, 2Q is a
variant of 2 -divergence restricted to the family Q:
Ep1 [f (x)]2
2
Q (p1 , p2 ) := sup
2
f 2Q Ep2 [f (x) ]

1.

The term 2Q (µ⇡ , µ) captures the distributional mismatch,
between the behavior policy and the target policy, that is
relevant to the function class Q. It determines the theoretical
limits of OPE within this function class. In the tabular
case, it relates to the worst-case density ratio, which often
shows up in importance sampling methods. However, when
we use function approximation, this 2Q divergence term
can be significantly smaller than the worst-case density
ratio. In particular, our analysis shows that 2Q (µ⇡ , µ̄) is the
condition number of a finite matrix, which can be reliably
estimated. This result suggests that OPE could be more
data-efficient with appropriate function approximation.
A summary of technical results of this paper:

