The Tree Ensemble Layer: Differentiability meets Conditional Computation

Hussein Hazimeh 1 Natalia Ponomareva 2 Petros Mol 2 Zhenyu Tan 3 Rahul Mazumder 1

Abstract
Neural networks and tree ensembles are state-ofthe-art learners, each with its unique statistical
and computational advantages. We aim to combine these advantages by introducing a new layer
for neural networks, composed of an ensemble
of differentiable decision trees (a.k.a. soft trees).
While differentiable trees demonstrate promising
results in the literature, they are typically slow in
training and inference as they do not support conditional computation. We mitigate this issue by
introducing a new sparse activation function for
sample routing, and implement true conditional
computation by developing specialized forward
and backward propagation algorithms that exploit
sparsity. Our efﬁcient algorithms pave the way
for jointly training over deep and wide tree ensembles using ﬁrst-order methods (e.g., SGD).
Experiments on 23 classiﬁcation datasets indicate
over 10x speed-ups compared to the differentiable
trees used in the literature and over 20x reduction
in the number of parameters compared to gradient boosted trees, while maintaining competitive
performance. Moreover, experiments on CIFAR,
MNIST, and Fashion MNIST indicate that replacing dense layers in CNNs with our tree layer reduces the test loss by 7-53% and the number of
parameters by 8x. We provide an open-source
TensorFlow implementation with a Keras API.

1. Introduction
Decision tree ensembles have proven very successful in various machine learning applications. Indeed, they are often
referred to as the best “off-the-shelf” learners (Hastie et al.,
2009), as they exhibit several appealing properties such as
ease of tuning, robustness to outliers, and interpretability
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 Google Research
Google Brain. Correspondence to: Hussein Hazimeh <hazimeh@mit.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

(Hastie et al., 2009; Chen & Guestrin, 2016). Another natural property in trees is conditional computation, which refers
to their ability to route each sample through a small number
of nodes (speciﬁcally, a single root-to-leaf path). Conditional computation can be broadly deﬁned as the ability of
a model to activate only a small part of its architecture in
an input-dependent fashion (Bengio et al., 2015). This can
lead to both computational beneﬁts and enhanced statistical properties. On the computation front, routing samples
through a small part of the tree leads to substantial training
and inference speed-ups compared to methods that do not
route samples. Statistically, conditional computation offers
the ﬂexibility to reduce the number of parameters used by
each sample, which can act as a regularizer (Breiman et al.,
1983; Hastie et al., 2009; Bengio et al., 2015).
However, the performance of trees relies on feature engineering, since they lack a good mechanism for representation
learning (Bengio et al., 2013). This is an area in which
neural networks (NNs) excel, especially in speech and image recognition applications (Bengio et al., 2013; He et al.,
2015; Yu & Deng, 2016). However, NNs do not naturally
support conditional computation and are harder to tune.
In this work, we combine the advantages of neural networks
and tree ensembles by designing a hybrid model. Speciﬁcally, we propose the Tree Ensemble Layer (TEL) for neural
networks. This layer is an additive model of differentiable
decision trees, can be inserted anywhere in a neural network, and is trained along with the rest of the network using
gradient-based optimization methods (e.g., SGD). While differentiable trees in the literature show promising results, especially in the context of neural networks, e.g., Kontschieder
et al. (2015); Frosst & Hinton (2017), they do not offer true
conditional computation. We equip TEL with a novel mechanism to perform conditional computation, during both training and inference. We make this possible by introducing
a new sparse activation function for sample routing, along
with specialized forward and backward propagation algorithms that exploit sparsity. Experiments on 23 real datasets
indicate that TEL achieves over 10x speed-ups compared to
the current differentiable trees, without sacriﬁcing predictive
performance.
Our algorithms pave the way for jointly optimizing over
both wide and deep tree ensembles. Here joint optimization

