Curvature-corrected learning dynamics in deep neural networks

Dongsung Huh 1

Abstract
Deep neural networks exhibit complex learning dynamics due to their non-convex loss landscapes. Second-order optimization methods facilitate learning dynamics by compensating for
ill-conditioned curvature. In this work, we investigate how curvature correction modifies the
learning dynamics in deep linear neural networks
and provide analytical solutions. We derive a
generalized conservation law that preserves the
path of parameter dynamics from curvature correction, which shows that curvature correction
only modifies the temporal profiles of dynamics
along the path. We show that while curvature
correction accelerates the convergence dynamics
of the input-output map, it can also negatively
affect the generalization performance. Our analysis also reveals an undesirable effect of curvature
correction that compromises stability of parameters dynamics during learning, especially with
block-diagonal approximation of natural gradient
descent. We introduce fractional curvature correction that resolves this problem while retaining
most of the acceleration benefits of full curvature
correction.

1. Introduction
The non-convex loss landscapes of deep neural networks
exhibit ill-conditioned curvature and saddle-points where
gradient-based first-order optimization methods can perform
poorly (Martens, 2010; Dauphin et al., 2014), which produces complex nonlinear learning dynamics (Saxe et al.,
2013). Second order methods, such as natural gradient
descent (NGD) (Amari, 1998), compensate for the effect
of curvature by using the distance metric intrinsic to the
space of input-output functions (Pascanu & Bengio, 2013;
Martens, 2014; Botev et al., 2017; Bernacchia et al., 2018).
1
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
Correspondence to: Dongsung Huh <huh@ibm.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

While recent advances in approximate NGD methods (e.g.
K-FAC) have dramatically improved the computational efficiency for practical scale applications (Ba et al., 2016;
Grosse & Martens, 2016; Botev et al., 2017; Martens et al.,
2018; Osawa et al., 2019), however, it remains largely unknown how curvature correction actually modifies the learning dynamics in deep networks. Do the curvature-corrected
learning rule simply accelerate convergences towards the
same minimum solutions as gradient descent, or do they
impose bias toward qualitatively different solutions?
As a first step toward establishing theoretical understanding
of these questions, we analyze the learning dynamics of deep
linear networks under a spectrum of curvature-corrected
update rules. Deep linear networks provide an excellent
mathematical framework for developing theoretical insights
on the complex inner workings of deep nonlinear networks
(Goodfellow et al., 2016). Despite their simplicity, deep
linear networks capture the essential nonlinear relationship
between network’s input-output maps and their parameters.
Recently, many works have analyzed the learning trajectories of deep linear networks under gradient descent to
compute the convergence rate under various initial conditions and architectures (Arora et al., 2018a;b; Bartlett et al.,
2019; Du & Hu, 2019), revealed decoupled modes of convergence dynamics to explain the origin of multiple stage-like
loss profiles (Saxe et al., 2013), and showed implicit biases
for regularization (Du et al., 2018; Arora et al., 2019) and
resistance to overfitting (Advani & Saxe, 2017; Lampinen
& Ganguli, 2018; Poggio et al., 2018). Yet, it is unknown
how these properties of convergence dynamics generalize
beyond the first-order update rules.
Our contribution The main results are summarized as
follows.
1. We show that the path of parameter dynamics is preserved under curvature correction by deriving a generalized conservation law that dictates the path shape.
Consequently, curvature correction only affects the
temporal profile of dynamics along the paths.
2. We show a trade-off between the accelerated dynamics
of network’s input-output map and the stability of parameter dynamics during learning: The process of full
curvature correction, which completely removes the

