Tight Bounds on Minimax Regret under
Logarithmic Loss via Self-Concordance

Blair Bilodeau 1 2 3 Dylan J. Foster 4 Daniel M. Roy 1 2 3

Abstract
We consider the classical problem of sequential
probability assignment under logarithmic loss
while competing against an arbitrary, potentially
nonparametric class of experts. We obtain tight
bounds on the minimax regret via a new approach
that exploits the self-concordance property of the
logarithmic loss. We show that for any expert
class with (sequential) metric entropy O(γ −p ) at
p
scale γ, the minimax regret is O(n p+1 ), and that
this rate cannot be improved without additional assumptions on the expert class under consideration.
As an application of our techniques, we resolve
the minimax regret for nonparametric Lipschitz
classes of experts.

1. Introduction
Sequential probability assignment is a classical problem that
has been studied intensely throughout domains including
portfolio optimization (Cover, 1991; Cover & Ordentlich,
1996; Cross & Barron, 2003), information theory (Rissanen, 1984; Merhav & Feder, 1998; Xie & Barron, 2000),
and—more recently—adversarial machine learning (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Grnarova et al., 2018; Liang & Modiano,
2018). The goal is for a player to assign probabilities to
an arbitrary, potentially adversarially generated sequence
of outcomes, and to do so nearly as well as a benchmark
class of experts. More formally, consider the following protocol: for rounds t = 1, . . . , n, the player receives a context
xt ∈ X , predicts a probability pbt ∈ [0, 1] (using only the
context xt ), observes a binary outcome yt ∈ {0, 1}, and
incurs the logarithmic loss (“log loss”), defined by
`(b
pt , yt ) = −yt log(b
pt ) − (1 − yt ) log(1 − pbt ).
1

Statistical Sciences, University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute 3 Institute for Advanced Study 4 Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Correspondence to: Blair Bilodeau
<blair.bilodeau@mail.utoronto.ca>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

The log loss penalizes the player based on how much probability mass they place on the actual outcome. Without
distributional assumptions, one cannot control the total incurred loss, and so it is standard to study the regret; that
is, the difference between the player’s total loss and the
total loss of the single best predictor in a (potentially uncountable) reference class of experts. Writing the vector of
player predictions as pb = (b
p1 , . . . , pbn ), and likewise defining x = (x1 , . . . , xn ) and y = (y1 , . . . , yn ), the player’s
regret with respect to a class of experts F ⊆ [0, 1]X is
defined as
Rn (F; b
p, x, y) =

n
X
t=1

`(b
pt , yt ) − inf

n
X

`(f (xt ), yt ).

f ∈F t=1

Compared to similar sequential prediction problems found
throughout the literature on online learning (Cesa-Bianchi
& Lugosi, 2006; Hazan, 2016; Lattimore & Szepesvári,
2020), the distinguishing feature of the sequential probability assignment problem is the log loss, which amounts
to evaluating the log-likelihood of the observed outcome
under the player’s predicted distribution. Typical results in
online learning assume the loss function to be convex and
smooth or Lipschitz (e.g., absolute loss or square loss on
bounded predictions) or at least bounded (e.g., classification
loss), while the log loss may have unbounded values and
unbounded gradient. Consequently, beyond simple classes
of experts, naively applying the standard tools of online
learning leads to loose guarantees; instead, we exploit refined properties of the log loss to obtain tight regret bounds
for sequential probability assignment.
Minimax Regret. We investigate the fundamental limits
for sequential probability assignment through the lens of
minimax analysis. We focus on minimax regret, defined by
Rn (F) = sup inf sup · · · sup inf sup Rn (F; b
p, x, y) , (1)
x1

p
b1

y1

xn p
bn yn

where xt ∈ Xt (defined formally in Section 2), pbt ∈ [0, 1],
and yt ∈ {0, 1} for all t ∈ [n]. The minimax regret expresses worst-case performance of the best player across
all adaptively chosen data sequences. For simple (e.g.,
parametric) classes of experts, the minimax regret is wellunderstood, including exact constants (Rissanen, 1986;

