Unraveling Meta-Learning: Understanding Feature
Representations for Few-Shot Tasks

Micah Goldblum 1 Steven Reich * 1 Liam Fowl * 1 Renkun Ni * 1 Valeriia Cherepanova * 1 Tom Goldstein 1

Abstract
Meta-learning algorithms produce feature extractors which achieve state-of-the-art performance
on few-shot classification. While the literature is
rich with meta-learning methods, little is known
about why the resulting feature extractors perform so well. We develop a better understanding of the underlying mechanics of meta-learning
and the difference between models trained using meta-learning and models which are trained
classically. In doing so, we introduce and verify
several hypotheses for why meta-learned models perform better. Furthermore, we develop a
regularizer which boosts the performance of standard training routines for few-shot classification.
In many cases, our routine outperforms metalearning while simultaneously running an order
of magnitude faster.

1. Introduction
Training neural networks from scratch requires large
amounts of labeled data, making it impractical in many
settings. When data is expensive or time consuming to
obtain, training from scratch may be cost prohibitive (AltaeTran et al., 2017). In other scenarios, models must adapt
efficiently to changing environments before enough time has
passed to amass a large and diverse data corpus (Nagabandi
et al., 2018). In both of these cases, massive state-of-the-art
networks would overfit to the tiny training sets available.
To overcome this problem, practitioners pre-train on large
auxiliary datasets and then fine-tune the resulting models
on the target task. For example, ImageNet pre-training of
large ResNets has become an industry standard for transfer
learning (Kornblith et al., 2019b). Unfortunately, transfer
learning from classically trained models often yields sub-par
performance in the extremely data-scarce regime or breaks
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Maryland, College Park.
Correspondence to: Micah Goldblum <goldblum@umd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

down entirely when only a few data samples are available
in the target domain.
Recently, a number of few-shot benchmarks have been
rapidly improved using meta-learning methods (Lee et al.,
2019; Song et al., 2019). Unlike classical transfer learning, which uses a base model pre-trained on a different
task, meta-learning algorithms produce a base network that
is specifically designed for quick adaptation to new tasks
using few-shot data. Furthermore, meta-learning is still effective when applied to small, lightweight base models that
can be fine-tuned with relatively few computations.
The ability of meta-learned networks to rapidly adapt to new
domains suggests that the feature representations learned
by meta-learning must be fundamentally different than feature representations learned through conventional training.
Because of the good performance that meta-learning offers
in various settings, many researchers have been content to
use these features without considering how or why they
differ from conventional representations. As a result, little is known about the fundamental differences between
meta-learned feature extractors and those which result from
classical training. Training routines are often treated like a
black box in which high performance is celebrated, but a
deeper understanding of the phenomenon remains elusive.
To further complicate matters, a myriad of meta-learning
strategies exist that may exploit different mechanisms.
In this paper, we delve into the differences between features learned by meta-learning and classical training. We
explore and visualize the behaviors of different methods and
identify two different mechanisms by which meta-learned
representations can improve few-shot learning. In the case
of meta-learning strategies that fix the feature extractor and
only update the last (classification) layer of a network during
the inner-loop, such as MetaOptNet (Lee et al., 2019) and
R2-D2 (Bertinetto et al., 2018), we find that meta-learning
tends to cluster object classes more tightly in feature space.
As a result, the classification boundaries learned during
fine-tuning are less sensitive to the choice of few-shot samples. In the second case, we hypothesize that meta-learning
strategies that use end-to-end fine-tuning, such as Reptile
(Nichol & Schulman, 2018), search for meta-parameters
that lie close in weight space to a wide range of task-specific

