From PAC to Instance-Optimal Sample Complexity in the Plackett-Luce Model

Aadirupa Saha 1 Aditya Gopalan 1

Abstract
We consider PAC-learning a good item from ksubsetwise feedback information sampled from a
Plackett-Luce probability model, with instancedependent sample complexity performance. In
the setting where subsets of a fixed size can
be tested and top-ranked feedback is made
available to the learner, we give an algorithm
with optimal instance-dependent sample complexity,
for PAC best arm identification,
of





Θ[k] Pn
1
1
k
O k
, ∆i
i=2 max 1, ∆2 ln δ ln ∆i
i

being the Plackett-Luce parameter gap between
the best and the ith best item, and Θ[k] is the
sum of the Plackett-Luce parameters for the topk items. The algorithm is based on a wrapper around a PAC winner-finding algorithm with
weaker performance guarantees to adapt to the
hardness of the input instance. The sample complexity is also shown to be multiplicatively better
depending on the length of rank-ordered feedback
available in each subset-wise play. We show optimality of our algorithms with matching sample
complexity lower bounds. We next address the
winner-finding problem in Plackett-Luce models
in the fixed-budget setting with instance dependent upper and lower bounds
 on the misidenti
˜
fication probability, of Ω exp(−2∆Q)
for a
given budget Q, where ˜
∆ is an explicit instancedependent problem complexity parameter. Numerical performance results are also reported.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of sequentially learning the best
item of a set when subsets of items can be tested but information about only their relative strengths is observed.
This is a basic search problem motivated by applications in
recommender systems and information retrieval (Hofmann
1

Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India. Correspondence
to: Aadirupa Saha <aadirupa@iisc.ac.in>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

et al., 2013; Radlinski et al., 2008), crowdsourced ranking
(Chen et al., 2013), tournament design (Graepel & Herbrich,
2006), etc. It has received recent attention in the online
learning community, primarily under the rubric of dueling
bandits (e.g., (Yue et al., 2012) and online ranking in the
Plackett-Luce (PL) discrete choice model (Chen et al., 2018;
Saha & Gopalan, 2019; Ren et al., 2018).
Our focus in this paper is to study the instance-dependent
complexity of learning the (near) best item in a subset-wise
PL feedback model by which we mean the following. Each
item has an a priori unknown PL weight parameter, and
every time a subset of alternatives is selected, an item or
items sampled from the PL probability distribution over the
subset are observed by the learner. Given a tolerance  and
confidence level δ, the learner faces the task of sequentially
playing subsets of items, and stopping and finding an optimal arm, i.e., an arm i whose PL parameter satisfies
θi ≥ maxj θj − , with probability of error at most δ.
Existing work on best arm learning in PL models, e.g., (Saha
& Gopalan, 2019), focuses on attaining the worst-case or
instance-independent sample complexity of learning an approximately best item. By this, we mean that the typical
goal is to design algorithms that terminate in a number of
rounds bounded by a function of only , δ and
the number of arms n, typically of the form O n2 log 1δ rounds.
Such worst-case results, though significantly novel, suffer
from two weaknesses: (1) The termination time guarantees
become vacuous in the setting where an exact best arm is
sought ( = 0), and (2) The guarantees do not reflect the
fact that some problem instances, in terms of their items’ PL
parameters, are easier than others to learn, e.g., the instance
with parameters (θ1 , . . . , θn ) = (1, 0.01, . . . , 0.01) ought
to be much easier than (1, 0.99, . . . , 0.99) since item 1 is
a distinctly clearer winner than in the latter case. In this
paper, we set ourselves the more challenging objective of
quantifying and attaining sample complexity that depends
on the inherent ‘hardness’ of the PL instance. In this context,
we make the following contributions:
(1) We give the first instance-optimal algorithm for the
problem of (, δ)-PAC learning a best item in a PL model
when subsets of a fixed size can be tested in each round.
This is accomplished by building a novel wrapper algorithm
(Alg. 1) around an (, δ)-PAC learning algorithm used as

