Interpretations are Useful:
Penalizing Explanations to Align Neural Networks with Prior Knowledge

Laura Rieger 1 Chandan Singh 2 W. James Murdoch 3 Bin Yu 2 3

Abstract
For an explanation of a deep learning model to
be effective, it must both provide insight into a
model and suggest a corresponding action in order to achieve an objective. Too often, the litany
of proposed explainable deep learning methods
stop at the first step, providing practitioners with
insight into a model, but no way to act on it.
In this paper we propose contextual decomposition explanation penalization (CDEP), a method
that enables practitioners to leverage explanations to improve the performance of a deep learning model. In particular, CDEP enables inserting
domain knowledge into a model to ignore spurious correlations, correct errors, and generalize to
different types of dataset shifts. We demonstrate
the ability of CDEP to increase performance on
an array of toy and real datasets.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated strong predictive performance across a wide variety of settings. However, in order to predict accurately,
they sometimes latch onto spurious correlations caused by
dataset bias or overfitting (Winkler et al., 2019). Moreover, DNNs are also known to exploit bias regarding gender, race, and other sensitive attributes present in training
datasets (Garg et al., 2018; Obermeyer et al., 2019; Dressel
& Farid, 2018). Recent work in explaining DNN predictions (Murdoch et al., 2019; Doshi-Velez & Kim, 2017) has
demonstrated an ability to reveal the relationships learned
by a model. Here, we extend this line of work to not
only uncover learned relationships, but penalize them to
1

DTU Compute, Technical University Denmark, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby, Denmark 2 EECS Department, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, California, USA 3 Department of Statistics, UC Berkeley,
Berkeley, California, USA. Correspondence to: Laura Rieger
<lauri@dtu.dk>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

improve a model.

Prediction

Label

Explanation

Desired
Explanation

Figure 1. CDEP allows practitioners to penalize both a model’s
prediction and the corresponding explanation.

We introduce contextual decomposition explanation
penalization (CDEP), a method which leverages a particular existing explanation technique for neural networks to
enable the insertion of domain knowledge into a model.
Given prior knowledge in the form of importance scores,
CDEP works by allowing the user to directly penalize
importances of certain features or feature interactions.
This forces the neural network to not only produce the
correct prediction, but also the correct explanation for that
prediction.1
While we focus on the use of contextual decomposition,
which allows the penalization of both feature importances
and interactions (Murdoch et al., 2018; Singh et al., 2018),
CDEP can be readily adapted for existing interpretation
techniques, as long as they are differentiable. Moreover,
CDEP is a general technique, which can be applied to arbitrary neural network architectures, and is often orders of
magnitude faster and more memory efficient than recent
gradient-based methods, allowing its use on meaningful
datasets.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of CDEP via experiments
across a wide array of tasks. In the prediction of skin cancer
from images, CDEP improves the prediction of a classifier
by teaching it to ignore spurious confounders present in the
training data.
1
Code, notebooks, scripts, documentation, and models for
reproducing experiments here and using CDEP on new models available at https://github.com/laura-rieger/
deep-explanation-penalization.

