Representation Learning via Adversarially-Contrastive Optimal Transport

Anoop Cherian 1 Shuchin Aeron 2

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of learning
compact (low-dimensional) representations for
sequential data that captures its implicit spatiotemporal cues. To maximize extraction of such
informative cues from the data, we set the problem within the context of contrastive representation learning and to that end propose a novel
objective via optimal transport. Specifically, our
formulation seeks a low-dimensional subspace
representation of the data that jointly (i) maximizes the distance of the data (embedded in this
subspace) from an adversarial data distribution
under the optimal transport, a.k.a. the Wasserstein distance, (ii) captures the temporal order,
and (iii) minimizes the data distortion. To generate the adversarial distribution, we propose a
novel framework connecting Wasserstein GANs
with a classifier, allowing a principled mechanism
for producing good negative distributions for contrastive learning, which is currently a challenging
problem. Our full objective is cast as a subspace
learning problem on the Grassmann manifold and
solved via Riemannian optimization. To empirically study our formulation, we provide experiments on the task of human action recognition in
video sequences. Our results demonstrate competitive performance against challenging baselines.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in deep neural network architectures
(Greff et al., 2016; Merity et al., 2018; Sutskever et al.,
2014; Zilly et al., 2017; Varol et al., 2017; Chung et al.,
2015; Kim et al., 2019) have resulted in significant progress
towards our ability to model and reason over sequential data.
However, this problem is far from considered solved and
continues to be challenging, especially in high-dimensional
1

Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs, Cambridge, MA. 2 Tufts
University, Medford, MA. Correspondence to: Anoop Cherian
<cherian@merl.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

spatio-temporal settings. There are several practical issues
that lead to this difficulty, notably (i) most of the highly
successful neural network models operate on data of a fixed
length (such as images), however temporally-evolving data,
such as for example the frame-level features from a video
recognition task, could be of arbitrary temporal length, and
(ii) the data may be entangled with nuisance factors, such as
for example, features corresponding to temporally-evolving
background clutter, which may make inference difficult.
While, it may be possible to extend popular deep architectures to address these challenges, they may be computationally heavy or require large-scale annotated data, which may
be difficult to gather. We refer the reader to several papers
(Dollar et al., 2005; Varol et al., 2016; Wang & Gupta, 2015;
Tran et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2017; Girdhar et al., 2019) illustrating the wide range of approaches undertaken to tackle
this challenging problem.
In this paper, we address these issues by learning a compact representation of a given video sequence of arbitrary
length, that maximally captures the spatio-temporal information, while at the same time can be effectively fed to a
light weight classifier for action recognition. We approach
this representation learning problem from the perspective
of contrastive learning (Saunshi et al., 2019; van den Oord
et al., 2018; Bose et al., 2018; Tschannen et al., 2019; Wang
& Cherian, 2018) that has recently emerged as a flexible
yet powerful tool for learning generic representations for
high dimensional data, using positive and negative examples.
The key idea in contrastive learning is to produce a representation that is closer to the positive (given data) examples,
and farther from the negatives. Usually, the negative examples are randomly picked. However, it is usually seen that
the performance of these algorithms heavily depend on the
choice of the negatives and their pairings with the positives.
(Arora et al., 2019; Bose et al., 2018).
Suppose we are given a set of negative examples to work
with. As the performance of contrastive learning depends
on the coupling between positive and negative examples, to
this end, we propose a novel contrastive learning objective
that simultaneously optimizes for learning a representation
via a tightly coupled interplay between four key components, namely (i) generating a (probabilistic/soft) coupling
with the negative data via minimizing the optimal transport
/Wasserstein distance (Santambrogio, 2015) between the

