Near-Tight Margin-Based Generalization Bounds
for Support Vector Machines

Allan Grønlund * 1 Lior Kamma * 1 Kasper Green Larsen * 1

Abstract
Support Vector Machines (SVMs) are among the
most fundamental tools for binary classification.
In its simplest formulation, an SVM produces a
hyperplane separating two classes of data using
the largest possible margin to the data. The focus
on maximizing the margin has been well motivated through numerous generalization bounds.
In this paper, we revisit and improve the classic
generalization bounds in terms of margins. Furthermore, we complement our new generalization
bound by a nearly matching lower bound, thus
almost settling the generalization performance of
SVMs in terms of margins.

margin SVM.
min kwk22
w

(1)

s.t. yi hxi , wi ≥ 1 ∀i.
Note that the maximum margin hyperplane is not necessarily a vector w of unit norm. If we however let w∗ =
w/kwk2 , then by linearity, we get a unit vector w∗ such that
yi hxi , w∗ i ≥ 1/kwk2 for all i. That is, the margin becomes
at least 1/kwk2 for all (xi , yi ).
As data is typically not linearly separable, one often considers a relaxed variant of the above optimization problem,
known as soft margin SVM (Cortes & Vapnik, 1995).

X

1. Introduction

min kwk22 + λ

Since their introduction (Vapnik, 1982; Cortes & Vapnik,
1995) Support Vector Machines (SVMs) have continued to
be among the most popular classification algorithms. In
the most basic setup an SVM produces, upon receiving a
training data set, a classifier by finding a maximum margin
hyperplane separating the data. More formally, given a
training data set S = {x1 , . . . , xm } of m samples in Rd ,
each with a label yi ∈ {−1, +1}, an SVM finds a unit
vector w ∈ Rd such that yi hxi , wi ≥ θ for all i, with the
largest possible value of the margin θ. Note that one often
includes a bias parameter b such that one instead requires
yi (hxi , wi + b) ≥ θ. As b has no relevance on this work
we ignore it for notational simplicity. The predicted label
on a new data data point x ∈ Rd , is simply sign(hx, wi).
When the data is linearly separable, that is there exists a
vector w with yi hxi , wi > 0 for all i, then the maximum
margin hyperplane w is the solution to the following convex
optimization problem, which is often referred to as the hard

s.t. yi hxi , wi ≥ 1 − ξi ∀i.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Aarhus
University, Denmark. Correspondence to: Allan Grønlund <jallan@cs.au.dk>, Lior Kamma <lior.kamma@cs.au.dk>, Kasper
Green Larsen <larsen@cs.au.dk>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

w,ξ

i

ξi
(2)

ξi ≥ 0 ∀i.
Here λ ≥ 0 is a hyper parameter which, roughly speaking,
controls the tradeoff between the magnitude of the margin
θ = 1/kwk2 and the number of data points with margin significantly less than θ. The soft margin optimization problem
is also convex and can be solved efficiently.
A key reason for the success of SVMs is the extensive
study and ubiquitousness of kernels (see e.g. (Boser et al.,
1992)). By allowing efficient calculation of inner products
in high (or even infinite) dimensional spaces, kernels make
it possible to apply SVMs in these spaces through feature
transforms without actually having to compute the feature
transform, neither during training or prediction. Predictions
are efficient since they only need to consider the support
vectors. These are the sample data points (x, y) that are not
strictly on the correct side of the margin of the hyperplane,
meaning that y hx, wi ≤ θ.
Feature transforms, like the application of a kernel, often
drastically increase the dimensionality of the input domain,
directly increasing the the VC-dimension of the hypothesis set (the set of hyperplanes) the same way. Thus one
might worry about overfitting. However, SVMs, even with

