StochasticRank: Global Optimization of Scale-Free Discrete Functions

Aleksei Ustimenko 1 Liudmila Prokhorenkova 1 2 3

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a powerful and efficient framework for direct optimization of ranking
metrics. The problem is ill-posed due to the discrete structure of the loss, and to deal with that,
we introduce two important techniques: stochastic
smoothing and novel gradient estimate based on
partial integration. We show that classic smoothing approaches may introduce bias and present
a universal solution for a proper debiasing. Importantly, we can guarantee global convergence
of our method by adopting a recently proposed
Stochastic Gradient Langevin Boosting algorithm.
Our algorithm is implemented as a part of the CatBoost gradient boosting library and outperforms
the existing approaches on several learning-torank datasets. In addition to ranking metrics, our
framework applies to any scale-free discrete loss
function.

1. Introduction
The quality of ranking algorithms is traditionally measured by ranking quality metrics such as Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (NDCG), Expected Reciprocal
Rank (ERR), Mean Average Precision (MAP), Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR), and so on (Sakai, 2013). These metrics
are defined on a list of documents sorted by their predicted
relevance to a query and capture the utility of that list for
users of a search engine, who are more likely to scan documents starting at the top. Direct optimization of ranking
metrics is an extremely challenging problem since sorting
makes them piecewise constant (as functions of predicted
relevances), so they are neither convex nor smooth. Many
algorithms were proposed for different ranking objectives
in the learning-to-rank (LTR) research field. We refer to Liu
(2009) for a systematic overview of some classic methods.
1
Yandex, Moscow, Russia 2 Moscow Institute of Physics
and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Moscow Region, Russia 3 Higher
School of Economics, Moscow, Russia. Correspondence to: Aleksei Ustimenko <austimenko@yandex-team.ru>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

To deal with the discrete structure of a ranking loss, one can
use some smooth approximation, which is easier to optimize.
This technique lies behind such well-known algorithms as
SoftRank (Taylor et al., 2008), ApproxNDCG (Qin et al.,
2010), RankNet (Burges, 2010), etc. The obtained smooth
function can be optimized by gradient-based methods and,
in particular, by Stochastic Gradient Boosting (SGB) that
is known to be the learning algorithm behind most stateof-the-art LTR frameworks and is commonly preferred by
major search engines (Chapelle & Chang, 2011; Yin et al.,
2016). Unfortunately, all known smoothing approaches
suffer from bias (see Sections 4.2-4.3) which prevents them
from truly direct optimization. Moreover, smoothed ranking
loss functions are non-convex, and existing algorithms can
guarantee only local optima.
Our ultimate goal is to solve these problems and propose
a truly direct LTR algorithm with provable guarantees of
global convergence and generalization. We adopt a theoretical approach, so we start with formal definitions of the class
of ranking losses and its generalization to scale-free (SF)
discrete loss functions (Section 3.2). Our results hold for the
general class of SF losses, which, in addition to all ranking
metrics, includes, e.g., a recently proposed loss function for
Learning-to-Select-with-Order (Vorobev et al., 2019). Then,
to mitigate the discontinuity of the loss, we use stochastic
smoothing. We prove that previous smoothing-based approaches are inconsistent with the underlying loss (due to
the problem of ties, which we discuss in the next section)
and propose a universal solution to this problem (relevancebased consistent smoothing, see Section 4.3). Next, we
derive a novel stochastic gradient estimate, which can be
applied to the entire class of SF losses (see Section 5). The
obtained estimate has low variance and uniformly bounded
error, which is crucial for our analysis. Finally, to guarantee
global convergence of the algorithm, we adopt a recently
proposed Stochastic Gradient Langevin Boosting (SGLB)
algorithm (Ustimenko & Prokhorenkova, 2020). SGLB is
based on a well studied Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics (Gelfand et al., 1992; Raginsky et al., 2017; Erdogdu
et al., 2018) and converges globally for a wide range of loss
functions including non-convex ones. We adapt SGLB to
our setting and obtain a gradient boosting algorithm that
converges globally for the entire class of SF loss functions
with provable generalization guarantees (see Section 6).

