Sparse Shrunk Additive Models

Guodong Liu * 1 Hong Chen * 2 Heng Huang 1 3

Abstract
Most existing feature selection methods in literature are linear models, so that the nonlinear relations between features and response variables are
not considered. Meanwhile, in these feature selection models, the interactions between features are
often ignored or just discussed under prior structure information. To address these challenging
issues, we consider the problem of sparse additive models for high-dimensional nonparametric
regression with the allowance of the flexible interactions between features. A new method, called
as sparse shrunk additive models (SSAM), is proposed to explore the structure information among
features. This method bridges sparse kernel regression and sparse feature selection. Theoretical results on the convergence rate and sparsity
characteristics of SSAM are established by the
novel analysis techniques with integral operator
and concentration estimate. In particular, our
algorithm and theoretical analysis only require
the component functions to be continuous and
bounded, which are not necessary to be in reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces. Experiments on
both synthetic and real-world data demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Sparse feature selection has attracted much attention in
machine learning community for learning tasks with highdimensional data, especially useful in bioinformatics related applications. Linear models with `1 -norm regularization, such as Lasso (Tibshirani, 1996) and Dantzig selec*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA 2 Department
of Mathematics and Statistics, College of Science, Huazhong
Agricultural University, Wuhan, China 3 JD Finance America Corporation, Mountain View, CA, USA. Correspondence
to: Hong Chen <chenh@mail.hzau.edu.cn>, Guodong Liu
<guodong.liu.e@pitt.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

tor(Candes & Tao, 2007), have been well studied for their
theoretical properties and extensively used for feature selection applications. However, in many applications, the linear
assumption could be too restricted to select the optimal features, because the relations between features and response
variables could be nonlinear. Because of the difficulties in
both computational algorithm and learning theory analysis,
only few of existing feature selection methods in literature
focus on the nonlinear feature selection.
To enhance the ability of feature selection models with
considering nonlinear relationship between features and
response variables, several sparse learning based additive
models were proposed for regression (Ravikumar et al.,
2009; Huang et al., 2010; Raskutti et al., 2012; Yuan &
Zhou, 2016; Yin et al., 2012; Chen et al., 2020, In press)
and classification (Zhao & Liu, 2012; Chen et al., 2017),
which are extensions of original additive models (Hastie
& Tibshirani, 1990). Note that, in these additive models,
each component function is a univariate smooth function
(Ravikumar et al., 2009; Huang et al., 2010; Raskutti et al.,
2012; Yuan & Zhou, 2016; Zhao & Liu, 2012) or is defined
on grouped features with prior structure information (Chen
et al., 2017; Yin et al., 2012). Although these sparse additive models can conduct nonlinear feature selection, all
of them do not explore the important feature interaction
without prior structure information. Recently, the shrunk
additive least square approximation (SALSA) (Kandasamy
& Yu, 2016) method was introduced to utilize the feature
interactions, but without feature selection mechanism.
On the other hand, the sparse sample selection arises from
learning tasks with large-scale data. The generalized Lasso
was proposed in (Roth, 2004) to handle the regression problem with addressing sample sparsity, and its learning theory
has been studied in (Shi et al., 2011). Recently, Nyström
approximation has been used for selecting important samples (landmark points) in kernel methods, which show that
the predictor can be derived efficiently from data dependent
hypothesis spaces associated with subsamples (Kumar et al.,
2012; Alaoui & Mahoney, 2015; Rudi et al., 2015). While
some fast algorithms have been developed for sparse kernel
regression, none of them is capable of the feature selection
and provides the interpretability of prediction.
To address the above challenges, in this paper, we propose

