Aligned Cross Entropy for Non-Autoregressive Machine Translation

Marjan Ghazvininejad 1 Vladimir Karpukhin 1 Luke Zettlemoyer 1 Omer Levy 1

Abstract
Non-autoregressive machine translation models
significantly speed up decoding by allowing for
parallel prediction of the entire target sequence.
However, modeling word order is more challenging due to the lack of autoregressive factors in
the model. This difficultly is compounded during training with cross entropy loss, which can
highly penalize small shifts in word order. In this
paper, we propose aligned cross entropy (AXE)
as an alternative loss function for training of nonautoregressive models. AXE uses a differentiable
dynamic program to assign loss based on the
best possible monotonic alignment between target tokens and model predictions. AXE-based
training of conditional masked language models
(CMLMs) substantially improves performance on
major WMT benchmarks, while setting a new
state of the art for non-autoregressive models.

1. Introduction
Non-autoregressive machine translation models can significantly improve decoding speed by predicting every word
in parallel (Gu et al., 2018; Libovický & Helcl, 2018). This
advantage comes at a cost to performance since modeling
word order is trickier when the model cannot condition on
its previous predictions. A range of semi-autoregressive
models (Lee et al., 2018; Stern et al., 2019; Gu et al., 2019;
Ghazvininejad et al., 2019) have shown there is a speedaccuracy tradeoff that can be optimized with limited forms
of autoregression. However, increasing performance of the
purely non-autoregressive models without sacrificing decoding speed remains an open challenge. In this paper, we
present a new training loss for non-autoregressive machine
translation that softens the penalty for word order errors, and
significantly improves performance with no modification to
the model or to the decoding algorithm.

Target Y

it

tastes

pretty

good

though

Model
Predictions
P (Top 5)

but
however
for
and
though

it
that
this
for
the

tastes
makes
looks
taste
feels

delicious
good
tasty
fine
exquisite

.
,
so
though
!

Figure 1. The model predictions are quite similar to the target, but
misaligned by one token. The first and second target tokens (it
tastes) are predicted in the second and third positions, respectively,
leaving only the predictions in the fourth and fifth positions aligned
with the target. The cross-entropy loss will heavily penalize the
predictions in the first, second, and third positions.

Existing models (both autoregressive and nonautoregressive) are typically trained with cross entropy loss.
Cross entropy is a strict loss function, where a penalty is
incurred for every word that is predicted out of position,
even for output sequences with small edit distances (see
Figure 1). Autoregressive models learn to avoid such
penalties, since words are generated conditioned on the
sentence prefix. However, non-autoregressive models do
not know the exact sentence prefix, and should (intuitively)
focus more on root errors (e.g. a missing word) while
allowing more partial credit for cascading errors (the right
word in the wrong place).

Marjan

To achieve this more relaxed loss, we introduce aligned
cross entropy (AXE), a new objective function that computes the cross entropy loss based on an alignment between
the sequence of token labels and the sequence of token distribution predictions. AXE uses dynamic programming to
find the monotonic alignment that minimizes the cross entropy loss. It provides non-autoregressive models with a
more accurate training signal by ignoring absolute positions
and focusing on relative order and lexical matching. We
efficiently implement AXE via matrix operations, and use
it to train conditional masked language models (CMLM;
Ghazvininejad et al., 2019) for machine translation. AXE
only slightly increases training time compared to cross entropy, and requires no changes to parallel argmax decoding.

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

Extensive experiments on machine translation benchmarks
demonstrate that AXE substantially boosts the performance
of CMLMs, while having the same decoding speed. In
WMT’14 EN-DE, training CMLMs with AXE (instead of

1
Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to:
Ghazvininejad <ghazvini@fb.com>.
th

