Supervised Learning: No Loss No Cry

Richard Nock 1 2 Aditya Krishna Menon 3

Abstract
Supervised learning requires the specification of
a loss function to minimise. While the theory of
admissible losses from both a computational and
statistical perspective is well-developed, these offer a panoply of different choices. In practice,
this choice is typically made in an ad hoc manner.
In hopes of making this procedure more principled, the problem of learning the loss function
for a downstream task (e.g., classification) has
garnered recent interest. However, works in this
area have been generally empirical in nature.
In this paper, we revisit the SLI SOTRON algorithm of Kakade et al. (2011) through a novel
lens, derive a generalisation based on Bregman
divergences, and show how it provides a principled procedure for learning the loss. In detail, we
cast SLI SOTRON as learning a loss from a family of composite square losses. By interpreting
this through the lens of proper losses, we derive a
generalisation of SLI SOTRON based on Bregman
divergences. The resulting B REGMAN T RON algorithm jointly learns the loss along with the classifier. It comes equipped with a simple guarantee
of convergence for the loss it learns, and its set of
possible outputs comes with a guarantee of agnostic approximability of Bayes rule. Experiments
indicate that the B REGMAN T RON outperforms
the SLI SOTRON, and that the loss it learns can be
minimized by other algorithms for different tasks,
thereby opening the interesting problem of loss
transfer between domains.

1. Introduction
Computationally efficient supervised learning essentially
started with the PAC framework of Valiant (1984), in which
1

Data61 (Australia) 2 The Australian National University (Australia) 3 Google Research (USA). Correspondence to:
<richard.nock@data61.csiro.au,adityakmenon@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

the goal was to learn in polynomial time a function being
able to predict a label (or class, among two possible) for
i.i.d. inputs. The initial loss, whose minimization enforces
the accurate prediction of labels, was the binary zero-one
loss which returns 1 iff a mistake is made.
The zero-one loss was later progressively replaced in learning algorithms for tractability reasons, including its nondifferentiability and the structural complexity of its minimization (Kearns & Vazirani, 1994; Auer et al., 1995).
From the late nineties, a zoo of losses started to be used
for tractable machine learning (ML), the most popular ones
built from the square loss and the logistic loss. Recently,
there has been a significant push to widen even more the
choice of loss; to pick a few, see Grabocka et al. (2019);
Kakade et al. (2011); Liu et al. (2019); Mei & Moura (2018);
Nock & Nielsen (2008; 2009); Reid & Williamson (2010);
Siahkamari et al. (2019); Streeter (2019); Sypherd et al.
(2019).
With a few exceptions, seldom do such works ground reasons for change of the loss outside of tractability at large, be
it algorithmic or statistical – with for example the introduction of classification calibration, which studies conditions
on losses complying with the accurate prediction of labels
(Bartlett et al., 2006). It turns out that statistics and Bayes decision theory give a precise reason, one which has long been
the object of philosophical and formal debates (de Finetti,
1949). It starts from a simple principle:
Bayes rule is optimal for the loss at hand,
a property known as properness (Savage, 1971). Then
comes a less known subtlety: a proper loss as commonly
used for real-valued prediction, such as the square and logistic loss, involves an implicit canonical link (Reid &
Williamson, 2010) function that maps class probabilities
(such as the output of Bayes rule) to real values. This is
exemplified by the sigmoid (inverse) link in deep learning.
Supervised learning in a Bayesian framework can thus be
more broadly addressed by learning a classifier and a link
for the domain at hand, which implies learning a proper
canonical loss with the classifier. This loss, if suitably
expressed, can be used for training. This kills two birds in
one shot: we get access not just to real valued predictions,
but also a way to embed them into class probability estimates

