Learning Human Objectives by Evaluating Hypothetical Behavior
Siddharth Reddy 1 Anca D. Dragan 1 Sergey Levine 1 Shane Legg 2 Jan Leike 2

Abstract
We seek to align agent behavior with a user’s objectives in a reinforcement learning setting with
unknown dynamics, an unknown reward function,
and unknown unsafe states. The user knows the
rewards and unsafe states, but querying the user
is expensive. We propose an algorithm that safely
and efficiently learns a model of the user’s reward
function by posing ‘what if?’ questions about hypothetical agent behavior. We start with a generative model of initial states and a forward dynamics model trained on off-policy data. Our method
uses these models to synthesize hypothetical behaviors, asks the user to label the behaviors with
rewards, and trains a neural network to predict the
rewards. The key idea is to actively synthesize the
hypothetical behaviors from scratch by maximizing tractable proxies for the value of information,
without interacting with the environment. We call
this method reward query synthesis via trajectory
optimization (ReQueST). We evaluate ReQueST
with simulated users on a state-based 2D navigation task and the image-based Car Racing video
game. The results show that ReQueST significantly outperforms prior methods in learning reward models that transfer to new environments
with different initial state distributions. Moreover,
ReQueST safely trains the reward model to detect
unsafe states, and corrects reward hacking before
deploying the agent.

1. Introduction
Users typically specify objectives for reinforcement learning (RL) agents through scalar-valued reward functions (Sutton & Barto, 2018). While users can easily define reward functions for tasks like playing games of Go or StarCraft, users may struggle to describe practical tasks like
1

University of California, Berkeley 2 DeepMind. Correspondence to: Siddharth Reddy <sgr@berkeley.edu>, Jan Leike
<leike@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Hypothetical behavior

Generative model

Dynamics
model
(1)
RL agent

(3)

Reward model

User
feedback

(2)

Figure 1. Our method learns a reward model from user feedback
on hypothetical behaviors, then deploys a model-based RL agent.

driving cars or controlling robotic arms in terms of rewards (Hadfield-Menell et al., 2017). Understanding user
objectives in these settings can be challenging – not only
for machines, but also for humans modeling each other and
introspecting on themselves (Premack & Woodruff, 1978).
For example, consider the trolley problem (Foot, 1967): if
you were the train conductor in Figure 1, presented with the
choice of either allowing multiple people to come to harm
by letting the train continue on its current track, or harming
one person by diverting the train, what would you do? The
answer depends on whether your value system leans toward
consequentialism or deontological ethics – a distinction
that may not be captured by a reward function designed
to evaluate common situations, in which ethical dilemmas
like the trolley problem rarely occur. In complex domains,
the user may not be able to anticipate all possible agent
behaviors and specify a reward function that accurately
describes user preferences over those behaviors.
We address this problem by actively synthesizing hypothetical behaviors from scratch, and asking the user to label
them with rewards. Figure 1 describes our algorithm: using
a generative model of initial states and a forward dynamics
model trained on off-policy data, we synthesize hypothetical
behaviors, ask the user to label the behaviors with rewards,
and train a neural network to predict the rewards. We repeat
this process until the reward model converges, then deploy
a model-based RL agent that optimizes the learned rewards.
The key idea in this paper is synthesizing informative hypo-

Model-based
RL agent

