Learning Selection Strategies in Buchberger’s Algorithm

Dylan Peifer 1 Michael Stillman 1 Daniel Halpern-Leistner 1

Abstract

for some polynomials a and b, then there can be no solution,
because the right hand side vanishes at any solution of the
system, but the left hand side is always 1.

Studying the set of exact solutions of a system of
polynomial equations largely depends on a single iterative algorithm, known as Buchberger’s
algorithm. Optimized versions of this algorithm
are crucial for many computer algebra systems
(e.g., Mathematica, Maple, Sage). We introduce a
new approach to Buchberger’s algorithm that uses
reinforcement learning agents to perform S-pair
selection, a key step in the algorithm. We then
study how the diffculty of the problem depends
on the choices of domain and distribution of polynomials, about which little is known. Finally, we
train a policy model using proximal policy optimization (PPO) to learn S-pair selection strategies
for random systems of binomial equations. In
certain domains, the trained model outperforms
state-of-the-art selection heuristics in total number of polynomial additions performed, which
provides a proof-of-concept that recent developments in machine learning have the potential to
improve performance of algorithms in symbolic
computation.

The converse also holds: the set of solutions with x and y in
C is empty if and only if there exists a linear combination (2)
for h = 1 (Hilbert, 1893). Thus the existence of solutions
to (1) can be reduced to the larger problem of determining
if a polynomial h lies in the ideal generated by these polynomials, which is defned to be the set I = hf1 , f2 i of all
polynomials of the form (2).
The key to solving this problem is to fnd a Gröbner basis for
the system. This is another set of polynomials {g1 , . . . , gk },
potentially much larger than the original set, which generate the same ideal I = hf1 , f2 i = hg1 , . . . , gk i, but for
which one can employ a version of the Euclidean algorithm
(discussed below) to determine if h ∈ I.

1. Introduction
Systems of multivariate polynomial equations, such as

0 = f1 (x, y) = x3 + y 2
(1)
0 = f2 (x, y) = x2 y − 1
appear in many scientifc and engineering felds, as well
as many subjects in mathematics. The most fundamental
question about such a system of equations is whether there
exists an exact solution. If one can express the constant
polynomial h(x, y) = 1 as a combination
h(x, y) = a(x, y)f1 (x, y) + b(x, y)f2 (x, y)

(2)

1

Department of Mathematics, Cornell University, Ithaca,
NY, USA. Correspondence to: Daniel Halpern-Leistner
<daniel.hl@cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

In fact, computing a Gröbner basis is the necessary frst step
in algorithms that answer a huge number of questions about
the original system: eliminating variables, parametrizing
solutions, studying geometric features of the solution set,
etc. This has led to a wide array of scientifc applications
of Gröbner bases, wherever polynomial systems appear, including: computer vision (Duff et al., 2019), cryptography
(Faugère et al., 2010), biological networks and chemical
reaction networks (Arkun, 2019), robotics (Abłamowicz,
2010), statistics (Diaconis & Sturmfels, 1998; Sullivant,
2018), string theory (Gray, 2011), signal and image processing (Lin et al., 2004), integer programming (Conti &
Traverso, 1991), coding theory (Sala et al., 2009), and
splines (Cox et al., 2005).
Buchberger’s algorithm (Buchberger, 1965; 2006) is the
basic iterative algorithm used to fnd a Gröbner basis. As it
can be costly in both time and space, this algorithm is the
computational bottleneck in many applications of Gröbner
bases. All direct algorithms for fnding Gröbner bases (e.g.,
(Faug`ere, 1999; Faug`ere, 2002; Roune & Stillman, 2012;
Eder & Faugère, 2017)) are variations of Buchberger’s algorithm, and highly optimized versions of the algorithm
are a key piece of computer algebra systems such as (CoCoA; Macaulay2; Magma; Maple; Mathematica; SageMath;
Singular).
There are several points in Buchberger’s algorithm which

