Private Outsourced Bayesian Optimization

Dmitrii Kharkovskii 1 Zhongxiang Dai 1 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low 1

Abstract
This paper presents the private-outsourcedGaussian process-upper confidence bound (POGP-UCB) algorithm, which is the first algorithm for privacy-preserving Bayesian optimization (BO) in the outsourced setting with a provable performance guarantee. We consider the
outsourced setting where the entity holding the
dataset and the entity performing BO are represented by different parties, and the dataset cannot
be released non-privately. For example, a hospital holds a dataset of sensitive medical records
and outsources the BO task on this dataset to an
industrial AI company. The key idea of our approach is to make the BO performance of our
algorithm similar to that of non-private GP-UCB
run using the original dataset, which is achieved
by using a random projection-based transformation that preserves both privacy and the pairwise
distances between inputs. Our main theoretical
contribution is to show that a regret bound similar
to that of the standard GP-UCB algorithm can be
established for our PO-GP-UCB algorithm. We
empirically evaluate the performance of our POGP-UCB algorithm with synthetic and real-world
datasets.

1. Introduction
Bayesian optimization (BO) has become an increasingly
popular method for optimizing highly complex black-box
functions mainly due to its impressive sample efficiency.
Such optimization problems appear frequently in various
applications such as automated machine learning (ML),
robotics, sensor networks, among others (Shahriari et al.,
2016). However, despite its popularity, the classical setting
of BO does not account for privacy issues, which arise due
to the widespread use of ML models in applications dealing
1

Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore. Correspondence to: Bryan Kian
Hsiang Low <lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

with sensitive datasets such as health care (Yu et al., 2013),
insurance (Chong et al., 2005) and fraud detection (Ngai
et al., 2011). A natural solution is to apply the cryptographic
framework of differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2016),
which has become the state-of-the-art technique for private
data release and has been widely adopted in ML (Sarwate &
Chaudhuri, 2013).
To this end, a recent work (Kusner et al., 2015) proposed
a DP variant of the Gaussian process-upper confidence
bound (GP-UCB) algorithm, which is a well-known BO
algorithm with theoretical performance guarantee (Srinivas
et al., 2010). Kusner et al. (2015) consider the common BO
task of hyperparameter tuning for ML models and introduce
methods for privatizing the outputs of the GP-UCB algorithm (the optimal input hyperparameter setting found by the
algorithm and the corresponding output measurement) by
releasing them using standard DP mechanisms. However, in
many scenarios, BO is performed in the outsourced setting,
in which the entity holding the sensitive dataset (referred
to as the curator hereafter) and the entity performing BO
(referred to as the modeler hereafter) are represented by different parties with potentially conflicting interests. In recent
years, such modelers (i.e., commercial companies) providing general-purpose optimization as a service have become
increasingly prevalent, such as SigOpt which uses BO as
a commercial service for black-box global optimization by
providing query access to the users (Dewancker et al., 2016),
and Google Cloud AutoML which offers the optimization
of the architectures of neural networks as a cloud service.
Unfortunately, the approach of Kusner et al. (2015) requires
the modeler and the curator to be represented by the same
entity and therefore both parties must have complete access
to the sensitive dataset and full understanding of the BO
algorithm, thus rendering it inapplicable in the outsourced
setting. Some examples of such settings are given below:
(a) A hospital is trying to find out which patients are likely to
be readmitted soon based on the result of an expensive medical test (Yu et al., 2013). Due to cost and time constraints,
the hospital (curator) is only able to perform the test for
a limited number of patients, and thus outsources the task
of selecting candidate patients for testing to an industrial
AI company (modeler). In this case, the inputs to BO are
medical records of individual patients and the function to
maximize (the output measurement) is the outcome of the

