Correlation Clustering with
Asymmetric Classification Errors

Jafar Jafarov 1 Sanchit Kalhan 2 Konstantin Makarychev 2 Yury Makarychev 3

Abstract
In the Correlation Clustering problem, we are
given a weighted graph G with its edges labelled
as “similar” or “dissimilar” by a binary classifier. The goal is to produce a clustering that
minimizes the weight of “disagreements”: the
sum of the weights of “similar” edges across clusters and “dissimilar” edges within clusters. We
study the correlation clustering problem under
the following assumption: Every “similar” edge
e has weight we ∈ [αw, w] and every “dissimilar” edge e has weight we ≥ αw (where α ≤ 1
and w > 0 is a scaling parameter). We give a
(3 + 2 loge (1/α)) approximation algorithm for
this problem. This assumption captures well the
scenario when classification errors are asymmetric. Additionally, we show an asymptotically
matching Linear Programming integrality gap of
Ω(log 1/α).

1. Introduction
In the Correlation Clustering problem, we are given a set
of objects with pairwise similarity information. Our aim
is to partition these objects into clusters that match this information as closely as possible. The pairwise information
is represented as a weighted graph G whose edges are labelled as “positive/similar” and “negative/dissimilar” by a
noisy binary classifier. The goal is to find a clustering C
that minimizes the weight of edges disagreeing with this
clustering: A positive edge is in disagreement with C, if its
endpoints belong to distinct clusters; and a negative edge is
in disagreement with C if its endpoints belong to the same
cluster. We call this objective the MinDisagree objective.
The MinDisagree objective has been extensively studied
1
University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA 2 Northwestern
University, Evanston, Illinois, USA 3 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago (TTIC), Chicago, Illinois, USA. Correspondence
to: Jafar Jafarov <jafarov@uchicago.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

in literature since it was introduced by Bansal, Blum, and
Chawla (2004) (see e.g., (Charikar et al., 2003; Demaine
et al., 2006; Ailon et al., 2008; Pan et al., 2015; Chawla
et al., 2015)). There are currently two standard models for
Correlation Clustering which we will refer to as (1) Correlation Clustering on Complete Graphs and (2) Correlation
Clustering with Noisy Partial Information. In the former
model, we assume that graph G is complete and all edge
weights are the same i.e., G is unweighted. In the latter
model, we do not make any assumptions on the graph G.
Thus, edges can have arbitrary weights and some edges
may be missing. These models are quite different from
the computational perspective. For the first model, Ailon,
Charikar, and Newman (2008) gave a 2.5 approximation
algorithm. This approximation factor was later improved to
2.06 by Chawla, Makarychev, Schramm, and Yaroslavtsev
(2015). For the second model, Charikar, Guruswami, and
Wirth (2003) and Demaine, Emanuel, Fiat, and Immorlica
(2006) gave an O(log n) approximation algorithm, they also
showed that Correlation Clustering with Partial Noisy Information is as hard as the Multicut problem and, hence,
O(log n) is likely to be the best possible approximation for
this problem. In this paper, we show how to interpolate
between these two models for Correlation Clustering.
We study the Correlation Clustering problem on complete
graphs with edge weights. In our model, the weights on the
edges are constrained such that the ratio of the lightest edge
in the graph to the heaviest positive edge is at least α ≤ 1.
Thus, if w is the weight of the heaviest positive edge in
the graph, then each positive edge has weight in [αw, w]
and each negative edge has weight greater than or equal to
αw. We argue that this model – which we call Correlation
Clustering with Asymmetric Classification Errors – is more
adept at capturing the subtleties in real world instances than
the two standard models. Indeed, the assumptions made by
the Correlation Clustering on Complete Graphs model are
too strong, since rarely do real world instances have equal
edge weights. In contrast, in the Correlation Clustering with
Noisy Partial Information model we can have edge weights
that are arbitrarily small or large, an assumption which is
too weak. In many real world instances, the edge weights
lie in some range [a, b] with a, b > 0. Our model captures a
larger family of instances.

