On Differentially Private Stochastic Convex Optimization
with Heavy-tailed Data

Di Wang * 1 2 Hanshen Xiao * 3 Srini Devadas 3 Jinhui Xu 1

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the problem of designing Differentially Private (DP) algorithms
for Stochastic Convex Optimization (SCO) on
heavy-tailed data. The irregularity of such data
violates some key assumptions used in almost
all existing DP-SCO and DP-ERM methods, resulting in failure to provide the DP guarantees.
To better understand this type of challenges, we
provide in this paper a comprehensive study of
DP-SCO under various settings. First, we consider the case where the loss function is strongly
convex and smooth. For this case, we propose
a method based on the sample-and-aggregate
framework, which has an excess population risk
d3
of Õ( nϵ
4 ) (after omitting other factors), where
n is the sample size and d is the dimensionality of the data. Then, we show that with some
additional assumptions on the loss functions, it
is possible to reduce the expected excess populad2
tion risk to Õ( nϵ
2 ). To lift these additional conditions, we also provide a gradient smoothing and
trimming based scheme to achieve excess popula2

d
tion risks of Õ( nϵ
2 ) and Õ(

2

d3
1

(nϵ2 ) 3

) for strongly

convex and general convex loss functions, respectively, with high probability. Experiments suggest that our algorithms can effectively deal with
the challenges caused by data irregularity.

1. Introduction
Stochastic Convex Optimization (SCO) (Vapnik, 2013) and
its empirical form, Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM),
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY
2
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal,
Saudi Arabia 3 CSAIL, MIT, Cambridge, MA. Correspondence to:
Di Wang <dwang45@buffalo.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

are the most fundamental problems in supervised learning
and statistics. They find numerous applications in many areas such as medicine, finance, genomics and social science.
One often encountered challenge in such models is how to
handle sensitive data, such as those in biomedical datasets.
As a commonly-accepted approach for preserving privacy,
differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2006) provides provable
protection against identification and is resilient to arbitrary
auxiliary information that might be available to attackers.
Methods to guarantee differential privacy have been widely
studied, and recently adopted in industry (Tang et al., 2017;
Ding et al., 2017).
Differentially Private Stochastic Convex Optimization and
Empirical Risk Minimization (i.e., DP-SCO and DP-ERM)
have been extensively studied in the past decade, starting
from (Chaudhuri & Monteleoni, 2009; Chaudhuri et al.,
2011). Later on, a long list of works have attacked the
problems from different perspectives: (Bassily et al., 2014;
Wang et al., 2017; 2019a; Wu et al., 2017; Bassily et al.,
2019) studied the problems in the low dimensional case
and the central model, (Kasiviswanathan & Jin, 2016; Kifer
et al., 2012; Talwar et al., 2015) considered the problems
in the high dimensional sparse case and the central model,
(Smith et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2018; 2019b; Duchi et al.,
2013) focused on the problems in the local model.
It is worth noting that all previous results need to assume
that either the loss function is O(1)-Lipschitz or each data
sample has bounded ℓ2 or ℓ∞ norm. This is particularly
true for those output perturbation based (Chaudhuri et al.,
2011) and objective or gradient perturbation based (Bassily et al., 2014) DP methods. However, such assumptions
may not always hold when dealing with real-world datasets,
especially those from biomedicine and finance, implying
that existing algorithms may fail. The main reason is that
in such applications, the datasets are often unbounded or
even heavy-tailed (Woolson & Clarke, 2011; Biswas et al.,
2007; Ibragimov et al., 2015). As pointed out by Mandelbrot and Fama in their influential finance papers (Mandelbrot, 1997; Fama, 1963), asset prices in the early 1960s
exhibit some power-law behavior. The heavy-tailed data
could lead to unbounded gradient and thus violate the Lipschitz condition. For example, consider the linear squared

