Active Learning on Attributed Graphs via Graph Cognizant Logistic
Regression and Preemptive Query Generation

Florence Regol† 1 Soumyasundar Pal 1 Yingxue Zhang 2 Mark Coates 1

Abstract
Node classification in attributed graphs is an important task in multiple practical settings, but it
can often be difficult or expensive to obtain labels. Active learning can improve the achieved
classification performance for a given budget on
the number of queried labels. The best existing
methods are based on graph neural networks, but
they often perform poorly unless a sizeable validation set of labelled nodes is available in order
to choose good hyperparameters. We propose
a novel graph-based active learning algorithm
for the task of node classification in attributed
graphs; our algorithm uses graph cognizant logistic regression, equivalent to a linearized graphconvolutional neural network (GCN), for the prediction phase and maximizes the expected error
reduction in the query phase. To reduce the delay experienced by a labeller interacting with the
system, we derive a preemptive querying system
that calculates a new query during the labelling
process, and to address the setting where learning starts with almost no labelled data, we also
develop a hybrid algorithm that performs adaptive model averaging of label propagation and linearized GCN inference. We conduct experiments
on five public benchmark datasets, demonstrating
a significant improvement over state-of-the-art approaches and illustrate the practical value of the
method by applying it to a private microwave link
network dataset.

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Eningeering,
2
McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada.
Huawei
Noah’s Ark Lab, Montréal Research Center, Montréal, QC,
Canada. Correspondence to: Florence Regol <florence.robertregol@mail.mcgill.ca>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
†Work done as intern at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Montréal
Research Center.

1. Introduction
In many classification tasks there are explicit or implicit
relationships between the data points that need to be classified. One can represent such data using a graph, where an
edge between two nodes (data points) indicates the presence
of a relationship. The resultant task of node classification
has attracted significant attention from the graph-learning
research community, and numerous graph learning architectures have been developed that yield impressive performance, especially in semi-supervised settings (Defferrard
et al., 2016; Kipf & Welling, 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017;
Veličković et al., 2018; Zhuang & Ma, 2018; Gao et al.,
2018a; Liu et al., 2019). In such cases, knowledge of the
graph topology can compensate for scarcity of labelled data.
In practice, the semi-supervised classification task often
arises in scenarios where it is challenging or expensive to
obtain labels. If we have the opportunity to decide which
nodes to query, then we should try to select the most informative nodes that lead to the best classification accuracy.
This is, in a nutshell, the goal of active learning; as we acquire labels, we make decisions about which label to query
next based on what we have learned. This is important in
applications such as medical imaging, where generating
labels requires considerable valuable time from domain experts (Hoi et al., 2006; Gal et al., 2017; Kurzendorfer et al.,
2017). The development of active learning algorithms for
node classification in graphs can be motivated by applications of graph convolutional neural networks (GNNs) in the
medical field. For example, in (Parisot et al., 2018), GNNs
are used to classify brain scan images, with the goal of
predicting disease outcomes or detecting the presence of a
disorder. Although we may have access to many brain scans
and can specify relationships between them (thus building
a graph), obtaining labels for them is expensive because it
requires attention from medical experts.
The early research that applies active learning to graph data
mainly focuses on the non-attributed graph setting (Zhu
et al., 2003b; Ji & Han, 2012; Ma et al., 2013). We focus
on node classification for attributed graphs, so the recently
proposed GNN-based methods (Cai et al., 2017; Gao et al.,
2018b) are more aligned with the task we address. The
results reported in these works are usually based on GNNs

