Fine-Grained Analysis of Stability and Generalization for Stochastic Gradient
Descent
Yunwen Lei 1 2 Yiming Ying 3

Abstract
Recently there are a considerable amount of work
devoted to the study of the algorithmic stability
and generalization for stochastic gradient descent
(SGD). However, the existing stability analysis
requires to impose restrictive assumptions on the
boundedness of gradients, smoothness and convexity of loss functions. In this paper, we provide
a fine-grained analysis of stability and generalization for SGD by substantially relaxing these
assumptions. Firstly, we establish stability and
generalization for SGD by removing the existing
bounded gradient assumptions. The key idea is
the introduction of a new stability measure called
on-average model stability, for which we develop
novel bounds controlled by the risks of SGD iterates. This yields generalization bounds depending on the behavior of the best model, and leads
to the first-ever-known fast bounds in the lownoise setting using stability approach. Secondly,
the smoothness assumption is relaxed by considering loss functions with Hölder continuous
(sub)gradients for which we show that optimal
bounds are still achieved by balancing computation and stability. To our best knowledge, this
gives the first-ever-known stability and generalization bounds for SGD with non-smooth loss functions (e.g., hinge loss). Finally, we study learning
problems with (strongly) convex objectives but
non-convex loss functions.

1. Introduction
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) has become the
workhorse behind many machine learning problems. As
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Kaiserslautern, Germany 2 School of Computer Science, University of
Birmingham, United Kingdom 3 Department of Mathematics and
Statistics, State University of New York at Albany, USA. Correspondence to: Yiming Ying <yying@albany.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

an iterative algorithm, SGD updates the model sequentially
upon receiving a new datum with a cheap per-iteration cost,
making it amenable for big data analysis. There is a plethora
of theoretical work on its convergence analysis as an optimization algorithm (e.g. Duchi et al., 2011; Lacoste-Julien
et al., 2012; Nemirovski et al., 2009; Rakhlin et al., 2012;
Shamir & Zhang, 2013; Zhang, 2004).
Concurrently, there are a considerable amount of work with
focus on its generalization analysis (Dieuleveut & Bach,
2016; Hardt et al., 2016; Lin et al., 2016; Rosasco & Villa,
2015; Ying & Zhou, 2016). For instance, using the tool of
integral operator the work (Dieuleveut & Bach, 2016; Lin &
Rosasco, 2017; Rosasco & Villa, 2015; Ying & Pontil, 2008)
studied the excess generalization error of SGD with the least
squares loss, i.e. the difference between the true risk of SGD
iterates and the best possible risk. An advantage of this
approach is its ability to capture the regularity of regression
functions and the capacity of hypothesis spaces. The results
were further extended in Lei & Tang (2018); Lin et al. (2016)
based on tools of empirical processes which are able to deal
with general convex functions even without a smoothness
assumption. The idea is to bound the complexity of SGD
iterates in a controllable manner, and apply concentration
inequalities in empirical processes to control the uniform
deviation between population risks and empirical risks over
a ball to which the SGD iterates belong.
Recently, in the seminal work (Hardt et al., 2016) the authors
studied the generalization bounds of SGD via algorithmic
stability (Bousquet & Elisseeff, 2002; Elisseeff et al., 2005)
for convex, strongly convex and non-convex problems. This
motivates several appealing work on some weaker stability
measures of SGD that still suffice for guaranteeing generalization (Charles & Papailiopoulos, 2018; Kuzborskij &
Lampert, 2018; Zhou et al., 2018). An advantage of this stability approach is that it considers only the particular model
produced by the algorithm, and can imply generalization
bounds independent of the dimensionality.
However, the existing stability analysis of SGD is established under the strong assumptions on the loss function
such as the boundedness of the gradient and strong smoothness. Such assumptions are very restrictive which are not satisfied in many standard contexts. For example, the bounded

