DINO: Distributed Newton-Type Optimization Method

Rixon Crane 1 Fred Roosta 1 2

Abstract

where `i is a loss function corresponding to xi and parameterized by w. For example, such settings are popular in
industry in the form of federated learning when data is
collected and processed locally, which increases computing resources and facilitates data privacy (Agarwal et al.,
2018). Another example is in big data regimes, where it
is more practical, or even necessary, to partition and store
large datasets on separate machines (Zhang & Lin, 2015).
Distributing machine learning model parameters is also becoming a necessity as some highly successful models now
contain billions of parameters, such as GPT-2 (Radford et al.,
2019; Lee et al., 2014).

We present a novel communication-efficient
Newton-type algorithm for finite-sum optimization over a distributed computing environment.
Our method, named DINO, overcomes both theoretical and practical shortcomings of similar existing methods. Under minimal assumptions, we
guarantee global sub-linear convergence of DINO
to a first-order stationary point for general nonconvex functions and arbitrary data distribution
over the network. Furthermore, for functions satisfying Polyak-Lojasiewicz (PL) inequality, we
show that DINO enjoys a linear convergence rate.
Our proposed algorithm is practically parameter
free, in that it will converge regardless of the selected hyper-parameters, which are easy to tune.
Additionally, its sub-problems are simple linear
least-squares, for which efficient solvers exist, and
numerical simulations demonstrate the efficiency
of DINO as compared with similar alternatives.

1. Introduction
Consider the generic finite-sum optimization problem


m
1 X
fi (w) ,
(1)
min f (w) ,
m i=1
w∈Rd
in a centralized distributed computing environment comprised of one central driver machine communicating to m
worker machines, where each worker i only has access to fi .
A common application of this problem is where each worker
i has access to a portion of n data points {x1 , . . . , xn }, indexed by a set Si ⊆ {1, . . . , n}, with
fi (w) =

|Si | X
`j (w; xj ),
n

(2)

j∈Si

*
Equal contribution 1 School of Mathematics and Physics, University of Queensland, Australia 2 International Computer Science
Institute, Berkeley, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Rixon Crane
<r.crane@uq.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

The need for distributed computing has motivated the development of many frameworks. For example, the popular machine learning packages PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2017) and
Tensorflow (Abadi et al., 2016) contain comprehensive functionality for distributed training of machine learning models.
Despite many benefits to distributed computing, there are
significant computational bottlenecks, such as those introduced through bandwidth and latency (Shamir & Srebro,
2014; Li et al., 2014; Wangni et al., 2018). Frequent transmission of data is expensive in terms of time and physical
resources (Zhang & Lin, 2015). For example, even transferring data on a local machine can be the main contributor to
energy consumption (Shalf et al., 2011).
With the bottleneck of communication, there has recently been significant focus on developing communicationefficient distributed optimization algorithms. This is particularly apparent in regards to popular first-order methods, such
as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Haddadpour et al.,
2019; Ivkin et al., 2019; Vogels et al., 2019; Basu et al.,
2019; Teng et al., 2019; Zheng et al., 2019). As first-order
methods solely rely on gradient information, which can often be computed easily in parallel, they are usually straightforward to implement in a distributed setting. However, their
typical inherent nature of performing many computationally
inexpensive iterations, which is suitable and desirable on a
single machine, leads to significant data transmission costs
and ineffective utilization of increased computing resources
in a distributed computing environment (Wang et al., 2018).

