Optimization from Structured Samples for Coverage Functions

Wei Chen 1 Xiaoming Sun 2 3 Jialin Zhang 2 3 Zhijie Zhang 2 3

Abstract
We revisit the optimization from samples (OPS)
model, which studies the problem of optimizing
objective functions directly from the sample data.
Previous results showed that we cannot obtain a
constant approximation ratio for the maximum
coverage problem using polynomially many independent samples of the form {Si , f (Si )}ti=1
(Balkanski et al., 2017), even if coverage functions are (1 − )-PMAC learnable using these
samples (Badanidiyuru et al., 2012), which means
most of the function values can be approximately
learned very well with high probability. In this
work, to circumvent the impossibility result of
OPS, we propose a stronger model called optimization from structured samples (OPSS) for
coverage functions, where the data samples encode the structural information of the functions.
We show that under three general assumptions on
the sample distributions, we can design efficient
OPSS algorithms that achieve a constant approximation for the maximum coverage problem. We
further prove a constant lower bound under these
assumptions, which is tight when not considering
computational efficiency. Moreover, we also show
that if we remove any one of the three assumptions, OPSS for the maximum coverage problem
has no constant approximation.

1. Introduction
Traditional optimization problems in the textbook are often
formulated as mathematical models with specified param1
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China. 2 CAS Key Lab
of Network Data Science and Technology, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.. Correspondence to: Wei Chen <weic@microsoft.com>, Xiaoming Sun,
Jialin Zhang, Zhijie Zhang <{sunxiaoming, zhangjialin, zhangzhijie}@ict.ac.cn>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

eters. The computational task is to optimize an objective
function given parameters of the model. One such example is the maximum coverage problem. Given a family of
subsets T1 , T2 , · · · , Tn of a ground set N and a positive
integer k, the problem asks to find k subsets whose union
contains the most number of elements in N . In practice,
however, parameters of the model are often hidden in the
complex real world and we cannot observe them directly.
Instead, we can only learn information about the model from
the passively observed sample data. Back to the maximum
coverage problem, in this case we may not know the exact
elements contained in every subset Ti , but only observe samples of subsets Ti ’s, and for each sample we only observe the
number of elements it covers. An immediate question, recently raised by Balkanski et al. (2017), asks to what extent
we can optimize objective functions based on the sample
data that we use to learn them. More specifically, given
samples {Si , f (Si )}ti=1 where Si ’s are drawn i.i.d. from
some distribution D on the subsets of N , f : 2N → R is
an unknown objective function, and t ∈ poly(|N |), can we
solve max|S|≤k f (S)? For maximum coverage, Si would
be a collection of some subsets Ti ’s, function f would be
the number of elements covered by such collections. Such
problems form a new approach to optimization called optimization from samples (OPS) (Balkanski et al., 2017).
A reasonable and perhaps the most natural approach is to
first learn a surrogate function f˜ : 2N → R which approximates well the original function f and then optimize f˜
instead of f . One may expect that if we can approximate
a function well, then we can also optimize it well. Standard frameworks of learnability in the literature include
PAC learnability for boolean functions due to Valiant (1984)
and PMAC learnability for real-valued set functions due to
Balcan and Harvey (2011).
Unfortunately, the learning-and-then-optimization approach
does not work in general. Indeed, Balkanski et al. (2017)
show the striking result that the maximum coverage problem √
cannot be approximated within a ratio better than
−Ω( log |N |)
2
using only polynomially many samples
drawn i.i.d. from any distribution, even though (a) for any
constant  > 0, coverage functions are (1 − )-PMAC learnable over any distribution (Badanidiyuru et al., 2012), which
means most of the function values can be approximately
learned very well with high probability; and (b) maximum

