Generating Programmatic Referring Expressions via Program Synthesis

Jiani Huang 1 Calvin Smith 2 Osbert Bastani 1 Rishabh Singh 3 Aws Albarghouthi 2 Mayur Naik 1

Abstract
Incorporating symbolic reasoning into machine
learning algorithms is a promising approach to
improve performance on learning tasks that require logical reasoning. We study the problem
of generating a programmatic variant of referring
expressions that we call referring relational programs. In particular, given a symbolic representation of an image and a target object in that image,
the goal is to generate a relational program that
uniquely identifies the target object in terms of
its attributes and its relations to other objects in
the image. We propose a neurosymbolic program
synthesis algorithm that combines a policy neural network with enumerative search to generate
such relational programs. The policy neural network employs a program interpreter that provides
immediate feedback on the consequences of the
decisions made by the policy, and also takes into
account the uncertainty in the symbolic representation of the image. We evaluate our algorithm
on challenging benchmarks based on the CLEVR
dataset, and demonstrate that our approach significantly outperforms several baselines.

1. Introduction
Incorporating symbolic reasoning with deep neural networks (DNNs) is an important challenge in machine learning. Intuitively, DNNs are promising techniques for processing perceptual information; then, symbolic reasoning
should be able to operate over the outputs of the DNNs to accomplish more abstract tasks. Recent work has successfully
applied this approach to question-answering tasks, showing
that leveraging programmatic representations can substantially improve performance—in particular, in visual question
answering, by building a programmatic representation of
1

University of Pennsylvania 2 University of WisconsinMadison 3 Google Brain. Correspondence to: Jiani Huang
<jianih@seas.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

the question and a symbolic representation of the image, we
can evaluate the question representation in the context of
the image representation to compute the answer (Yi et al.,
2018; Mao et al., 2019; Ma et al., 2019).
A natural question is whether incorporating symbolic reasoning with DNNs can be useful for tasks beyond question
answering. In particular, consider the problem of generating
a referring expression—i.e., an image caption that uniquely
identifies a given target object in a given image (Golland
et al., 2010; Kazemzadeh et al., 2014). In contrast to visual
question answering, where we translate a question to a program and then execute that program, in this case, we want to
synthesize a program identifying the target object and then
translate this program into a caption.
In this paper, we take a first step towards realizing this approach. In particular, we study the problem of generating a
programmatic variant of referring expressions that we call
referring relational programs. We assume we are given a
symbolic representation of an image—such a representation
can be constructed using state-of-the-art deep learning algorithms (Redmon et al., 2016; Krishna et al., 2017; Yi et al.,
2018; Mao et al., 2019)—together with a target object in
that image. Then, our goal is to synthesize a relational program that uniquely identifies the target object in terms of its
attributes and its relations to other objects in the image. Figure 1 (left) shows an example of an image from the CLEVR
dataset, and two referring relational programs for object G
in this image. The task for this image is challenging since G
has identical attributes as H, which means that the program
must use spatial relationships to distinguish them.
Our formulation of referring relational programs can take
into account the uncertainty in the predictions of the DNN
used to construct the symbolic representation of the image.
One approach would be to use probabilistic reasoning, but
doing so can be computationally intractable. Instead, we
use an approach based on uncertainty sets—we construct
uncertainty sets that include all DNN predictions above a
certain probability threshold, and require that the referring
relational program uniquely identify the target object for all
possible configurations in these uncertainty sets.
Based on this formulation, we propose an algorithm for
synthesizing referring relational programs given the sym-

