Efficiently Learning Adversarially Robust Halfspaces with Noise

Omar Montasser 1 Surbhi Goel 2 Ilias Diakonikolas 3 Nathan Srebro 1

Abstract

The information-theoretic aspects of adversarially robust
learning have been studied in recent work, see, e.g.,
(Schmidt et al., 2018; Cullina et al., 2018; Khim & Loh,
2018; Bubeck et al., 2019; Yin et al., 2019; Montasser et al.,
2019). This includes studying what learning rules should
be used for robust learning and how much training data is
needed to guarantee high robust accuracy. It is now known
that any hypothesis class H with finite VC dimension is
robustly learnable, though sometimes improper learning is
necessary and the sample complexity may be exponential in
the VC dimension (Montasser et al., 2019).

We study the problem of learning adversarially
robust halfspaces in the distribution-independent
setting. In the realizable setting, we provide necessary and sufficient conditions on the adversarial
perturbation sets under which halfspaces are efficiently robustly learnable. In the presence of
random label noise, we give a simple computationally efficient algorithm for this problem with
respect to any `p -perturbation.

1. Introduction
Learning predictors that are robust to adversarial examples
remains a major challenge in machine learning. A line
of work has shown that predictors learned by deep neural
networks are not robust to adversarial examples (Szegedy
et al., 2014; Biggio et al., 2013; Goodfellow et al., 2015).
This has led to a long line of research studying different
aspects of robustness to adversarial examples.
In this paper, we consider the problem of distributionindependent learning of halfspaces that are robust to adversarial examples at test time, also referred to as robust
PAC learning of halfspaces. Halfspaces are binary predictors of the form hw (x) = sign(hw, xi), where w ∈ Rd .
In adversarially robust PAC learning, given an instance
space X and label space Y = {±1}, we formalize an adversary – that we would like to be robust against – as a
map U : X 7→ 2X , where U(x) ⊆ X represents the set of
perturbations (adversarial examples) that can be chosen by
the adversary at test time (i.e., we require that x ∈ U(x)).
For an unknown distribution D over X × Y, we observe m
i.i.d. samples S ∼ Dm , and our goal is to learn a predictor
ĥ : X 7→ Y that achieves small robust risk,
"
#
RU (ĥ; D) ,

E

sup 1[ĥ(z) 6= y] .

(x,y)∼D z∈U (x)

(1)

1

Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago 2 University of Texas
at Austin 3 University of Wisconsin-Madison. Correspondence to:
Omar Montasser <omar@ttic.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

On the other hand, the computational aspects of adversarially robust PAC learning are less understood. In this paper,
we take a first step towards studying this broad algorithmic question with a focus on the fundamental problem of
learning adversarially robust halfspaces.
A first question to ask is whether efficient PAC learning
implies efficient robust PAC learning, i.e., whether there
is a general reduction that solves the adversarially robust
learning problem. Recent work has provided strong evidence that this is not the case. Specifically, (Bubeck et al.,
2019) showed that there exists a learning problem that can
be learned efficiently non-robustly, but is computationally
intractable to learn robustly (under plausible complexitytheoretic assumptions). There is also more recent evidence
that suggests that this is also the case in the PAC model.
(Awasthi et al., 2019) showed that it is computationally intractable to even weakly robustly learn degree-2 polynomial
threshold functions (PTFs) with `∞ perturbations in the
realizable setting, while PTFs of any constant degree are
known to be efficiently PAC learnable non-robustly in the
realizable setting. (Gourdeau et al., 2019) showed that there
are hypothesis classes that are hard to robustly PAC learn,
under the assumption that it is hard to non-robustly PAC
learn.
The aforementioned discussion suggests that when studying robust PAC learning, we need to characterize which
types of perturbation sets U admit computationally efficient
robust PAC learners and under which noise assumptions.
In the agnostic PAC setting, it is known that even weak
(non-robust) learning of halfspaces is computationally intractable (Feldman et al., 2006; Guruswami & Raghavendra,
2009; Diakonikolas et al., 2011; Daniely, 2016). For `2 -

