Cost-effectively Identifying Causal Effects When
Only Response Variable is Observable

Tian-Zuo Wang 1 Xi-Zhu Wu 1 Sheng-Jun Huang 2 Zhi-Hua Zhou 1

Abstract
In many real tasks, we care about how to make
decisions rather than mere predictions on an event,
e.g. how to increase the revenue next month instead of merely knowing it will drop. The key is to
identify the causal effects on the desired event. It
is achievable with do-calculus if the causal structure is known; however, in many real tasks it is
not easy to infer the whole causal structure with
the observational data. Introducing external interventions is needed to achieve it. In this paper, we
study the situation where only the response variable is observable under intervention. We propose
a novel approach which is able to cost-effectively
identify the causal effects, by an active strategy
introducing limited interventions, and thus guide
decision-making. Theoretical analysis and empirical studies validate the effectiveness of the
proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Making accurate predictions on an event has been extensively studied, and achieved great success in various applications. In many real tasks, however, it is more important
to know how to make decisions rather than mere predictions. For example, instead of knowing that there will be a
drop in sales, sellers care more about how to increase sales;
and doctors care about how to rehabilitate patients rather
than merely predicting the disease. A reasonable solution
for such problems is to make causal effect identification,
i.e. identify the causal effect of each variable on the event.
Then one can know how to make the optimal decision by an
intervention on a specific variable with a specific value.
1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 2 College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China. Correspondence
to: Sheng-Jun Huang <huangsj@nuaa.edu.cn>, Zhi-Hua Zhou
<zhouzh@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Pearl contributed a series of seminal works (Pearl, 2009)
in identifying causal effects. Given the knowledge of the
causal graph, do-calculus is an excellent tool to make it.
However, the causal graph is usually not available in advance, and thus it is crucial to discover the causal structure.
There are many classical off-the-shelf causal discovery methods (Spirtes et al., 2000; Chickering, 2002), which typically
obtain a Markov equivalence class based on the observational data. Unfortunately, there often remains unknown
causal relations in the Markov equivalence class, leading
to some unidentified causal effects. A primary solution is
to discover the additional causal relations from the interventional data generated by actively intervening on some
variables. Some related works are proposed to discover the
whole structure with the target of reducing the total intervention times or cost (He & Geng, 2008; Hauser & Bühlmann,
2014; Kocaoglu et al., 2017). When all variables under interventions are observable, these methods work quite well.
In many real tasks, however, when performing interventions,
it is expensive or even hard to observe all variables. For example, after receiving treatments, the patients are not willing
to undergo a full medical examination once again. Usually,
doctors merely get the feedback of their illness conditions.
In many cases, only the event we want to change, i.e., the
response variable, is easily accessible when we impose
an intervention. In this paper, to deal with such problems,
we propose a novel approach ACI for Active Causal effect Identification, i.e., identify causal effects when only
response variable is observable under active intervention.
Due to the limitation of observations, it is no longer easy
to identify the causal structure by methods of He & Geng
(2008) and Hauser & Bühlmann (2014). Specifically, these
methods identify causal relations by just whether the distribution of some variable changes under interventions on
others. In their setting, such consideration is sufficient
for the causal discovery process. But when only the postinterventional information of response variable is available,
they may fail to discover the causal structure. For example,
the structures in Fig. 1(a) and Fig. 1(b) cannot be distinguished because no matter which variables we intervene on,
the distribution of Y will change. We make a progress on
how to use interventional data. To the best of our knowledge,

