Optimization and Analysis of the pAp@k Metric for Recommender Systems

Gaurush Hiranandani 1 Warut Vijitbenjaronk 1 Oluwasanmi Koyejo 1 Prateek Jain 2

Abstract
Modern recommendation and notifcation systems
must be robust to data imbalance, limitations
on the number of recommendations/notifcations,
and heterogeneous engagement profles across
users. The pAp@k metric, which combines the
partial-AUC and the precision@k metrics, was
recently proposed to evaluate such recommendation systems and has been used in real-world deployments. Conceptually, pAp@k measures the
probability of correctly ranking a top-ranked positive instance over top-ranked negative instances.
Due to the combinatorial aspect surfaced by topranked points, little is known about the characteristics and optimization methods of pAp@k. In
this paper, we analyze the learning-theoretic properties of pAp@k, particularly its benefts in evaluating modern recommender systems, and propose
novel surrogates that are consistent under certain
data regularity conditions. We then provide gradient descent based algorithms to optimize the surrogates directly. Our analysis and experimental
evaluation suggest that pAp@k indeed exhibits
a certain dual behavior with respect to partialAUC and precision@k. Moreover, the proposed
methods outperform all the baselines in various
applications. Taken together, our results motivate
the use of pAp@k for large-scale recommender
systems with heterogeneous user-engagement.

1. Introduction
Modern recommendation services are quickly shifting from
the search based pull paradigm, which requires users to be
aware of the information in the frst place, to push services,
where the relevant information is recommended automatically. To devise high-quality push services, system designers
must grapple with a variety of issues, which include data imbalance, space constraints, i.e., the recommendation of only
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Illinois, USA
Microsoft Research, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India. Correspondence to: Gaurush Hiranandani <gaurush2@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the
author(s).
2

a few items (top-k) out of a vast repository of items, and
heterogeneity in the engagement profles of users with the
system, i.e., varied fraction of relevant items across users.
Examples of platforms that must manage these constraints
are ubiquitous – the Microsoft Teams platform1 constructs
the activity feed by displaying only a few essential messages
to the users, the Behance2 news feed includes only a few
photos based on user’s preferences, and Google Scholar3
notifes users about a selected subset of the most relevant citations to the user’s research. For such application domains,
the recommendation problem can be formulated as a bipartite ranking problem. Further, in top-k settings, an ideal
ranking metric rewards ordering the most relevant items at
the top of the list, whereas accurate ranking in the remaining
part is not of great importance (Rakotomamonjy, 2012).
To this end, several metrics have been proposed such
as area under the receiver operating characteristic curve
(AUC) (Rakotomamonjy, 2004), partial-AUC (McClish,
1989), and precision@k (Agichtein et al., 2006). Unfortunately, these standard metrics often fail to address one
or more of the outlined challenges. For instance, while it
is widely accepted that AUC is suitable for ranking problems characterized by imbalanced class priors (Cortes &
Mohri, 2004), it can provide a misleading picture to the
practitioners when the focus is on accuracy at the top of
the list (Agarwal, 2011). Consider the example in Table 1,
where three ranking functions f1 , f2 , and f3 provide ranking to a dataset of fve relevant (label = 1) and six irrelevant
(label = 0) instances. While f1 has the highest AUC, its
accuracy at the top is the worst among the three functions.
The partial-AUC (pAUC) is designed to address this issue (Jiang et al., 1996; Agarwal, 2011); however, pAUC
itself is often inadequate as it unnecessarily pits all the relevant items beyond the privileged set of k relevant items
against the top scored irrelevant items – thus over-penalizing
predictions that are suffciently accurate at the top-k. Again,
take the example in Table 1: f2 ’s accuracy at the top is not
the most adequate; however, it achieves the highest pAUC
when recommendations are limited to k = 2 items as pAUC
rewards gain in ranking all the relevant items (even beyond
top-2) over irrelevant items. This issue is exacerbated when
the model is learned jointly across multiple users with a
1
2

www.products.offce.com/microsoft-teams
www.behance.net 3 www.scholar.google.com

