An Optimistic Perspective on Offline Reinforcement Learning

Rishabh Agarwal 1 Dale Schuurmans 1 2 Mohammad Norouzi 1

Abstract
Off-policy reinforcement learning (RL) using a
fixed offline dataset of logged interactions is an
important consideration in real world applications.
This paper studies offline RL using the DQN Replay Dataset comprising the entire replay experience of a DQN agent on 60 Atari 2600 games.
We demonstrate that recent off-policy deep RL
algorithms, even when trained solely on this fixed
dataset, outperform the fully-trained DQN agent.
To enhance generalization in the offline setting,
we present Random Ensemble Mixture (REM), a
robust Q-learning algorithm that enforces optimal
Bellman consistency on random convex combinations of multiple Q-value estimates. Offline REM
trained on the DQN Replay Dataset surpasses
strong RL baselines. Ablation studies highlight
the role of offline dataset size and diversity as
well as the algorithm choice in our positive results. Overall, the results here present an optimistic view that robust RL algorithms used on
sufficiently large and diverse offline datasets can
lead to high quality policies. To provide a testbed
for offline RL and reproduce our results, the DQN
Replay Dataset is released at offline-rl.github.io.

1

Introduction

One of the main reasons behind the success of deep learning
is the availability of large and diverse datasets such as ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) to train expressive deep neural
networks. By contrast, most reinforcement learning (RL)
algorithms (Sutton & Barto, 2018) assume that an agent
interacts with an online environment or simulator and learns
from its own collected experience. This limits online RL’s
applicability to complex real world problems, where active
data collection means gathering large amounts of diverse
data from scratch per experiment, which can be expensive,
1

Google Research, Brain Team 2 University of Alberta. Correspondence to: Rishabh Agarwal <rishabhagarwal@google.com>,
Mohammad Norouzi <mnorouzi@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

unsafe, or require a high-fidelity simulator that is often difficult to build (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2019).
Offline RL concerns the problem of learning a policy from
a fixed dataset of trajectories, without any further interactions with the environment. This setting can leverage the
vast amount of existing logged interactions for real world
decision-making problems such as robotics (Cabi et al.,
2019; Dasari et al., 2019), autonomous driving (Yu et al.,
2018), recommendation systems (Strehl et al., 2010; Bottou et al., 2013), and healthcare (Shortreed et al., 2011).
The effective use of such datasets would not only make
real-world RL more practical, but would also enable better
generalization by incorporating diverse prior experiences.
In offline RL, an agent does not receive any new corrective
feedback from the online environment and needs to generalize from a fixed dataset of interactions to new online
interactions during evaluation. In principle, off-policy algorithms can learn from data collected by any policy, however,
recent work (Fujimoto et al., 2019b; Kumar et al., 2019;
Wu et al., 2019; Siegel et al., 2020) presents a discouraging
view that standard off-policy deep RL algorithms diverge
or otherwise yield poor performance in the offline setting.
Such papers propose remedies by regularizing the learned
policy to stay close to the training dataset of offline trajectories. Furthermore, Zhang & Sutton (2017) assert that a large
replay buffer can even hurt the performance of off-policy
algorithms due to its “off-policyness”.
By contrast, this paper presents an optimistic perspective on
offline RL that with sufficiently large and diverse datasets,
robust RL algorithms, without an explicit correction for
distribution mismatch, can result in high quality policies.
The contributions of this paper can be summarized as:
• An offline RL setup is proposed for evaluating algorithms on Atari 2600 games (Bellemare et al., 2013),
based on the logged replay data of a DQN agent (Mnih
et al., 2015) comprising 50 million (observation, action,
reward, next observation) tuples per game. This setup reduces the computation cost of the experiments considerably and helps improve reproducibility by standardizing
training using a fixed dataset. The DQN Replay Dataset
and our code1 is released to enable offline optimization
1

Open-source code at github.com/google-research/batch_rl.

