Linear Mode Connectivity and the Lottery Ticket Hypothesis

Jonathan Frankle 1 Gintare Karolina Dziugaite 2 Daniel M. Roy 3 4 Michael Carbin 1

Abstract
We study whether a neural network optimizes to
the same, linearly connected minimum under different samples of SGD noise (e.g., random data
order and augmentation). We find that standard
vision models become stable to SGD noise in this
way early in training. From then on, the outcome
of optimization is determined to a linearly connected region. We use this technique to study
iterative magnitude pruning (IMP), the procedure
used by work on the lottery ticket hypothesis to
identify subnetworks that could have trained in
isolation to full accuracy. We find that these subnetworks only reach full accuracy when they are
stable to SGD noise, which either occurs at initialization for small-scale settings (MNIST) or early
in training for large-scale settings (ResNet-50 and
Inception-v3 on ImageNet).

1. Introduction
When training a neural network with mini-batch stochastic
gradient descent (SGD), training examples are presented to
the network in a random order within each epoch. In many
cases, each example also undergoes random data augmentation. This randomness can be seen as noise that varies
from training run to training run and alters the network’s trajectory through the optimization landscape, even when the
initialization and hyperparameters are fixed. In this paper,
we investigate how this SGD noise affects the outcome of
optimizing neural networks and the role this effect plays in
sparse, lottery ticket networks (Frankle & Carbin, 2019).
Instability analysis. To study these questions, we propose
instability analysis. The goal of instability analysis is to
determine whether the outcome of optimizing a particular
neural network is stable to SGD noise. Figure 1 (left) visualizes instability analysis. First, we create a network N with
random initialization W0 . We then train two copies of N
1
MIT CSAIL 2 Element AI 3 University of Toronto 4 Vector Institute. Correspondence to: Jonathan Frankle <jfrankle@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

W0

W0

Wk

WT1

WT2

WT1

WT2

Instability
Instability
Figure 1. A diagram of instability analysis from step 0 (left) and
step k (right) when comparing networks using linear interpolation.

with different samples of SGD noise (i.e., different random
data orders and augmentations). Finally, we compare the
resulting networks to measure the effect of these different
samples of SGD noise on the outcome of optimization. If
the networks are sufficiently similar according to a criterion,
we determine N to be stable to SGD noise. We also study
this behavior starting from the state of N at step k of training (Figure 1 right). Doing so allows us to determine when
the outcome of optimization becomes stable to SGD noise.
There are many possible ways in which to compare the
networks that result from instability analysis (Appendix G).
We use the behavior of the optimization landscape along
the line between these networks (blue in Figure 1). Does
error remain flat or even decrease (meaning the networks
are in the same, linearly connected minimum), or is there a
barrier of increased error? We define the linear interpolation
instability of N to SGD noise as the maximum increase
in error along this path (red). We consider N stable to
SGD noise if error does not increase along this path, i.e.,
instability ≈ 0. This means N will find the same, linearly
connected minimum regardless of the sample of SGD noise.
By linearly interpolating at the end of training in this fashion,
we assess a linear form of mode connectivity, a phenomenon
where the minima found by two networks are connected
by a path of nonincreasing error. Freeman & Bruna (2017),
Draxler et al. (2018), and Garipov et al. (2018) show that the
modes of standard vision networks trained from different
initializations are connected by nonlinear paths of constant
error or loss. Based on this work, we expect that all networks
we examine are connected by such paths. However, the
modes found by Draxler et al. and Garipov et al. are not
connected by linear paths. The only extant example of
linear mode connectivity is by Nagarajan & Kolter (2019),
who train MLPs from the same initialization on disjoint

