Variational Label Enhancement
Ning Xu 1 Jun Shu 2 Yun-Peng Liu 1 Xin Geng 1

Abstract
Label distribution covers a certain number of labels, representing the degree to which each label
describes the instance. When dealing with label
ambiguity, label distribution could describe the
supervised information in a fine-grained way. Unfortunately, many training sets only contain simple logical labels rather than label distributions
due to the difficulty of obtaining label distributions directly. To solve this problem, we consider
the label distributions as the latent vectors and
infer them from the logical labels in the training datasets by using variational inference. After
that, we induce a predictive model to train the
label distribution data by employing the multioutput regression technique. The recovery experiment on fourteen label distribution datasets
and the predictive experiment on ten multi-label
learning datasets validate the advantage of our
approach over the state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Learning with ambiguity is a hot topic in recent machine
learning and data mining research. A learning process is
essentially building a mapping from the instances to the
labels. This paper mainly focuses on the ambiguity at the label side of the mapping, i.e., one instance is not necessarily
mapped to one label (Tsoumakas & Katakis, 2006). During the past decade, the techniques for learning with label
ambiguity have been widely employed to learn from data
with rich semantics, such as text (Rubin et al., 2012), image
(Cabral et al., 2011), audio (Lo et al., 2011), video (Wang
et al., 2011), etc. For learning with label ambiguity, the logical labels are always assigned to the instance, partitioning
the supervised information into relevance/irrelevance labels
rigidly (Gibaja & Ventura, 2015; Zhang & Zhou, 2014).
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China 2 School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China. Correspondence to: Xin Geng <xgeng@seu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

relevant labels

instances

irrelevant labels

sand

sun

sailboat
(a)

sand
bus

sailboat

(b)

Figure 1. An example of the relative importance among relevant /
irrelevant labels

However, the relevance or irrelevance of a label to an instance is essentially relative in the real-world tasks. When
multiple labels are associated with an instance, the relative
importance among them is more likely to be different rather
than exactly equal. For instance, when “sand” and “sailboat”
are relevant to the two images in Fig. 1, “sand” is more
significant than “sailboat” in image (a) and the opposite
scenario occurs in image (b). On the other hand, the “irrelevance” of each irrelevant label may be very different.
For instance, “bus” is more irrelevant than “sun” to the two
images in Fig. 1, since “sun” often appears with “sand”and
“sailboat” on the beach. Therefore, assigning the logical
label lxy ∈ {0, 1} to each instance x with the relevant (irrelevant) label y ignores the relative importance among the
relevant (irrelevant) labels.
To solve this problem, a more natural way to label an instance x is to assign a real number dyx to each possible label
y, representing the degree to which y describes x. Such dyx
is called the description degree of y to x. For a particular
instance, the description degrees of all the labels constitute
a real-valued vector called label distribution (Geng, 2016).
Therefore, label distribution is more fine-grained to describe
the supervised information in the tasks of learning with label
ambiguity.
However, label distributions are not explicitly available in
most training sets as quantifying the description degrees is
costly. It needs to be somehow recovered from the training
set, a process which is named as label enhancement (LE)
(Xu et al., 2018). After the label distributions are recov-

