Fast and Private Submodular and k-Submodular Functions Maximization with
Matroid Constraints
Akbar Rafiey 1 Yuichi Yoshida 2

Abstract
The problem of maximizing nonnegative monotone submodular functions under a certain constraint has been intensively studied in the last
decade, and a wide range of efficient approximation algorithms have been developed for this
problem. Many machine learning problems, including data summarization and influence maximization, can be naturally modeled as the problem
of maximizing monotone submodular functions.
However, when such applications involve sensitive data about individuals, their privacy concerns
should be addressed. In this paper, we study the
problem of maximizing monotone submodular
functions subject to matroid constraints in the
framework of differential privacy. We provide
(1 − 1e )-approximation algorithm which improves
upon the previous results in terms of approximation guarantee. This is done with an almost cubic
number of function evaluations in our algorithm.
Moreover, we study k-submodularity, a natural
generalization of submodularity. We give the
first 12 -approximation algorithm that preserves
differential privacy for maximizing monotone
k-submodular functions subject to matroid constraints. The approximation ratio is asymptotically tight and is obtained with an almost linear
number of function evaluations.

1. Introduction
A set function F : 2E → R is submodular if for any S ⊆
T ⊆ E and e ∈ E \ T it holds that F (S ∪ {e}) − F (S) ≥
F (T ∪ {e}) − F (T ). The theory of submodular maximization provides a general and unified framework for various
1
Department of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, Canada 2 National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo,
Japan. Correspondence to: Akbar Rafiey <arafiey@sfu.ca>,
Yuichi Yoshida <yyoshida@nii.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

combinatorial optimization problems including the Maximum Coverage, Maximum Cut, and Facility Location problems. Furthermore, it also appears in a wide variety of
applications such as viral marketing (Kempe et al., 2003),
information gathering (Krause & Guestrin, 2007), feature
selection for classification (Krause & Guestrin, 2005), influence maximization in social networks (Kempe et al., 2003),
document summarization (Lin & Bilmes, 2011), and speeding up satisfiability solvers (Streeter & Golovin, 2008). For
a survey, see (Krause & Golovin, 2014). As a consequence
of these applications and importance, a wide range of efficient approximation algorithms have been developed for
maximizing submodular functions subject to different constraints (Călinescu et al., 2011; Nemhauser & Wolsey, 1978;
Nemhauser et al., 1978; Vondrák, 2008).
The need for efficient optimization methods that guarantee
the privacy of individuals is wide-spread across many applications concerning sensitive data about individuals, e.g.,
medical data, web search query data, salary data, social
networks. Let us motivate privacy concerns by an example.
Example 1.1 (Feature Selection (Krause & Guestrin,
2005; Mitrovic et al., 2017)). A sensitive dataset
D = {(xi , Ci )}ni=1 consists of a feature vector xi =
(xi (1), . . . , xi (m)) associated to each individual i together
with a binary class label Ci . The objective is to select a
small (e.g., size at most k) subset S ⊆ [m] of features that
can provide a good classifier for C. One particular example
for this setting is determining collection of features such as
height, weight, and age that are most relevant in predicting
if an individual is likely to have a particular disease such as
diabetes and HIV. One approach to address the feature selection problem, due to Krause & Guestrin (2005), is based
on maximizing a submodular function which captures the
mutual information between a subset of features and the
class label of interest. Here, it is important that the selection
of relevant features does not compromise the privacy of any
individual who has contributed to the training dataset.
Differential privacy is a rigorous notion of privacy that allows statistical analysis of sensitive data while providing
strong privacy guarantees. Basically, differential privacy
requires that computations be insensitive to changes in any
particular individual’s record. A dataset is a collection of

