Born-Again Tree Ensembles

Thibaut Vidal 1 Maximilian Schiffer 2

Abstract
The use of machine learning algorithms in finance,
medicine, and criminal justice can deeply impact
human lives. As a consequence, research into interpretable machine learning has rapidly grown
in an attempt to better control and fix possible
sources of mistakes and biases. Tree ensembles
offer a good prediction quality in various domains,
but the concurrent use of multiple trees reduces
the interpretability of the ensemble. Against this
background, we study born-again tree ensembles,
i.e., the process of constructing a single decision
tree of minimum size that reproduces the exact
same behavior as a given tree ensemble in its entire feature space. To find such a tree, we develop
a dynamic-programming based algorithm that exploits sophisticated pruning and bounding rules
to reduce the number of recursive calls. This algorithm generates optimal born-again trees for many
datasets of practical interest, leading to classifiers
which are typically simpler and more interpretable
without any other form of compromise.

1. Introduction
Tree ensembles constitute a core technique for prediction
and classification tasks. Random forests (Breiman, 2001)
and boosted trees (Friedman, 2001) have been used in various application fields, e.g., in medicine for recurrence risk
prediction and image classification, in criminal justice for
custody decisions, or in finance for credit risk evaluation.
Although tree ensembles offer a high prediction quality,
distorted predictions in high-stakes decisions can be exceedingly harmful. Here, interpretable machine learning models
are essential to understand potential distortions and biases.
Research in this domain has significantly increased (Mur1

Department of Computer Science, Pontifical Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro (PUC-Rio), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. 2 TUM
School of Management, Technical University of Munich, Munich,
Germany. Correspondence to: Thibaut Vidal <vidalt@inf.pucrio.br>, Maximilian Schiffer <schiffer@tum.de>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

doch et al., 2019) with numerous works focusing on the
construction of optimal sparse trees (Hu et al., 2019) or on
the interpretability of neural networks (Zhang et al., 2018;
Melis & Jaakkola, 2018).
Currently, there exists a trade-off between the interpretability and the performance of tree (ensemble) classifiers. Single decision trees (e.g., those produced by CART) are wellknown for their interpretability, whereas tree ensembles and
gradient boosting approaches allow for high prediction quality but are generally more opaque and redundant. Against
this background, we study born-again tree ensembles in a
similar notion as born-again trees (see, Breiman & Shang,
1996), and search for a simpler classifier that faithfully reproduces the behavior of a tree ensemble.
Formally, let (X, y) = {xi , yi }ni=1 be a training set in
which each xi ∈ Rp is a p-dimensional numerical feature
vector, and each yi ∈ N is its associated class. Each sample
of this training set has been independently drawn from an
unknown distribution (X , Y). Based on this training set, a
tree ensemble T learns a function FT : X → Y that predicts yi for each xi drawn from X . With this notation, we
state Problem 1, which is the core of our studies.
Problem 1 (Born-again tree ensemble) Given a tree ensemble T , we search for a decision tree T of minimal size
that is faithful to T , i.e., such that FT (x) = FT (x) for all
x ∈ Rp .
We note that the condition FT (x) = FT (x) applies to the
entire feature space. Indeed, our goal is to faithfully reproduce the decision function of the tree ensemble for all
possible inputs in X . In other words, we are looking for
a new representation of the same classifier. Problem 1 depends on the definition of a size metric. In this study, we
refer to the size of a tree either as its depth (D) or its number
of leaves (L). Additionally, we study a hierarchical objective
(DL) which optimizes depth in priority and then the number of leaves. For brevity, we detail the methodology for
the depth objective (D) in the main paper. The supplementary material contains the algorithmic adaptations needed to
cover the other objectives, rigorous proofs for all theorems,
as well as additional illustrations and experimental results.
Theorem 1 states the computational complexity of Problem 1.

