Learning Task-Agnostic Embedding of Multiple Black-Box Experts
for Multi-Task Model Fusion
Trong Nghia Hoang * 1 Chi Thanh Lam * 2 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low 2 Patrick Jaillet 3

Abstract
Model fusion is an emerging study in collective
learning where heterogeneous experts with private
data and learning architectures need to combine
their black-box knowledge for better performance.
Existing literature achieves this via a local knowledge distillation scheme that transfuses the predictive patterns of each pre-trained expert onto a
white-box imitator model, which can be incorporated efficiently into a global model. This scheme
however does not extend to multi-task scenarios
where different experts were trained to solve different tasks and only part of their distilled knowledge is relevant to a new task. To address this
multi-task challenge, we develop a new fusion
paradigm that represents each expert as a distribution over a spectrum of predictive prototypes,
which are isolated from task-specific information
encoded within the prototype distribution. The
task-agnostic prototypes can then be reintegrated
to generate a new model that solves a new task
encoded with a different prototype distribution.
The fusion and adaptation performance of the proposed framework is demonstrated empirically on
several real-world benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
In various disciplines such as environmental sensing (Low
et al., 2007; 2009; Podnar et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2017),
traffic monitoring (Hoang et al., 2014a;b; 2015; 2017; Yu
et al., 2019) and healthcare analytics (Fu et al., 2019; Hong
et al., 2019; Xiao et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2020), observational data that describe the same phenomenon or concept
are often acquired from multiple experiments, which are conducted on different subjects. The data that they generated
*

Equal contribution 1 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab 2 National University of Singapore 3 Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Trong Nghia Hoang <nghiaht@ibm.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

would therefore have different distributions or statistical
properties. In practice, due to privacy concerns, data collected from different acquisition frameworks (e.g., sensors
and/or experiments) are also private and cannot be shared
among themselves (McMahan et al., 2017; Yoon et al., 2018;
Hoang et al., 2019b). This creates private datasets of the
same phenomenon, where each is used to train a separate
model from a local perspective. For example, in clinical
research, patient information is often recorded across different institutions (Xu & Wang, 2019), which do not share data
with each other due to protect the patient’s sensitive information. As such, each institution can only model the patient
population using data collected from a single demographic
region, which might not generalize well to others.
Furthermore, in settings with strict security requirements,
parameters of a local model also need to be kept private
due to a recently discovered threat of adversarial ML attack
(Finlayson et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2019), which essentially
makes it a black box to others. This violates the model
transparency requirement of existing distributed modeling
works addressing this data federation issue (McMahan et al.,
2017; Hoang et al., 2019b; Yurochkin et al., 2019a;b; Singh
& Jaggi, 2019), which results in the black-box challenge.
This led us to the recent development of a black-box fusion
framework (Hoang et al., 2019a) which allows multiple
agents (e.g., medical institutions) to transfuse their blackbox knowledge onto the corresponding white-box surrogates
that share the same model architecture. Each surrogate can
then exchange and aggregate the parameter gradients of
their predictions to generate a parameter-correcting gradient
that combines their learning priors.
However, similar to the existing literature in federated learning (McMahan et al., 2017; Hoang et al., 2019b; Yurochkin
et al., 2019a;b), this work assumes local models were trained
to solve the same task (albeit with different data). Their
proposed methods in fact do not isolate task-specific (irrelevant knowledge) from task-agnostic information (relevant
knowledge) which are implicitly entangled in the parameter
representation of each model. This entanglement presents a
problem in multi-task setting since it does not tell us which
part of an existing model is relevant to a new task and which
part is not. This is also an issue in a remotely relevant litera-

