Feature Noise Induces Loss Discrepancy Across Groups

Fereshte Khani 1 Percy Liang 1

Abstract
The performance of standard learning procedures
has been observed to differ widely across groups.
Recent studies usually attribute this loss discrepancy to an information deficiency for one group
(e.g., one group has less data). In this work, we
point to a more subtle source of loss discrepancy—
feature noise. Our main result is that even when
there is no information deficiency specific to
one group (e.g., both groups have infinite data),
adding the same amount of feature noise to all
individuals leads to loss discrepancy. For linear
regression, we thoroughly characterize the effect
of feature noise on loss discrepancy in terms of
the amount of noise, the difference between moments of the two groups, and whether group information is used or not. We then show this loss
discrepancy does not vanish immediately if a shift
in distribution causes the groups to have similar moments. On three real-world datasets, we
show feature noise increases the loss discrepancy
if groups have different distributions, while it does
not affect the loss discrepancy on datasets where
groups have similar distributions.

1. Introduction
Standard learning procedures such as empirical risk minimization have been shown to result in models that perform
well on average but whose performance differ widely across
groups such as whites and non-whites (Angwin et al., 2016;
Barocas and Selbst, 2016). This loss discrepancy across
groups is especially problematic in critical applications that
impact people’s lives (Berk, 2012; Chouldechova, 2017).
Despite the vast literature on removing loss discrepancy
(Hardt et al., 2016; Khani et al., 2019; Agarwal et al., 2018;
Zafar et al., 2017), the direct removal of loss discrepancy
might introduce other problems such as intra-group loss
1
Department of Computer Scinece, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Fereshte Khani <fereshte@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

discrepancy (Lipton et al., 2018) and adverse long-term
impacts (Liu et al., 2018). Therefore, it is important to
understand the source of loss discrepancy.
Why do such loss discrepancies exist? The literature generally studies sources of loss discrepancy due to an “information deficiency” of one group—that is, one group has,
for example, more noise (Corbett-Davies et al., 2017), less
training data (Chouldechova and Roth, 2018; Chen et al.,
2018), biased prediction targets (Madras et al., 2019), or
less-predictive features (Chen et al., 2018). Some work also
states that groups have different risk distributions, and thus
making hard (binary) decisions on such distributions causes
loss discrepancy (Corbett-Davies and Goel, 2018; Canetti
et al., 2019). In this work, we show that even under very
favorable conditions—i.e., no bias in the prediction targets,
infinite data, perfect predictive features for both groups, and
no hard (binary) decisions (in regression)—adding the same
amount of feature noise to all individuals still leads to loss
discrepancy.
In order to study the effect of feature noise (which includes
omitted features as a special case) and use of group information on loss discrepancy, we consider the following
regression setup. We assume each individual belongs to
a group g ∈ {0, 1} and has latent features z ∈ Rd which
cause the target y = β > z + α. However, we only observe a
noisy version of z through one of the following observation
functions:
o−g (z, g, u) = [z + u],

o+g (z, g, u) = [z + u, g],

(1)
(2)

where u ∈ Rd is mean-zero noise independent of the rest of
the variables, and the group membership g can be either included or not. We study the discrepancy of both the residual
(y − ŷ), which measures the amount of underestimation and
the squared error ((y − ŷ)2 ), which measures the overall
performance. Abusing terminology, we call both losses.
We consider two common flavors of loss discrepancies: (i)
statistical loss discrepancy, which measures the difference
between the expected losses of the two groups (Hardt et al.,
2016; Agarwal et al., 2018; Woodworth et al., 2017; Pleiss
et al., 2017; Khani et al., 2019); and (ii) counterfactual loss
discrepancy, which measures the difference between the
loss of an individual and a “counterfactual” individual with

