Doubly robust off-policy evaluation with shrinkage

Yi Su 1 Maria Dimakopoulou 2 Akshay Krishnamurthy 3 Miroslav Dudı́k 3

Abstract

subroutines for optimizing a policy (Dudı́k et al., 2011).

We propose a new framework for designing estimators for off-policy evaluation in contextual bandits. Our approach is based on the asymptotically
optimal doubly robust estimator, but we shrink
the importance weights to minimize a bound on
the mean squared error, which results in a better
bias-variance tradeoff in finite samples. We use
this optimization-based framework to obtain three
estimators: (a) a weight-clipping estimator, (b) a
new weight-shrinkage estimator, and (c) the first
shrinkage-based estimator for combinatorial action sets. Extensive experiments in both standard
and combinatorial bandit benchmark problems
show that our estimators are highly adaptive and
typically outperform state-of-the-art methods.

The most accurate approaches to off-policy evaluation are
variants of doubly robust (DR) estimators (Robins & Rotnitzky, 1995; Bang & Robins, 2005; Dudı́k et al., 2011). DR
estimation begins by fitting a regression model to predict rewards as a function of context and action. The fitted model
can be used to impute unobserved rewards of the target
policy on the training data, but such a direct estimate is typically biased. Instead, DR adds a correction term obtained
by importance weighting the difference between observed
rewards and predicted rewards. The resulting approach is
unbiased, and it is asymptotically optimal under weaker
assumptions than other methods (Rothe, 2016). However,
its finite-sample variance can still be quite high when importance weights (also known as inverse propensity scores) are
large. Therefore, several works have developed variants of
DR that clip or remove large importance weights. Although
weight clipping incurs some bias, it substantially decreases
the variance and can yield a lower mean squared error (Bembom & van der Laan, 2008; Bottou et al., 2013; Wang
et al., 2017; Su et al., 2018). These works motivate weight
shrinkage as a heuristic for trading off bias and variance,
but they do not provide insight into when and how these
different methods should be used.

1. Introduction
Many real-world applications, ranging from online news
recommendation (Li et al., 2011), advertising (Bottou et al.,
2013), and search engines (Li et al., 2015) to personalized
healthcare (Zhou et al., 2017), are naturally modeled by
the contextual bandit protocol (Langford & Zhang, 2008),
where a learner repeatedly observes a context, takes an
action, and accrues reward. In news recommendation, the
context is any information about the user, such as history of
past visits, the action is the recommended article, and the
reward could indicate the user’s click on the article. The goal
is to maximize the reward, but the learner can only observe
the reward for chosen actions, and not for the others.
We study a fundamental problem in contextual bandits
known as off-policy evaluation, where the goal is to use
the data gathered by a past algorithm, known as the logging
policy, to estimate the average reward of a new algorithm,
known as the target policy. High-quality off-policy estimates help avoid costly A/B testing and can also be used as

In this paper, we ask: What are the systematic strategies
for shrinking importance weights? We seek to answer this
question without making strong assumptions about the quality of the reward predictor, but we would like to adapt to its
quality. We make the following contributions:
• We derive a general framework for shrinking the importance weights by optimizing a sharp bound on the
mean squared error (MSE). We use two bounding techniques. The first is agnostic to the quality of the reward
estimator and yields pessimistic shrinkage estimators.
The second incorporates the quality of the reward
predictor and yields optimistic shrinkage estimators.

3

Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 2 Netflix, Los Gatos, CA
Microsoft Research, New York, NY. Correspondence to: Yi Su
<ys756@cornell.edu>.

• We provide theoretical justification for the standard
practice of weight clipping by showing that it
corresponds to pessimistic shrinkage.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

• Using optimistic shrinkage, we derive new estimators,
which are also applicable to combinatorial actions, arising, for example, when a news portal is recommending

1

