Finite-Time Last-Iterate Convergence for Multi-Agent Learning in Games

Tianyi Lin * 1 Zhengyuan Zhou * 2 Panayotis Mertikopoulos 3 Michael. I. Jordan 4

Abstract
In this paper, we consider multi-agent learning
via online gradient descent in a class of games
called λ-cocoercive games, a fairly broad class of
games that admits many Nash equilibria and that
properly includes unconstrained strongly monotone games. We characterize the finite-time lastiterate convergence rate for joint OGD learning
on λ-cocoercive games; further, building on this
result, we develop a fully adaptive OGD learning
algorithm that does not require any knowledge of
problem parameter (e.g. cocoercive constant λ)
and show, via a novel double-stopping time technique, that this adaptive algorithm achieves same
finite-time last-iterate convergence rate as nonadaptive counterpart. Subsequently, we extend
OGD learning to the noisy gradient feedback case
and establish last-iterate convergence results–first
qualitative almost sure convergence, then quantitative finite-time convergence rates– all under
non-decreasing step-sizes. To our knowledge, we
provide the first set of results that fill in several
gaps of the existing multi-agent online learning
literature, where three aspects–finite-time convergence rates, non-decreasing step-sizes, and fully
adaptive algorithms have been unexplored before.

1. Introduction
In its most basic incarnation, online learning (Blum, 1998;
Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2012; Hazan, 2016) can be described
as a feedback loop of the following form:
1. The agent interfaces with the environment by choosing
an action at ∈ A ⊆ Rd (e.g., bidding in an auction,
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Industrial Engineering
and Operations Research, UC Berkeley 2 Stern School of Business, New York University and IBM Research 3 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, LIG, 38000 Grenoble and Criteo AI lab
4
Department of Statistics and Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Tianyi Lin <darren lin@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

selecting a route in a traffic network).
2. The environment then yields a reward function rt (·),
and the agent obtains the reward rt (at ) and receives
some feedback (e.g., reward function rt (·), gradient
∇rt (at ), or reward rt (at )), and the process repeats.
As the reward functions rt (·) are allowed to change from
round to round, the standard metric that quantifies the performance of an online learning algorithm is that of regret (Blum
& Mansour, 2007):
time T , the regret is the difference
Pat
T
between maxa∈A t=1 ut (a), the total rewards achieved
PT
by the best fixed action in hindsight, and t=1 ut (at ), the
total rewards achieved by the algorithm. In the rich online learning literature (Zinkevich, 2003; Kalai & Vempala,
2005; Shalev-Shwartz & Singer, 2007; Arora et al., 2012;
Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2012; Hazan, 2016), perhaps the simplest algorithm that achieves the minimax-optimal regret
guarantee is Zinkevich’s online gradient descent (OGD),
where the agent simply takes a gradient step (at current
action) to form the next action, performing a projection if
necessary. Due to its simplicity and strong performance,
it is arguably one of the most widely-used algorithms in
online learning theory and applications (Zinkevich, 2003;
Hazan et al., 2007; Quanrud & Khashabi, 2015).
At the same time, the most common instantiation of the
above online learning model (where reward functions
change arbitrarily over time) is multi-agent online learning:
each agent is making online decisions in an environment
that consists of other agents who are simultaneously making
online decisions and whose actions impact the rewards of
other agents; that is, each agent’s reward is determined by an
(unknown) game. Note that in multi-agent online learning,
as other agents’ actions change, each agent’s reward function, when viewed solely as a function of its own action, also
changes, despite the fact that the underlying game mechanism is fixed. Consequently, in this setting, the universality
of the OGD regret bounds raises high expectations in terms
of performance guarantees, leading to the following fundamental question in game-theoretical learning (Cesa-Bianchi
& Lugosi, 2006; Shoham & Leyton-Brown, 2008; Viossat &
Zapechelnyuk, 2013; Bloembergen et al., 2015; Monnot &
Piliouras, 2017): Would OGD learning, and more broadly
no-regret learning, lead to Nash equilibiria?

