Designing Optimal Dynamic Treatment Regimes:
A Causal Reinforcement Learning Approach

Junzhe Zhang 1 Elias Bareinboim 1

Abstract
A dynamic treatment regime (DTR) consists of a
sequence of decision rules, one per stage of intervention, that dictates how to determine the treatment assignment to patients based on evolving
treatments and covariates’ history. These regimes
are particularly effective for managing chronic
disorders and is arguably one of the critical ingredients underlying more personalized decisionmaking systems. All reinforcement learning algorithms for finding the
p optimal DTR in online settings will suffer Ω( |DX∪S |T ) regret on some
environments, where T is the number of experiments and DX∪S is the domains of the treatments X and covariates S. This implies that
T = Ω(|DX∪S |) trials will be required to generate an optimal DTR. In many applications, the
domains of X and S could be enormous, which
means that the time required to ensure appropriate learning may be unattainable. We show that,
if the causal diagram of the underlying environment is provided, one could achieve regret that
is exponentially smaller than DX∪S . In particular, we develop two online algorithms that satisfy
such regret bounds by exploiting the causal structure underlying the DTR; one is the based on the
principle of optimism in the face of uncertainty
(OFU-DTR), and the other uses the posterior sampling learning (PS-DTR). Finally, we introduce
efficient methods to accelerate these online learning procedures by leveraging the abundant, yet
biased observational (non-experimental) data.

1

Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New
York, USA. Due to a glitch during the submission process, earlier
versions of this manuscript might have a different list of authors.
See (Zhang & Bareinboim, 2020) for the full technical report.
Correspondence to: Junzhe Zhang <junzhez@cs.columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

1. Introduction
In medical practice, a patient typically has to be treated at
multiple stages; a physician sequentially assigns each treatment, repeatedly tailored to the patient’s time-varying, dynamic state (e.g., infection’s level, different diagnostic tests).
Dynamic treatment regimes (DTRs, Murphy 2003) provide
an attractive framework of personalized treatments in longitudinal settings. Operationally, a DTR consists of decision
rules that dictate what treatment to provide at each stage,
given the patient’s evolving conditions and treatments’ history. These decision rules are alternatively known as adaptive treatment strategies (Lavori & Dawson, 2000; 2008;
Murphy, 2005a; Thall et al., 2000; 2002) or treatment policies (Lunceford et al., 2002; Wahed & Tsiatis, 2004; 2006).
Learning the optimal dynamic treatment regime concerns
with finding a sequence of decision rules σX over a finite
set of treatments X that maximizes a primary outcome
Y . The main challenge is that since the underlying system
dynamics are often unknown, it’s not immediate how to
infer the consequences of executing the policy do(σX ), i.e.,
the causal effect EσX [Y ]. Most of the current work in the
causal inference literature focus on the off-policy (offline)
learning setting, where one tries to identify the causal effect
from the combination of static data and qualitative assumptions about the data-generating mechanisms. Several criteria
and algorithms have been developed (Pearl, 2000; Spirtes
et al., 2001; Bareinboim & Pearl, 2016). For instance, a
criterion called the sequential backdoor (Pearl & Robins,
1995) allows one to determine whether causal effects can be
obtained by adjustment. This condition is also referred to
as sequential ignorability (Rubin, 1978; Murphy, 2003). To
ensure it, one could randomly assign values of treatments at
each stage of the intervention and observe the subsequent
outcomes; a popular strategy of this kind is known as the
sequential multiple assignment randomized trail (SMART,
Murphy 2005a). Whenever the backdoor condition can
be ascertained, a number of efficient off-policy estimation
procedures exist, including popular methods based on the
propensity score (Rosenbaum & Rubin, 1983), inverse probability of treatment weighting (Murphy et al., 2001; Robins
et al., 2008), and Q-learning (Murphy, 2005b).
More recently, (Zhang & Bareinboim, 2019) introduced

