Adversarial Attacks on Probabilistic Autoregressive Forecasting Models

Raphaël Dang-Nhu 1 Gagandeep Singh 1 Pavol Bielik 1 Martin Vechev 1

Abstract
We develop an effective generation of adversarial
attacks on neural models that output a sequence
of probability distributions rather than a sequence
of single values. This setting includes recently
proposed deep probabilistic autoregressive forecasting models that estimate the probability distribution of a time series given its past and achieve
state-of-the-art results in a diverse set of application domains. The key technical challenge we
address is effectively differentiating through the
Monte-Carlo estimation of statistics of the joint
distribution of the output sequence. Additionally,
we extend prior work on probabilistic forecasting
to the Bayesian setting which allows conditioning
on future observations, instead of only on past
observations. We demonstrate that our approach
can successfully generate attacks with small input perturbations in two challenging tasks where
robust decision making is crucial – stock market
trading and prediction of electricity consumption.

1. Introduction
Deep probabilistic autoregressive models have been recently
integrated into the Amazon SageMaker toolkit and successfully applied to various kinds of sequential data such as
handwriting (Graves, 2013), speech and music (Oord et al.,
2016a), images (Oord et al., 2016c;b) and time series from
a number of different domains (Salinas et al., 2019). At
a high level, given a sequence of input values (i.e., pen-tip
locations, raw audio signals or stock market prices), the
goal is to train a generative model that outputs an accurate
sequence of next values, conditioned on all the previous
values. The main benefit of such probabilistic models is that
they model the joint distribution of output values, rather than
predicting only a single best realization (i.e., the most likely
value at each step). Predicting a density rather than just a
1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Raphaël Dang-Nhu <dangnhur@student.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

single best value has several advantages – it naturally fits the
inherently stochastic nature of many processes, allowing for
the assessment of uncertainty and its associated risk, and has
been shown to produce better overall prediction accuracy
when used in forecasting tasks (Salinas et al., 2019).
In this work, we develop an efficient approach for generating adversarial attacks on deep probabilistic autoregressive models. The issue of adversarial robustness and
attacks (Szegedy et al., 2013; Goodfellow et al., 2014),
i.e., generating small input perturbations that lead to mispredictions, is an important problem with large body of
recent work. Yet, to our best knowledge this is the first work
that explores adversarial attacks in a new challenging setting
where the neural network output is a sequence of probability
distributions. The difficulty in generating adversarial attacks
in this setting is that it requires computing the gradient of
an expectation that it is too complex to be analytically integrated (Schittenkopf et al., 2000; Salinas et al., 2019) and is
approximated using Monte-Carlo methods.
We address the key technical challenge of efficiently differentiating through the Monte-Carlo estimation, a necessary
part of generating white-box gradient based adversarial attacks, by using two techniques to approximate the gradient
of the expectation. The first approach is the score-function
estimator (Glynn, 1990; Kleijnen & Rubinstein, 1996) obtained by inverting the gradient and the expectation’s integral. The second technique differentiates individual samples
using a random variate reparametrizatrion and originates
from the variational inference literature (Salimans et al.,
2013; Kingma & Welling, 2013; Rezende et al., 2014).
We present the first approach for generating adversarial attacks on deep probabilistic autoregressive models by applying two techniques that differentiate through MonteCarlo estimation of an expectation. We show that the
reparametrization estimator is efficient at generating adversarial attacks and outperforms the score-function estimator
by evaluating on two domains that benefit from stochastic
sequential reasoning – stock market trading and electricity
consumption. We make our code, datasets and scripts to
reproduce our experiments available online1 .
1
https://github.com/eth-sri/
probabilistic-forecasts-attacks

