Fair k-Centers via Maximum Matching

Matthew Jones * 1 Huy Lê Nguy ˜ên * 1 Thy Nguyen * 1

Abstract
The ﬁeld of algorithms has seen a push for fair­
ness, or the removal of inherent bias, in recent
history. In data summarization, where a much
smaller subset of a data set is chosen to represent
the whole of the data, fairness can be introduced
by guaranteeing each "demographic group" a spe­
ciﬁc portion of the representative subset. Speciﬁ­
cally, this paper examines this fair variant of the
k-centers problem, where a subset of the data with
cardinality k is chosen to minimize distance to the
rest of the data. Previous papers working on this
problem presented both a 3-approximation algo­
rithm with a super-linear runtime and a linear-time
algorithm whose approximation factor is exponen­
tial in the number of demographic groups. This
paper combines the best of each algorithm by pre­
senting a linear-time algorithm with a guaranteed
3-approximation factor and provides empirical
evidence of both the algorithm’s runtime and ef­
fectiveness.

1. Introduction
The power of Machine Learning systems has lead to a
widespread increase in their use, with roles in improving the
quality of healthcare and education, selecting items in a so­
cial media or news feed, job searching, and more (Holstein
et al., 2019). However, the potential for these algorithms
to operate in an unfair manner is not only recognized, but
has been directly observed, such as in an automated hiring
system favoring candidates based on age, gender, or race
(Tambe et al., 2019; Cowgill, 2018; Datta et al., 2015) and
in an advertisement selection algorithm which was found
more likely to produce results related to searching criminal
histories when using keywords which were names "typically
*

Equal contribution 1 Khoury College of Computer Science,
Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts, U.S.A.. Cor­
respondence to: Matthew Jones <jones.m@northeastern.edu>,
Huy Lê Nguyên <hu.nguyen@northeastern.edu>, Thy Nguyen
<nguyen.thy2@northeastern.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the au­
thor(s).

associated with black people" (Sweeney, 2013). The existence of this underlying bias has led to a recent popularity
of fair ML algorithms, which attempt to correct this social
issue.
The problem in this paper particularly concerns the problem
of data summarization, which involves ﬁnding a small subset
of a large data set which is "approximately representative" of
the whole data set. To see how bias would exist in this space,
imagine an image search tool which returns some images
related to a set of keywords. Inherent bias in the set of
matching images can lead to bias in the set of images which
should summarize all the matching images. For example,
a Google Images search for the keyword "CEO" returns a
much higher fraction of men than the actual fraction of male
CEOs (Kay et al., 2015).
In the k-centers problem for data summarization, a few
centers are chosen as the representative set of the data by
choosing the set of centers such that for any data point in
the set, there is some center which is sufﬁciently similar to
the data point. Speciﬁcally, the ultimate goal of k-centers is
to minimize the maximum dissimilarity between any data
point and its most similar center. To introduce fairness
to this problem, consider the case where the data set is
partitioned into a set of groups. A k-centers algorithm can
be thought of as a fair algorithm if the proportion of centers
which belong to a particular group is approximately equal
to the proportion of the data which belongs to the same
group. This idea will be formalized in the next section,
but it gives a path for introducing fairness to the k-centers
algorithm: restrict the number of centers in each group such
that the approximate equality between any group’s share of
the centers and share of the whole data set is forced.
It is known that the k-centers problem is NP-hard to solve,
and is even NP-hard to approximate within a factor less
than 2. Furthermore, there exists an algorithm which takes
linear time in the size of the data set which yields a 2­
approximation for the k-centers problem (Gonzalez, 1985).
It is clear, then, that it is likewise NP-hard to solve the
fair variant of the k-centers problem. However, there exist
algorithms which are able to approximately solve the fair
k-centers problem. Currently, for this fair variant of the
k-centers problem there exists both an algorithm which
takes linear time with respect to the size of the data set and

