A Quantile-based Approach for Hyperparameter Transfer Learning

David Salinas 1 Huibin Shen 2 Valerio Perrone 2

Abstract
Bayesian optimization (BO) is a popular methodology to tune the hyperparameters of expensive
black-box functions. Traditionally, BO focuses
on a single task at a time and is not designed to
leverage information from related functions, such
as tuning performance objectives of the same algorithm across multiple datasets. In this work,
we introduce a novel approach to achieve transfer
learning across different datasets as well as different objectives. The main idea is to regress the
mapping from hyperparameter to objective quantiles with a semi-parametric Gaussian Copula distribution, which provides robustness against different scales or outliers that can occur in different
tasks. We introduce two methods to leverage this
mapping: a Thompson sampling strategy as well
as a Gaussian Copula process using such quantile
estimate as a prior. We show that these strategies
can combine the estimation of multiple objectives
such as latency and accuracy, steering the hyperparameters optimization toward faster predictions
for the same level of accuracy. Extensive experiments demonstrate significant improvements over
state-of-the-art methods for both hyperparameter
optimization and neural architecture search.

1. Introduction
Tuning complex machine learning models such as deep neural networks can be daunting. Object detection or language
understanding models often rely on deep neural networks
with many tunable hyperparameters, and automatic hyperparameter optimization (HPO) techniques such as Bayesian
optimization (BO) are critical to find good hyperparameters
in short time. BO addresses the black-box optimization
1

NAVER LABS Europe (work started while being
at Amazon) 2 Amazon Web Services.
Correspondence
to: David Salinas <david.salinas@naverlabs.com>, Huibin
Shen <huibishe@amazon.com>, Valerio Perrone <vperrone@amazon.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

problem by placing a probabilistic model, typically a Gaussian process (GP), on the function to minimize; then, the
hyperparameters to evaluate next are determined through
an acquisition function that trades off exploration and exploitation. Interest in BO has been originally motivated by
speeding up HPO pipelines where the function to optimize
usually takes hours to evaluate or even thousand of GPU
days in total in the case of neural architecture search (NAS)
(Zoph & Le, 2017; Real et al., 2018b). While traditional BO
focuses on each problem in isolation, recent years have seen
a surge of interest in transfer learning for HPO. The key
idea is to exploit evaluations from previous, related tasks
(e.g., the same neural network tuned on multiple datasets)
to further speed up the hyperparameter search.
A key challenge for joint models is that different blackboxes exhibit heterogeneous scale and noise levels (Bardenet et al., 2013; Yogatama & Mann, 2014; Wistuba et al.,
2018; Feurer et al., 2018). The straightforward approach
of standardizing outputs (Yogatama & Mann, 2014) only
works for tasks with normally distributed observations and
no outliers. While rank estimation can be used to alleviate
scale issues, the difficulty of feeding back rank information to GPs leads to restricting assumptions. For instance,
Bardenet et al. (2013) does not model rank estimation uncertainty, while Feurer et al. (2018) uses independent GPs
removing the adaptivity of the GP to the current task.
This paper shows how semi-parametric Gaussian Copulas
effectively handle heterogeneous scales across tasks, giving
rise to several algorithmic instantiations for hyperparameter
transfer learning. Our key contributions are as follows:
• We propose using Gaussian Copulas instead of standardization to map observations from different tasks to
comparable distributions;
• Two novel methods leveraging this finding, namely
a Thompson sampling and Gaussian Copula process
combined with a joint parametric prior;
• An extensive empirical study demonstrating substantial
improvements over state-of-the-art transfer learning
methods on real-world datasets, including on neural
architecture search (NAS);
• A simple extension that scalarizes Gaussian Copula

