Fully Parallel Hyperparameter Search: Reshaped Space-Filling

M.-L. Cauwet 1 C. Couprie 2 J. Dehos 3 P. Luc 2 J. Rapin 2 M. Riviere 2 F. Teytaud 3 O. Teytaud 2 N. Usunier 2

Abstract
Space-filling designs such as Low Discrepancy
Sequence (LDS), Latin Hypercube Sampling
(LHS) and Jittered Sampling (JS) were proposed
for fully parallel hyperparameter search, and were
shown to be more effective than random and grid
search. We prove that LHS and JS outperform
random search only by a constant factor. Consequently, we introduce a new sampling approach
based on the reshaping of the search distribution, and we show both theoretically and numerically that it leads to significant gains over random
search. Two methods are proposed for the reshaping: Recentering (when the distribution of
the optimum is known), and Cauchy transformation (when the distribution of the optimum is unknown). The proposed methods are first validated
on artificial experiments and simple real-world
tests on clustering and Salmon mappings. Then
we demonstrate that they bring performance improvement in a wide range of expensive artificial intelligence tasks, namely attend/infer/repeat,
video next frame segmentation forecasting and
progressive generative adversarial networks.

1. Introduction
One-shot optimization is a critical component of parallel
hyperparameter search (Bergstra and Bengio, 2012; Bousquet et al., 2017). It consists in approximating the minimum
of a function f by its minimum minx∈X f (x) over a finite
subset X = {x1 , . . . , xn } of points provided by a sampler,
i.e., a generator of points sets. A straightforward sampler
generates points sets independently and randomly. Despite
its simplicity, Bergstra and Bengio (2012) pointed out that
*

Equal contribution 1 ESIEE, Université Paris-Est, LIGM (UMR
8049), CNRS, ENPC, ESIEE Paris, UPEM, F-77454, Marnela-Vallée, France 2 Facebook AI Research 3 Université du Littoral Côte d’Opale. Correspondence to: M.-L. Cauwet <marieliesse.cauwet@esiee.fr>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

such random sampling is robust and outperforms grid sampling. However space-filling designs such as Low Discrepancy Sequences (LDS), Latin Hypercube Sampling (LHS)
or Jittered Sampling (JS) are good candidates because they
aim at distributing the points more diversely than independent random sampling. In particular, Bousquet et al. (2017)
advocated a specific variant of LDS, namely scrambledHammersley (Hammersley, 1960; Atanassov, 2004). While
LDS performance is well known for numerical integration
(Koksma, 1942), their use for one-shot optimization - and a
fortiori for hyperparameter tuning - is far less explored. We
quantify the benefit of LDS, LHS and JS approaches and,
looking for more headroom, propose the concept of distribution reshaping, i.e., using a search distribution different
from the prior distribution of the optimum.
Space-filling vs reshaping: the two components of oneshot optimization. Let us distinguish two probability distributions: the prior probability distribution P0 of the optimum and the search probability distribution Ps . When
P0 is known, random sampling boils down to choosing the
search distribution Ps = P0 and applying independent sampling. The aforementioned space-filling designs (LDS, LHS,
JS), compared to random sampling, relax the assumptions
that the samples are independently drawn according to Ps .
The state of the art already contains many results in this
field: we add some mathematical proofs, and propose a new
paradigm, namely Reshaping, which goes one step further
and relax the condition Ps = P0 . This modification originates from Theorem 1 which shows that, surprisingly, even
if the optimum is randomly drawn as a standard normal distribution in an artificial problem (e.g. we know a priori that
the optimum x∗ is randomly drawn as a standard Gaussian
and the objective function is x 7→ kx − x∗ k2 ), the optimal
search distribution is not that Gaussian distribution. Hence,
inspired by Rahnamayan and Wang (2009); Rahnamayan
et al. (2007), we propose reshaped versions using Ps spikier
than P0 around the center: addition of a middle point and,
by extension, our Recentering reshaping. On the other hand,
the Cauchy reshaping is driven by distinct considerations: it
compensates the corner avoidance property characterizing
some space-filling designs (Owen, 2006; Hartinger et al.,
2005) and counterbalances the risk of expert errors on the
correct hyperparameter’s range, i.e., unknown P0 .
Contributions. We first study the case Ps = P0 in Sec-

