Bandits with Adversarial Scaling

Thodoris Lykouris 1 Vahab Mirrokni 2 Renato Paes Leme 2

Abstract
We study adversarial scaling, a multi-armed bandit model where rewards have a stochastic and
an adversarial component. Our model captures
display advertising where the click-through-rate
can be decomposed to a (fixed across time) armquality component and a non-stochastic userrelevance component (fixed across arms). Despite
the relative stochasticity of our model, we demonstrate two settings where most bandit algorithms
suffer. On the positive side, we show that two
algorithms, one from the action elimination and
one from the mirror descent family are adaptive
enough to be robust to adversarial scaling. Our
results shed light on the robustness of adaptive
parameter selection in stochastic bandits, which
may be of independent interest.

1. Introduction
The multi-armed bandit setting is the cleanest paradigm to
capture the tension between exploring information about
the underlying system and exploiting the most profitable
actions based on the current information. A decision-maker
(or learner) repeatedly selects among a set of k actions
also referred to as arms, earns the reward of the selected
arm, and obtains feedback only about it. This creates a
direct trade-off between learning about the performance of
underexplored actions and earning the reward from those
that seem the most profitable. This trade-off is prominent in
applications such as display advertising where a platform
needs to repeatedly select which ad to show in response to a
particular pageview. The arms therefore correspond to the
competing ads and, upon being shown, each ad can result in
a click or not. We use this as a running example and assume
that the goal of the learner is to maximize the total number
of clicks (in practice, there are other goals such as revenue
and user-experience, but we ignore those for simplicity).
*

Equal contribution 1 Microsoft Research, New York City, NY,
USA 2 Google Research, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to:
Thodoris Lykouris <thlykour@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

Modeling this problem, one soon realizes that the two classical multi-armed bandit approaches fail to capture the
essence of the setting. The two main approaches in the
multi-armed bandit learning literature assume that the rewards obtained from each pageview are either completely
adversarial or coming from identical and independent distributions (i.i.d.). However, clearly some ads have better
quality and are consistently more clickable than others, so
assuming a fully adversarial model seems to ignore a lot of
useful structure in the data. On the other extreme, stochastic
models assume that each ad has a fixed probability of being clicked whenever displayed (this is typically referred to
as click-through-rate). In practice, click-through-rates are
known to vary due to various factors: time of the day, day of
the week, seasonalities (e.g. users tend to click more before
Christmas and on Black Friday) but those factors affect ads
uniformly. Tracà & Rudin (2015) propose a model where
the mean µt (a) reward of an arm a at time t is a product
µt (a) = q t · θ(a)
of the intrinsic quality of the arm and a seasonality term
q t . In the display ads example, q t is the clickiness of the
user behind her page-view and θ(a) is the intrinsic quality
of the ad. The motivation of Tracà & Rudin (2015) comes
from retail: θ(a) is the effect certain action has in the store
(the product price, which items are on sale...) and q t is the
number of customers in the store in that day. In their model,
the seasonality effect q t is known to the algorithm.
We depart from their model by assuming we do not have
access to q t . In display ads, the clickiness of users can be
a function of a large number of covariates and it affects
users in complex ways: certain users click more during the
evening while other users click more during the day. Clickness of users in China is affected by Chinese New Year
while clickiness of users in the US is affected by Thanksgiving. Estimating all those patterns is costly so it is useful
to have models that exploit the structure of µt (a) without
having to estimate the seasonality/clickness model directly.
To obtain more robust algorithms we assume q t is adversarially chosen and hence the name adversarial scaling. If we
think of q t as a seasonality effect, there is not an adversary
per se in the motivation, but rather a very complex pattern
which we choose not to assume anything about to get robust algorithms. However, q t can also model some actually

