Einsum Networks: Fast and Scalable Learning of
Tractable Probabilistic Circuits
Robert Peharz 1 Steven Lang 2 Antonio Vergari 3 Karl Stelzner 2 Alejandro Molina 2 Martin Trapp 4
Guy Van den Broeck 3 Kristian Kersting 2 Zoubin Ghahramani 5

Abstract
Probabilistic circuits (PCs) are a promising avenue for probabilistic modeling, as they permit a
wide range of exact and efficient inference routines. Recent “deep-learning-style” implementations of PCs strive for a better scalability, but are
still difficult to train on real-world data, due to
their sparsely connected computational graphs. In
this paper, we propose Einsum Networks (EiNets),
a novel implementation design for PCs, improving
prior art in several regards. At their core, EiNets
combine a large number of arithmetic operations
in a single monolithic einsum-operation, leading
to speedups and memory savings of up to two
orders of magnitude, in comparison to previous
implementations. As an algorithmic contribution,
we show that the implementation of ExpectationMaximization (EM) can be simplified for PCs,
by leveraging automatic differentiation. Furthermore, we demonstrate that EiNets scale well to
datasets which were previously out of reach, such
as SVHN and CelebA, and that they can be used
as faithful generative image models.

1. Introduction
The central goal of probabilistic modeling is to approximate the data-generating distribution, in order to answer
statistical queries by means of probabilistic inference. In
recent years many novel probabilistic models based on deep
neural networks have been proposed, such as Variational
Autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2014) (formerly
known as Density Networks (MacKay, 1995)), Normalizing Flows (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015; Papamakarios

et al., 2019), Autoregressive Models (ARMs) (Larochelle &
Murray, 2011; Uria et al., 2016), and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014). While all
these models have achieved impressive results on large-scale
datasets, i.e. they have been successful in terms of representational power and learning, they unfortunately fall short
in terms of inference, a main aspect of probabilistic modeling and reasoning (Pearl, 1988; Koller & Friedman, 2009).
All of the mentioned models allow to draw unbiased samples, enabling inference via Monte Carlo estimation. This
strategy, however, becomes quickly unreliable and computational expensive for all but the simplest inference queries.
Also other approximate inference techniques, e.g. variational inference, are often biased and their inference quality
might be hard to analyse. Besides sampling, only ARMs
and Flows support efficient evaluation of the probability
density for a given sample, which can be used, e.g., for
model comparison and outlier detection.
However, even for ARMs and Flows the following inference task is computationally hard: Consider a density p(X1 , . . . , XN ) over N random variables, where N
might be just in the order of a few dozens. For example,
X1 , . . . , XN might represent medical measurements of a
particular person drawn from the general population modeled by p(X1 , . . . , XN ). Now assume that we split the variables into three disjoint sets Xq , Xm , and Xe of roughly
the same size, and that we wish to compute
R
p(xq , x0m , xe )dx0m
p(xq | xe ) = R R
,
(1)
p(x0q , x0m , xe )dx0q dx0m

Eindhoven University of Technology 2 Technical University
of Darmstadt 3 University of California, Los Angeles 4 Graz University of Technology 5 University of Cambridge, Uber AI Labs.
Correspondence to: Robert Peharz <r.peharz@tue.nl>, Steven
Lang <steven.lang.mz@gmail.com>.

for arbitrary values xq and xe . In words, we wish to predict
query variables Xq , based on evidence Xe = xe , while accounting for all possible values of missing variables Xm , by
marginalizing them. Conditional densities like (1) highlight
the role of generative models as “multi-purpose predictors”,
since the choice of Xq , Xm , and Xe can be arbitrary. However, evaluating conditional densities of this form is notoriously hard for any of the models above, which represents a
principal drawback of these methods.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

These shortcomings in terms of inference have motivated a
growing stream of research on tractable probabilistic models, where inference queries like (1) can be computed ex-

1

