CLUB: A Contrastive Log-ratio Upper Bound of Mutual Information

Pengyu Cheng 1 Weituo Hao 1 Shuyang Dai 1 Jiachang Liu 1 Zhe Gan 2 Lawrence Carin 1

Abstract
Mutual information (MI) minimization has gained
considerable interests in various machine learning tasks. However, estimating and minimizing
MI in high-dimensional spaces remains a challenging problem, especially when only samples,
rather than distribution forms, are accessible. Previous works mainly focus on MI lower bound
approximation, which is not applicable to MI
minimization problems. In this paper, we propose a novel Contrastive Log-ratio Upper Bound
(CLUB) of mutual information. We provide a
theoretical analysis of the properties of CLUB
and its variational approximation. Based on this
upper bound, we introduce a MI minimization
training scheme and further accelerate it with a
negative sampling strategy. Simulation studies on
Gaussian distributions show the reliable estimation ability of CLUB. Real-world MI minimization experiments, including domain adaptation
and information bottleneck, demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method. The code is
at https://github.com/Linear95/CLUB.

1. Introduction
Mutual information (MI) is a fundamental measure of the
dependence between two random variables. Mathematically,
the definition of MI between variables x and y is


p(x, y)
I(x; y) = Ep(x,y) log
.
(1)
p(x)p(y)
This important tool has been applied in a wide range of
scientific fields, including statistics (Granger & Lin, 1994;
Jiang et al., 2015), bioinformatics (Lachmann et al., 2016;
Zea et al., 2016), robotics (Julian et al., 2014; Charrow et al.,
2015), and machine learning (Chen et al., 2016; Alemi et al.,
2016; Hjelm et al., 2018; Cheng et al., 2020).
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke
University, Durham, North Carolina, USA 2 Microsoft, Redmond, Washington, USA. Correspondence to: Pengyu Cheng
<pengyu.cheng@duke.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

In machine learning, especially in deep learning frameworks,
MI is typically utilized as a criterion or a regularizer in loss
functions, to encourage or limit the dependence between
variables. MI maximization has been studied extensively
in various tasks, e.g., representation learning (Hjelm et al.,
2018; Hu et al., 2017), generative models (Chen et al., 2016),
information distillation (Ahn et al., 2019), and reinforcement learning (Florensa et al., 2017). Recently, MI minimization has obtained increasing attention for its applications in disentangled representation learning (Chen et al.,
2018), style transfer (Kazemi et al., 2018), domain adaptation (Gholami et al., 2018), fairness (Kamishima et al.,
2011), and the information bottleneck (Alemi et al., 2016).
However, only in a few special cases can one calculate the
exact value of mutual information, since the calculation
requires closed forms of density functions and a tractable
log-density ratio between the joint and marginal distributions. In most machine learning tasks, only samples from the
joint distribution are accessible. Therefore, sample-based
MI estimation methods have been proposed. To approximate MI, most previous works focused on lower-bound
estimation (Chen et al., 2016; Belghazi et al., 2018; Oord
et al., 2018), which is inconsistent to MI minimization tasks.
In contrast, MI upper bound estimation lacks extensive exploration in the literature. Among the existing MI upper
bounds, Alemi et al. (2016) fixes one of the marginal distribution (p(y) in (1)) to a standard Gaussian, and obtains
a variational upper bound in closed form. However, the
Gaussian marginal distribution assumption is unduly strong,
which makes the upper bound fail to estimate MI with low
bias. Poole et al. (2019) points out a leave-one-out upper
bound, which provides tighter MI estimation when sample
size is large. However, it suffers from high numerical instability in practice when applied to MI minimization models.
To overcome the defects of previous MI estimators, we
introduce a Contrastive Log-ratio Upper Bound (CLUB).
Specifically, CLUB bridges mutual information estimation
with contrastive learning (Oord et al., 2018), where MI
is estimated by the difference of conditional probabilities
between positive and negative sample pairs. Further, we
develop a variational form of CLUB (vCLUB) into scenarios where the conditional distribution p(y|x) is unknown,
by approximating p(y|x) with a neural network. We theoretically prove that, with good variational approximation,

