Up or Down? Adaptive Rounding for Post-Training Quantization

Markus Nagel * 1 Rana Ali Amjad * 1 Mart van Baalen 1 Christos Louizos 1 Tijmen Blankevoort 1

Abstract
When quantizing neural networks, assigning each
floating-point weight to its nearest fixed-point
value is the predominant approach. We find that,
perhaps surprisingly, this is not the best we can
do. In this paper, we propose AdaRound, a better weight-rounding mechanism for post-training
quantization that adapts to the data and the task
loss. AdaRound is fast, does not require finetuning of the network, and only uses a small
amount of unlabelled data. We start by theoretically analyzing the rounding problem for a
pre-trained neural network. By approximating the
task loss with a Taylor series expansion, the rounding task is posed as a quadratic unconstrained binary optimization problem. We simplify this to a
layer-wise local loss and propose to optimize this
loss with a soft relaxation. AdaRound not only
outperforms rounding-to-nearest by a significant
margin but also establishes a new state-of-the-art
for post-training quantization on several networks
and tasks. Without fine-tuning, we can quantize
the weights of Resnet18 and Resnet50 to 4 bits
while staying within an accuracy loss of 1%.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are being used in many real-world
applications as the standard technique for solving tasks in
computer vision, machine translation, voice recognition,
ranking, and many other domains. Owing to this success
and widespread applicability, making these neural networks
efficient has become an important research topic. Improved
efficiency translates into reduced cloud-infrastructure costs
and makes it possible to run these networks on heterogeneous devices such as smartphones, internet-of-things appli*

Equal contribution 1 Qualcomm AI Research, an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.. Correspondence to:
Markus Nagel <markusn@qti.qualcomm.com>, Rana Ali Amjad <ramjad@qti.qualcomm.com>, Tijmen Blankevoort <tijmen@qti.qualcomm.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

cations, and even dedicated low-power hardware.
One effective way to optimize neural networks for inference is neural network quantization (Krishnamoorthi, 2018;
Guo, 2018). In quantization, neural network weights and
activations are kept in a low-bit representation for both
memory transfer and calculations in order to reduce power
consumption and inference time. The process of quantizing
a network generally introduces noise, which results in a loss
of performance. Various prior works adapt the quantization
procedure to minimize the loss in performance while going
as low as possible in the number of bits used.
As Nagel et al. (2019) explained, the practicality of neural network quantization methods is important to take
into consideration. Although many methods exist that do
quantization-aware training (Jacob et al., 2018; Louizos
et al., 2019) and get excellent results, these methods require
a user to spend significant time on re-training models and
hyperparameter tuning.
On the other hand, much attention has recently been dedicated to post-training quantization methods (Nagel et al.,
2019; Cai et al., 2020; Choukroun et al., 2019; Banner et al.,
2019), which can be more easily applied in practice. These
types of methods allow for network quantization to happen
on-the-fly when deploying models, without the user of the
model spending time and energy on quantization. Our work
focuses on this type of network quantization.
Rounding-to-nearest is the predominant approach for all
neural network weight quantization work that came out thus
far. This means that the weight vector w is rounded to the
nearest representable quantization grid value in a fixed-point
grid by

 
w
b = s · clip
, n, p ,
(1)
w
s
where s denotes the quantization scale parameter and, n and
p denote the negative and positive integer thresholds for
clipping. We could round any weight down by replacing b·e
with b·c, or up using d·e. But, rounding-to-nearest seems
the most sensible, as it minimizes the difference per-weight
in the weight matrix. Perhaps surprisingly, we show that
for post-training quantization, rounding-to-nearest is not
optimal.
Our contributions in this work are threefold:

