Fast Differentiable Sorting and Ranking

Mathieu Blondel 1 Olivier Teboul 1 Quentin Berthet 1 Josip Djolonga 1

Abstract
The sorting operation is one of the most commonly used building blocks in computer programming. In machine learning, it is often used for
robust statistics. However, seen as a function,
it is piecewise linear and as a result includes
many kinks where it is non-differentiable. More
problematic is the related ranking operator, often
used for order statistics and ranking metrics. It
is a piecewise constant function, meaning that
its derivatives are null or undefined. While numerous works have proposed differentiable proxies to sorting and ranking, they do not achieve
the O(n log n) time complexity one would expect
from sorting and ranking operations. In this paper, we propose the first differentiable sorting and
ranking operators with O(n log n) time and O(n)
space complexity. Our proposal in addition enjoys
exact computation and differentiation. We achieve
this feat by constructing differentiable operators
as projections onto the permutahedron, the convex hull of permutations, and using a reduction
to isotonic optimization. Empirically, we confirm
that our approach is an order of magnitude faster
than existing approaches and showcase two novel
applications: differentiable Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient and least trimmed squares.

1. Introduction
Modern deep learning architectures are built by composing
parameterized functional blocks (including loops and conditionals) and are trained end-to-end using gradient backpropagation. This has motivated the term differentiable programming, recently popularized, among others, by LeCun
(2018). Despite great empirical successes, many operations
commonly used in computer programming remain poorly
differentiable or downright pathological, limiting the set of
1

Google Research, Brain team.
Correspondence to:
Mathieu
Blondel
<mblondel@google.com>,
Olivier
Teboul <oliviert@google.com>, Quentin Berthet <qberthet@google.com>, Josip Djolonga <josipd@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

architectures for which a gradient can be computed.
We focus in this paper on two such operations: sorting and ranking. Sorting returns the given input vector
with its values re-arranged in monotonic order. It plays a
key role to handle outliers in robust statistics, as in leastquantile (Rousseeuw, 1984) or trimmed (Rousseeuw &
Leroy, 2005) regression. As a piecewise linear function,
however, the sorted vector contains many kinks where it is
non-differentiable. In addition, when used in composition
with other functions, sorting often induces non-convexity,
thus rendering model parameter optimization difficult.
The ranking operation, on the other hand, outputs the positions, or ranks, of the input values in the sorted vector.
A workhorse of order statistics (David & Nagaraja, 2004),
ranks are used in several metrics, including Spearman’s
rank correlation coefficient (Spearman, 1904), top-k accuracy and normalized discounted cumulative gain (NDCG).
As piecewise constant functions, ranks are unfortunately
much more problematic than sorting: their derivatives are
null or undefined, preventing gradient backpropagation. For
this reason, a large body of work has studied differentiable
proxies to ranking. While several works opt to approximate
ranking metrics directly (Chapelle & Wu, 2010; Adams &
Zemel, 2011; Lapin et al., 2016; Rolı́nek et al., 2020), others introduce “soft” ranks, which can then be plugged into
any differentiable loss function. Taylor et al. (2008) use a
random perturbation technique to compute expected ranks
in O(n3 ) time, where n is the dimensionality of the vector
to rank. Qin et al. (2010) propose a simple method based
on comparing pairwise distances between values, thereby
taking O(n2 ) time. This method is refined by Grover et al.
(2019) using unimodal row-stochastic matrices. Lastly, Cuturi et al. (2019) adopt an optimal transport viewpoint of sorting and ranking. Their method is based on differentiating
through the iterates of the Sinkhorn algorithm (Sinkhorn &
Knopp, 1967) and costs O(T mn) time, where T is the number of Sinkhorn iterations and m ∈ N is a hyper-parameter
which trades computational cost and precision (convergence
to “hard” sort and ranks is only guaranteed if m = n).
In this paper, we propose the first differentiable sorting and
ranking operators with O(n log n) time and O(n) memory
complexity. Our proposals enjoy exact computation and differentiation (i.e., they do not involve differentiating through

