A Flexible Framework for Nonparametric Graphical Modeling that
Accommodates Machine Learning

Yunhua Xiang 1 Noah Simon 1

Abstract
Graphical modeling has been broadly useful for
exploring the dependence structure among features in a dataset. However, the strength of graphical modeling hinges on our ability to encode and
estimate conditional dependencies. In particular,
commonly used measures such as partial correlation are only meaningful under strongly parametric (in this case, multivariate Gaussian) assumptions. These assumptions are unverifiable, and
there is often little reason to believe they hold in
practice. In this paper, we instead consider 3 nonparametric measures of conditional dependence.
These measures are meaningful without structural
assumptions on the multivariate distribution of the
data. In addition, we show that for 2 of these measures there are simple, strong plug-in estimators
that require only the estimation of a conditional
mean. These plug-in estimators (1) are asymptotically linear and non-parametrically efficient,
(2) allow incorporation of flexible machine learning techniques for conditional mean estimation,
and (3) enable the construction of valid Wald-type
confidence intervals. In addition, by leveraging
the influence function of these estimators, one
can obtain intervals with simultaneous coverage
guarantees for all pairs of features.

1. Introduction
With the development of new high-throughput measurement technologies in biotechnology, engineering, and elsewhere, it is increasingly common to measure a number of
features on each of a collection of people/objects without
a strong apriori understanding on the interplay between
these features. It is fundamental to developing science that
we learn these relationships. For example, understanding
1
Department of Biostatistics, University of Washington, Seattle,
USA. Correspondence to: Yunhua Xiang <xiangyh@uw.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

co-expression of genes (Stuart et al., 2003; Ben-Dor et al.,
1999; Ma et al., 2007; Chu et al., 2009) is foundational to
biology; identifying regulatory networks (Hartemink et al.,
2000) can help us understand cell differentiation (Huang
& Ingber, 2000; Boyer et al., 2005), and identify targets
for treatment of disease (Csermely et al., 2005; Berger &
Iyengar, 2009); and among many other applications.
The relationships between features can be evaluated and
expressed using Graphical Modeling: Here we use a graph
G = (V, E, W ), where V = {1, ..., p} (p > 2) indexes a
set of nodes {Vi }i∈V representing the features, E = {ei,j }
is a set of edges corresponding to dependence between adjacent nodes, and W = {wi,j } is a collection of weights
expressing the strength of each edge. In defining these
edges and weights, one must decide on a measure of association/dependence. Covariance and correlation are two
commonly-used measures for the dependence between two
variables in multivariate analysis (Anderson et al., 1958;
Székely et al., 2007; Samuel et al., 2001; Langfelder &
Horvath, 2008; Choi et al., 2010; Zager & Verghese, 2008).
However, one is often interested in a more causallymotivated parameter: In particular, when using correlation,
features can easily be connected due to indirect effects (Bedford & Cooke, 2002). For example, two “connected” features may be mechanistically tied to a third feature, and
otherwise completely unrelated. These are often not the
edges we wish to discover. One is often more interested in
a conditional measure: For two features Y and Z, conditional on fixing all other features X = {Vk }pk=1 − {Y, Z},
we aim to assess if there an association between Y and Z.
Previous work has attempted to address this using partial
correlation (De La Fuente et al., 2004; Baba et al., 2004).
Rather than connecting features with non-zero correlation,
instead features with non-zero entries in the precision matrix
are connected. This corresponds to assessing the conditional
dependence when all of the features considered have a joint
Gaussian distribution (Yuan & Lin, 2007; Friedman et al.,
2008). In practice, that is rarely, if ever, the case, and edges
may correspond to scientific quantities of little interest.
In this work, we address this issue: We consider a more
general form of conditional dependence that reduces to the
partial correlation when all features are Gaussian. This de-

