LTF: A Label Transformation Framework for Correcting Target Shift

Jiaxian Guo 1 Mingming Gong 2 Tongliang Liu 1 Kun Zhang 3 Dacheng Tao 1

Abstract

Distribution shift is a major obstacle to the deployment of current deep learning models on realworld problems. Let Y be the target (label) and
X the predictors (features). We focus on one
type of distribution shift, target shift, where the
marginal distribution of the target variable PY
changes, but the conditional distribution PX|Y
does not. Existing methods estimate the density
ratio between the source- and target-domain label distributions by density matching. However,
these methods are either computationally infeasible for large-scale data or restricted to shift correction for discrete labels. In this paper, we propose
an end-to-end Label Transformation Framework
(LTF) for correcting target shift, which implicitly
models the shift of PY and the conditional distribution PX|Y using neural networks. Thanks to
the flexibility of deep networks, our framework
can handle continuous, discrete, and even multidimensional labels in a unified way and is scalable to big data. Moreover, for high dimensional
X, such as images, we find that the redundant
information in X severely degrades the estimation accuracy. To remedy this issue, we propose
to match the distribution implied by our generative model and the target-domain distribution in
a low-dimensional feature space that discards information irrelevant to Y . Both theoretical and
empirical studies demonstrate the superiority of
our method over previous approaches.

1
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science,
Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia 2 School of Mathematics and Statistics, The University of Melbourne 3 Department of Philosophy,
Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Jiaxian Guo
<jguo5934@uni.sydney.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Standard supervised learning methods typically assume that
the training set (source domain) and the test set (target domain) have the same distribution. However, the data available for training is always limited and may not represent
and reflect the statistics of the test data. As such, the sourceS
domain distribution PXY
is often different from the targetT
domain distribution PXY
, degrading the performance of
the models learned on the training set. This phenomenon
is called distribution shift, which has become a significant
obstacle to the deployment of deep learning models in the
real world.
To overcome distribution shift and improve the prediction
on test data, existing methods have studied various distribution shift settings, among which covariate shift and target
shift have been widely considered. Covariate shift assumes
that the marginal PX changes across training and test sets,
whereas the conditional distribution PY |X is invariant (Shimodaira, 2000; Sugiyama et al., 2008; Gretton et al., 2009;
Long et al., 2015; 2017; 2018; Liu et al., 2019). Target
shift assumes that the label distribution PY changes but the
conditional distribution PX|Y stays the same (Zhang et al.,
2013; Iyer et al., 2014; Lipton et al., 2018; Azizzadenesheli
et al., 2019).
Here we focus on the target shift problem since it appears in
a wide range of real-world learning problems. For example,
in disease prediction, where our goal is to predict disease
Y from symptoms X, the distribution of the disease can
change over location and time, while the mechanism of
symptoms PX|Y is rather stable. Consider the flu prediction
task, the data available for flu prediction is always has a
regular morbidity rate, but if a model is trained on these
data, the performance of this model will decrease when it
is used to detect flu in a location or over a period with a
high morbidity rate (Tasche, 2017). In addition, target shift
also exists in many computer vision applications, such as
predicting object locations (Yang et al., 2018) and direction
and human poses (Martinez et al., 2017). The distribution
of object locations or human poses often changes across
training and test sets.
Despite being a natural phenomenon in many real applications, target shift is relatively understudied compared to
covariate shift. Chan & Ng (2005) proposed an expectation-

