Streaming Submodular Maximization under a k-Set System Constraint

Ran Haba 1 Ehsan Kazemi 2 3 Moran Feldman 4 Amin Karbasi 2

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel framework
that converts streaming algorithms for monotone
submodular maximization into streaming algorithms for non-monotone submodular maximization. This reduction readily leads to the currently
tightest deterministic approximation ratio for submodular maximization subject to a k-matchoid
constraint. Moreover, we propose the first streaming algorithm for monotone submodular maximization subject to k-extendible and k-set system
constraints. Together with our proposed reduction,
we obtain O(k log k) and O(k 2 log k) approximation ratio for submodular maximization subject
to the above constraints, respectively. We extensively evaluate the empirical performance of our
algorithm against the existing work in a series
of experiments including finding the maximum
independent set in randomly generated graphs,
maximizing linear functions over social networks,
movie recommendation, Yelp location summarization, and Twitter data summarization.

1. Introduction
Submodularity captures an intuitive diminishing returns
property where the benefit of an item decreases as the context in which it is considered grows. This property naturally
occurs in many applications where items may represent data
points, features, actions, etc. Moreover, submodularity is a
sufficient condition that leads to an efficient optimization
procedure for many discrete optimization problems. The
above reasons have led to a surge of applications in machine
learning where the gain of discrete choices shows diminishing returns and the optimization can be handled efficiently.
Novel examples include non-parametric learning (Mirza1

Depart. of Mathematics and Computer Science, The Open
University of Israel 2 Yale Institute for Network Science, Yale
University 3 Now at Google, Zürich, Switzerland 4 Department of
Computer Science, University of Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to:
Ehsan Kazemi <ehsankazemi@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

soleiman et al., 2016b), dictionary learning (Das & Kempe,
2011), crowd teaching (Singla et al., 2014), regression under human assistance (De et al., 2019), sequence selection
(Tschiatschek et al., 2017; Mitrovic et al., 2019) interpreting
neural networks (Elenberg et al., 2017), adversarial attacks
(Lei et al., 2019), fairness (Kazemi et al., 2018), social graph
analysis (Norouzi-Fard et al., 2018), data summarization
(Dasgupta et al., 2013; Tschiatschek et al., 2014; Elhamifar
& Clara De Paolis Kaluza, 2017; Kirchhoff & Bilmes, 2014;
Mitrovic et al., 2018; Kazemi et al., 2020), fMRI parcellation (Salehi et al., 2017), and DNA sequencing (Libbrecht
et al., 2018).
More formally, a set function f : 2N → R≥0 is called submodular if for all sets A ⊆ B ⊆ N and element u ∈
/ B we
have f (A ∪ {u}) − f (A) ≥ f (B ∪ {u}) − f (B). Moreover,
a set function is called monotone if f (A) ≤ f (B) whenever
A ⊆ B. The focus of this paper is on maximizing a general submodular function (not necessarily monotone). More
concretely, we consider a very general form of constrained
submodular maximization, i.e.,
OPT = arg max f (A) ,

(1)

A∈I

where I represents the set of feasible solutions. For instance, when f is monotone and I represents a cardinality/size constraint,1 the celebrated result of (Nemhauser
et al., 1978) states that the greedy algorithm achieves a
e/(e − 1)-approximation for this problem, which is known
to be optimal (Nemhauser & Wolsey, 1978). In the recent
years, there has been a large body of literature aiming at
solving Problem (1) in the offline/centralized setting under
various types of feasibility constraints such as matroid, kmatchoid, k-extendible system, and k-set system (formal
definitions of some of these terms appear in Section 3).
In the offline/centralized setting, the problem of maximizing
a (non-monotone) submodular function subject to the above
types of constraints is fairly well understood and easy-toimplement algorithms have been proposed. For instance, for
maximization under a k-set system√constraint, one obtains
√
an approximation ratio of k + O( k) using roughly k
invocations of the natural greedy algorithm and an algorithm
for unconstrained submodular maximization. Or, when
1
Formally, I contains in this case all subsets of N of size at
most ρ for some value ρ.

