Reward-Free Exploration for Reinforcement Learning

Chi Jin 1 Akshay Krishnamurthy 2 Max Simchowitz 3 Tiancheng Yu 4

Abstract
Exploration is widely regarded as one of the
most challenging aspects of reinforcement learning (RL), with many naive approaches succumbing to exponential sample complexity. To isolate
the challenges of exploration, we propose a new
“reward-free RL” framework. In the exploration
phase, the agent first collects trajectories from
an MDP M without a pre-specified reward function. After exploration, it is tasked with computing near-optimal policies under for M for a
collection of given reward functions. This framework is particularly suitable when there are many
reward functions of interest, or when the reward
function is shaped by an external agent to elicit
desired behavior.
We give an efficient algorithm that conducts
Õ(S 2 Apoly(H)/2 ) episodes of exploration and
returns -suboptimal policies for an arbitrary
number of reward functions. We achieve this by
finding exploratory policies that visit each “significant” state with probability proportional to its
maximum visitation probability under any possible policy. Moreover, our planning procedure
can be instantiated by any black-box approximate planner, such as value iteration or natural
policy gradient. We also give a nearly-matching
Ω(S 2 AH 2 /2 ) lower bound, demonstrating the
near-optimality of our algorithm in this setting.

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL), an agent repeatedly interacts with an unknown environment with the goal of maximizing its cumulative reward. To do so, the agent must
engage in exploration, learning to visit states in order to
investigate whether they hold high reward.
1

Princeton University 2 Microsoft Research, New York
3
University of California, Berkeley 4 Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. Correspondence to: Chi Jin <chij@princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Exploration is widely regarded as the most significant challenge in RL, because the agent may have to take precise sequences of actions to reach states with high reward. Here,
simple randomized exploration strategies provably fail: for
example, a random walk can take exponential time to reach
the corner of the environment where the agent can accummulate high reward (Li, 2012). While reinforcement learning has seen a tremendous surge of recent research activity, essentially all of the standard algorithms deployed in
practice employ simple randomization or its variants, and
consequently incur extremely high sample complexity.
On the other hand, sophisticated exploration strategies
which deliberately incentivize the agent to visit new states
are provably sample-efficient (c.f., Kearns & Singh (2002);
Brafman & Tennenholtz (2002); Azar et al. (2017); Dann
et al. (2017); Jin et al. (2018)), with recent work providing a
nearly-complete theoretical understanding for maximizing
a single prespecified reward function (Dann & Brunskill,
2015; Azar et al., 2017; Zanette & Brunskill, 2019; Simchowitz & Jamieson, 2019). In practice, however, reward
functions are often iteratively engineered to encourage desired behavior via trial and error (e.g. in constrained RL
formulations (Altman, 1999; Achiam et al., 2017; Tessler
et al., 2018; Miryoosefi et al., 2019)). In such cases, repeatedly invoking the same reinforcement learning algorithm with different reward functions can be quite sample
inefficient.
One solution to avoid excessive data collection in such
settings is to first collect a dataset with good coverage
over all possible scenarios in the environment, and then
apply a “Batch-RL” algorithm. Indeed many algorithms
are known for computing near optimal policies from previously collected data, provided that the dataset has good
coverage (Munos & Szepesvári, 2008; Antos et al., 2008;
Chen & Jiang, 2019; Agarwal et al., 2019). However, prior
work provides little guidance into how to obtain such good
coverage.
In this paper, we aim to develop an end-to-end instantiation
of this proposal. To this end we ask:
How can we efficiently explore an environment without using any reward information?
In particular, by exploring the environment, we aim to

