FetchSGD: Communication-Efficient Federated Learning with Sketching

Daniel Rothchild∗ 1 Ashwinee Panda∗ 1 Enayat Ullah 2 Nikita Ivkin 3 Ion Stoica 1 Vladimir Braverman 2
Joseph Gonzalez 1 Raman Arora 2

Abstract
Existing approaches to federated learning suffer from a communication bottleneck as well as
convergence issues due to sparse client participation. In this paper we introduce a novel algorithm,
called FetchSGD, to overcome these challenges.
FetchSGD compresses model updates using a
Count Sketch, and then takes advantage of the
mergeability of sketches to combine model updates from many workers. A key insight in the
design of FetchSGD is that, because the Count
Sketch is linear, momentum and error accumulation can both be carried out within the sketch.
This allows the algorithm to move momentum
and error accumulation from clients to the central
aggregator, overcoming the challenges of sparse
client participation while still achieving high compression rates and good convergence. We prove
that FetchSGD has favorable convergence guarantees, and we demonstrate its empirical effectiveness by training two residual networks and a
transformer model.

1. Introduction
Federated learning has recently emerged as an important setting for training machine learning models. In the federated
setting, training data is distributed across a large number
of edge devices, such as consumer smartphones, personal
computers, or smart home devices. These devices have
data that is useful for training a variety of models – for text
prediction, speech modeling, facial recognition, document
identification, and other tasks (Shi et al., 2016; Brisimi et al.,
2018; Leroy et al., 2019; Tomlinson et al., 2009). However,
data privacy, liability, or regulatory concerns may make it
difficult to move this data to the cloud for training (EU,
* Equal contribution
1 University of California, Berkeley, California, USA 2 Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
Maryland 3 Amazon. Correspondence to: Daniel Rothchild
<drothchild@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

2018). Even without these concerns, training machine learning models in the cloud can be expensive, and an effective
way to train the same models on the edge has the potential
to eliminate this expense.
When training machine learning models in the federated
setting, participating clients do not send their local data to
a central server; instead, a central aggregator coordinates
an optimization procedure among the clients. At each iteration of this procedure, clients compute gradient-based
updates to the current model using their local data, and they
communicate only these updates to a central aggregator.
A number of challenges arise when training models in the
federated setting. Active areas of research in federated learning include solving systems challenges, such as handling
stragglers and unreliable network connections (Bonawitz
et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2019), tolerating adversaries (Bagdasaryan et al., 2018; Bhagoji et al., 2018), and ensuring
privacy of user data (Geyer et al., 2017; Hardy et al., 2017).
In this work we address a different challenge, namely that of
training high-quality models under the constraints imposed
by the federated setting.
There are three main constraints unique to the federated setting that make training high-quality models difficult. First,
communication-efficiency is a necessity when training on
the edge (Li et al., 2018), since clients typically connect to
the central aggregator over slow connections (∼ 1Mbps)
(Lee et al., 2010). Second, clients must be stateless, since
it is often the case that no client participates more than once
during all of training (Kairouz et al., 2019). Third, the data
collected across clients is typically not independent and
identically distributed. For example, when training a nextword prediction model on the typing data of smartphone
users, clients located in geographically distinct regions generate data from different distributions, but enough commonality exists between the distributions that we may still want
to train a single model (Hard et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2018).
In this paper, we propose a new optimization algorithm for
federated learning, called FetchSGD, that can train highquality models under all three of these constraints. The crux
of the algorithm is simple: at each round, clients compute
a gradient based on their local data, then compress the gradient using a data structure called a Count Sketch before

