Neural Networks are Convex Regularizers: Exact Polynomial-time Convex
Optimization Formulations for Two-layer Networks

Mert Pilanci 1 Tolga Ergen 1

Abstract
We develop exact representations of training twolayer neural networks with rectified linear units
(ReLUs) in terms of a single convex program with
number of variables polynomial in the number
of training samples and the number of hidden
neurons. Our theory utilizes semi-infinite duality
and minimum norm regularization. We show that
ReLU networks trained with standard weight decay are equivalent to block `1 penalized convex
models. Moreover, we show that certain standard
convolutional linear networks are equivalent semidefinite programs which can be simplified to `1
regularized linear models in a polynomial sized
discrete Fourier feature space.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we introduce a finite dimensional, polynomialsize convex program that globally solves the training problem for two-layer neural networks with rectified linear unit
(ReLU) activation functions. The key to our analysis is a
generic convex duality method we introduce, and is of independent interest for other non-convex problems. We further
prove that strong duality holds in a variety of architectures.
1.1. Related work and overview
Convex neural network training was considered in the literature (Bengio et al., 2006; Bach, 2017). However, convexity
arguments in the existing work are restricted to infinite width
networks, where infinite dimensional optimization problems
need to be solved. In fact, adding even a single neuron to the
model requires the solution of a non-convex problem where
no efficient algorithm is known (Bach, 2017). In this work,
we develop a novel duality theory and introduce polynomialtime finite dimensional convex programs, which are exact
and computationally tractable.
1

Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Mert Pilanci <pilanci@stanford.edu>, Tolga Ergen <ergen@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Several recent studies considered over-parameterized neural
networks, where the width approaches infinity by leveraging
connections to kernel methods, and showed that randomly
initialized gradient descent can fit all the training samples
(Jacot et al., 2018; Du et al., 2019; Allen-Zhu et al., 2019).
However, in this kernel regime, the analysis shows that
almost no hidden neurons move from their initial values
to actively learn useful features (Chizat & Bach, 2018).
Experiments also confirm that the kernel approximation as
the width tends to infinity is unable to fully explain the
success of non-convex neural network models (Arora et al.,
2019). On the contrary, our work precisely characterizes the
mechanism behind extraordinary modeling capabilities of
neural networks for any finite number of hidden neurons.
We prove that networks with ReLU are identical to convex
regularization methods in a finite higher dimensional space.
Consider a two-layer network f : Rd → R with m neurons
f (x) =

m
X

φ(xT uj )αj ,

(1)

j=1

where uj ∈ Rd and αj ∈ R are the weights for hidden and
output layers, respectively, and φ(t) = (t)+ := max(t, 0)
is the ReLU activation. We extend the definition of scalar
functions to vectors/matrices entry-wise. We use Bp to
denote the unit `p ball in Rd . We denote the set of integers
from 1 to n as [n]. We also use σ to denote singular values.
In order to keep the notation simple and clearly convey the
main idea, we will restrict our attention to two-layer ReLU
networks with scalar output trained with squared loss. All
of our results immediately extend to vector outputs, tensor
inputs, arbitrary convex classification and regression loss
functions, and other network architectures (see Appendix).
Given a data matrix X ∈ Rn×d , a label vector y ∈ Rn , and
a regularization parameter β > 0, consider minimizing the
squared loss objective and squared `2 -norm of all parameters
m
2
1 X
(Xuj )+ αj − y
{αj ,uj }j=1 2
2
j=1

p∗ := minm

m

+

(2)

βX
(kuj k22 + αj2 ) .
2 j=1

