GraphOpt: Learning Optimization Models of Graph Formation
Rakshit Trivedi 1 Jiachen Yang 1 Hongyuan Zha 1 2

Abstract
Formation mechanisms are fundamental to the
study of complex networks, but learning them
from observations is challenging. In real-world
domains, one often has access only to the final
constructed graph, instead of the full construction
process, and observed graphs exhibit complex
structural properties. In this work, we propose
GraphOpt, an end-to-end framework that jointly
learns an implicit model of graph structure formation and discovers an underlying optimization
mechanism in the form of a latent objective function. The learned objective can serve as an explanation for the observed graph properties, thereby
lending itself to transfer across different graphs
within a domain. GraphOpt poses link formation
in graphs as a sequential decision-making process and solves it using maximum entropy inverse
reinforcement learning algorithm. Further, it employs a novel continuous latent action space that
aids scalability. Empirically, we demonstrate that
GraphOpt discovers a latent objective transferable across graphs with different characteristics.
GraphOpt also learns a robust stochastic policy
that achieves competitive link prediction performance without being explicitly trained on this task
and further enables construction of graphs with
properties similar to those of the observed graph.

1. Introduction and Related Work
Learning generative mechanisms of graph-structured data
is an important approach to build graph constructors for
data augmentation (Chakrabarti & Faloutsos, 2006) and
inference modules for downstream network analysis and
prediction tasks. Such models have wide-ranging applications in several domains spanning recommendation sys1
Georgia Institute of Technology, USA 2 Institute for
Data and Decision Analytics, the Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Shenzhen. Correspondence to: Rakshit Trivedi
<rstrivedi@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

Figure 1. ⌦ is set of latent objective functions {Fi }, any of which
could lead to observed graph G when optimised. Our goal is
to discover one such latent objective Fopt that could serve as an
explanation of the observed graph properties, and optimise it to
learn a graph construction procedure ⇧ such that ⇧(V), given
node set V, mimics the network patterns observed in G. While Fopt
may not match the unknown ground truth mechanism when one
exists, it can produce an accurate ⇧ and hence can be operationally
equivalent to the true mechanism.

tems (Zhang et al., 2017), biological networks (Singh &
Lio, 2019), knowledge graphs (Xiao et al., 2016), social networks (Liu et al., 2016) and many more. Formation mechanisms play a fundamental role in driving the generative
process of structures observed in the real-world (Barabási
& Pósfai, 2016). Modeling these mechanisms is important as it could facilitate synthesis of novel graph structures
for various subsequent studies such as analysing disease
progression. Moreover, access to these mechanisms could
help to build intelligent systems that generalize beyond the
task of structure generation and support transfer to graphs
beyond available observations. However, in real-world domains, such formation mechanisms are often unknown and
learning them from data is challenging due to: limited or no
access to the construction process (one often observes only
the final graph); complex discrete nature of graph and rare
availability of large collection of graph samples for learning.
In this paper, we investigate the novel problem setting of
discovering an underlying formation mechanism of the observed graph structure. Concretely, we propose GraphOpt,
an end-to-end learning framework that jointly learns the
forward model of graph construction and solves the inverse
problem of discovering an underlying optimization mechanism, in the form of a latent objective function, that serves

