Optimal approximation for unconstrained
non-submodular minimization
Marwa El Halabi 1 Stefanie Jegelka 1

Abstract
Submodular function minimization is well studied, and existing algorithms solve it exactly or up
to arbitrary accuracy. However, in many applications, such as structured sparse learning or batch
Bayesian optimization, the objective function is
not exactly submodular, but close. In this case,
no theoretical guarantees exist. Indeed, submodular minimization algorithms rely on intricate connections between submodularity and convexity.
We show how these relations can be extended to
obtain approximation guarantees for minimizing
non-submodular functions, characterized by how
close the function is to submodular. We also extend this result to noisy function evaluations. Our
approximation results are the ﬁrst for minimizing
non-submodular functions, and are optimal, as
established by our matching lower bound.

1. Introduction
Many machine learning problems can be formulated as minimizing a set function H. This problem is in general NP-hard,
and can only be solved efﬁciently with additional structure.
One especially popular example of such structure is that H
is submodular, i.e., it satisﬁes the diminishing returns (DR)
property: H(A ∪ {i}) − H(A) ≥ H(B ∪ {i}) − H(B), for
all A ⊆ B, i ∈ V \ B. Several existing algorithms minimize a submodular H in polynomial time, exactly or within
arbitrary accuracy. Submodularity is a natural model for a
variety of applications, such as image segmentation (Boykov
& Kolmogorov, 2004), data selection (Lin & Bilmes, 2010),
or clustering (Narasimhan et al., 2006). But, in many other
settings, such as structured sparse learning, Bayesian optimization, and column subset selection, the objective function is not exactly submodular. Instead, it satisﬁes a weaker
version of the diminishing returns property. An important
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to:
Marwa El Halabi <marwash@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

class of such functions are α-weakly DR-submodular functions, introduced in (Lehmann et al., 2006). The parameter
α quantiﬁes how close the function is to being submodular (see Section 2 for a precise deﬁnition). Furthermore,
in many cases, only noisy evaluations of the objective are
available. Hence, we ask: Do submodular minimization
algorithms extend to such non-submodular noisy functions?
Non-submodular maximization, under various notions of
approximate submodularity, has recently received a lot
of attention (Das & Kempe, 2011; Elenberg et al., 2018;
Sakaue, 2019; Bian et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2017; Gatmiry
& Gomez-Rodriguez, 2019; Harshaw et al., 2019; Kuhnle
et al., 2018; Horel & Singer, 2016; Hassidim & Singer,
2018). In contrast, only few studies consider minimization
of non-submodular set functions. Recent works have studied the problem of minimizing the ratio of two set functions,
where one (Bai et al., 2016; Qian et al., 2017a) or both
(Wang et al., 2019) are non-submodular. The ratio problem
is related to constrained minimization, which does not admit
a constant factor approximation even in the submodular case
(Svitkina & Fleischer, 2011). If the objective is approximately modular, i.e., it has bounded curvature, algorithmic
techniques related to those for submodular maximization
achieve optimal approximations for constrained minimization (Sviridenko et al., 2017; Iyer et al., 2013). Algorithms
for minimizing the difference of two submodular functions
were proposed in (Iyer & Bilmes, 2012; Kawahara et al.,
2015), but no approximation guarantees were provided.
In this paper, we study the unconstrained non-submodular
minimization problem
minS⊆V H(S) := F (S) − G(S),

(1)

where F and G are monotone (i.e., non-decreasing or
non-increasing) functions, F is α-weakly DR-submodular,
and G is β-weakly DR-supermodular, i.e., −G is β −1 weakly DR-submodular. The deﬁnitions of weak DR-sub/supermodularity only hold for monotone functions, and
thus do not directly apply to H. We show that, perhaps
surprisingly, any set function H can be decomposed into
functions F and G that satisfy these assumptions, albeit
with properties leading to weaker approximations when the
function is far from being submodular.

