On Leveraging Pretrained GANs for Generation with Limited Data

Miaoyun Zhao * 1 Yulai Cong * 1 Lawrence Carin 1

Abstract
Recent work has shown generative adversarial
networks (GANs) can generate highly realistic
images, that are often indistinguishable (by humans) from real images. Most images so generated are not contained in the training dataset,
suggesting potential for augmenting training sets
with GAN-generated data. While this scenario
is of particular relevance when there are limited
data available, there is still the issue of training the
GAN itself based on that limited data. To facilitate
this, we leverage existing GAN models pretrained
on large-scale datasets (like ImageNet) to introduce additional knowledge (which may not exist
within the limited data), following the concept of
transfer learning. Demonstrated by natural-image
generation, we reveal that low-level filters (those
close to observations) of both the generator and
discriminator of pretrained GANs can be transferred to facilitate generation in a perceptuallydistinct target domain with limited training data.
To further adapt the transferred filters to the target domain, we propose adaptive filter modulation (AdaFM). An extensive set of experiments is
presented to demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed techniques on generation with limited
data.

1. Introduction
Recent research has demonstrated the increasing power
of generative adversarial networks (GANs) to generate
high-quality samples, that are often indistinguishable from
real data (Karras et al., 2017; Lucic et al., 2018; Miyato
et al., 2018; Brock et al., 2019; Karras et al., 2019a); this
demonstrates the capability of GANs to exploit the valuable information within the underlying data distribution.
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Duke University, Durham NC, USA. Correspondence
to: Miaoyun Zhao <miaoyun9zhao@gmail.com>, Yulai Cong
<yulaicong@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Although many powerful GAN models pretrained on largescale datasets have been released, few efforts have been
made (Giacomello et al., 2019) to take advantage of the
valuable information within those models to facilitate downstream tasks; this shows a clear contrast with the popularity
of transfer learning for discriminative tasks (e.g., to reuse the
feature extractor of a pretrained classifier) (Bengio, 2012;
Donahue et al., 2014; Luo et al., 2017; Zamir et al., 2018),
and transfer learning in natural language processing (e.g.,
to reuse the expensively-pretrained BERT model) (Devlin
et al., 2018; Bao & Qiao, 2019; Peng et al., 2019; Mozafari
et al., 2019).
Motivated by the significant value of released pretrained
GAN models, we propose to leverage the information
therein to facilitate downstream tasks in a target domain with
limited training data. This situation arises frequently due to
expensive data collection or privacy issues that may arise in
medical or biological applications (Yi et al., 2019). We concentrate on the challenging scenario of GAN model development when limited training data are available. One key observation motivating our method is that a well-trained GAN
can generate realistic images not observed in the training
dataset (Brock et al., 2019; Karras et al., 2019a; Han et al.,
2019), demonstrating the generalization ability of GANs to
capture the training data manifold. Likely arising from novel
combinations of information/attributes/styles (see stunning
illustrations in StyleGAN (Karras et al., 2019a)), this generalization of GANs is extremely appealing for scenarios
in which there are limited data (Yi et al., 2019; Han et al.,
2019). For example, GANs can be used to augment the
training set via realistic data generation, to alleviate overfitting or provide regularizations for classification (Wang &
Perez, 2017; Frid-Adar et al., 2018), segmentation (Bowles
et al., 2018), or detection (Han et al., 2019; 2020).
However, the limited data in the target domain manifests a
problem in learning the underlying GAN model, as GANs
typically require substantial training data. When a limited
quantity of data are available, to naively train a GAN is
prone to overfitting, as powerful GAN models have numerous parameters that are essential for realistic generation
(Bermudez et al., 2018; Bowles et al., 2018; Frid-Adar
et al., 2018; Finlayson et al., 2018). To alleviate overfitting, one may consider transferring additional information
from other domains via transfer learning, which may deliver

