Online Dense Subgraph Discovery via Blurred-Graph Feedback

Yuko Kuroki 1 2 Atsushi Miyauchi 1 2 Junya Honda 1 2 Masashi Sugiyama 2 1

Abstract
Dense subgraph discovery aims to find a dense
component in edge-weighted graphs. This is a
fundamental graph-mining task with a variety of
applications and thus has received much attention recently. Although most existing methods
assume that each individual edge weight is easily
obtained, such an assumption is not necessarily
valid in practice. In this paper, we introduce a
novel learning problem for dense subgraph discovery in which a learner queries edge subsets
rather than only single edges and observes a noisy
sum of edge weights in a queried subset. For this
problem, we first propose a polynomial-time algorithm that obtains a nearly-optimal solution with
high probability. Moreover, to deal with largesized graphs, we design a more scalable algorithm
with a theoretical guarantee. Computational experiments using real-world graphs demonstrate
the effectiveness of our algorithms.

1. Introduction
Dense subgraph discovery aims to find a dense component in
edge-weighted graphs. This is a fundamental graph-mining
task with a variety of applications and thus has received
much attention recently. Applications include detection
of communities or span link farms in Web graphs (Dourisboure et al., 2007; Gibson et al., 2005), molecular complexes
extraction in protein–protein interaction networks (Bader
& Hogue, 2003), extracting experts in crowdsoucing systems (Kawase et al., 2019), and real-time story identification
in micro-blogging streams (Angel et al., 2012).
Among a lot of optimization problems arising in dense subgraph discovery, the most popular one would be the densest
subgraph problem. In this problem, given an edge-weighted
undirected graph, we are asked to find a subset of vertices
that maximizes the so-called degree density (or simply den1
The University of Tokyo, Japan 2 RIKEN AIP, Japan. Correspondence to: Yuko Kuroki <ykuroki@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

sity), which is defined as half the average degree of the subgraph induced by the subset. Unlike most optimization problems for dense subgraph discovery, the densest subgraph
problem can be solved exactly in polynomial time using
some exact algorithms, e.g., Charikar’s linear-programmingbased (LP-based) algorithm (Charikar, 2000) and Goldberg’s flow-based algorithm (Goldberg, 1984). Moreover,
there is a simple greedy algorithm called the greedy peeling,
which obtains a well-approximate solution in almost linear
time (Charikar, 2000). Owing to the solvability and the
usefulness of solutions, the densest subgraph problem has
actively been studied in data mining, machine learning, and
optimization communities (Ghaffari et al., 2019; Gionis &
Tsourakakis, 2015; Miller et al., 2010; Papailiopoulos et al.,
2014). We thoroughly review the literature in Appendix A.
Although the densest subgraph problem requires a full input of the graph data, in many real-world applications, the
edge weights need to be estimated from uncertain measurements. For example, consider protein–protein interaction
networks, where vertices correspond to proteins in a cell
and edges (resp. edge weights) represent the interactions
(resp. the strength of interactions) among the proteins. In
the generation process of such networks, the edge weights
are estimated through biological experiments using measuring instruments with some noises (Nepusz et al., 2012).
As another example, consider social networks, where vertices correspond to users of some social networking service
and edge weights represent the strength of communications
(e.g., the number of messages exchanged) among them. In
practice, we often need to estimate the edge weights by observing anonymized communications between users (Adar
& Ré, 2007).
Recently, in order to handle the uncertainty of edge weights,
Miyauchi & Takeda (2018) introduced a robust optimization
variant of the densest subgraph problem. In their method,
all edges are repeatedly queried by a sampling oracle that
returns an individual edge weight. However, such a sampling procedure for individual edges is often quite costly
or sometimes impossible. On the other hand, it is often
affordable to observe aggregated information of a subset
of edges. For example, in the case of protein–protein interaction networks, it may be costly to conduct experiments
for all possible pairs of proteins, but it is cost-effective to
observe molecular interaction among a molecular group

