On the Noisy Gradient Descent that Generalizes as SGD

Jingfeng Wu 1 Wenqing Hu 2 Haoyi Xiong 3 Jun Huan 4 Vladimir Braverman 1 Zhanxing Zhu 5

Abstract
The gradient noise of SGD is considered to play a
central role in the observed strong generalization
abilities of deep learning. While past studies confirm that the magnitude and covariance structure
of gradient noise are critical for regularization, it
remains unclear whether or not the class of noise
distributions is important. In this work we provide negative results by showing that noises in
classes different from the SGD noise can also effectively regularize gradient descent. Our finding
is based on a novel observation on the structure of
the SGD noise: it is the multiplication of the gradient matrix and a sampling noise that arises from
the mini-batch sampling procedure. Moreover,
the sampling noises unify two kinds of gradient
regularizing noises that belong to the Gaussian
class: the one using (scaled) Fisher as covariance
and the one using the gradient covariance of SGD
as covariance. Finally, thanks to the flexibility of
choosing noise class, an algorithm is proposed to
perform noisy gradient descent that generalizes
well, the variant of which even benefits large batch
SGD training without hurting generalization.

1. Introduction
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is one of the standard
workhorses for optimizing deep models (Bottou, 1991).
Though initially proposed to remedy the computational bottleneck of gradient descent (GD), recent studies suggest
SGD in addition induces a crucial implicit regularization,
which prevents the over-parameterized models from converging to the minima that cannot generalize well (Zhang
et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2018; Jastrz˛ebski et al., 2017; Hoffer
1
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA 2 Missouri
University of Science and Technology, Rolla, MO, USA 3 Big
Data Laboratory, Baidu Research, Beijing, China 4 Styling.AI Inc.,
Beijing, China 5 Peking University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Jingfeng Wu <uuujf@jhu.edu>, Zhanxing Zhu <zhanxing.zhu@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

et al., 2017; Keskar et al., 2017). To gain intuitions, one can
compare the generalization abilities of (i) GD vs. SGD, (ii)
small batch SGD vs. large batch SGD, and (iii) SGD vs. gradient Langevin dynamic (GLD). Empirical studies confirm
that (i) SGD outperforms GD (Zhu et al., 2018), (ii) small
batch SGD generalizes better than large batch SGD (Hoffer
et al., 2017; Keskar et al., 2017), and (iii) GLD cannot compete with SGD (Zhu et al., 2018). To understand why these
phenomena happen, let us look at the differences between
the compared algorithms. Firstly SGD can be viewed as GD,
an deterministic algorithm, with an unbiased noise inserted
at every iteration, which is called the gradient noise (Bottou
et al., 2018). Secondly the gradient noise of the small batch
SGD has a much larger magnitude than that of the large
batch SGD (Hoffer et al., 2017; Jastrz˛ebski et al., 2017).
Thirdly, even though the noise magnitude is tuned to be
equal, the SGD noise has a nontrivial covariance structure,
instead of just being a white noise as in GLD (Zhu et al.,
2018). The above discussions exhibit a critical fact:
Certain noises can effectively regularize gradient descent.
Despite the efforts spent, this important yet implicit regularization effect induced by noise has never been fully
understood. From the Bayesian perspective, the noise is
interpreted to perform variational inference (Mandt et al.,
2017; Chaudhari & Soatto, 2017). Such interpretation, however, requires unrealistic assumptions such as the noise has
constant covariance (Mandt et al., 2017) or certain force is
conservative (Chaudhari & Soatto, 2017). Another theory argues that the noise enables the gradient algorithm to escape
from sharp minima (Zhu et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2019; Simsekli et al., 2019) that typically generalize worse (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Keskar et al., 2017). Hence GD
enhanced by such noise tends to find flat minima that generalize well. This explanation hold valid to some extent;
but the escaping behavior is too subtle to fit practice — the
loss/accuracy does not jump significantly after the dynamic
reaching a minimum, e.g., see the final epochs of Figure 4
in (Huang et al., 2017). Therefore the algorithm does not
explicitly escape from minima in practice. Although the
mechanism has not been completely understood, we can
still recognize and utilize such implicit regularization by
studying the properties of gradient noise.
We next summarize three important aspects of gradient noise

