Budgeted Online Influence Maximization

Pierre Perrault 1 2 3 Jennifer Healey 1 Zheng Wen 4 Michal Valko 4 3

Abstract
We introduce a new budgeted framework for online influence maximization, considering the total
cost of an advertising campaign instead of the
common cardinality constraint on a chosen influencer set. Our approach models better the realworld setting where the cost of influencers varies
and advertizers want to find the best value for their
overall social advertising budget. We propose an
algorithm assuming an independent cascade diffusion model and edge-level semi-bandit feedback,
and provide both theoretical and experimental results. Our analysis is also valid for the cardinalityconstraint setting and improves the state of the art
regret bound in this case.

1. Introduction
Viral marketing through online social networks now represents a significant part of many digital advertising budgets. In this form of marketing, companies incentivize chosen influencers in social networks (e.g., Facebook, Twitter,
YouTube) to feature a product in hopes that their followers
will adopt the product and repost the recommendation to
their own network of followers. The effectiveness of the
chosen set of influencers can be measured by the expected
number of users that adopt the product due to their initial
recommendation, called the spread. Influence maximization
(IM, Kempe et al., 2003) is the problem of choosing the
optimal set of influencers to maximize the spread under a
cardinality constraint on the chosen set.
In order to define the spread, we need to specify a diffusion
process such as independent cascade (IC) or linear threshold
(LT) (Kempe et al., 2003). The parameters of these models
are usually unknown. Different methods exist to estimate
the parameters of the diffusion model from historical data
(see section 1.1) however historical data is often difficult
to obtain. Another possibility is to consider online influ1

Adobe Research, San Jose, CA 2 ENS Paris-Saclay
3
Inria Lille 4 DeepMind. Correspondence to: Pierre Perrault
<pierre.perrault@outlook.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

ence maximization (OIM) (Vaswani et al., 2015; Wen et al.,
2017) where an agent actively learns about the network by
interacting with it repeatedly, trying to find the best seed
influencers. The agent thus faces the dilemma of exploration
versus exploitation, allowing us to see it as multi-armed bandits problem (Auer et al., 2002). More precisely, the agent
faces IM over T rounds. Each round, it selects m seeds
(based on feedback from prior rounds) and diffusion occurs;
then it gains a reward equal to the spread and receives some
feedback on the diffusion.
IM and OIM optimize with the constraint of a fixed number
of seeds. This reflects a fixed seed cost model, for example, where influencers are incentivized by being given an
identical free product. In reality, however, many influencers
demand different levels of compensation. Those with a high
out-degree (e.g., number of followers) are usually more expensive. Due to these cost variations, marketers usually
wish to optimize their seed sets S under a budget c(S) ≤ b
rather than a cardinality constraint |S| ≤ m. Optimizing a
seed set under a budget has been studied in the offline case
by Nguyen and Zheng (2013). In the online case, Wang
et al. (2020) considered the relaxed constraint E[c(S)] ≤ b,
where the expectation is over the possible randomness of
S.1 We believe however that the constraint of a fixed, equal
budget c(S) ≤ b at each round does not sufficiently model
the willingness to choose a cost-efficient seed set. Indeed,
we see that the choice of b is crucial: a b too large translates
into a waste of budget (some seeds that are too expensive
will be chosen) and a b too small translates into a waste of
time (a whole round is used to influence only a few users).
To circumvent this issue, instead of a budget per round, in
our framework, we allow the agent to choose seed sets of
any cost at each round, under an overall budget constraint
(equal to B = bT for instance). In summary, we incorporate the OIM framework into a budgeted bandit setting.
Our setting is more flexible for the agent, and better meets
real-world needs.
1.1. Related work on IM
IM can be formally defined as follows. A social network
is modeled as a directed graph G = (V, E), with nodes V
1
This relaxation is to avoid a computationally costly partial
enumeration (Krause and Guestrin, 2005; Khuller et al., 1999)

