Learning Discrete Structured Representations by Adversarially Maximizing
Mutual Information
Karl Stratos 1 Sam Wiseman 2

Abstract
We propose learning discrete structured representations from unlabeled data by maximizing the
mutual information between a structured latent
variable and a target variable. Calculating mutual
information is intractable in this setting. Our key
technical contribution is an adversarial objective
that can be used to tractably estimate mutual information assuming only the feasibility of cross
entropy calculation. We develop a concrete realization of this general formulation with Markov
distributions over binary encodings. We report
critical and unexpected findings on practical aspects of the objective such as the choice of variational priors. We apply our model on document
hashing and show that it outperforms current best
baselines based on discrete and vector quantized
variational autoencoders. It also yields highly
compressed interpretable representations.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised learning of discrete representations is appealing because they correspond to natural symbolic representations in many domains (e.g., phonemes in speech
signals, topics in text, and objects in images). However,
working with discrete variables comes with technical challenges such as non-differentiability and nontrivial combinatorial optimization. Standard methods approach the problem
within the framework of variational autoencoding (Kingma
& Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014) and bypass these
challenges by adopting some form of gradient approximation and possibly strong independence assumptions (Bengio
et al., 2013; van den Oord et al., 2017).
In this paper we are instead interested in a promising alternative framework based on maximal mutual information
(MMI). Unlike autoencoding, MMI estimates a distribution
1
Rutgers University 2 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago.
Correspondence to: Karl Stratos <karlstratos@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

over latent variables without modeling raw signals by maximizing the mutual information between the latent and a
target variable (Brown et al., 1992; Bell & Sejnowski, 1995;
Tishby et al., 1999). It is well motivated as a principled
approach to learning representations that retain only predictive information and drop noise. Its neural extensions have
recently been quite successful in learning useful continuous
representations across domains (Oord et al., 2018; Belghazi
et al., 2018; Hjelm et al., 2019; Bachman et al., 2019).
We depart from these existing works on MMI in two important ways. First, we learn discrete structured representations.
There are previous works on learning discrete representations with neural MMI (McAllester, 2018; Stratos, 2019),
but they only consider unstructured representations which
can transmit at most the log of the number of labels bits
of information. Breaking the log bottleneck in the discrete
regime requires making encodings structured, but it also
makes exact computation intractable. Thus the feasibility
of optimizing mutual information effectively in this setting
remains unclear. We develop a tractable formulation that
only requires tractable cross entropy by a combination of
mild structural assumptions and an appropriate loss function
(see below).
Second, we consider a new mutual information estimator
based on the difference of entropies for learning representations. This is a crucial departure from existing works
that optimize variational lower bounds (Poole et al., 2019).
Estimators of a lower bound on mutual information have
been shown to suffer fundamental limitations (McAllester &
Stratos, 2020), suggesting a need to investigate alternative
estimators. Our estimator is neither a lower bound nor an
upper bound, yet it can be optimized adversarially as in
generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.,
2014). We show for the first time that such adversarial
optimization of mutual information is a viable option for
learning meaningful representations.
Our proposed discrete structured MMI is novel and largely
uncharted in the literature. An important contribution of
this paper is charting practical considerations for this alien
approach by developing a concrete realization based on a
structured model over binary encodings. More specifically,
the model encodes an observation into a zero-one vector

