Learning Adversarial Markov Decision Processes
with Bandit Feedback and Unknown Transition
Chi Jin 1 Tiancheng Jin 2 Haipeng Luo 2 Suvrit Sra 3 Tiancheng Yu 3

Abstract
We consider the task of learning in episodic finitehorizon Markov decision processes with an unknown transition function, bandit feedback, and
adversarial losses. We propose
p an efficient algorithm that achieves Õ(L|X| |A|T ) regret with
high probability, where L is the horizon, |X| the
number of states, |A| the number of actions, and T
the number of episodes. To our knowledge,
our al√
gorithm is the first to ensure Õ( T ) regret in this
challenging setting; in fact it achieves the same
regret as (Rosenberg & Mansour, 2019a) who
consider the easier setting with full-information.
Our key contributions are two-fold: a tighter confidence set for the transition function; and an optimistic loss estimator that is inversely weighted by
an upper occupancy bound.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning studies the problem where a learner
interacts with the environment sequentially and aims to improve her strategy over time. The environment dynamics are
usually modeled as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) with
a fixed and unknown transition function. We consider a general setting where the interaction proceeds in episodes with
a fixed horizon. Within each episode the learner sequentially
observes her current state, selects an action, suffers and observes the loss corresponding to the chosen state-action pair,
and then transits to the next state according to the underlying
transition function.1 The goal of the learner is to minimize
her regret: the difference between her total loss and the total
loss of an optimal fixed policy.
1
Princeton University 2 University of Southern California 3 Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence
to: Tiancheng Jin <tiancheng.jin@usc.edu>, Tiancheng Yu
<yutc@mit.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
1
As in previous work (Rosenberg & Mansour, 2019a;b),
throughout we use the term “losses” instead of “rewards” to be
consistent with the adversarial online learning literature. One can
translate between losses and rewards by simply taking negation.

The majority of the literature in learning MDPs assumes
stationary losses, that is, the losses observed for a specific
state-action pair follow a fixed and unknown distribution.
To better capture applications with non-stationary or even
adversarial losses, the works (Even-Dar et al., 2009; Yu
et al., 2009) are among the first to study the problem of
learning adversarial MDPs, where the losses can change
arbitrarily between episodes. There are several follow-ups
in this direction, such as (Yu et al., 2009; Neu et al., 2010;
2012; Zimin & Neu, 2013; Dekel & Hazan, 2013; Rosenberg
& Mansour, 2019a). See Section 1.1 for more related work.
For an MDP with |X| states, |A| actions, T episodes,
and L steps in each episode, the best existing result is
the workp
(Rosenberg & Mansour, 2019a), which achieves
Õ(L|X| |A|T ) regret, assuming a fixed and unknown
transition function, adversarial losses, but importantly fullinformation feedback: i.e., the loss for every state-action
pair is revealed at the end of each episode. On the other hand,
with the more natural and standard bandit feedback (where
only the loss for each visited state-action pair is revealed),
a later work by the same authors (Rosenberg & Mansour,
2019b) achieves regret Õ(L3/2 |X||A|1/4 T 3/4 ), which has
a much worse dependence on the number of episodes T
compared to the full-information setting.
Our main contribution significantly improves on (Rosenberg
& Mansour, 2019b). In particular,
p we propose an efficient
algorithm that achieves Õ(L|X| |A|T ) regret in the same
setting with bandit feedback, an unknown transition function, and adversarial losses. Although our regret bound still
exhibits
p a gap compared to the best existing lower bound
Ω(L |X||A|T ) (Jin et al., 2018), to the best of our knowledge, for this
√ challenging setting our result is the first to
achieve Õ( T ) regret. Importantly, this also matches the
regret upper bound of Rosenberg & Mansour (2019a), who
consider the easier setting with full-information feedback.
Our algorithm builds on the UC-O-REPS algorithm (Rosenberg & Mansour, 2019a;b)—we also construct confidence
sets to handle the unknown transition function, and apply
Online Mirror Descent over the space of occupancy measures (see Section 2.1) to handle adversarial losses. The first
key difference and challenge is that with bandit feedback, to
apply Online Mirror Descent we must construct good loss

