NADS: Neural Architecture Distribution Search for Uncertainty Awareness

Randy Ardywibowo 1 Shahin Boluki 1 Xinyu Gong 2 Zhangyang Wang 2 Xiaoning Qian 1

Abstract
Machine learning (ML) systems often encounter
Out-of-Distribution (OoD) errors when dealing
with testing data coming from a distribution different from training data. It becomes important
for ML systems in critical applications to accurately quantify its predictive uncertainty and
screen out these anomalous inputs. However,
existing OoD detection approaches are prone to
errors and even sometimes assign higher likelihoods to OoD samples. Unlike standard learning
tasks, there is currently no well established guiding principle for designing OoD detection architectures that can accurately quantify uncertainty.
To address these problems, we ﬁrst seek to identify guiding principles for designing uncertaintyaware architectures, by proposing Neural Architecture Distribution Search (NADS). NADS
searches for a distribution of architectures that
perform well on a given task, allowing us to
identify common building blocks among all
uncertainty-aware architectures. With this formulation, we are able to optimize a stochastic
OoD detection objective and construct an ensemble of models to perform OoD detection. We
perform multiple OoD detection experiments and
observe that our NADS performs favorably, with
up to 57% improvement in accuracy compared to
state-of-the-art methods among 15 different testing conﬁgurations.

1. Introduction
Detecting anomalous data is crucial for safely applying machine learning in autonomous systems for critical applications and for AI safety (Amodei et al., 2016). Such anoma1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas
A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA 2 Department of
Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA. Correspondence to: Randy Ardywibowo <randyardywibowo@tamu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

lous data can come in settings such as in autonomous driving (Kendall & Gal, 2017; NHTSA, 2017), disease monitoring (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2016), and fault detection
(Hendrycks et al., 2019b). In these situations, it is important for these systems to reliably detect abnormal inputs so
that their occurrence can be overseen by a human, or the
system can proceed using a more conservative policy.
The widespread use of deep learning models within these
autonomous systems have aggravated this issue. Despite having high performance in many predictive tasks,
deep networks tend to give high conﬁdence predictions on
Out-of-Distribution (OoD) data (Goodfellow et al., 2015;
Nguyen et al., 2015). Moreover, commonly used OoD
detection approaches are prone to errors and even assign
higher likelihoods to samples from other datasets (Lee
et al., 2018; Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2016).
Unlike common machine learning tasks such as image classiﬁcation, segmentation, and speech recognition, there are
currently no well established guidelines for designing architectures that can accurately screen out OoD data and
quantify its predictive uncertainty. Such a gap makes Neural Architecture Search (NAS) a promising option to explore the better design of uncertainty-aware models (Elsken
et al., 2018). NAS algorithms attempt to ﬁnd an optimal
neural network architecture for a speciﬁc task. Existing efforts have primarily focused on searching for architectures
that perform well on image classiﬁcation or segmentation.
However, it is unclear whether architecture components
that are beneﬁcial for image classiﬁcation and segmentation models would also lead to better uncertainty quantiﬁcation (UQ) and thereafter be effective for OoD detection.
Because of this, it is necessary to tailor the search objective in order to ﬁnd the architectures that can accurately
detect OoD data. However, designing an optimization objective that leads to uncertainty-aware models is also not
straightforward. With no access to labels for OoD data,
unsupervised/self-supervised generative models maximizing the likelihood of in-distribution data become the primary tools for UQ (Hendrycks et al., 2019a). However,
these models counter-intuitively assign high likelihoods to
OoD data (Nalisnick et al., 2019a; Choi & Jang, 2018;
Hendrycks et al., 2019a; Shafaei et al.). Because of this,
maximizing the log-likelihood is inadequate for OoD de-

