A Unified Theory of Decentralized SGD
with Changing Topology and Local Updates

Anastasia Koloskova * 1 Nicolas Loizou 2 Sadra Boreiri 1 Martin Jaggi 1 Sebastian U. Stich * 1

Abstract
Decentralized stochastic optimization methods
have gained a lot of attention recently, mainly
because of their cheap per iteration cost, data locality, and their communication-efficiency. In this
paper we introduce a unified convergence analysis
that covers a large variety of decentralized SGD
methods which so far have required different intuitions, have different applications, and which
have been developed separately in various communities.
Our algorithmic framework covers local SGD updates and synchronous and pairwise gossip updates on adaptive network topology. We derive
universal convergence rates for smooth (convex
and non-convex) problems and the rates interpolate between the heterogeneous (non-identically
distributed data) and iid-data settings, recovering
linear convergence rates in many special cases,
for instance for over-parametrized models. Our
proofs rely on weak assumptions (typically improving over prior work in several aspects) and
recover (and improve) the best known complexity results for a host of important scenarios, such
as for instance coorperative SGD and federated
averaging (local SGD).

1. Introduction
Training machine learning models in a non-centralized
fashion can offer many advantages over traditional centralized approaches in core aspects such as data ownership,
privacy, fault tolerance and scalability. In efforts to depart
from the traditional parameter server paradigm (Dean et al.,
2012), federated learning (Konečnỳ et al., 2016; McMahan
*
Equal contribution 1 EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland 2 Mila and
DIRO, Université de Montréal, Canada. Correspondence to: Anastasia Koloskova <anastasia.koloskova@epfl.ch>, Sebastian U.
Stich <sebastian.stich@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

et al., 2016; 2017; Kairouz et al., 2019) has emerged, but
also fully decentralized approaches have been suggested
recently—though yet still at a smaller scale than federated
learning (Lian et al., 2017; Assran et al., 2019; Koloskova
et al., 2020). However, the community has identified a host
of challenges that come along with decentralized training:
notably, high communication cost (Tang et al., 2018a; Wang
et al., 2019; Koloskova et al., 2019), a need for time-varying
topologies (Nedić & Olshevsky, 2014; Assran et al., 2019)
and data-heterogeneity (Li et al., 2018; Karimireddy
et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020a;b). It is imperative to have a
good theoretical understanding of decentralized stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) to predict the training performance
of SGD in these scenarios and to assist the design of optimal
decentralized training schemes for machine learning tasks.
In contrast to the centralized setting, where the convergence of SGD is well understood (Bach & Moulines, 2011;
Rakhlin et al., 2012; Dekel et al., 2012), the analyses of SGD
in non-centralized settings are often application specific
and have been historically developed separately in different
communities, besides some recent efforts towards a unified
theory. Notably, Wang & Joshi (2018) propose a framework
for decentralized optimization with non-heterogeneous data
and Li et al. (2019) study decentralized SGD for non-convex
heterogeneous settings. We here propose a significantly extended framework that covers these previously proposed
ones as special cases.
We provide tight convergence rates for a large family of
decentralized SGD variants. Proving convergence rates in
a unified framework is much more powerful than studying
individual special cases on their own: We are not only able
to recover many existing analyses and results, we can also
often show improved rates under more general setting. Remarkably, for instance for local SGD (Zinkevich et al., 2010;
Stich, 2019b; Patel & Dieuleveut, 2019) we show improved
rates for the convex and strongly-convex case and recover
the best known rates for the non-convex case under weaker
assumptions than assumed in prior work (highlighted in
Table 1).

