An Investigation of
Why Overparameterization Exacerbates Spurious Correlations

Shiori Sagawa * 1 Aditi Raghunathan * 1 Pang Wei Koh * 1 Percy Liang 1

Abstract
We study why overparameterization—increasing
model size well beyond the point of zero training
error—can hurt test error on minority groups despite improving average test error when there are
spurious correlations in the data. Through simulations and experiments on two image datasets,
we identify two key properties of the training data
that drive this behavior: the proportions of majority versus minority groups, and the signal-to-noise
ratio of the spurious correlations. We then analyze
a linear setting and theoretically show how the
inductive bias of models towards “memorizing”
fewer examples can cause overparameterization
to hurt. Our analysis leads to a counterintuitive approach of subsampling the majority group, which
empirically achieves low minority error in the
overparameterized regime, even though the standard approach of upweighting the minority fails.
Overall, our results suggest a tension between using overparameterized models versus using all the
training data for achieving low worst-group error.

1. Introduction
The typical goal in machine learning is to minimize the average error on a test set that is independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) to the training set. A large body of prior work
has shown that overparameterization—increasing model
size beyond the point of zero training error—improves average test error in a variety of settings, both empirically
(with neural networks, e.g., Nakkiran et al. (2019)) and theoretically (with linear and random projection models, e.g.,
Belkin et al. (2019); Mei & Montanari (2019)).
However, recent work has also demonstrated that models
*
Equal contribution 1 Stanford University.
Correspondence to:
Shiori Sagawa <ssagawa@cs.stanford.edu>,
Aditi Raghunathan <aditir@stanford.edu>, Pang Wei Koh
<pangwei@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Underparameterized

Overparameterized

Figure 1. Top: Overparameterization hurts test error on the worst
group when models are trained with the reweighted objective that
upweights minority groups (Equation 3). Without reweighting,
models have poor worst-group error regardless of model size (Appendix A.1). Bottom: Consider data points (x, y), where x ∈ R2
comprises a core feature xcore (x-axis) and a spurious feature xspu
(y-axis). The label y is highly correlated with xspu , except on two
minority groups (crosses). Underparameterized models use the
core feature (left), but overparameterized models use the spurious
feature and memorize the minority points (right).

with low average error can still fail on particular groups of
data points (Blodgett et al., 2016; Hashimoto et al., 2018;
Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018). This problem of high worstgroup error arises especially in the presence of spurious
correlations, such as strong associations between label and
background in image classification (McCoy et al., 2019;
Sagawa et al., 2020). To mitigate this problem, common approaches reduce the worst-group training loss, e.g., through
distributionally robust optimization (DRO) or simply upweighting the minority groups. Sagawa et al. (2020) showed
these approaches improve worst-group error on strongly
regularized neural networks but fail to help standard neural
networks that can achieve zero training error, suggesting that
increasing model capacity by reducing regularization—and
perhaps by increasing overparameterization as well—can
exacerbate spurious correlations.

