Two Simple Ways to Learn Individual Fairness Metrics from Data

Debarghya Mukherjee 1 * Mikhail Yurochkin 2 * Moulinath Banerjee 1 Yuekai Sun 1

Abstract
Individual fairness is an intuitive definition of
algorithmic fairness that addresses some of the
drawbacks of group fairness. Despite its benefits,
it depends on a task specific fair metric that encodes our intuition of what is fair and unfair for
the ML task at hand, and the lack of a widely accepted fair metric for many ML tasks is the main
barrier to broader adoption of individual fairness.
In this paper, we present two simple ways to learn
fair metrics from a variety of data types. We show
empirically that fair training with the learned metrics leads to improved fairness on three machine
learning tasks susceptible to gender and racial biases.1 We also provide theoretical guarantees on
the statistical performance of both approaches.

1. Introduction
Machine learning (ML) models are an integral part of modern decision-making pipelines. They are even part of some
high-stakes decision support systems in criminal justice,
lending, medicine etc.. Although replacing humans with
ML models in the decision-making process appear to eliminate human biases, there is growing concern about ML
models reproducing historical biases against certain historically disadvantaged groups. This concern is not unfounded.
For example, Dastin (2018) reports gender-bias in Amazon’s
resume screening tool, Angwin et al. (2016) mentions racial
bias in recidivism prediction instruments, Vigdor (2019)
reports gender bias in the credit limits of Apple Card.
As a first step towards mitigating algorithmic bias in ML
models, researchers proposed a myriad of formal definitions
of algorithmic fairness. At a high-level, there are two groups
of mathematical definitions of algorithmic fairness: group
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, University of
Michigan 2 IBM Research, MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab. Correspondence to: Debarghya Mukherjee <mdeb@umich.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
1
Codes are available at https://github.com/
mdebumich/Fair_metric_learning.

fairness and individual fairness. Group fairness divides the
feature space into (non-overlapping) protected subsets and
imposes invariance of the ML model on the subsets. Most
prior work focuses on group fairness because it is amenable
to statistical analysis. Despite its prevalence, group fairness
suffers from two critical issues. First, it is possible for an ML
model that satisfies group fairness to be blatantly unfair with
respect to subgroups of the protected groups and individuals
(Dwork et al., 2011). Second, there are fundamental incompatibilities between seemingly intuitive notions of group
fairness (Kleinberg et al., 2016; Chouldechova, 2017).
In light of the issues with group fairness, we consider individual fairness in our work. Intuitively, individually fair
ML models should treat similar users similarly. Dwork et al.
(2011) formalize this intuition by viewing ML models as
maps between input and output metric spaces and defining
individual fairness as Lipschitz continuity of ML models.
The metric on the input space is the crux of the definition
because it encodes our intuition of which users are similar.
Unfortunately, individual fairness was dismissed as impractical because there is no widely accepted similarity metric
for most ML tasks. In this paper, we take a step towards
operationalizing individual fairness by showing it is possible
to learn good similarity metrics from data.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section
2, we describe two different ways to learn data-driven fair
metric: one from knowledge of groups of similar inputs and
another from knowledge of similar and dissimilar pairs of
inputs. In Section 3, we show that (i) the methods are robust
to noise in the data, and (ii) the methods leads to individually
fair ML models. Finally, in Section 4, we demonstrate the
effectiveness of the methods in mitigating bias on two ML
tasks susceptible to gender and racial biases.

2. Learning fair metrics from data
The intuition underlying individual fairness is fair ML models should treat comparable users similarly. We write comparable instead of similar in the rest of this paper to emphasize that comparable samples may differ in ways that
are irrelevant to the task at hand. Formally, we consider
an ML model as a map h : X → Y, where (X , dx ) and
(Y, dy ) are the input and output metric spaces respectively.
Individual fairness (Dwork et al., 2011; Friedler et al., 2016)

