Unsupervised Speech Decomposition via Triple Information Bottleneck

Kaizhi Qian * 1 2 Yang Zhang * 1 Shiyu Chang 1 David Cox 1 Mark Hasegawa-Johnson 2

Abstract
Speech information can be roughly decomposed
into four components: language content, timbre,
pitch, and rhythm. Obtaining disentangled representations of these components is useful in many
speech analysis and generation applications. Recently, state-of-the-art voice conversion systems
have led to speech representations that can disentangle speaker-dependent and independent information. However, these systems can only disentangle timbre, while information about pitch,
rhythm and content is still mixed together. Further disentangling the remaining speech components is an under-determined problem in the absence of explicit annotations for each component,
which are diffcult and expensive to obtain. In
this paper, we propose S PEECH F LOW, which can
blindly decompose speech into its four components by introducing three carefully designed information bottlenecks. S PEECH F LOW is among
the frst algorithms that can separately perform
style transfer on timbre, pitch and rhythm without text labels. Our code is publicly available
at https://github.com/auspicious3000/
SpeechSplit.

1. Introduction
Human speech conveys a rich stream of information, which
can be roughly decomposed into four important components:
content, timbre, pitch and rhythm. The language content of
speech comprises the primary information in speech, which
can also be transcribed to text. Timbre carries information
about the voice characteristics of a speaker, which is closely
connected with the speaker’s identity. Pitch and rhythm are
the two major components of prosody, which expresses the
emotion of the speaker. Pitch variation conveys the aspects
*
Equal contribution 1 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, USA
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA. Correspondence to: Yang Zhang <yang.zhang2@ibm.com>, Kaizhi Qian
<kaizhiqian@gmail.com >.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

of the tone of the speaker, and rhythm characterizes how
fast the speaker utters each word or syllable.
For decades, speech researchers have sought to obtain disentangled representations of these speech components, which
are useful in many speech applications. In speech analysis
tasks, the disentanglement of speech components helps to
remove interference introduced by irrelevant components.
In speech generation tasks, disentanglement is the foundation of many applications, such as voice conversion (Chou
& Lee, 2019), prosody modifcation (Shechtman & Sorin,
2019), emotional speech synthesis (Pell et al., 2011), and
low bit-rate speech encoding (Schroeder & Atal, 1985), to
name a few.
Recently, state-of-the-art voice conversion systems have
been able to obtain a speaker-invariant representation of
speech, which disentangles the speaker-dependent information (Qian et al., 2019; Chou et al., 2018; Chou & Lee,
2019). However, these algorithms are only able to disentangle timbre. The remaining aspects, i.e. content, pitch,
and rhythm are still lumped together. As a result, the converted speech produced by these algorithms differs from the
source speech only in terms of timbre. The pitch contour
and rhythm remain largely the same.
From an information-theoretic perspective, the success in
timbre disentanglement can be ascribed to the availability
of a speaker identity label, which preserves almost all the
information of timbre, such that voice conversion systems
can ‘subtract’ such information from speech. For example,
AUTOVC (Qian et al., 2019), a voice conversion system,
constructs an autoencoder for speech and feeds the speaker
identity label to the decoder. As shown in fgure 2(a), by
constructing an information bottleneck between the encoder
and decoder, AUTOVC can force the encoder to remove
the timbre information, because the equivalent information
is supplied to the decoder directly. It is worth noting that
although the speaker identity is also correlated with the pitch
and timbre information, the information overlap is relatively
small, so the speaker identity cannot serve as labels for pitch
and rhythm. If we had analogous information-preserving
labels for timbre, rhythm or pitch, the disentanglement of
these aspects would be straightforward, simply by utilizing
these labels the same way voice conversion algorithms use
the speaker identity label.

