Accelerated Message Passing for Entropy-Regularized MAP Inference
Jonathan N. Lee 1 Aldo Pacchiano 2 Peter Bartlett 2 3 Michael I. Jordan 2 3

Abstract
Maximum a posteriori (MAP) inference in
discrete-valued Markov random fields is a fundamental problem in machine learning that involves
identifying the most likely configuration of random variables given a distribution. Due to the difficulty of this combinatorial problem, linear programming (LP) relaxations are commonly used
to derive specialized message passing algorithms
that are often interpreted as coordinate descent on
the dual LP. To achieve more desirable computational properties, a number of methods regularize
the LP with an entropy term, leading to a class
of smooth message passing algorithms with convergence guarantees. In this paper, we present
randomized methods for accelerating these algorithms by leveraging techniques that underlie classical accelerated gradient methods. The proposed
algorithms incorporate the familiar steps of standard smooth message passing algorithms, which
can be viewed as coordinate minimization steps.
We show that these accelerated variants achieve
faster rates for finding ✏-optimal points of the unregularized problem, and, when the LP is tight,
we prove that the proposed algorithms recover
the true MAP solution in fewer iterations than
standard message passing algorithms.

1. Introduction
Undirected graphical models are extensively used in machine learning since they provide a versatile and powerful
way of modeling dependencies between variables (Wainwright & Jordan, 2008). In this work we focus on the important class of discrete-valued pairwise models. Efficient
1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, USA
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences,
University of California, Berkeley, USA 3 Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley, USA. Correspondence
to: Jonathan Lee <jnl@stanford.edu>, Aldo Pacchiano <pacchiano@berkeley.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

inference in these models has multiple applications, ranging
from computer vision (Jegelka & Bilmes, 2011), to statistical physics (Mezard & Montanari, 2009), information
theory (MacKay, 2003) and even genome research (Torada
et al., 2019).
In this paper we study and propose efficient methods for
maximum a posteriori (MAP) inference in these models.
The MAP problem corresponds to finding a configuration
of all variables achieving a maximal probability and is a key
problem that arises when using these undirected graphical
models. There exists a vast literature on MAP inference
spanning multiple communities, where it is known as constraint satisfaction (Schiex et al., 1995) and energy minimization (Kappes et al., 2013). Even in the binary case, the
MAP problem is known to be NP-hard to compute exactly or
even to approximate (Kolmogorov & Zabin, 2004; Cooper,
1990).
As a result, there has been much emphasis on devising methods that may work on settings under which the problem
becomes tractable. A popular way to achieve this goal is to
express the problem as an integer program and then relax
this to a linear program (LP). If the LP constraints are set to
the convex hull of marginals corresponding to all global settings, also known as the marginal polytope (Wainwright &
Jordan, 2008), then the LP would yield the optimal integral
solution to the MAP problem. Unfortunately, writing down
this polytope would require exponentially many constraints
and therefore it is not tractable. We can consider larger
polytopes defined over subsets of the constraints required
to define the marginal polytope. This is a popular approach
that underpins the family of LP relaxations known as the
Sherali-Adams (SA) hierarchy (Sherali & Adams, 1990).
Instead of enforcing global consistency, we enforce only
pairwise consistency via the local polytope, thus yielding
pseudo-marginals that are pairwise consistent but may not
correspond to any true global distribution. Despite the local
polytope requiring a number of constraints that is linear in
the number of edges of the input graph, the runtime required
for solving this linear program for large graphs may still be
prohibitive in practice (Yanover et al., 2006). These limitations have motivated the design and theoretical analysis of
message passing algorithms that exploit the structure of the
problem. In this paper we study a class of smooth message
passing algorithms, derived from a regularized version of the

