An Imitation Learning Approach for Cache Replacement

Evan Zheran Liu 1 2 Milad Hashemi 2 Kevin Swersky 2 Parthasarathy Ranganathan 2 Junwhan Ahn 2

Abstract
Program execution speed critically depends on increasing cache hits, as cache hits are orders of
magnitude faster than misses. To increase cache
hits, we focus on the problem of cache replacement: choosing which cache line to evict upon inserting a new line. This is challenging because it
requires planning far ahead and currently there is
no known practical solution. As a result, current
replacement policies typically resort to heuristics designed for specific common access patterns,
which fail on more diverse and complex access
patterns. In contrast, we propose an imitation
learning approach to automatically learn cache
access patterns by leveraging Belady’s, an oracle
policy that computes the optimal eviction decision
given the future cache accesses. While directly
applying Belady’s is infeasible since the future
is unknown, we train a policy conditioned only
on past accesses that accurately approximates Belady’s even on diverse and complex access patterns, and call this approach PARROT. When evaluated on 13 of the most memory-intensive SPEC
applications, PARROT increases cache miss rates
by 20% over the current state of the art. In addition, on a large-scale web search benchmark,
PARROT increases cache hit rates by 61% over a
conventional LRU policy. We release a Gym environment to facilitate research in this area, as data
is plentiful, and further advancements can have
significant real-world impact.

1. Introduction
Caching is a universal concept in computer systems that
bridges the performance gap between different levels of data
storage hierarchies, found everywhere from databases to operating systems to CPUs (Jouppi, 1990; Harty & Cheriton,
1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, California, USA 2 Google Research, Sunnyvale, California, USA. Correspondence to: Evan Z. Liu <evanliu@cs.stanford.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Evict
Cache

A

B

C

A

B

Miss
Accesses

D

D

A

B

Hit
A

D
Miss

C

Figure 1. Cache replacement. At t = 0, line D is accessed, causing
a cache miss. The replacement policy chooses between lines A,
B, and C in the cache and in this case evicts C. At t = 1, line A
is accessed and is already in the cache, causing a cache hit. No
action from the replacement policy is needed. At t = 2, line C
is accessed, causing another cache miss. The replacement policy
could have avoided this miss by evicting a different line at t = 0.

1992; Xu et al., 2013; Cidon et al., 2016). Correctly selecting what data is stored in caches is critical for latency, as
accessing the data directly from the cache (a cache hit) is
orders of magnitude faster than retrieving the data from a
lower level in the storage hierarchy (a cache miss). For example, Cidon et al. (2016) show that improving cache hit
rates of web-scale applications by just 1% can decrease total latency by as much as 35%.
Thus, general techniques for increasing cache hit rates
would significantly improve performance at all levels of the
software stack. Broadly, two main avenues for increasing
cache hit rates exist: (i) avoiding future cache misses by
proactively prefetching the appropriate data into the cache
beforehand; and (ii) strategically selecting which data to
evict from the cache when making space for new data (cache
replacement). Simply increasing cache sizes is a tempting
third avenue, but is generally prohibitively expensive.
This work focuses on single-level cache replacement (Figure 1). When a new block of data (referred to as a line) is
added to the cache (i.e., due to a cache miss), an existing
cache line must be evicted from the cache to make space for
the new line. To do this, during cache misses, a cache replacement policy takes as inputs the currently accessed line
and the lines in the cache and outputs which of the cache
lines to evict.
Prior work frequently relies on manually-engineered heuristics to capture the most common cache access patterns, such
as evicting the most recently used (MRU) or least recently
used (LRU) cache lines, or trying to identify the cache

