SCAFFOLD: Stochastic Controlled Averaging for Federated Learning

Sai Praneeth Karimireddy 1 2 Satyen Kale 3 Mehryar Mohri 3 4 Sashank J. Reddi 3 Sebastian U. Stich 1
Ananda Theertha Suresh 3

Abstract
Federated Averaging (F EDAVG) has emerged as
the algorithm of choice for federated learning
due to its simplicity and low communication
cost. However, in spite of recent research efforts, its performance is not fully understood. We
obtain tight convergence rates for F EDAVG and
prove that it suffers from ‘client-drift’ when the
data is heterogeneous (non-iid), resulting in unstable and slow convergence.
As a solution, we propose a new algorithm
(SCAFFOLD) which uses control variates (variance reduction) to correct for the ‘client-drift’ in
its local updates. We prove that SCAFFOLD requires significantly fewer communication rounds
and is not affected by data heterogeneity or client
sampling. Further, we show that (for quadratics)
SCAFFOLD can take advantage of similarity in
the client’s data yielding even faster convergence.
The latter is the first result to quantify the usefulness of local-steps in distributed optimization.

1. Introduction
Federated learning has emerged as an important paradigm
in modern large-scale machine learning. Unlike in traditional centralized learning where models are trained using
large datasets stored in a central server (Dean et al., 2012;
Iandola et al., 2016; Goyal et al., 2017), in federated learning, the training data remains distributed over a large number of clients, which may be phones, network sensors, hospitals, or alternative local information sources (Konečnỳ
et al., 2016b;a; McMahan et al., 2017; Mohri et al., 2019;
Kairouz et al., 2019). A centralized model (referred to
as server model) is then trained without ever transmitting
1
EPFL, Lausanne 2 Based on work performed at Google Research, New York. 3 Google Research, New York 4 Courant Institute, New York. Correspondence to: Sai Praneeth Karimireddy
<sai.karimireddy@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

client data over the network, thereby ensuring a basic level
of privacy. In this work, we investigate stochastic optimization algorithms for federated learning.
The key challenges for federated optimization are 1) dealing with unreliable and relatively slow network connections
between the server and the clients, 2) only a small subset
of clients being available for training at a given time, and
3) large heterogeneity (non-iid-ness) in the data present on
the different clients (Konečnỳ et al., 2016a). The most popular algorithm for this setting is F EDAVG (McMahan et al.,
2017). F EDAVG tackles the communication bottleneck by
performing multiple local updates on the available clients
before communicating to the server. While it has shown
success in certain applications, its performance on heterogeneous data is still an active area of research (Li et al.,
2018; Yu et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019b; Haddadpour & Mahdavi, 2019; Khaled et al., 2020). We prove that indeed such
heterogeneity has a large effect on F EDAVG—it introduces
a drift in the updates of each client resulting in slow and unstable convergence. Further, we show that this client-drift
persists even if full batch gradients are used and all clients
participate throughout the training.
As a solution, we propose a new Stochastic Controlled Averaging algorithm (SCAFFOLD) which tries to correct for
this client-drift. Intuitively, SCAFFOLD estimates the update direction for the server model (c) and the update direction for each client ci .1 The difference (c − ci ) is then an
estimate of the client-drift which is used to correct the local
update. This strategy successfully overcomes heterogeneity and converges in significantly fewer rounds of communication. Alternatively, one can see heterogeneity as introducing ‘client-variance’ in the updates across the different
clients and SCAFFOLD then performs ‘client-variance reduction’ (Schmidt et al., 2017; Johnson & Zhang, 2013;
Defazio et al., 2014). We use this viewpoint to show that
SCAFFOLD is relatively unaffected by client sampling.
Finally, while accommodating heterogeneity is important,
it is equally important that a method can take advantage of
similarities in the client data. We prove that SCAFFOLD
indeed has such a property, requiring fewer rounds of com1

We refer to these estimates as control variates and the resulting correction technique as stochastic controlled averaging.

