Feature Quantization Improves GAN Training
Yang Zhao * 1 Chunyuan Li * 2 Ping Yu 1 Jianfeng Gao 2 Changyou Chen 1

Abstract
The instability in GAN training has been a longstanding problem despite remarkable research efforts. We identify that instability issues stem from
difficulties of performing feature matching with
mini-batch statistics, due to a fragile balance between the fixed target distribution and the progressively generated distribution. In this work, we propose Feature Quantization (FQ) for the discriminator, to embed both true and fake data samples
into a shared discrete space. The quantized values
of FQ are constructed as an evolving dictionary,
which is consistent with feature statistics of the recent distribution history. Hence, FQ implicitly enables robust feature matching in a compact space.
Our method can be easily plugged into existing
GAN models, with little computational overhead
in training. Extensive experimental results show
that the proposed FQ-GAN can improve the FID
scores of baseline methods by a large margin on
a variety of tasks, including three representative
GAN models on 9 benchmarks, achieving new
state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al., 2014) are a powerful class of generative models,
successfully applied to a variety of tasks such as image
generation (Karras et al., 2019a), image-to-image translation (Liu et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2017; Isola et al.,
2017), text-to-image generation (Zhang et al., 2017),
super-resolution (Sønderby et al., 2016), domain adaptation (Tzeng et al., 2017) and sampling from unnormalized
distributions (Li et al., 2019).
*

Equal contribution
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University at
Buffalo, SUNY 2 Microsoft Research, Redmond. Correspondence
to: Chunyuan Li <chunyl@microsoft.com>, Changyou Chen
<changyou@buffalo.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Training GANs is a notoriously challenging task, as it involves optimizing a non-convex problem for its Nash equilibrium in a high-dimensional parameter space. In practice,
GANs are typically trained via alternatively updating generator and discriminator, using stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) based on mini-batches of true/fake data samples.
This procedure is often unstable and lacks theoretical guarantees (Salimans et al., 2016). Consequently, training may
exhibit instability, divergence or mode collapse (Mescheder
et al., 2018). As a result, many techniques to stabilize GAN
training have been proposed (Salimans et al., 2016; Miyato
et al., 2018; Karras et al., 2019b).
One possible explanation for the instability is that the learning environment for GANs is non-stationary, and previous
models rely heavily on the current mini-batch statistics to
match the features across different image regions. Since
the mini-batch only provides an estimate, the true underlying distribution can only be learned after passing through
a large number of mini-batches. This could prevent adversarial learning on large-scale datasets for a variety of
reasons: (i) A small mini-batch may not be able to represent
true distribution for large datasets, optimization algorithms
may have trouble discovering parameter values that carefully search for continuous features to match fake samples
with real samples, and these parameterizations may be brittle and prone to failure when applied to previously unseen
images. (ii) Increasing the size of the mini-batch can increase the estimation quality, but doing this also loses the
computational efficiency obtained by using SGD. (iii) In
particular, the distribution of fake samples shifts as the generator changes during training, making the classification
task for discriminator evolve over time (Chen et al., 2019;
Liang et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2020; Cong et al., 2020). In
such a non-stationary online environment, discriminator can
forget previous tasks if it relies on the statistics from the
current single mini-batch, rendering training unstable.
In this work, we show that GANs benefit from feature quantization (FQ) in the discriminator. A dictionary is first constructed via moving-averaged summary of features in recent
training history for both true and fake data samples. This
enables building a large and consistent dictionary on-the-fly
that facilitates the online fashion of GAN training. Each
dictionary item represents a unique feature prototype of similar image regions. By quantizing continuous features in

