Estimating the Number and Effect Sizes of Non-null Hypotheses

Jennifer Brennan 1 Ramya Korlakai Vinayak 1 Kevin Jamieson 1

Abstract
We study the problem of estimating the distribution of effect sizes (the mean of the test statistic
under the alternate hypothesis) in a multiple testing setting. Knowing this distribution allows us
to calculate the power (type II error) of any experimental design. We show that it is possible
to estimate this distribution using an inexpensive
pilot experiment, which takes significantly fewer
samples than would be required by an experiment
that identified the discoveries. Our estimator can
be used to guarantee the number of discoveries
that will be made using a given experimental design in a future experiment. We prove that this
simple and computationally efficient estimator enjoys a number of favorable theoretical properties,
and demonstrate its effectiveness on data from a
gene knockout experiment on influenza inhibition
in Drosophila.

1. Introduction
Designing scientific experiments is something of a chicken
and egg problem. In order to design an experiment with a
specified power (type II error), we need to know the effect
size (the mean of the test statistic under the alternate hypothesis). The effect size determines the required accuracy
of each measurement, which increases with the number of
experimental replicates (samples). Unfortunately, this effect
size is typically unknown, and estimating the effect size for
a single hypothesis test is as sample intensive as performing
the original experiment. In the case of single hypothesis
testing, this presents a fundamental barrier to efficient experimental design. By contrast, in the setting of multiple
hypothesis testing, we show that it is possible to estimate
the distribution of effect sizes present in the data using an inexpensive pilot experiment, which takes significantly fewer
samples than would be required for the full experiment.
1
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Correspondence to:
Jennifer Brennan <jrb@cs.washington.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the au-

For example, suppose a scientist would like to test 10,000
genes using an experimental measurement that is distributed
N (µi , 1t ) when the effect size is µi and t replicates are performed. Without knowledge of the likely effect sizes, it is
unclear how to choose an experimental design. An experiment with too many replicates per hypothesis is wasteful;
one with too few will lack the statistical power to identify
alternate hypotheses. In this paper, we seek to facilitate
experimental design in the multiple testing setting by answering the question “How many hypotheses have an effect
size of at least γ?” using significantly fewer samples than
would be needed to identify all discoveries with that effect
size. These estimates suggest a trade-off between the cost
of an experiment (as measured by the number of experimental replicates required to achieve a certain power) and the
number and effect sizes of the discoveries that will be made.
Figure 1 illustrates the application of our estimator to an
inexpensive pilot study, allowing a scientist to evaluate possible experimental designs. The application to experimental
design motivates an important property of our estimator:
it must produce a conservative estimate of the number of
hypotheses above a given effect size. If the scientist designs
a costly experiment based on the results of this estimator, it
is important to ensure that this experiment will generate at a
minimum the estimated number of discoveries.
As a baseline, one approach to this estimation problem
is to use a plug-in estimator, which estimates the entire
distribution of effect sizes and then “plugs in” this estimate
as if it were the true distribution. The plug-in estimator
could start with the maximum likelihood estimate (MLE)
of the distribution of effect sizes given the observed test
statistics. The estimate for the fraction of hypotheses above
some effect size γ would simply be the fraction of this
distribution that exceeded γ. Unfortunately, such a plug-in
estimator based on the MLE may vastly overestimate this
fraction, as two distributions can have similar likelihoods
but very different amounts of mass above some threshold.
In this work, we design an estimator for the fraction of
hypotheses with effect sizes above a given threshold, for
all thresholds simultaneously. Our estimator operates in
the spirit of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, first creating
an `∞ ball around the empirical CDF to define plausible
thor(s).

