On the Generalization Benefit of Noise in Stochastic Gradient Descent
Samuel L. Smith 1 Erich Elsen 1 Soham De 1

Abstract
It has long been argued that minibatch stochastic
gradient descent can generalize better than large
batch gradient descent in deep neural networks.
However recent papers have questioned this claim,
arguing that this effect is simply a consequence of
suboptimal hyperparameter tuning or insufficient
compute budgets when the batch size is large. In
this paper, we perform carefully designed experiments and rigorous hyperparameter sweeps on a
range of popular models, which verify that small
or moderately large batch sizes can substantially
outperform very large batches on the test set. This
occurs even when both models are trained for
the same number of iterations and large batches
achieve smaller training losses. Our results confirm that the noise in stochastic gradients can enhance generalization. We study how the optimal
learning rate schedule changes as the epoch budget grows, and we provide a theoretical account
of our observations based on the stochastic differential equation perspective of SGD dynamics.

1. Introduction
It has long been believed that stochastic gradient descent
can generalize better than full batch gradient descent in deep
learning (Heskes & Kappen, 1993; LeCun et al., 2012). This
topic was revived by Keskar et al. (2016), who showed that
the test accuracy often falls if one holds the learning rate
constant and increases the batch size, even if one continues
training until the loss ceases to fall. A number of recent papers have studied this effect (Smith & Le, 2017; Jastrz˛ebski
et al., 2017; Chaudhari & Soatto, 2018). However this phenomenon has also been questioned by many authors (Hoffer
et al., 2017; Shallue et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019). In
a widely read work, Shallue et al. (2018) argue that much
of the generalization benefit of small batches arises either
because the learning rate is not properly tuned for large
1
DeepMind, London. Correspondence to: Samuel L. Smith
<slsmith@google.com>, Soham De <sohamde@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

batches, or because authors often compare different batch
sizes under a constant epoch budget (such that small batches
are allowed to take more parameter steps). To our knowledge, no previous authors have observed a generalization
gap between small and large batch training under a constant
step budget after properly tuning the learning rate schedule.
This debate is particularly challenging to resolve, because
there is no consensus regarding how SGD hyperparameters
should be tuned. While large research labs can afford to run
complete grid searches over multiple dimensions (Shallue
et al., 2018), this option is unrealistic for most researchers.
Many authors have proposed a linear scaling rule between
learning rate and batch size (Krizhevsky, 2014; Goyal et al.,
2017; Smith et al., 2017; McCandlish et al., 2018), while
others propose a square root rule (Hoffer et al., 2017) or
argue that no single scaling rule is reliable across multiple
architectures (Shallue et al., 2018). Some authors argue
that SGD with Momentum significantly outperforms vanilla
SGD (Sutskever et al., 2013), while others claim that SGD
with and without Momentum are equivalent if one maintains
a constant “effective learning rate” (Mandt et al., 2017;
Kidambi et al., 2018; Liu & Belkin, 2018a). Goyal et al.
(2017) found that learning rate warmup enables us to scale
training efficiently to larger batch sizes, and Shallue et al.
(2018) emphasized that the optimal scaling strategy may
change, depending on whether one scales the batch size
under a constant epoch budget or a constant step budget.
Fortuntely, recent theoretical work suggests a consensus
may be within reach (Ma et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2019).
These papers clarify the debate, by observing that SGD has
two regimes with different behaviours. We refer to these two
regimes as the “noise dominated” regime, which arises when
the batch size is small or the loss is well conditioned, and the
“curvature dominated” regime, which arises when the batch
size is large or the loss is poorly conditioned. Under certain
assumptions, the linear scaling rule will hold in the noise
dominated regime for constant epoch budgets (Ma et al.,
2017; Smith & Le, 2017; Zhang et al., 2019). However this
rule does not hold in the curvature dominated regime. Similarly, SGD with and without Momentum achieve similar
performance in the noise dominated regime if one maintains
a constant effective learning rate (Smith et al., 2019; Zhang
et al., 2019), but SGD with Momentum performs better in
the curvature dominated regime (Shallue et al., 2018).

