Beyond Synthetic Noise: Deep Learning on Controlled Noisy Labels

Lu Jiang 1 Di Huang 2 Mason Liu 3 Weilong Yang 1

Abstract
Performing controlled experiments on noisy data
is essential in understanding deep learning across
noise levels. Due to the lack of suitable datasets,
previous research has only examined deep learning on controlled synthetic label noise, and realworld label noise has never been studied in a controlled setting. This paper makes three contributions. First, we establish the first benchmark of
controlled real-world label noise from the web.
This new benchmark enables us to study the web
label noise in a controlled setting for the first time.
The second contribution is a simple but effective
method to overcome both synthetic and real noisy
labels. We show that our method achieves the
best result on our dataset as well as on two public benchmarks (CIFAR and WebVision). Third,
we conduct the largest study by far into understanding deep neural networks trained on noisy
labels across different noise levels, noise types,
network architectures, and training settings. The
data and code are released at the following link
http://www.lujiang.info/cnlw.html.

1. Introduction
Performing experiments on controlled noise is essential
in understanding Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) trained
on noisy labeled data. Previous work performs controlled
experiments by injecting a series of synthetic label noises
into a well-annotated dataset such that the dataset’s noise
level can vary, in a controlled manner, to reflect different
magnitudes of label corruption in real applications. Through
studying controlled synthetic label noise, researchers have
discovered theories and methodologies that have greatly
fostered the development of this field.
1
Google Research, Mountain View, United States 2 Google
Cloud AI, Sunnyvale, United States 3 Cornell University,
Ithaca, United States. Correspondence to: Lu Jiang <lujiang@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

However, due to the lack of suitable datasets, previous work
has only examined DNNs on controlled synthetic label noise,
and real-world label noise has never been studied in a controlled setting. This leads to two major issues. First, as
synthetic noise is generated from an artificial distribution,
a tiny change in the distribution may lead to inconsistent
or even contradictory findings. For example, contrary to
the common understanding that DNNs trained on synthetic
noisy labels generalize poorly (Zhang et al., 2017), Rolnick
et al. (2017) showed that DNNs can be robust to massive
label noise when the noise distribution is made slightly
different. Due to the lack of datasets, these findings, unfortunately, have not yet been verified beyond synthetic noise
in a controlled setting. Second, the vast majority of previous
studies prefer to verify robust learning methods on a spectrum of noise levels because the goal of these methods is to
overcome a wide range of noise levels. However, current
evaluations are limited because they are conducted only on
synthetic label noise. Although there do exist datasets of
real label noise e.g. WebVision (Li et al., 2017a), Clothing1M (Xiao et al., 2015), etc, they are not suitable for controlled evaluation in which a method must be systematically
verified on multiple different noise levels, because the training images in these datasets are not manually labeled and
hence their data noise level is fixed and unknown.
In this paper, we study a realistic type of label noise in a controlled setting called web labels. “Webly-labeled” images
are commonly used in the literature (Bootkrajang & Kabán,
2012; Li et al., 2017a; Krause et al., 2016; Chen & Gupta,
2015), in which both images and labels are crawled from
the web and the noisy labels are automatically determined
by matching the images’ surrounding text to a class name
during web crawling or equivalently by querying the search
index afterward. Unlike synthetic labels, web labels follow
a realistic label noise distribution but have not been studied
in a controlled setting.
We make three contributions in this paper. First, we establish
the first benchmark of controlled web label noise, where
each training example is carefully annotated to indicate
whether the label is correct or not. Specifically, we automatically collect images by querying Google Image Search
using a set of class names, have each image annotated by
3-5 workers, and create training sets of ten controlled noise
levels. As the primary goal of our annotation is to identify

