Stochastic bandits with arm-dependent delays

Anne Gael Manegueu 1 Claire Vernade 2 Alexandra Carpentier 1 Michal Valko 3

Abstract
Significant work has been recently dedicated to
the stochastic delayed bandits because of its relevance in applications. The applicability of existing algorithms is however restricted by the fact
that strong assumptions are often made on the delay distributions, such as full observability, restrictive shape constraints, or uniformity over arms.
In this work, we weaken them significantly and
only assume that there is a bound on the tail of the
delay. In particular, we cover the important case
where the delay distributions vary across arms,
and the case where the delays are heavy-tailed.
Addressing these difficulties, we propose a simple but efficient UCB-based algorithm called the
PatientBandits. We provide both problemsdependent and problems-independent bounds on
the regret as well as performance lower bounds.

1. Introduction
In realistic applications of reinforcement learning (RL),
rewards come delayed. In a game, for instance, the consequences of the agent’s actions are only observed at the
end. This issue at the core of challenges in RL (Garcia
et al., 1966), when the horizon is finite or geometrically
discounted. Even much simpler (state-less) bandit setups,
such as online advertising suffer from delayed feedback
(Chapelle & Li, 2011; Chapelle, 2014). In particular, most
systems do not optimize for clicks but for conversions,
which are events implying a stronger commitment from the
customer. However, different ads trigger different customer
response time. Typically, more expensive—and rewarding—
products require more time to convert on customers’ side,
and the system needs to be tuned to be robust to the delays.
1
Otto-von-Guericke University of Magdeburg, DE
DeepMind, London, UK 3 DeepMind, Paris, FR. Correspondence to: Anne Manegueu <anne.manegueu@ovgu.de>,
Claire Vernade <vernade@google.com>, Alexandra Carpentier <alexandra.carpentier@ovgu.de>, Michal Valko
<valkom@deepmind.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

As a result, we study stochastic delayed bandits for which
the delay distributions are arm-dependent and possibly
heavy-tailed. We consider the realistic model for delayed
conversions of Chapelle (2014) and Vernade et al. (2017) in
which delays are only partially observable. Conversions are
binary events that represent a strong commitment (buying,
subscribing, . . . ). If a conversion happens, it is sent with
some delay to the learner who observes both its reward and
the corresponding delay. Otherwise, the reward is null by
default but it has no specific delay, only the current waiting
time. This models a typical e-commerce application: if a
customer does not buy the recommended product, the recommendation system will not be informed. The nature of
this setup brings two main challenges (1) the censoring due
to partially observed delays, which forces the learner to deal
with an unknown amount of missing feedback; and (2) the
identifiability1 issue due to arm-dependent delays.
Prior work for delayed bandits have bypassed the challenges
above by assuming that the delays are observed (Joulani
et al., 2013; Dudik et al., 2011), which removes the ambiguity, or bounded by a fixed quantity (Pike-Burke et al., 2018;
Garg & Akash, 2019; Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2018), which
gives other possibilities to deal with them. Another approach that has been proposed by Vernade et al. (2017) is
to drop the artificial requirement of observability of delays,
and instead impose that all delays have the same distribution
across arms and that this distribution is known. We further
discuss the relevant related work in Section 3. While the
known approaches yield good results under their strong assumptions on delays, none of them provides a solution to
the realistic problem that we are tackling.
Contributions This work is the first to consider a stochastic bandit setting with arm-dependent, unbounded, and possibly heavy-tailed delays with partially observable delays. We
jointly address the challenges of Vernade et al. (2017), Zhou
et al. (2019) and Thune et al. (2019). Unlike Vernade et al.
(2017); Zhou et al. (2019), we make only mild assumptions
on the delays. Furthermore, we give a precise characterization of the impact of the delays on the regret than that
given in the more difficult, non-stochastic setting of Thune
1
Ex.: Consider two instances for : (1) reward follows a
Bernoulli(1) and delay is a Dirac in +∞ and (2) reward follows a Bernoulli(0) and delay is a Dirac in 0. Both instances
produce the same data but have strictly different parameters.

