What can I do here? A Theory of Affordances in Reinforcement Learning
Khimya Khetarpal 1 * Zafarali Ahmed 2 Gheorghe Comanici 2 David Abel 3 Doina Precup 1 2

Abstract
Reinforcement learning algorithms usually assume that all actions are always available to an
agent. However, both people and animals understand the general link between the features of
their environment and the actions that are feasible.
Gibson (1977) coined the term “affordances” to
describe the fact that certain states enable an agent
to do certain actions, in the context of embodied
agents. In this paper, we develop a theory of affordances for agents who learn and plan in Markov
Decision Processes. Affordances play a dual role
in this case. On one hand, they allow faster planning, by reducing the number of actions available
in any given situation. On the other hand, they
facilitate more efficient and precise learning of
transition models from data, especially when such
models require function approximation. We establish these properties through theoretical results
as well as illustrative examples. We also propose
an approach to learn affordances and use it to
estimate transition models that are simpler and
generalize better.

1. Introduction
Humans and animals have an exceptional ability to perceive their surroundings and understand which behaviors
can be carried out successfully. For example, a hard surface enables walking or running, whereas a slippery surface
enables skating or sliding. This capacity to focus on the
most relevant behaviors in a given situation enables efficient
decision making by limiting the choices of action that are
even considered, and leads to quick adaptation to changes
in the environment.
Gibson (1977) defined affordances as different possibilities
of action that the environment affords to an agent. For exam*

Work done during an internship at DeepMind. 1 Mila - McGill
University 2 DeepMind 3 Brown University. Correspondence to:
Khimya Khetarpal <khimya.khetarpal@mail.mcgill.ca>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

ple, water affords the action of swimming to a fish, but not
to a land animal. Hence, affordances are a function of the
environment as well as the agent, and emerge out of their interaction. Heft (1989) discussed the fact that affordances are
located at the agent-environment boundary. Gibson (1977)
pointed out that affordances can also be viewed as a way to
characterize an agent’s state in an action-oriented fashion.
For example, a seat can be any object on which one can sit
above from the ground, regardless of its shape or color. This
view leads potentially to very robust generalization when
processing the perceptual stream in order to determine what
to do. We take inspiration from Gibson (1977), Heft (1989),
and Chemero (2003) and provide a framework that enables
artificially intelligent (AI) agents to represent and reason
about their environment through the lens of affordances.
In this paper, we focus on reinforcement learning (RL)
agents (Sutton & Barto, 2018). We aim to endow RL agents
with the ability to represent and learn affordances, which
can help them to plan more efficiently, and lead to better
generalization. While defining affordances is not a new
topic in AI (see Sec. 8 for a discussion of related work),
our approach builds directly on the general framework of
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), in its traditional form.
In order to define affordances, we need to first capture the
notion of what it would mean for an agent to carry out an
action “successfully”. To do this, we introduce the notion
of intent, i.e., a desired outcome for an action. Affordances
will then capture a subset of the state-action space in which
the intent is achieved. This view is very compatible with
model-based RL, in which the transition model captures the
consequences of actions. However, learning an accurate
model of the entire environment can be quite difficult, especially in large environments. Hence, we propose to learn
affordances, and use them to define partial models (Talvitie
& Singh, 2009), which focus on making high quality predictions for a subset of state and actions: those linked through
an affordance.
We first define affordances in MDPs (Sec. 3) and quantify
the value loss when replacing the true MDP model with an
affordance-based model (Sec. 4). Then, we investigate the
setting in which affordance-based partial models are learned
from data, and we show that the planning loss is bounded,
with high probability (Sec. 5). The bound is given in terms

