Multiresolution Tensor Learning for Efficient
and Interpretable Spatial Analysis

Jung Yeon Park 1 Kenneth Theo Carr 1 Stephan Zheng 2 Yisong Yue 3 Rose Yu 1 4

Abstract
Efficient and interpretable spatial analysis is crucial in many fields such as geology, sports, and
climate science. Tensor latent factor models can
describe higher-order correlations for spatial data.
However, they are computationally expensive to
train and are sensitive to initialization, leading to
spatially incoherent, uninterpretable results. We
develop a novel Multiresolution Tensor Learning (MRTL) algorithm for efficiently learning interpretable spatial patterns. MRTL initializes the
latent factors from an approximate full-rank tensor model for improved interpretability and progressively learns from a coarse resolution to the
fine resolution to reduce computation. We also
prove the theoretical convergence and computational complexity of MRTL. When applied to two
real-world datasets, MRTL demonstrates 4 ∼ 5x
speedup compared to a fixed resolution approach
while yielding accurate and interpretable latent
factors.

1. Introduction
Analyzing large-scale spatial data plays a critical role in
sports, geology, and climate science. In spatial statistics,
kriging or Gaussian processes are popular tools for spatial analysis (Cressie, 1992). Others have proposed various Bayesian methods such as Cox processes (Miller et al.,
2014; Dieng et al., 2017) to model spatial data. However,
while mathematically appealing, these methods often have
1

Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA. 2 Salesforce AI Research, Palo Alto,
CA, USA. Work done while at California Institute of Technology. 3 Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA.
4
Computer Science and Engineering, University of California,
San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA.. Correspondence to: Jung
Yeon Park, Rose Yu <park.jungy@northeastern.edu,
roseyu@eng.ucsd.edu >.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

difficulties scaling to high-resolution data.
We are interested in learning high-dimensional tensor latent factor models,
which have shown to be
a scalable alternative for
spatial analysis (Yu et al.,
2018; Litvinenko et al.,
2019). High resolution
Figure 1. Latent factors: random
spatial data often con(left) vs. good (right) initializatain higher-order corretion. Latent factors vary in interlations between features
pretability depending on initialand locations, and tenization.
sors can naturally encode
such multi-way correlations. For example, in competitive
basketball play, we can predict how each player’s decision to
shoot is jointly influenced by their shooting style, his or her
court position, and the position of the defenders by simultaneously encoding these features as a tensor. Using such
representations, learning tensor latent factors can directly
extract higher-order correlations.
A challenge in such models is high computational cost.
High-resolution spatial data is often discretized, leading
to large high-dimensional tensors whose training scales exponentially with the number of parameters. Low-rank tensor
learning (Yu et al., 2018; Kossaifi et al., 2019) reduces the
dimensionality by assuming low-rank structures in the data
and uses tensor decomposition to discover latent semantics;
for an overview of tensor learning, see review papers (Kolda
& Bader, 2009; Sidiropoulos et al., 2017). However, many
tensor learning methods have been shown to be sensitive to
noise (Cheng et al., 2016) and initialization (Anandkumar
et al., 2014). Other numerical techniques, including random
sketching (Wang et al., 2015; Haupt et al., 2017) and parallelization, (Austin et al., 2016; Li et al., 2017a) can speed up
training, but they often fail to utilize the unique properties
of spatial data such as spatial auto-correlations.
Using latent factor models also gives rise to another issue:
interpretability. It is well known that a latent factor model
is generally not identifiable (Allman et al., 2009), leading to
uninterpretable factors that do not offer insights to domain
experts. In general, the definition of interpretability is highly

