Attacks Which Do Not Kill Training Make Adversarial Learning Stronger

Jingfeng Zhang * † 1 Xilie Xu * 2 Bo Han 3 4 Gang Niu 4 Lizhen Cui 5
Masashi Sugiyama 4 6 Mohan Kankanhalli 1

Abstract
Adversarial training based on the minimax formulation is necessary for obtaining adversarial
robustness of trained models. However, it is conservative or even pessimistic so that it sometimes
hurts the natural generalization. In this paper,
we raise a fundamental question—do we have to
trade off natural generalization for adversarial robustness? We argue that adversarial training is
to employ confident adversarial data for updating
the current model. We propose a novel formulation of friendly adversarial training (FAT): rather
than employing most adversarial data maximizing the loss, we search for least adversarial data
(i.e., friendly adversarial data) minimizing the
loss, among the adversarial data that are confidently misclassified. Our novel formulation is
easy to implement by just stopping the most adversarial data searching algorithms such as PGD
(projected gradient descent) early, which we call
early-stopped PGD. Theoretically, FAT is justified by an upper bound of the adversarial risk.
Empirically, early-stopped PGD allows us to answer the earlier question negatively—adversarial
robustness can indeed be achieved without compromising the natural generalization.

1. Introduction
Safety-critical nature of some areas such as medicine (Buch
et al., 2018) and automatic driving (Litman, 2017), neces*
Equal contribution † Preliminary work was done during an
internship at RIKEN AIP. 1 School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore 2 Taishan College, Shandong University, Jinan, China 3 Department of Computer Science, Hong
Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China 4 RIKEN Center for
Advanced Intelligence Project (AIP), Tokyo, Japan 5 School of Software & Joint SDU-NTU Centre for Artificial Intelligence Research
(C-FAIR), Shandong University, Jinan, China 6 Graduate School of
Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Jingfeng Zhang <j-zhang@comp.nus.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

sitates the need for deep neural networks (DNNs) to be
adversarially robust that generalize well. Recent research
focuses on improving their robustness mainly by two defense approaches, i.e., certified defense and empirical defense. Certified defense tries to learn provably robust DNNs
against norm-bounded (e.g., `2 and `∞ ) perturbations (Cohen et al., 2019; Wong & Kolter, 2018; Tsuzuku et al., 2018;
Lécuyer et al., 2019; Weng et al., 2018; Balunovic & Vechev,
2020; Zhang et al., 2020). Empirical defense incorporates
adversarial data into the training process (Goodfellow et al.,
2015; Madry et al., 2018; Cai et al., 2018; Zhang et al.,
2019b; Wang et al., 2019; 2020). For instance, empirical
defense has been used to train Wide ResNet (Zagoruyko
& Komodakis, 2016) with natural data and its adversarial
variants to make the trained network robust against strong
adaptive attacks (Athalye et al., 2018; Carlini & Wagner,
2017). This paper belongs to the empirical defense category.
Existing empirical defense methods formulate the adversarial training as a minimax optimization problem (Section 2.1) (Madry et al., 2018). To conduct this minimax optimization, projected gradient descent (PGD) is a common
method to generate the most adversarial data that maximizes
the loss, updating the current model. PGD perturbs the natural data for a fixed number of steps with small step size.
After each step of perturbation, PGD projects the adversarial
data back onto the -norm ball of the natural data.
However, this minimax formulation is conservative (or even
pessimistic), such that it sometimes hurts the natural generalization (Tsipras et al., 2019). For example, the top panels
in Figure 1 show that at step #6 to #10 in PGD, the adversarial variants of the natural data significantly cross over
the decision boundary and are located at their peer’s (natural data) area. Since adversarial training aims to fit natural
data and its adversarial variants simultaneously, such the
cross-over mixture makes adversarial training extremely difficult. Therefore, the most adversarial data generated by the
PGD-10 (i.e., step #10 in top panel of Figure 1) directly
“kill” the training, thus rendering the training unsuccessful.
Inspired by philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche’s quote “that
which does not kill us makes us stronger,” we propose
friendly adversarial training (FAT): rather than employing
the most adversarial data for updating the current model, we

