The Many Shapley Values for Model Explanation

Mukund Sundararajan 1 Amir Najmi 1

Abstract
The Shapley value has become the basis for several methods that attribute the prediction of a
machine-learning model on an input to its base
features. The use of the Shapley value is justified by citing the uniqueness result from (Shapley,
1953), which shows that it is the only method that
satisfies certain good properties (axioms). There
are, however, a multiplicity of ways in which the
Shapley value is operationalized for model explanation. These differ in how they reference
the model, the training data, and the explanation
context. Hence they differ in output, rendering
the uniqueness result inapplicable. Furthermore,
the techniques that rely on they training data produce non-intuitive attributions, for instance unused features can still receive attribution. In this
paper, we use the axiomatic approach to study
the differences between some of the many operationalizations of the Shapley value for attribution. We discuss a technique called Baseline Shapley (BShap), provide a proper uniqueness result
for it, and contrast it with two other techniques
from prior literature, Integrated Gradients (Sundararajan et al., 2017) and Conditional Expectation Shapley (Lundberg & Lee, 2017).

1. Motivation and Related Work
We discuss the attribution problem, i.e., the problem of
distributing the prediction score of a model for a specific
input to its base features (cf. (Ribeiro et al., 2016; Lundberg
& Lee, 2017; Sundararajan et al., 2017)); the attribution to
a base feature can be interpreted as the importance of the
feature to the prediction. For instance, when attribution is
applied to a model that makes loan decisions, the attributions
tell you how influential a feature was to the loan decision for
a specific loan applicant. Attributions thus have explanatory
1
Google LLC. Correspondence to: Mukund Sundararajan
<mukunds@google.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

value.
One of the leading approaches to attribution is based on the
Shapley value (Shapley, 1953), a construct from cooperative
game theory. In cooperative game theory, a group of players
come together to consume a service, and this incurs some
cost. The Shapley value distributes this cost among the
players. There is a correspondence between cost-sharing
and the attribution problem: The cost function is analogous
to the model, the players to base features, and the cost-shares
to the attributions.
The Shapley value is known to be the unique method that
satisfies certain properties (see Section 2.1 for more details). The desirability of these properties, and the uniqueness result make a strong case for using the Shapley value.
Unfortunately, despite the uniqueness result, there are a multiplicity of Shapley values that differ in how they refer to
the model, the training data, and the explanation context.
Here is a sampling of the literature to illustrate the variety
of approaches:
1. (Lindeman et al., 1980; Grömping, 2007)) uses the
Shapley value to attribute the goodness of fit (R2 ) of a
linear regression model to its features by retraining the
model on different feature subsets.
2. (Owen, 2014; Owen & Prieur, 2017) apply the Shapley
value to study the importance of a feature to a given
function, by using it to identify the ”variance explained”
by the feature; no retraining involved.
3. (Štrumbelj et al., 2009; Štrumbelj & Kononenko, 2014)
use the Shapley value to solve the attribution problem,
i.e., feature importance for a specific prediction. The
first paper applies the Shapley value by retraining the
model on every possible subset of the features. The second paper applies the Shapley value to the conditional
expectation of a specific model (no retraining) (see
Section 2.1.1 for a formal definition of the conditional
expectation approach). They assume that features are
distributed uniformly and independently.
4. (Datta et al., 2016) applies the Shapley value to the
conditional expectations of the model’s function with
a contrived distribution that is the product of the
marginals of the underlying feature distribution.

