Distributed Online Optimization over a Heterogeneous Network with
Any-Batch Mirror Descent

Nima Eshraghi 1 Ben Liang 1

Abstract
In distributed online optimization over a computing network with heterogeneous nodes, slow
nodes can adversely affect the progress of fast
nodes, leading to drastic slowdown of the overall convergence process. To address this issue,
we consider a new algorithm termed Distributed
Any-Batch Mirror Descent (DABMD), which is
based on distributed Mirror Descent but uses a
fixed per-round computing time to limit the waiting by fast nodes to receive information updates
from slow nodes. DABMD is characterized by
varying minibatch sizes across nodes. It is applicable to a broader range of problems compared
with existing distributed online optimization methods such as those based on dual averaging, and
it accommodates time-varying network topology.
We study two versions of DABMD, depending
on whether the computing nodes average their
primal variables via single or multiple consensus
iterations. We show that both versions provide
strong theoretical performance guarantee, by deriving upperbounds on their expected dynamic
regret, which capture the variability in minibatch
sizes. Our experimental results show substantial
reduction in cost and acceleration in convergence
compared with the known best alternative.

1. Introduction
In many practical applications, system parameters and cost
functions vary over time. For example, in online machine
learning, data samples arrive dynamically, so that the learning model is progressively updated. Therefore, online optimization has recently attracted significant attention as an
important tool for modeling various classes of problems
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to: Nima
Eshraghi <nima.eshraghi@mail.utoronto.ca>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

with uncertainty, including cloud computing (Lin et al.,
2013), networking (Shi et al., 2018), and machine learning
(Shalev-Shwartz, 2012).
Furthermore, emerging computing and machine learning
applications often demand huge amounts of data and computation, which exacerbates the need for distributed computation, to avoid overburdening a single computing node and
to provide robustness to failures. Yet, a central challenge
to distributed computation is how to handle the uncertainty
involved in the processing time of heterogeneous computing
nodes. In a large distributed computing network, the finishing times of different computing nodes can vary greatly
across the network and time, and they can be highly random
due to the variation in available computing resource and
dynamics of the workload. In the design of these networks,
it is difficult to capture such uncertainty in an offline setting,
while online optimization techniques naturally accommodate unpredictable variations in the cost functions.
In this paper, we study the problem of online optimization
over a distributed computing network with time-varying
topology. The network consists of heterogeneous computing nodes, and the processing speed varies among the nodes
and over time. At each time instant, there is a global cost
function in the network, which is generally defined and is
time-varying. An example of such a global cost is the prediction loss. Individual nodes communicate locally to collaboratively supplement their incomplete knowledge about
the time-varying global cost. Our aim is to minimize the
total accumulated cost over a finite time interval.
The above computing model can be viewed as an abstraction
for several important practical cases. For instance, consider
a parallel processing system with unknown processing times.
The computing nodes may be parallel processors or virtual
machine instances in a public cloud or mobile edge servers.
A number of factors contribute to not knowing the processing time on these processors. For example, an edge server
may be shared among offloaded user tasks and network service tasks, so that only a fraction of the processing resource
may be available to serve the user tasks. Another example is networked sensors and mobile devices in a machine
learning application, where the goal is to fit a model to a
large dataset. Different sensors and devices have differing

