In Defense of Uniform Convergence: Generalization via Derandomization
with an Application to Interpolating Predictors

Jeffrey Negrea 1 2 3 Gintare Karolina Dziugaite 4 3 Daniel M. Roy 1 2 3

Abstract
We propose to study the generalization error of
a learned predictor ĥ in terms of that of a surrogate (potentially randomized) predictor that is
coupled to ĥ and designed to trade empirical risk
for control of generalization error. In the case
where ĥ interpolates the data, it is interesting to
consider theoretical surrogate predictors that are
partially derandomized or rerandomized, e.g., fit
to the training data but with modified label noise.
We also show that replacing ĥ by its conditional
distribution with respect to an arbitrary σ-field is
a convenient way to derandomize. We study two
examples, inspired by the work of Nagarajan and
Kolter (2019) and Bartlett et al. (2020), where
the learned predictor ĥ interpolates the training
data with high probability, has small risk, and,
yet, does not belong to a nonrandom class with
a tight uniform bound on two-sided generalization error. At the same time, we bound the risk
of ĥ in terms of surrogates constructed by conditioning and denoising, respectively, and shown
to belong to nonrandom classes with uniformly
small generalization error.

1. Introduction
One of the central problems in learning theory is to explain the statistical performance of deep learning algorithms. There is particular interest in explaining how overparameterized neural networks, trained by simple variants of stochastic gradient descent (SGD), simultaneously
achieve low risk and zero empirical risk on benchmark
datasets. While certain naive explanations have been ruled
out (Zhang et al., 2017), progress has been slow.
1
Stat. Sci., U. Toronto 2 Vector Inst. 3 Inst. Adv. Study 4 Element
AI. Correspondence to: J. Negrea <negrea@utstat.toronto.edu>,
G. K. Dziugaite <karolina.dziugaite@elementai.com>, D. M. Roy
<droy@utstat.toronto.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

The bulk of recent work has approached this problem by arguing that the classifier learned by SGD belongs to a class
for which there is a uniform and tight (two-sided) bound
on the generalization error (Bartlett, Foster, and Telgarsky,
2017; Golowich, Rakhlin, and Shamir, 2018; Long and
Sedghi, 2020; Neyshabur et al., 2017; Wei and Ma, 2019).
After raising this observation, Nagarajan and Kolter (2019)
argue that this approach may be unable to explain performance observed in overparameterized models. They argue
this point by constructing a simple problem where an SGDlike algorithm learns a classifier that achieves low risk and
zero empirical risk, yet the learned classifier does not belong (even with high probability) to a class whose generalization error is uniformly small. Nagarajan and Kolter
conjecture that SGD finds a fit that is simple at a macroscopic level (leading to good generalization) but complex
at the microscopic level due to data-dependent fluctuations
(hurting “uniform convergence”). A similar observation for
minimum-norm interpolating kernel methods is made by
Belkin, Ma, and Mandal (2018, Sec. 4), where they find
that norm-dependent bounds will be vacuously large.
In this work, we initiate a response to Nagarajan and Kolter
(2019) in defense of the utility of uniform convergence for
understanding learning algorithms that obtain zero empirical risk. We do so by introducing the technique of derandomization, whereby a risk bound is obtained by comparing the learned hypothesis with a surrogate that is less
influenced by the data. This technique can be seen to be
implicit in several classical analyses, including the bias–
variance analysis of linear regression. We look at the highdimensional case as our first example. Our second example mimics one by Nagarajan and Kolter and shows
how rerandomization can produce a derandomized surrogate without microscopic fluctuations. In each case, we
show that the surrogate belongs to a class possessing an
appropriate uniform convergence property and is similar
enough to the original learned hypothesis to yield a tight
bound on risk.
In order to formalize our results, we require a notion of
uniform convergence that is applicable to learning algorithms that produce interpolating predictors.1 In general,
1

We use the term “interpolating predictors” to refer to predic-

