Adding Seemingly Uninformative Labels Helps in Low Data Regimes

Christos Matsoukas 1 2 3 Albert Bou I Hernandez 1 Yue Liu 1 2 Karin Dembrower 4 5 Gisele Miranda 1 2
Emir Konuk 1 2 Johan Fredin Haslum 1 2 3 Athanasios Zouzos 6 Peter Lindholm 4 Fredrik Strand 4 6
Kevin Smith 1 2

Abstract
Evidence suggests that networks trained on large
datasets generalize well not solely because of the
numerous training examples, but also class diversity which encourages learning of enriched
features. This raises the question of whether this
remains true when data is scarce – is there an
advantage to learning with additional labels in
low-data regimes? In this work, we consider a
task that requires difficult-to-obtain expert annotations: tumor segmentation in mammography
images. We show that, in low-data settings, performance can be improved by complementing the
expert annotations with seemingly uninformative
labels from non-expert annotators, turning the task
into a multi-class problem. We reveal that these
gains increase when less expert data is available,
and uncover several interesting properties through
further studies. We demonstrate our findings on
C SAW-S, a new dataset that we introduce here,
and confirm them on two public datasets.

1. Introduction
When abundant training data is available, deep learning
approaches have achieved remarkable feats, especially in
areas like computer vision and natural language processing.
However, even within these well-studied domains, there
exist many important problems for which data is scarce.
In medicine, large well-labeled datasets are difficult to come
by for a variety of reasons. Often, legal regulations and
privacy concerns prohibit the distribution of data. Or there
1

School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, KTH
Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden 2 Science for
Life Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden 3 AstraZeneca, Gothenburg,
Sweden 4 Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden 5 Capio Sankt
Göran Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden 6 Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. Correspondence to: Christos Matsoukas
<matsou@kth.se>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. We consider low-data regime tasks where expert data is
difficult to obtain, such as tumor segmentation in mammography
images from the C SAW-S dataset. A network trained with only expert annotations of the tumors (blue) is significantly outperformed
by the same network which is given additional complementary
non-expert annotations (red) of breast anatomy (e.g. skin, pectoral
muscle, nipple), turning the task into a multi-class problem. Performance is measured for varying numbers of training images/patients
by intersection over union (IoU) over five repetitions (shaded area
indicates 95% CI).

simply may not be enough patients to collect the data from.
This may be due to the rare nature of a disease that only
affects a limited population, or due to the logistics of collecting data from different administrative regions. Sometimes
the techniques used for diagnosis are expensive or require
painful procedures (e.g. biopsies), and thus data is only collected when deemed absolutely necessary. Finally, there
are cases where sufficient data may be available, but crucial
expert-level annotations are prohibitively expensive or difficult to obtain. This problem is common in other domains
such as astronomy and biology where either data or expert
knowledge is difficult to obtain.
In this work, we observe that performance on expert image segmentation tasks can be significantly improved by
adding seemingly uninformative annotations during training. Although we cannot offer a definitive explanation for
this effect, we surmise that the class diversity encourages
learning of enriched features that capture complementary
information to the main task. The additional labels do not

