Breaking the Curse of Space Explosion: Towards Effcient NAS
with Curriculum Search
Yong Guo * 1 Yaofo Chen * 1 2 Yin Zheng * 3 Peilin Zhao * 4 Jian Chen 1 5 Junzhou Huang 4 Mingkui Tan 1

Abstract
Neural architecture search (NAS) has become an
important approach to automatically fnd effective
architectures. To cover all possible good architectures, we need to search in an extremely large
search space with billions of candidate architectures. More critically, given a large search space,
we may face a very challenging issue of space
explosion. However, due to the limitation of computational resources, we can only sample a very
small proportion of the architectures, which provides insuffcient information for the training. As
a result, existing methods may often produce suboptimal architectures. To alleviate this issue, we
propose a curriculum search method that starts
from a small search space and gradually incorporates the learned knowledge to guide the search
in a large space. With the proposed search strategy, our Curriculum Neural Architecture Search
(CNAS) method signifcantly improves the search
effciency and fnds better architectures than existing NAS methods. Extensive experiments on
CIFAR-10 and ImageNet demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been producing stateof-the-art results in many challenging tasks including image classifcation (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2020;
Zheng et al., 2015; Guo et al., 2020a), semantic segmentation (Shelhamer et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2018; Huang et al.,
2019), and many other areas (Zheng et al., 2016b;a; Jiang
*

Equal contribution . This work is done when Yong Guo works
as an intern in Tencent AI Lab. 1 School of Software Engineering, South China University of Technology 2 Pazhou Laboratory
3
Weixin Group, Tencent 4 Tencent AI Lab, Tencent 5 Guangdong
Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing. Correspondence to: Mingkui Tan <mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn>, Jian Chen
<ellachen@scut.edu.cn>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Standard NAS with
fixed search space

NAS with curriculum search

Stage-1
Searched Architecture
(acc=97.10%, #params=3.99M)

Stage-3

Stage-2

Searched Architecture
(acc=97.40%, #params=3.66M)

architecture search space

searched architecture

search direction

adaptively evolved subspace

initial sampled architecture

Figure 1. Comparisons of the search process between standard
NAS methods and our proposed curriculum NAS (CNAS) method.
By gradually refning the candidate subspace, CNAS performs
much accurate architecture sampling, thus can signifcantly improve the search effciency and fnd better architectures than standard NAS methods.

et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2019; Zeng et al., 2019; Hosseini
et al., 2020; Guo et al., 2020b; Cao et al., 2018). Besides
designing DNNs manually, there is a growing interest in
automatically designing effective architectures by neural architecture search (NAS) methods (Zoph & Le, 2017; Pham
et al., 2018). Existing studies show that the automatically
searched architectures often outperform the manually designed ones in both image classifcation tasks and language
modeling tasks (Zoph et al., 2018; Lian et al., 2020).
NAS methods seek to search for an optimal architecture in
a predefned search space. To this end, existing methods
have to explore the whole search space by sampling suffciently many architectures. However, the search space is
often extremely large (e.g., billions of candidate architectures (Pham et al., 2018)), resulting in the space explosion
issue. To be specifc, due to the limitation of computational
resources, we can only sample a very small proportion of
the architectures from the search space. Thus, we can only
receive very limited information to guide the search process.
As a result, NAS models become hard to train and often fnd
sub-optimal architectures.
To alleviate the space explosion issue, we seek to improve
the search by conducting more accurate sampling, i.e., exploring the subspace that contains potentially better architectures. In this way, given limited resources to conduct

