Temporal Phenotyping using Deep Predictive Clustering of Disease Progression

Changhee Lee 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 2 3 1

Abstract
Due to the wider availability of modern electronic
health records, patient care data is often being
stored in the form of time-series. Clustering such
time-series data is crucial for patient phenotyping,
anticipating patients’ prognoses by identifying
“similar” patients, and designing treatment guidelines that are tailored to homogeneous patient subgroups. In this paper, we develop a deep learning
approach for clustering time-series data, where
each cluster comprises patients who share similar
future outcomes of interest (e.g., adverse events,
the onset of comorbidities). To encourage each
cluster to have homogeneous future outcomes, the
clustering is carried out by learning discrete representations that best describe the future outcome
distribution based on novel loss functions. Experiments on two real-world datasets show that our
model achieves superior clustering performance
over state-of-the-art benchmarks and identifies
meaningful clusters that can be translated into actionable information for clinical decision-making.

1. Introduction
Chronic diseases – such as cystic fibrosis and dementia –
are heterogeneous in nature, with widely differing outcomes
even in narrow patient subgroups. Disease progression manifests through a broad spectrum of clinical factors, collected
as a sequence of measurements in electronic health records,
which gives a rise to complex progression patterns among
patients (Samal et al., 2011; Yoon et al., 2017). For example,
cystic fibrosis evolves slowly, allowing for development of
comorbidities and bacterial infections, and creating distinct
responses to therapeutic interventions, which in turn makes
the survival and quality of life substantially different (Ramos
et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2019). Identifying patient subgroups
with similar progression patterns can be advantageous for
1

University of California, Los Angeles, USA 2 University of
Cambridge, UK 3 Alan Turing Institute, UK. Correspondence to:
Changhee Lee <chl8856@ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

understanding such heterogeneous diseases. This allows
clinicians to anticipate patients’ prognoses by comparing to
“similar” patients and to design treatment guidelines tailored
to homogeneous subgroups (Zhang et al., 2019).
Temporal clustering has been recently used as a data-driven
framework to partition patients with time-series observations into subgroups of patients. Recent research has
typically focused on either finding fixed-length and lowdimensional representations (Zhang et al., 2019; Rusanov
et al., 2016) or on modifying the similarity measure (Giannoula et al., 2018; Luong & Chandola, 2017) both in an
attempt to apply the existing clustering algorithms to timeseries observations. However, clusters identified from these
approaches are purely unsupervised – they do not account
for patients’ observed outcomes (e.g., adverse events, the
onset of comorbidities, etc.) – which leads to heterogeneous
clusters if the clinical presentation of the disease differs
even for patients with the same outcomes. Thus, a common
prognosis in each cluster remains unknown which can mystify the understanding of the underlying disease progression
(Boudier et al., 2019; Wami et al., 2013). To overcome this
limitation, we focus on predictive clustering (Blockeel et al.,
2017) to combine predictions on the future outcomes with
clustering. More specifically, we aim at finding cluster assignments and centroids by learning discrete representations
of time-series that best describe the future outcome distribution. By doing so, patients in the same cluster share similar
future outcomes to provide a prognostic value. Figure 1
illustrates a pictorial depiction of the clustering procedure.
In this paper, we propose an actor-critic approach for temporal predictive clustering, which we call AC-TPC.1 Our
model consists of three networks – an encoder, a selector,
and a predictor – and a set of centroid candidates. The key
insight, here, is that we model temporal predictive clustering
as learning discrete representations of the input time-series
that best describe the future outcome distribution. More
specifically, the encoder maps an input time-series into a
continuous latent encoding; the selector assigns a cluster
(i.e., maps to a discrete representation) to which the input
belongs by taking the latent encoding as an input; and the
predictor estimates the future outcome distributions condi1

Source code available at https://github.com/
chl8856/AC_TPC.

