T-GD: Transferable GAN-generated Images Detection Framework

Hyeonseong Jeon 1 Youngoh Bang 1 Junyaup Kim 2 Simon S. Woo 2 3

Abstract
Recent advancements in Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) enable the generation of
highly realistic images, raising concerns about
their misuse for malicious purposes. Detecting
these GAN-generated images (GAN-images) becomes increasingly challenging due to the significant reduction of underlying artifacts and specific
patterns. The absence of such traces can hinder detection algorithms from identifying GAN-images
and transferring knowledge to identify other types
of GAN-images as well. In this work, we present
the Transferable GAN-images Detection framework (T-GD), a robust transferable framework for
an effective detection of GAN-images. T-GD is
composed of a teacher and a student model that
can iteratively teach and evaluate each other to improve the detection performance. First, we train
the teacher model on the source dataset and use it
as a starting point for learning the target dataset.
To train the student model, we inject noise by mixing up the source and target datasets, while constraining the weight variation to preserve the starting point. Our approach is a self-training method,
but distinguishes itself from prior approaches by
focusing on improving the transferability of GANimage detection. T-GD achieves high performance
on the source dataset by overcoming catastrophic
forgetting and effectively detecting state-of-theart GAN-images with only a small volume of data
without any metadata information.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) (Choi et al., 2019; Zakharov et al., 2019; Karras
1

Department of Artificial Intelligence, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, S. Korea 2 Computer Science and Engineering Department, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, S. Korea 3 Department
of Applied Data Science, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, S.
Korea. Correspondence to: Simon S. Woo <swoo@g.skku.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Sample data used for our experiment. Images inside the
green border are real images, while those inside the red border are
GAN-images. The left-hand side images in row order are from
CelebA, StarGAN, FFHQ, and StyleGAN. The right-hand side
images in row order are from PGGAN and StyleGAN2.

et al., 2019b; Shaham et al., 2019) enable the generation of
realistic images, which has now become feasible through
few-shot or single-shot learning. Some GANs manage to
further reduce visible artifacts and patterns, such as blurred
object shape, checkerboard artifacts, semantically strange
objects, and unnatural backgrounds. For these reasons, even
high-resolution images produced by the latest GANs are
hardly distinguishable from real images or by human inspection.
A typical way of detecting GAN-images is to train Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and a binary classifier
with a large number of images generated from GANs. Some
researchers (Marra et al., 2019a; Zhang et al., 2019; Yu
et al., 2019) have shown that the detection performance can
be improved by analyzing artifacts and patterns in GANimages. Many of the existing methods has achieved high
performance in detecting GAN-images when the model tests
on the same dataset used during the training phase (Tariq
et al., 2019; 2018; Jeon et al., 2019). Moreover, this binary
classifier can be realized by the use of existing and wellstructured CNN architectures (Tan & Le, 2019; Jeon et al.,
2020).

