Extragradient with player sampling for faster Nash equilibrium finding

Samy Jelassi * 1 Carles Domingo-Enrich * 2 Damien Scieur 3 Arthur Mensch 4 2 Joan Bruna 2

Abstract
Data-driven modeling increasingly requires to
find a Nash equilibrium in multi-player games, e.g.
when training GANs. In this paper, we analyse a
new extra-gradient method for Nash equilibrium
finding, that performs gradient extrapolations and
updates on a random subset of players at each
iteration. This approach provably exhibits a better
rate of convergence than full extra-gradient for
non-smooth convex games with noisy gradient
oracle. We propose an additional variance reduction mechanism to obtain speed-ups in smooth
convex games. Our approach makes extrapolation
amenable to massive multiplayer settings, and
brings empirical speed-ups, in particular when
using a heuristic cyclic sampling scheme. Most
importantly, it allows to train faster and better
GANs and mixtures of GANs.

A growing number of models in machine learning require
to optimize over multiple interacting objectives. This is
the case of generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow
et al., 2014), imaginative agents (Racanière et al., 2017), hierarchical reinforcement learning (Wayne & Abbott, 2014)
and multi-agent reinforcement learning (Bu et al., 2008).
Solving saddle-point problems (see e.g., Rockafellar, 1970),
that is key in robust learning (Kim et al., 2006) and image
reconstruction (Chambolle & Pock, 2011), also falls in this
category. These examples can be cast as games where players are parametrized modules that compete or cooperate to
minimize their own objective functions.

vex n-player games, for which Nash equilibria exist (Rosen,
1965). Finding a Nash equilibrium in this setting is equivalent to solving a variational inequality problem (VI) with
a monotone operator (Rosen, 1965; Harker & Pang, 1990).
This VI can be solved using first-order methods, that are
prevalent in single-objective optimization for machine learning. Stochastic gradient descent (the simplest first-order
method) is indeed known to converge to local minima under
mild conditions met by ML problems (Bottou & Bousquet,
2008). Yet, while gradient descent can be applied simultaneously to different objectives, it may fail in finding a Nash
equilibrium in very simple settings (see e.g., Letcher et al.,
2019; Gidel et al., 2019). Two alternative modifications of
gradient descent are necessary to solve the VI (hence Nash)
problem: averaging (Magnanti & Perakis, 1997; Nedić &
Ozdaglar, 2009) or extrapolation with averaging. The later
was introduced as the extra-gradient (EG) method by Korpelevich (1976)); it is faster (Nemirovski, 2004) and can
handle noisy gradients (Juditsky et al., 2011). Extrapolation corresponds to an opponent shaping step: each player
anticipates its opponents’ next moves to update its strategy.
In n-player games, extra-gradient computes 2n single player
gradients before performing a parameter update. Whether
in massive or simple two-players games, this may be an
inefficient update strategy: early gradient information, computed at the beginning of each iteration, could be used to
perform eager updates or extrapolations, similar to how alternated update of each player would behave. Therefore, we
introduce and analyse new extra-gradient algorithms that
extrapolate and update random or carefully selected subsets
of players at each iteration (Fig. 1).

*
Equal contribution 1 Princeton University, USA 2 NYU CIMS,
New York, USA 3 Samsung SAIT AI Lab, Montreal, Canada
4
ENS, DMA, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Samy Jelassi
<sjelassi@princeton.edu>.

– We review the extra-gradient algorithm for differentiable
games and outline its shortcomings (§3.1). We propose
a doubly-stochastic extra-gradient (DSEG) algorithm
(§3.2) that updates the strategies of a subset of players,
thus performing player sampling. DSEG performs faster
but noisier updates than the original full extra-gradient
method (full EG, (Juditsky et al., 2011)), that uses a
(once) stochastic gradient oracle. We introduce a variance reduction method to attenuate the noise added by
player sampling in smooth games.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

– We derive convergence rates for DSEG in the convex
setting (§4), as summarized in Table 1. Proofs strongly
relies on the specific structure of the noise introduced by

To define a principled solution to a multi-objective optimization problem, we may rely on the notion of Nash equilibrium (Nash, 1951). At a Nash equilibrium, no player can improve its objective by unilaterally changing its strategy. The
theoretical section of this paper considers the class of con-

