Adaptive Adversarial Multi-task Representation Learning

Yuren Mao 1 Weiwei Liu 2 Xuemin Lin 1

Abstract
Adversarial Multi-task Representation Learning
(AMTRL) methods are capable of boosting the
performance of Multi-task Representation Learning (MTRL) models. However, the theoretical mechanism behind AMTRL has been only
minimally investigated. Accordingly, to ﬁll this
gap, we study the generalization error bound of
AMTRL through the lens of Lagrangian duality.
Based on this duality, we propose a novel adaptive
AMTRL algorithm that improves the performance
of the original AMTRL methods. We further conduct extensive experiments to back up our theoretical analysis and validate the superiority of our
proposed algorithm.

1. Introduction
Multi-task Representation Learning (MTRL), which is an
inﬂuential line of research on Multi-task Learning, learns
related tasks simultaneously by sharing a common representation. Compared with learning each task independently,
MTRL typically has a lower computational cost and better
prediction performance. It has achieved great success in
various applications ranging from computer vision (Kendall
et al., 2018) to natural language processing (Collobert &
Weston, 2008).
Recently, adversarial MTRL (AMTRL) methods (Liu et al.,
2017; Chen et al., 2018a; Shi et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2018;
Liu et al., 2018; Yadav et al., 2018) have been widely utilized in a range of applications. AMTRL methods improve
the performance of original MTRL models by adding an
extra adversarial module, i.e., a task discriminator in the representation space. Unfortunately, the theoretical mechanism
behind AMTRL methods is still not well understood.
The ﬁndings of this paper suggest that AMTRL methods
2
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China.
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New
South Wales, Australia. Correspondence to: Weiwei Liu <liuweiwei863@gmail.com>.

1

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

restrict the hypothesis class by enforcing all the tasks to
share an identical distribution in the representation space.
The identical distribution restriction provides further inductive bias and tightens the task-averaged generalization error
bound for MTRL. Based on this restriction, we formulate
AMTRL as a constrained optimization problem and propose to solve the problem using the augmented Lagrangian
method.
To quantitatively measure how likely the tasks share an identical distribution in the representation space, we propose a
pairwise relatedness metric for AMTRL. Based on this metric, a weight adaption strategy is proposed in order to accelerate the convergence of the adversarial module. Combining
the weight adaption strategy and the augmented Lagrangian
method, we present the adaptive AMTRL method.
This paper conducts experiments on two popular multi-task
learning applications: sentiment analysis and topic classiﬁcation. Experimental results verify our theoretical analysis
and validate that the proposed algorithm outperforms several
state-of-the-art methods.

2. Related Works
Adaptive weighting scalarization, which linearly scalarizes the tasks with adaptive weight assignment, is a typical MTRL method. Various adaptive weighting strategies
(Kendall et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2018b; Sener & Koltun,
2018; Lin et al., 2019; Mao et al., 2020) have been proposed
to balance the regularization between tasks and improve
the performance of original MTRL. By contrast, existing
AMTRL methods, for example (Liu et al., 2017; Chen et al.,
2018a), only adopts the naïve uniform scalarization. In this
paper, we propose a adaptive weighting strategy for AMTRL
based on the augmented Lagrangian (Hestenes, 1969) and a
novel task relatedness metric. The task relatedness metric
is proposed based on the representation similarity. Comparing with the typical representation-similarity-based task
relatedness metric (Kriegeskorte et al., 2008; McClure &
Kriegeskorte, 2016; Dwivedi & Roig, 2019), the proposed
task relatedness metric computes the representation similarity with the output of the adversarial module and does not
require extra computation of correlation coefﬁcients, which
is more efﬁcient for AMTRL.

