Data Valuation using Reinforcement Learning

Jinsung Yoon 1 Sercan Ö. Arık 1 Tomas Pfister 1

Abstract
Quantifying the value of data is a fundamental
problem in machine learning and has multiple important use cases: (1) building insights about the
dataset and task, (2) domain adaptation, (3) corrupted sample discovery, and (4) robust learning.
We propose Data Valuation using Reinforcement
Learning (DVRL), to adaptively learn data values
jointly with the predictor model. DVRL uses a
data value estimator (DVE) to learn how likely
each datum is used in training of the predictor
model. DVE is trained using a reinforcement signal that reflects performance on the target task.
We demonstrate that DVRL yields superior data
value estimates compared to alternative methods
across numerous datasets and application scenarios. The corrupted sample discovery performance
of DVRL is close to optimal in many regimes
(i.e. as if the noisy samples were known apriori),
and for domain adaptation and robust learning
DVRL significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
by 14.6% and 10.8%, respectively.

1. Introduction
Data is an essential ingredient of machine learning – it is
well known that training on larger-scale and higher-quality
datasets results in superior models (Hestness et al., 2017;
Najafabadi et al., 2015). However, collecting such largescale and high-quality datasets can be challenging and costly,
as one needs to determine which data samples are most
useful for the target task and then label them correctly.
Recent work (Toneva et al., 2019) suggests that not all samples are equally useful to learn from, particularly so for
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). Many datasets contain
low-quality (e.g. due to measuring hardware) or incorrectlylabeled samples (e.g. due to human errors), and in those
scenarios similar or even higher performance may be ob1

Google Cloud AI, Sunnyvale, California, USA. Correspondence to: Jinsung Yoon <jinsungyoon@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

tained by removing a significant portion of training samples
(Ferdowsi et al., 2013; Frenay & Verleysen, 2014). Moreover, datasets may contain a mismatch between the train and
test sets (e.g. different location or time), and in those cases
higher performance can be obtained by carefully selecting
the samples most relevant for the test scenario from the training set (Ngiam et al., 2018; Zhu et al., 2019). Because of the
ubiquity of these scenarios, accurately quantifying the values of training samples has a great potential for improving
model performance on real-world datasets. In addition to
improving model performance, assigning a value to individual datum can also enable new use cases. It can be used to
suggest better practices for data collection, e.g. what kinds
of additional data would benefit the most. Organizations that
sell data can use it for pricing of each datum. Finally, it can
be used to construct large-scale training datasets in a cheap
way, e.g., by web searching using the labels as keywords
and filtering away less valuable data.
So how does one evaluate the value of a single datum? At the
full dataset granularity, it is straightforward: one can simply
train a model on the entire dataset and use its performance
on a testing set as its value. However, evaluating the value
of a single datum is far more difficult – especially so for
complex models such as DNNs on large-scale datasets as it
is computationally infeasible to train them on all subsets. To
tackle this, early explorations have recently been performed
with permutation-based methods such as Influence Functions (Koh & Liang, 2017) and game theory-based methods
such as Data Shapley (Ghorbani & Zou, 2019). However,
even the best current methods are far from being computationally feasible for large datasets and complex models and
their data valuation performance is limited. Concurrently,
meta learning-based adaptive weight assignment approaches
such as (Ren et al., 2018) have been developed. Their data
value mapping is typically based on gradient descent learning or other heuristic approaches that alter the conventional
predictor model training dynamics, rather than prioritizing
learning from high value data samples.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel approach
to data valuation based on meta learning. Unlike previous
works, our method integrates data valuation into the training
procedure of the predictor model. This allows the predictor
model to get extra supervision from samples that are more
valuable for the given task, improving both predictor and

