On Efficient Low Distortion Ultrametric Embedding

Vincent Cohen-Addad 1 Karthik C. S. 2 Guillaume Lagarde 3

Abstract
A classic problem in unsupervised learning and
data analysis is to find simpler and easy-tovisualize representations of the data that preserve
its essential properties. A widely-used method to
preserve the underlying hierarchical structure of
the data while reducing its complexity is to find an
embedding of the data into a tree or an ultrametric,
but computing such an embedding on a data set
of n points in Ω(log n) dimensions incurs a quite
prohibitive running time of Θ(n2 ).
In this paper, we provide a new algorithm which
takes as input a set of points P in Rd , and for ev1+

1. Introduction
The curse of dimensionality has ruthlessly been haunting
machine learning and data mining researchers. On the one
hand, high dimensional representation of data elements allows fine-grained description of each datum and can lead to
more accurate models, prediction and understanding. On the
other hand, obtaining a significant signal in each dimension
often requires a huge amount of data and high-dimensional
data requires algorithms that can efficiently handle it. Hence,
computing a simple representation of a high-dimensional
dataset while preserving its most important properties has
been a central problem in a large number of communities
since the 1950s.

ρ

ery c ≥ 1, runs in time n c2 (for some universal
constant ρ > 1) to output an ultrametric ∆ such
that for any two points u, v in P, we have ∆(u, v)
is within a multiplicative factor of 5c to the distance between u and v in the “best” ultrametric
representation of P. Here, the best ultrametric is
e that minimizes the maximum
the ultrametric ∆
distance distortion with respect to the `2 distance,
namely that minimizes max ∆e (u,v)/ku−vk2 .
u,v∈ P

We complement the above result by showing that
under popular complexity theoretic assumptions,
for every constant ε > 0, no algorithm with running time n2−ε can distinguish between inputs in
`∞ -metric that admit isometric embedding and
those that incur a distortion of 3/2.
Finally, we present empirical evaluation on classic machine learning datasets and show that the
output of our algorithm is comparable to the output of the linkage algorithms while achieving a
much faster running time.
1 Sorbonne Université, UPMC Univ Paris 06, CNRS,
LIP6, Paris, France 2 Department of Computer Science,
Tel Aviv University, Israel 3 LaBRI, Université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.
Correspondence to:
Vincent Cohen-Addad <vcohenad@gmail.com>, Karthik C. S.
<karthik0112358@gmail.com>, Guillaume Lagarde <guillaume.lagarde@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Of course, computing a simple representation of an arbitrary
high-dimensional set of data elements necessarily incurs
some information loss. Thus, the main question has been
to find dimensionality reduction techniques that would preserve – or better, reveal – some structure of the data. An
example of such a successful approach has been the principal component analysis which can be used to denoise a
dataset and obtain a low-dimensional representation where
‘similar’ data elements are mapped to close-by locations.
This approach has thus become a widely-used, powerful tool
to identify cluster structures in high-dimensional datasets.
Yet, in many cases more complex structures underlie the
datasets and it is crucial to identify this structure. For example, given similarity relations between species, computing
a phylogenetic tree requires more than identifying a ‘flat’
clustering structure, it is critical to identify the whole hierarchy of species. Thus, computing a simple representation
of an input containing a hierarchical structure has drawn a
lot of attention over the years, in particular from the computational biology community. The most popular approaches
are arguably the linkage algorithms, average-linkage, singlelinkage, Ward’s method, and complete-linkage, which produce an embedding of the original metric into an ultrametric1 , see for example the seminal work of (Carlsson &
Mémoli, 2010). Unfortunately, these approaches come with
a major drawback: all these methods, have quadratic running time2 – even in the best case – when the input consists
1 An ultrametric ( X, ∆ ) is a metric space where for each

x, y, z ∈ X, ∆( x, y) ≤ max(∆( x, z), ∆(z, y)).
2 We would like to note here that the relevant work of (Abboud

