Customizing ML Predictions For Online Algorithms

Keerti Anand 1 Rong Ge 1 Debmalya Panigrahi 1

Abstract
A popular line of recent research incorporates
ML advice in the design of online algorithms to
improve their performance in typical instances.
These papers treat the ML algorithm as a blackbox, and redesign online algorithms to take advantage of ML predictions. In this paper, we ask
the complementary question: can we redesign ML
algorithms to provide better predictions for online algorithms? We explore this question in the
context of the classic rent-or-buy problem, and
show that incorporating optimization benchmarks
in ML loss functions leads to signifcantly better performance, while maintaining a worst-case
adversarial result when the advice is completely
wrong. We support this fnding both through theoretical bounds and numerical simulations.

1. Introduction
Optimization under uncertainty is a classic theme in the
felds of algorithm design and machine learning. In the
former, the framework of online algorithms adopts a conservative approach and optimizes for the worst case (or
adversarial) future. While this ensures robustness, the inherent pessimism of the adversarial approach often results in
weak guarantees. Machine learning (ML), on the other hand,
takes a more optimistic approach of trying to predict the
future by ftting an appropriate model to past data. Indeed,
a popular line of recent research is to incorporate ML predictions in the design of online algorithms to improve their
performance while preserving the inherent robustness of the
framework (see related work for references). In this line of
research, ML is used as a black box, and the focus is on redesigning online algorithms to use predictions generated by
any ML technique. In this paper, we ask the complementary
question: can we re-design learning algorithms to better
serve optimization objectives?
1

Department of Computer Science, Duke University, Durham
NC, United States.
Correspondence to: Keerti Anand
<kanand@cs.duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

The key to this question is the observation that unlike in a
generic learning setting, we are not interested in traditional
loss functions such as classifcation error or mean-squared
loss, but only in the eventual performance of the online algorithm. The performance of the online algorithm is measured
by its competitive ratio – the worst-case ratio between the
cost of the online algorithm’s solution and that of the (offine) optimum. By leveraging ML predictions, one can hope
to achieve a better competitive ratio in the typical case. Even
if the ML algorithm does not make accurate predictions, it
suffces if the learning errors do not adversely affect the
decisions taken by the online algorithm. Instead of treating
the learning algorithm and the subsequent optimization as
independent modules as in the previous line of work, we
ask if we can improve the overall online algorithm by designing them in conjunction. That is, we seek to design a
learning algorithm specifc to the optimization task at hand,
and an optimization algorithm that is aware of the learning
algorithm that generated the predictions.
We investigate this question in the context of the classic
rent-or-buy (a.k.a. ski rental) problem. In this problem,
the algorithm is faced with one of two choices: a small
recurring (rental) cost, or a large (buying) cost that has to
be paid once but no cost thereafter. This choice routinely
arises in our daily lives such as in the decision to rent or
buy a house, corporate decisions to rent or buy data centers,
expensive equipment, and so on. Naturally, the optimal
choice depends on the duration of use, a longer duration
justifying the decision to buy instead of renting. But, this
is where the uncertainty lies: the length of use is often not
known in advance. The ski rental problem is perhaps the
most fundamental, and structurally simplest, of all problems
in online algorithms, and has been widely studied in many
contexts (see, e.g., Karlin et al. (1994; 2003); Lotker et al.
(2008); Khanafer et al. (2013); Kodialam (2014)), including
that of online algorithms with ML predictions (Purohit et al.,
2018; Gollapudi & Panigrahi, 2019). We formally defne
this problem next.
The ski rental problem. In the ski rental problem, a skier
has two options: to buy skis at a one time cost of $B or to
rent them at a cost of $1 per day. The skier does not know the
length of the ski season in advance, and only learns it once
the season ends. Note that if the length of the season were
known, then the optimal policy is to buy at the beginning of

