Neural Kernels without Tangents
Vaishaal Shankar 1 Alex Fang 1 Wenshuo Guo 1 Sara Fridovich-Keil 1 Ludwig Schmidt 1
Jonathan Ragan-Kelley 2 Benjamin Recht 1

Abstract
We investigate the connections between neural
networks and simple building blocks in kernel
space. In particular, using well established feature space tools such as direct sum, averaging, and
moment lifting, we present an algebra for creating
“compositional” kernels from bags of features. We
show that these operations correspond to many
of the building blocks of “neural tangent kernels”
(NTK). Experimentally, we show a correlation in
test error between neural network architectures
and the associated kernels. We construct a simple
neural network architecture using only 3 ⇥ 3 convolutions, 2 ⇥ 2 average pooling, ReLU, and optimized with SGD and MSE loss that achieves 96%
accuracy on CIFAR10, and whose corresponding compositional kernel achieves 90% accuracy.
We also use our constructions to investigate the
relative performance of neural networks, NTKs,
and compositional kernels in the small dataset
regime. In particular, we find that compositional
kernels outperform NTKs and neural networks
outperform both kernel methods.

1. Introduction
Recent research has drawn exciting connections between
neural networks and kernel methods, providing new insights into training dynamics, generalization, and expressibility (Daniely et al., 2016; Jacot et al., 2018; Du et al.,
2019b;a; Ghorbani et al., 2019; Allen-Zhu et al., 2019; Lee
et al., 2019). This line of work relates “infinitely wide”
neural networks to particular kernel spaces, showing that
infinite limits of random initializations of neural networks
lead to particular kernels on the same input data. Since
these initial investigations, some have proposed to use these
kernels in prediction problems, finding promising results
1

University of California, Berkeley 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Vaishaal Shankar
<vaishaal@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

on many benchmark problems (Li et al., 2019; Arora et al.,
2020). However, these kernels do not match the performance of neural networks on most tasks of interest, and
the kernel constructions themselves are not only hard to
compute, but their mathematical formulae are difficult to
even write down (Arora et al., 2019).
In this paper, we aim to understand empirically if there are
computationally tractable kernels that approach the expressive power of neural networks, and if there are any practical
links between kernel and neural network architectures. We
take inspiration from both the recent literature on “neural
tangent kernels” (NTK) and the classical literature on compositional kernels, such as ANOVA kernels. We describe a
set of three operations in feature space that allow us to turn
data examples presented as collections of small feature vectors into a single expressive feature-vector representation.
We then show how to compute these features directly on
kernel matrices, obviating the need for explicit vector representations. We draw connections between these operations,
the compositional kernels of Daniely et al. (2016), and the
Neural Tangent Kernel limits of Jacot et al. (2018). These
connections allow us to relate neural architectures to kernels
in a transparent way, with appropriate simple analogues of
convolution, pooling, and nonlinear rectification (Sec. 3).
Our main investigation, however, is not in establishing these
connections. Our goal is to test whether the analogies between these operations hold in practice: is there a correlation
between neural architecture performance and the performance of the associated kernel? Inspired by simple networks proposed by David Page (2018), we construct neural
network architectures for computer vision tasks using only
3 ⇥ 3 convolutions, 2 ⇥ 2 average pooling, and ReLU nonlinearities. We show that the performance of these neural architectures on CIFAR-10 strongly predicts the performance
of the associated kernel. The best architecture achieves 96%
accuracy on CIFAR-10 when trained with SGD on a mean
squared error (MSE) loss. The corresponding compositional
kernel achieves 90% accuracy, which is, to our knowledge,
the highest accuracy achieved thus far by a kernel machine
on CIFAR-10. We emphasize here that we compute an exact kernel directly from pixels, and do not rely on random
feature approximations often used in past work.

