Tails of Lipschitz Triangular Flows

Priyank Jaini * 1 2 Ivan Kobyzev 3 Yaoliang Yu 1 2 Marcus A. Brubaker 3 4

Abstract
We investigate the ability of popular flow based
methods to capture tail-properties of a target density by studying the increasing triangular maps
used in these flow methods acting on a tractable
source density. We show that the density quantile
functions of the source and target density provide
a precise characterization of the slope of transformation required to capture tails in a target density.
We further show that any Lipschitz-continuous
transport map acting on a source density will result in a density with similar tail properties as the
source, highlighting the trade-off between a complex source density and a sufficiently expressive
transformation to capture desirable properties of
a target density. Subsequently, we illustrate that
flow models like Real-NVP, MAF, and Glow as
implemented originally lack the ability to capture
a distribution with non-Gaussian tails. We circumvent this problem by proposing tail-adaptive
flows consisting of a source distribution that can
be learned simultaneously with the triangular map
to capture tail-properties of a target density. We
perform several synthetic and real-world experiments to compliment our theoretical findings.

1. Introduction
Increasing triangular maps are a recent construct in probability theory that can transform any source density to any target
density (Bogachev et al., 2005). The Knothe-Rosenblatt
transformation (Rosenblatt, 1952; Knothe et al., 1957) gives
an explicit version of an increasing triangular map that does
the transformation. These triangular maps provide a unified
framework (Jaini et al., 2019) to study popular neural density estimation methods like normalizing flows (Tabak &
Vanden-Eijnden, 2010; Tabak & Turner, 2013; Rezende &
*
Equal contribution 1 Univesity of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada
Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada 3 Borealis AI 4 York University, Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to: Priyank Jaini
<p.jaini@uwaterloo.ca>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Mohamed, 2015) and autoregressive models (Papamakarios et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2018; Kingma et al., 2016;
Uria et al., 2016; Larochelle & Murray, 2011) which are
tractable methods for explicitly modelling densities for highdimensional datasets. Indeed, these methods have been
applied successfully in several domains including natural
images, videos, speech and audio synthesis, novelty detection, and natural language.
This work studies the tail properties of a target density by
characterizing the properties of the corresponding increasing
triangular map required to push a tractable source density
with known tails to the desired target density. We begin in
§3 by showing that, in one dimension, the density quantile
functions of the source and target density characterize the
slope of a (unique) increasing transformation. Furthermore,
the asymptotic properties of the density quantile function
allow us to give a granular characterisation of the degree
of heaviness of a distribution. We show that the degree
of heaviness parameter of the source and target densities
characterize the properties of the corresponding triangular
map completely. We then give a precise rate at which an
increasing transformation must grow in order to capture the
tail behaviour of the target density by drawing connections
between the degree of heaviness parameter and the existence
of higher-order moments of the densities.
We generalize these results for higher dimensions in §4 by
showing that a Lipschitz-continuous transport map will always result in a target density with the same tail properties
as the source, highlighting the trade-off between choosing
an appropriate source density and sufficiently complex transport map to capture tails in a target density. Additionally,
when the source and target densities are from the elliptical
family, we show that the increasing triangular map from a
light-tailed distribution to a heavy-tailed distribution must
have all diagonal entries of the Jacobian unbounded.
In §5, we discuss the implications of these results for a
class of flow based models that we call affine triangular
flows which include NICE (Dinh et al., 2015), Real-NVP
(Dinh et al., 2017), MAF (Papamakarios et al., 2017), IAF
(Kingma et al., 2016), and Glow (Kingma & Dhariwal,
2018). We show both theoretically and empirically that
these models as originally implemented lack the ability to
push a fixed source density to a target density with heav-

