Rigging the Lottery:
Making All Tickets Winners
Utku Evci 1 Trevor Gale 1 Jacob Menick 2 Pablo Samuel Castro 1 Erich Elsen 2

Abstract
Many applications require sparse neural networks
due to space or inference time restrictions. There
is a large body of work on training dense networks
to yield sparse networks for inference, but this limits the size of the largest trainable sparse model to
that of the largest trainable dense model. In this
paper we introduce a method to train sparse neural
networks with a ﬁxed parameter count and a ﬁxed
computational cost throughout training, without
sacriﬁcing accuracy relative to existing dense-tosparse training methods. Our method updates the
topology of the sparse network during training by
using parameter magnitudes and infrequent gradient calculations. We show that this approach
requires fewer ﬂoating-point operations (FLOPs)
to achieve a given level of accuracy compared to
prior techniques. We demonstrate state-of-the-art
sparse training results on a variety of networks
and datasets, including ResNet-50, MobileNets on
Imagenet-2012, and RNNs on WikiText-103. Finally, we provide some insights into why allowing
the topology to change during the optimization
can overcome local minima encountered when the
topology remains static* .

Figure 1. RigL improves the optimization of sparse neural networks by leveraging weight magnitude and gradient information
to jointly optimize model parameters and connectivity.

are obtained with techniques that require, at a minimum,
the cost of training a dense model in terms of memory and
FLOPs (Zhu & Gupta, 2018; Guo et al., 2016), and sometimes signiﬁcantly more (Molchanov et al., 2017).

Google Brain 2 DeepMind. Correspondence to: Utku Evci
<evcu@google.com>, Erich Elsen <eriche@google.com>.

This paradigm has two main limitations. First, the maximum
size of sparse models is limited to the largest dense model
that can be trained; even if sparse models are more parameter
efﬁcient, we can’t use pruning to train models that are larger
and more accurate than the largest possible dense models.
Second, it is inefﬁcient; large amounts of computation must
be performed for parameters that are zero valued or that will
be zero during inference. Additionally, it remains unknown
if the performance of the current best pruning algorithms is
an upper bound on the quality of sparse models. Gale et al.
(2019) found that three different dense-to-sparse training
algorithms all achieve about the same sparsity / accuracy
trade-off. However, this is far from conclusive proof that no
better performance is possible.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).
* Code available at github.com/google-research/rigl

The Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (Frankle & Carbin, 2019)
hypothesized that if we can ﬁnd a sparse neural network
with iterative pruning, then we can train that sparse network
from scratch, to the same level of accuracy, by starting from

1. Introduction
The parameter and ﬂoating point operation (FLOP) efﬁciency of sparse neural networks is now well demonstrated
on a variety of problems (Han et al., 2015; Srinivas et al.,
2017). Multiple works have shown inference time speedups
are possible using sparsity for both Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) (Kalchbrenner et al., 2018) and Convolutional Neural Networks (ConvNets) (Park et al., 2016; Elsen
et al., 2019). Currently, the most accurate sparse models
1

