CURL: Contrastive Unsupervised Representations for Reinforcement Learning
Michael Laskin⇤ 1 Aravind Srinivas⇤ 1 Pieter Abbeel 1

Abstract
We present CURL: Contrastive Unsupervised
Representations for Reinforcement Learning.
CURL extracts high-level features from raw pixels using contrastive learning and performs offpolicy control on top of the extracted features.
CURL outperforms prior pixel-based methods,
both model-based and model-free, on complex
tasks in the DeepMind Control Suite and Atari
Games showing 1.9x and 1.2x performance gains
at the 100K environment and interaction steps
benchmarks respectively. On the DeepMind Control Suite, CURL is the first image-based algorithm to nearly match the sample-efficiency of
methods that use state-based features. Our code
is open-sourced and available at https://www.
github.com/MishaLaskin/curl.

1. Introduction
Developing agents that can perform complex control tasks
from high dimensional observations such as pixels has been
possible by combining the expressive power of deep neural
networks with the long-term credit assignment power of reinforcement learning algorithms. Notable successes include
learning to play a diverse set of video games from raw pixels
(Mnih et al., 2015), continuous control tasks such as controlling a simulated car from a dashboard camera (Lillicrap
et al., 2015) and subsequent algorithmic developments and
applications to agents that successfully navigate mazes and
solve complex tasks from first-person camera observations
(Jaderberg et al., 2016; Espeholt et al., 2018; Jaderberg et al.,
2019); and robots that successfully grasp objects in the real
world (Kalashnikov et al., 2018).
However, it has been empirically observed that reinforcement learning from high dimensional observations such as
raw pixels is sample-inefficient (Lake et al., 2017; Kaiser
*

Equal contribution 1 University of California, Berkeley, BAIR.
Correspondence to: Michael Laskin, Aravind Srinivas, <mlaskin,
aravind srinivas@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

Figure 1. Contrastive Unsupervised Representations for
Reinforcement Learning (CURL) combines instance contrastive
learning and reinforcement learning. CURL trains a visual
representation encoder by ensuring that the embeddings of
data-augmented versions oq and ok of observation o match using
a contrastive loss. The query observations oq are treated as the
anchor while the key observations ok contain the positive and
negatives, all constructed from the minibatch sampled for the RL
update. The keys are encoded with a momentum averaged version
of the query encoder. The RL policy and (or) value function are
built on top of the query encoder which is jointly trained with the
contrastive and reinforcement learning objectives. CURL is a
generic framework that can be plugged into any RL algorithm that
relies on learning representations from high dimensional images.

et al., 2019). Moreover, it is widely accepted that learning
policies from physical state based features is significantly
more sample-efficient than learning from pixels (Tassa et al.,
2018). In principle, if the state information is present in the
pixel data, then we should be able to learn representations
that extract the relevant state information. For this reason,
it may be possible to learn from pixels as fast as from state
given the right representation.
From a practical standpoint, although high rendering speeds
in simulated environments enable RL agents to solve complex tasks within reasonable wall clock time, learning in
the real world means that agents are bound to work within
the limitations of physics. Kalashnikov et al. (2018) needed
a farm of robotic arms that collected large scale robot in-

