Video Prediction via Example Guidance

Jingwei Xu * ‡ 1 Huazhe Xu * 2 Bingbing Ni 1 Xiaokang Yang 1 Trevor Darrell 2

Abstract

𝜙𝑝𝑟𝑒
𝜙𝑝𝑧

𝒩(0,1)

𝑥𝑡

𝑥𝑡

(B) Parametric Prior

(A) Gaussian Prior

Feature

In video prediction tasks, one major challenge is
to capture the multi-modal nature of future contents and dynamics. In this work, we propose
a simple yet effective framework that can efficiently predict plausible future states, where the
key insight is that the potential distribution of a
sequence could be approximated with analogous
ones in a repertoire of training pool, namely, expert examples. By further incorporating a novel
optimization scheme into the training procedure,
plausible predictions can be sampled efficiently
from distribution constructed from the retrieved
examples. Meanwhile, our method could be seamlessly integrated with existing stochastic predictive models; significant enhancement is observed
with comprehensive experiments in both quantitative and qualitative aspects. We also demonstrate the generalization ability to predict the motion of unseen class, i.e., without access to corresponding data during training phase. Project Page:
https://sites.google.com/view/vpeg-supp/home.

𝜙𝑝𝑟𝑒

Input
GT
Searched Examples

𝜙𝑝𝑟𝑒

Input
Similarity Search

𝜙𝑝𝑧

Multi-modal
Examples

𝑥𝑡

Time step

(C) Proposed Example Guidance Prior
Figure 1. Illustration of stochastic prediction with different prior
schemes. Rectangle box refers to input. φqz is for uncertainty
modelling and φpre is the prediction model. We omit the output
part for simplicity. Blue line corresponds to stochastic modelling
and dashed line is the sampling procedure of random variable. (A)
Prediction with fixed Gaussian prior, which does not consider the
temporal dependency between different time steps. (B) Prediction
with parametric prior, which lacks explicit supervision signal for
multi-modal future modelling. (C) Proposed prediction scheme
with similar examples retrieved in training dataset. These examples
are utilized construct an explicit multi-modal distribution target
for the training of prediction model.

1. Introduction
Video prediction involves accurately generating possible
forthcoming frames in a pixel-wise manner given several
preceding images as inputs. As a natural routine for understanding the dynamic pattern of real-world motion, it
facilitates many promising downstream applications, e.g.,
robot control, automatous driving and model-based reinforcement learning (Kurutach et al., 2018; Nair et al., 2018;
Pathak et al., 2017).
Srivastava et al. (2015) first proposes to predict simple digit
motion with deep neural models. Video frames are synthesized in a deterministic manner (Denton & Birodkar,
*
Equal contribution . ‡ Work done during visiting Berkeley
AI Research. 1 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 University of
California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Bingbing Ni <nibingbing@sjtu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

2017), which also suffers to achieve long-range and highquality prediction, even with large model capacity (Finn
et al., 2016). Babaeizadeh et al. (2018) shows that the distribution of frames is a more important aspect that should be
modelled. Variational based methods (e.g., SVG (Denton
& Fergus, 2018) and SAVP (Lee et al., 2018)) are naturally
developed to achieve good performance on simple dynamics
such as digit moving (Srivastava et al., 2015) and robot arm
manipulation (Finn et al., 2016).
However, real-world motion commonly follows multimodal distributions. With the increase of motion diversity
and complexity, variational inference with prior Gaussian
distribution is insufficient to cover the wide spectrum of future possibilities. Meanwhile, downstream tasks mentioned
in the first paragraph require prediction model with capability to model real-world distribution (i.e., can the multimodal motion pattern be effectively captured?) and high
sampling efficiency (i.e., fewer samples needed to achieve
higher prediction accuracy). These are both important fac-

