Super-efficiency of automatic differentiation
for functions defined as a minimum
Pierre Ablin 1 Gabriel Peyré 1 Thomas Moreau 2

Abstract

sparse code, and L is the Lasso cost (Mairal et al., 2010).
In this case, ` measures the ability of the dictionary x to
encode the input data. Another example is the computation of the Wassertein barycenter of distributions in optimal transport (Agueh and Carlier, 2011): x represents the
barycenter, ` is the sum of distances to x, and the distances
themselves are defined by minimizing the transport cost. In
the field of optimization, formulation (1) is also encountered
as a smoothing technique, for instance in reweighted leastsquares (Daubechies et al., 2010) where L is smooth but not
`. In game theory, such problems naturally appear in twoplayers maximin games(von Neumann, 1928), with applications for instance to generative adversarial nets (Goodfellow
et al., 2014). In this setting, ` should be maximized.

In min-min optimization or max-min optimization, one has to compute the gradient of a function
defined as a minimum. In most cases, the minimum has no closed-form, and an approximation is
obtained via an iterative algorithm. There are two
usual ways of estimating the gradient of the function: using either an analytic formula obtained
by assuming exactness of the approximation, or
automatic differentiation through the algorithm.
In this paper, we study the asymptotic error made
by these estimators as a function of the optimization error. We find that the error of the automatic
estimator is close to the square of the error of the
analytic estimator, reflecting a super-efficiency
phenomenon. The convergence of the automatic
estimator greatly depends on the convergence of
the Jacobian of the algorithm. We analyze it for
gradient descent and stochastic gradient descent
and derive convergence rates for the estimators in
these cases. Our analysis is backed by numerical
experiments on toy problems and on Wasserstein
barycenter computation. Finally, we discuss the
computational complexity of these estimators and
give practical guidelines to chose between them.

A key point to optimize ` – either maximize or minimize –
is usually to compute the gradient of `, g ∗ (x) , ∇`(x).
If the minimizer z ∗ (x) = arg minz L(z, x) is available, the first order optimality conditions impose that
∇1 L (z ∗ (x), x) = 0 and the gradient is given by
g ∗ (x) = ∇2 L (z ∗ (x), x) .

(2)

However, in most cases the minimizer z ∗ (x) of the function
is not available in closed-form. It is approximated via an
iterative algorithm, which produces a sequence of iterates
zt (x). There are then three ways to estimate g ∗ (x):
The analytic estimator corresponds to plugging the approximation zt (x) in (2)

1. Introduction
In machine learning, many objective functions are expressed
as the minimum of another function: functions ` defined as
`(x) = minm L (z, x) ,
z∈R

(1)

where L : Rm × Rn → R. Such formulation arises for
instance in dictionary learning, where x is a dictionary, z a
1

Department de Mathématique et Applications, ENS
ULM, Paris, France 2 Université Paris-Saclay, Inria,
CEA, Palaiseau, 91120, France.
Correspondence to:
Pierre Ablin <pierre.ablin@ens.fr>,
Thomas Moreau
<thomas.moreau@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

gt1 (x) , ∇2 L (zt (x), x) .

(3)

d
The automatic estimator is gt2 (x) , dx
[L (zt (x), x)],
where the derivative is computed with respect to zt (x) as
well. The chain rule gives

gt2 (x) = ∇2 L (zt (x), x) +

∂zt
∇1 L (zt (x), x) .
∂x

(4)

This expression can be computed efficiently using automatic
differentiation (Baydin et al., 2018), in most cases at a cost
similar to that of computing zt (x).
If ∇211 L(z ∗ (x), x) is invertible, the implicit func∗
tion theorem gives ∂z∂x(x) = J (z ∗ (x), x) where

