NGBoost: Natural Gradient Boosting for Probabilistic Prediction

Tony Duan * 1 Anand Avati * 1 Daisy Yi Ding 1 Khanh K. Thai 2 Sanjay Basu 3 Andrew Ng 1
Alejandro Schuler 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Many important supervised machine learning problems are
regression problems. Weather forecasting (predicting temperature of the next day based on today’s atmospheric variables (Gneiting and Katzfuss, 2014)) and clinical prediction (predicting time to mortality with survival prediction
*

Equal contribution 1 Stanford University, Stanford, California, United States 2 Unlearn.ai, San Francisco, California, United States 3 Harvard Medical School, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States.
Correspondence
to:
Anand Avati <avati@cs.stanford.edu>, Tony Duan
<tonyduan@cs.stanford.edu>, Alejandro Schuler <alejandro.schuler@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Predicted mean
95% prediction interval

y

We present Natural Gradient Boosting (NGBoost), an algorithm for generic probabilistic
prediction via gradient boosting. Typical regression models return a point estimate, conditional
on covariates, but probabilistic regression models output a full probability distribution over the
outcome space, conditional on the covariates.
This allows for predictive uncertainty estimation — crucial in applications like healthcare and
weather forecasting. NGBoost generalizes gradient boosting to probabilistic regression by treating the parameters of the conditional distribution as targets for a multiparameter boosting algorithm. Furthermore, we show how the Natural
Gradient is required to correct the training dynamics of our multiparameter boosting approach.
NGBoost can be used with any base learner, any
family of distributions with continuous parameters, and any scoring rule. NGBoost matches or
exceeds the performance of existing methods for
probabilistic prediction while offering additional
benefits in flexibility, scalability, and usability.
An open-source implementation is available at
github.com/stanfordmlgroup/ngboost.

x

Figure 1. Prediction intervals for a toy 1-dimensional probabilistic regression problem, fit via NGBoost. The dots represent data
points. The thick black line is the predicted mean after fitting
the model. The thin gray lines are the upper and lower quantiles
covering 95% of the prediction distribution.

on structured medical records of the patient (Avati et al.,
2018)) are important examples.
Most machine learning methods tackle this problem with
point prediction, returning a single “best guess” prediction
(e.g. the temperature tomorrow will be 16◦ C). However,
in these fields it is often important to be able to quantify
uncertainty in the prediction or be able to answer multiple
questions on the fly (e.g. what’s the probability it will be
between 18◦ C and 20◦ C? What about <15◦ C?) (Kruchten,
2016).
In order to answer arbitrary questions about the probability
of events conditional on covariates, we must estimate the
conditional probability distribution P (y|x) for each value
of x instead of producing a point estimate like E[y|x]. This
is called probabilistic regression. Probabilistic regression
is increasingly being used in fields like meteorology and
healthcare (Gneiting and Raftery, 2007; Avati et al., 2019).
Probabilistic estimation is already the norm in classification problems. Although some classifiers (e.g. standard
support vector machines) only return a predicted class label, most are capable of returning estimated probabilities
for each class; effectively, a conditional probability mass
function.
However, existing methods for probabilistic regression are
either inflexible, slow, or inaccessible to non-experts. Any

