Low-loss connection of weight vectors: distribution-based approaches

Ivan Anokhin 1 Dmitry Yarotsky 1

Abstract
Recent research shows that sublevel sets of the
loss surfaces of overparameterized networks are
connected, exactly or approximately. We describe
and compare experimentally a panel of methods
used to connect two low-loss points by a low-loss
curve on this surface. Our methods vary in accuracy and complexity. Most of our methods are
based on “macroscopic” distributional assumptions, and some are insensitive to the detailed
properties of the points to be connected. Some
methods require a prior training of a “global connection model” which can then be applied to any
pair of points. The accuracy of the method generally correlates with its complexity and sensitivity
to the endpoint detail.

1. Introduction
Though loss surfaces of neural networks have a complex
shape, it is generally accepted that large networks train well
and their performance is not very dependent on the weight
initialization, despite apparently different trained values resulting from different initializations (Choromanska et al.,
2015). When thinking of the landscape of a complex nonconvex function such as a loss surface, one can imagine
different heuristic scenarios for the structure of the bottom
of the surface (Baity-Jesi et al., 2018). One scenario is that
the loss function has multiple isolated local minima. Another scenario is that there are, in contrast, few local minima,
and the sub-level sets of the loss function have only one or a
small number of connected components (despite their possibly complex shape). Of course, the second scenario agrees
better with the practically observed efficiency of network
training by gradient descent. In general, the second scenario
is more likely in the setting of overparameterized networks
(small networks are known to host numerous isolated local
minima, see e.g. (Safran & Shamir, 2017)).

Recent research provides some further evidence in favor of
the “connected sublevel set” scenario. A particular easy-toformulate task that one can analyze both experimentally and
theoretically is:
Given two low-loss weight vectors ΘA , ΘB ,
connect them by a low-loss curve.

(1)

Recent studies of this connectedness problem can be divided
into numerical and theoretical ones. The numerical studies
have been performed in (Garipov et al., 2018; Draxler et al.,
2018). In these papers, the desired low-loss curves are constructed by numerically optimizing the curves connecting
the two given low-loss points. The results show that typically one can find a curve on which the loss value is only
slightly worse than at the endpoints.
The theoretical studies rigorously confirm this effect under
certain conditions (generally, overparameterization-related).
For a single-hidden- layer ReLU network, (Freeman &
Bruna, 2016) prove that two weight vectors with loss ≤ l0
can be connected by a curve with loss ≤ l0 if the number
of hidden neurons is sufficiently large. For pyramidal multilayer networks with piecewise linear activation functions,
(Nguyen, 2019) proves that in the overparameterized setting (when the size of the first hidden layer is larger than
the size of the training set), sublevel sets are connected
and unbounded. (Kuditipudi et al., 2019) assume that the
model is dropout-stable or noise-stable, and then construct
a connecting path with a low loss.
Obviously, these experimental and theoretical works have
quite different methodologies. The paths found in the experimental studies are numerically optimized to particular
endpoints, and the structure of these optimal paths is not
well understood. On the other hand, while the theoretical
works offer some explicit rigorous constructions of lowloss paths, it is not clear to which extent they match the
experimentally found ones.

Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow. Correspondence to: Ivan Anokhin <i.anokhin.mm@gmail.com>,
Dmitry Yarotsky <d.yarotsky@skoltech.ru>.

Motivated by this discrepancy, in the present paper we adopt
a somewhat different point of view on task (1), putting
forward this general goal:

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Describe universally applicable and possibly simple methods that, given two weight vectors ΘA , ΘB produce connecting curves of possibly low loss.

1

