Safe Deep Semi-Supervised Learning for Unseen-Class Unlabeled Data

Lan-Zhe Guo 1 Zhen-Yu Zhang 1 Yuan Jiang 1 Yu-Feng Li 1 Zhi-Hua Zhou 1

Abstract
Deep semi-supervised learning (SSL) has been
recently shown very effectively. However, its
performance is seriously decreased when the
class distribution is mismatched, among which
a common situation is that unlabeled data contains some classes not seen in the labeled data.
Efforts on this issue remain to be limited. This
paper proposes a simple and effective safe deep
SSL method to alleviate the harm caused by it. In
theory, the result learned from the new method is
never worse than learning from merely labeled
data, and it is theoretically guaranteed that its
generalization
approaches the optimal in the orp
der O( d ln(n)/n), even faster than the convergence rate in supervised learning associated with
massive parameters. In the experiment of benchmark data, unlike the existing deep SSL methods
which are no longer as good as supervised learning in 40% of unseen-class unlabeled data, the
new method can still achieve performance gain
in more than 60% of unseen-class unlabeled data.
Moreover, the proposal is suitable for many deep
SSL algorithms and can be easily extended to
handle other cases of class distribution mismatch.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have been reported to achieve competitive or even better performance than human beings
in certain supervised learning tasks (LeCun et al., 2015).
These tasks, however, all meet a basic condition, that is,
have a large number of labeled training data. In many practical tasks, such condition is difficult to meet, as the acquisition of labeled data comes at a cost, which requires huge
human and financial costs (Zhou, 2017; Oliver et al., 2018),
limiting deep neural network in a broader field.
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China. Correspondence to:
Yu-Feng Li <liyf@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. One example of class distribution mismatch. Unlabeled
data contains classes that are not seen in the labeled data (indicated with red bounding boxes).

Deep semi-supervised learning (SSL) is proposed to utilize a large number of cheap unlabeled data to help deep
neural networks improve performance, reducing the demand for labeled data. Deep SSL has been reported that
it achieves highly competitive performance to the supervised learning model, which saves a lot of labeling costs,
by exploring the structure of unlabeled data, such as introducing entropy minimization (Grandvalet & Bengio, 2005;
Lee, 2013), consistency regularization (Sajjadi et al., 2016;
Laine & Aila, 2017; Tarvainen & Valpola, 2017), adversarial training (Miyato et al., 2018) and other interesting
techniques (Berthelot et al., 2019).
All of the above positive results, however, are based on a
basic assumption that labeled data and unlabeled data come
from the same distribution. Such an assumption is difficult to hold in many practical applications, among which
one common case is that unlabeled data contains classes
that are not seen in the labeled data. For example, in web
page classification (Yang et al., 2011), unlabeled web pages
crawled from the Internet according to keywords usually
contain many categories that have not been seen before. In
medical diagnosis (Yang et al., 2015), unlabeled medical
images often contain different foci from the diseases to be
diagnosed. In image classification, as shown in Figure 1,
unlabeled images crawled from Internet/social networking
sites according to keywords usually contain broader category concepts than labeled data. Faced with this type of

