Cooperative Multi-Agent Bandits with Heavy Tails

Abhimanyu Dubey 1 Alex Pentland 1

Abstract
We study the heavy-tailed stochastic bandit problem in the cooperative multi-agent setting, where
a group of agents interact with a common bandit problem, while communicating on a network
with delays. Existing algorithms for the stochastic
bandit in this setting utilize confidence intervals
arising from an averaging-based communication
protocol known as running consensus, that does
not lend itself to robust estimation for heavy-tailed
settings. We propose MP-UCB, a decentralized
multi-agent algorithm for the cooperative stochastic bandit that incorporates robust estimation with
a message-passing protocol. We prove optimal
regret bounds for MP-UCB for several problem
settings, and also demonstrate its superiority to
existing methods. Furthermore, we establish the
first lower bounds for the cooperative bandit problem, in addition to providing efficient algorithms
for robust bandit estimation of location.

1. Introduction
The multi-agent cooperative bandit is an increasingly relevant decision-making problem in the era of large-scale
and distributed inference. In this setting, a group of agents,
v ∈ V , are each faced with a decision-making problem (e.g.,
a multi-armed bandit), while simultaneously communicating with other agents over a network. The motivation for
studying this problem stems from the rise in decentralized
computing systems, and technical interest arises from designing algorithms to leverage cooperation and accelerate
collective decision-making (Landgren et al., 2016a; 2018).
Consider the case when the agents interact with the classical multi-armed stochastic bandit. For each agent v ∈ V ,
the problem proceeds in a series of synchronous rounds
t = 1, 2, ..., T . In each round, each agent selects an action
1

Media Lab and Institute for Data, Systems and Society, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Abhimanyu Dubey <dubeya@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Av,t ∈ A, where the space of actions A is assumed to be
finite and countable (|A| = K). It then obtains an i.i.d.
reward xv,t , with mean µAv,t , Av,t ∈ A. The overall objective of the agents is to minimize the group regret RG (T ).

RG (T ) =

X
v∈G

Rv (T ) = µ∗ T |V | −

X T
X

µAv,t .

(1)

v∈V t=1

Here, µ∗ = maxa∈A µa denotes the mean of the optimal
arm, and ∆a = µ∗ − µa is the suboptimality of arm a from
the optimal arm A∗ = arg maxa∈A µa . In the cooperative bandit, each agent faces the same problem (i.e., A is
the same for each agent). In addition to the explorationexploitation tradeoff succintly captured by the conventional
bandit problem, each agent faces the additional complexity
of leveraging feedback from its neighbors. This feedback
is typically available to the agent after a (variable) delay,
based on the communication network between the agents.
This communication network is conveniently determined
by a graph G = (V, E), where V denotes the set of agents,
and E is the set of edges, where edge (i, j) ∈ E if agents i
and j are neighbors. Messages are sent between trials of the
bandit problem, and take d(v, v 0 ) trials to be communicated
from agent v to v 0 (where d(v, v 0 ) is the distance between
the agents v and v 0 in G).
Research on this problem has exclusively been on reward distributions that are sub-Gaussian (Landgren et al.,
2016a;b; Martı́nez-Rubio et al., 2019). While this is certainly applicable in several domains, increasing evidence
suggests that assumptions of sub-Gaussianity may not hold
for numerous applications specific to distributed decisionmaking, in problems such as distributed load estimation of
internet traffic (Crovella et al., 1998; Hernandez-Campos
et al., 2004), multi-agent modeling of supply chain networks (Thadakamaila et al., 2004), modeling information
cascades in economic multi-agent models (De Vany et al.,
1999; Konovalov, 2010) and, among others, numerous problems in distributed modeling for social science (Barabasi,
2005; Eom & Jo, 2015). Moreover, in sub-Gaussian environments, if the multi-agent communication is noisy with
a (small) non-zero bias, this can lead to model misspecification equivalent to the communicated variable exhibiting
heavy tails (McCulloch & Neuhaus, 2011). It is therefore
prudent to devise methods that are robust to such heavy-

