Divide, Conquer, and Combine: a New Inference Strategy
for Probabilistic Programs with Stochastic Support
Yuan Zhou 1 Hongseok Yang 2 Yee Whye Teh 3 Tom Rainforth 3

Abstract
Universal probabilistic programming systems
(PPSs) provide a powerful framework for specifying rich probabilistic models. They further
attempt to automate the process of drawing inferences from these models, but doing this successfully is severely hampered by the wide range of
non–standard models they can express. As a result, although one can specify complex models in
a universal PPS, the provided inference engines often fall far short of what is required. In particular,
we show that they produce surprisingly unsatisfactory performance for models where the support
varies between executions, often doing no better than importance sampling from the prior. To
address this, we introduce a new inference framework: Divide, Conquer, and Combine, which remains efficient for such models, and show how it
can be implemented as an automated and generic
PPS inference engine. We empirically demonstrate substantial performance improvements over
existing approaches on three examples.

1. Introduction
Probabilistic programming systems (PPSs) provide a flexible platform where probabilistic models are specified as
programs and inference procedures are performed in an automated manner. Some systems, such as BUGS (Tesauro
et al., 2012) and Stan (Carpenter et al., 2017), are primarily
designed around the efficient automation of a small number of inference strategies and the convenient expression of
models for which these inference strategies are suitable.
Universal PPSs, such as Church (Goodman et al., 2008),
Venture (Mansinghka et al., 2014), Anglican (Wood et al.,
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford,
United Kingdom 2 School of Computer Science, KAIST, South Korea 3 Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Yuan Zhou <yuan.zhou@cs.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. MAP estimate of the means and covariances of a Gaussian mixture model in the cases of K = 1 and K = 2 clusters. If
K is itself random, the model has stochastic support as the parameters of the second cluster, e.g. its mean, only exist when K = 2.

2014), and Pyro (Bingham et al., 2018), on the other hand,
are set up to try and support the widest possible range of
models a user might wish to write. Though this means that
such systems can be used to write models which would
be otherwise difficult to encode, this expressiveness comes
at the cost of significantly complicating the automation of
inference. In particular, models may contain random variables with mixed types or have varying, or even unbounded,
dimensionalities; characteristics which cause significant
challenges at the inference stage.
In this paper, we aim to address one of the most challenging
model characteristics: variables whose very existence is
stochastic, often, though not always, leading to the overall
dimensionality of the model varying between realizations.
Many practical models posses this characteristic. For example, many models contain a variable controlling an allowed
number of states, such as the number of clusters in a mixture model (see Figure 1, Richardson & Green 1997; Nobile
& Fearnside 2007), or the number of states in a HMM or
change point model (Fox et al., 2008). More generally, many
inference problems involve some sort of Bayesian model
averaging where the constituent models do not share the
exact same set of parameters. Other models are inherently
defined on spaces with non-static support, such as probabilistic context free grammars (PCFGs) (Manning et al., 1999),
program induction models (Perov & Wood, 2014), kernel
or function induction models (Schaechtle et al., 2016; Janz
et al., 2016), many Bayesian non-parametric models (Roy
et al., 2008; Teh, 2010), and a wide range of simulator–based
models (Le et al., 2016; Baydin et al., 2019).

