Growing Action Spaces

Gregory Farquhar 1 2 Laura Gustafson 3 Zeming Lin 3 Shimon Whiteson 1 Nicolas Usunier 3
Gabriel Synnaeve 3

Abstract
In complex tasks, such as those with large combinatorial action spaces, random exploration may
be too inefficient to achieve meaningful learning
progress. In this work, we use a curriculum of
progressively growing action spaces to accelerate
learning. We assume the environment is out of
our control, but that the agent may set an internal
curriculum by initially restricting its action space.
Our approach uses off-policy reinforcement learning to estimate optimal value functions for multiple action spaces simultaneously and efficiently
transfers data, value estimates, and state representations from restricted action spaces to the full
task. We show the efficacy of our approach in
proof-of-concept control tasks and on challenging large-scale StarCraft micromanagement tasks
with large, multi-agent action spaces.

1. Introduction
The value of curricula has been well established in machine
learning, reinforcement learning, and in biological systems.
When a desired behaviour is sufficiently complex, or the environment too unforgiving, it can be intractable to learn from
scratch through random exploration. Instead, by “starting
small” (Elman, 1993), an agent can build skills, representations, and a dataset of meaningful experiences that allow
it to accelerate its learning. Such curricula can drastically
improve sample efficiency (Bengio et al., 2009).
Typically, curriculum learning uses a progression of tasks or
environments. Simple tasks that provide meaningful feedback to random agents are used first, and some schedule
is used to introduce more challenging tasks later during
training (Graves et al., 2017). However, in many contexts
neither the agent nor experimenter has such unimpeded con1

University of Oxford 2 Work done at Facebook AI Research
Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to: Gregory Farquhar
<gregfar@google.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

trol over the environment. In this work, we instead make
use of curricula that are internal to the agent, simplifying
the exploration problem without changing the environment.
In particular, we grow the size of the action space of reinforcement learning agents over the course of training.
At the beginning of training, our agents use a severely restricted action space. When this restricted action space is
appropriately chosen for the task, this helps exploration by
guiding the agent towards rewards and meaningful experiences, and provides low variance updates during learning.
The action space is then grown progressively. Eventually, using the most unrestricted action space, the agents are able to
find superior policies. Each action space is a strict superset
of the more restricted ones. In many cases, it is straightforward to identify a suitable hierarchy of action spaces
that enable efficient exploration. For example, continuous
action spaces can be discretised with increasing resolution.
Curricula for coping with the large combinatorial action
spaces induced by many agents can be obtained from the
prior that nearby agents are more likely to need to coordinate. For example, in routing or traffic flow problems
nearby agents or nodes may wish to adopt similar local policies to alleviate global congestion. Our curriculum learning
paradigm is valuable whenever it is possible to identify a
restricted action space in which random exploration leads
to significantly more informative experiences than random
exploration in the full action space, and when regularities
in the action space allow learning from these experiences to
transfer to the full task.
We propose an approach that uses off-policy reinforcement
learning to improve sample efficiency in this type of curriculum learning. Since data from exploration using a restricted
action space is still valid in the Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs) corresponding to the less restricted action spaces,
we can learn value functions in the less restricted action
space with ‘off-action-space’ data collected by exploring
in the restricted action space. In our approach, we learn
value functions corresponding to each level of restriction
simultaneously. We can use the relationships of these value
functions to each other to accelerate learning further, by
using value estimates themselves as initialisations or as
bootstrap targets for the less restricted action spaces, as well
as sharing learned state representations.

