Transfer Learning without Knowing: Reprogramming Black-box Machine
Learning Models with Scarce Data and Limited Resources

Yun-Yun Tsai 1 Pin-Yu Chen 2 Tsung-Yi Ho 1

Abstract
Current transfer learning methods are mainly
based on finetuning a pretrained model with
target-domain data. Motivated by the techniques
from adversarial machine learning (ML) that are
capable of manipulating the model prediction via
data perturbations, in this paper we propose a
novel approach, black-box adversarial reprogramming (BAR), that repurposes a well-trained blackbox ML model (e.g., a prediction API or a proprietary software) for solving different ML tasks,
especially in the scenario with scarce data and
constrained resources. The rationale lies in exploiting high-performance but unknown ML models to gain learning capability for transfer learning.
Using zeroth order optimization and multi-label
mapping techniques, BAR can reprogram a blackbox ML model solely based on its input-output
responses without knowing the model architecture
or changing any parameter. More importantly, in
the limited medical data setting, on autism spectrum disorder classification, diabetic retinopathy
detection, and melanoma detection tasks, BAR
outperforms state-of-the-art methods and yields
comparable performance to the vanilla adversarial reprogramming method requiring complete
knowledge of the target ML model. BAR also outperforms baseline transfer learning approaches by
a significant margin, demonstrating cost-effective
means and new insights for transfer learning.

1. Introduction
Transfer learning is a widely used practical machine learning (ML) methodology for learning to solve a new task in
1
National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
IBM Research.
Correspondence to:
Yun-Yun Tsai
<alice103000004@gmail.com>,
Pin-Yu
Chen
<pinyu.chen@ibm.com>, Tsung-Yi Ho <tyho@cs.nthu.edu.tw>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

a target domain based on the knowledge transferred from
a source-domain task (Pan & Yang, 2009). One popular
target-domain task is transfer learning of medical imaging
with a large and rich benchmark dataset (e.g., ImageNet) as
the source-domain task, since high-quality labeled medical
images are often scarce and costly to acquire new samples (Raghu et al., 2019). For deep learning models, transfer learning is often achieved by finetuning a pretrained
source-domain model with the target-domain data, which
requires complete knowledge and full control of the pretrained model, including knowing and modifying the model
architecture and pretrained model parameters.
In this paper, we revisit transfer learning to address two
fundamental questions: (i) Is finetuning a pretrained model
necessary for learning a new task? (ii) Can transfer learning
be expanded to black-box ML models where nothing but
only the input-output model responses (data samples and
their predictions) are observable? In contrast, we call finetuning a white-box transfer learning method as it assumes
the source-domain model to be transparent and modifiable.
Recent advances in adversarial ML have shown great capability of manipulating the prediction of a well-trained deep
learning model by designing and learning perturbations to
the data inputs without changing the target model (Biggio &
Roli, 2018), such as prediction-evasive adversarial examples
(Szegedy et al., 2014). Despite of the “vulnerability” in deep
learning models, these findings also suggest the plausibility
of transfer learning without modifying the pretrained model
if an appropriate perturbation to the target-domain data can
be learned to align the target-domain labels with the pretrained source-domain model predictions. Indeed, the adversarial reprogramming (AR) method proposed in (Elsayed
et al., 2019) partially gives a negative answer to Question (i)
by showing simply learning a universal target-domain data
perturbation is sufficient to repurpose a pretrained sourcedomain model, where the domains and tasks can be different,
such as reprogramming an ImageNet classifier to solve the
task of counting squares in an image. However, the authors
did not investigate the performance of AR on the limited
data setting often encountered in transfer learning. Moreover, since the training of AR requires backpropagation of
a deep learning model, AR still falls into the category of

