On the Sample Complexity of Adversarial Multi-Source PAC Learning

Nikola Konstantinov 1 Elias Frantar 1 2 Dan Alistarh 1 Christoph H. Lampert 1

Abstract
We study the problem of learning from multiple untrusted data sources, a scenario of increasing practical relevance given the recent emergence of crowdsourcing and collaborative learning paradigms. Specifically, we analyze the situation in which a learning system obtains datasets
from multiple sources, some of which might be biased or even adversarially perturbed. It is known
that in the single-source case, an adversary with
the power to corrupt a fixed fraction of the training
data can prevent PAC-learnability, that is, even
in the limit of infinitely much training data, no
learning system can approach the optimal test error. In this work we show that, surprisingly, the
same is not true in the multi-source setting, where
the adversary can arbitrarily corrupt a fixed fraction of the data sources. Our main results are a
generalization bound that provides finite-sample
guarantees for this learning setting, as well as
corresponding lower bounds. Besides establishing PAC-learnability our results also show that in
a cooperative learning setting sharing data with
other parties has provable benefits, even if some
participants are malicious.

1. Introduction
An important problem of current machine learning research
is to make learned systems more trustworthy. One particular aspect of this is robustness against data of unexpected or even adversarial nature. Robustness at prediction
time has recently received a lot of attention, in particular with work on the detection of out-of-distribution conditions (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017; Liang et al., 2018;
Lee et al., 2018) and protection against adversarial examples (Raghunathan et al., 2018; Singh et al., 2018; Cohen
1

Institute of Science and Technology Austria, Klosterneuburg,
Austria 2 Vienna University of Technology, Vienna, Austria. Correspondence to: Nikola Konstantinov <nkonstan@ist.ac.at>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

et al., 2019). Robustness at training time, however, is represented less prominently, despite also being of great importance. One reason might be that learning from a potentially
adversarial data source is very hard: a classic result states
that when a fixed fraction of the training dataset is adversarially corrupted, successful learning in the PAC sense is
not possible anymore (Kearns & Li, 1993). In other words,
there exists no robust learning algorithm that could overcome the effects of adversarial corruptions in a constant
fraction of the training dataset and approach the optimal
model, even in the limit of infinite data.
In this work, we study the question of robust learning in
the multi-source case, i.e. when more than one dataset is
available for training. This is a situation of increasing relevance in the era of big data, where machine learning models
tend to be trained on very large datasets. To create these,
one commonly relies on distributing the task of collecting
and annotating data, e.g. to crowdsourcing (Sheng & Zhang,
2019) services, or by adopting a collective or federated
learning scenario (McMahan & Ramage, 2017).
Unfortunately, relying on data from other parties comes
with the danger that some of the sources might produce
data of lower quality than desired, be it due to negligence,
bias or malicious behaviour. Consequently, the analogous
question to the classic problem described above is the following, which we refer to as adversarial multi-source learning. Given a number of i.i.d. datasets, a constant fraction
of which might have been adversarially manipulated, is
there a learning algorithm that overcomes the effect of the
corruptions and approaches an optimal model?
In this work, we study this problem formally and provide
a positive answer. Specifically, our main result is an upper
bound on the sample complexity of adversarial multi-source
learning, that holds as long as less than half of sources are
manipulated (Theorem 1).
A number of interesting results follow as immediate corollaries. First, we show that any hypothesis class that is uniformly convergent and hence PAC-learnable in the classical
i.i.d. sense is also PAC-learnable in the adversarial multisource scenario. This is in stark contrast to the single-source
situation where, as mentioned above, no non-trivial hypothesis class is robustly PAC-learnable. As a second consequence, we obtain the insight that in a cooperative learning

