Striving for Simplicity and Performance in Off-Policy DRL:
Output Normalization and Non-Uniform Sampling

Che Wang * 1 2 Yanqiu Wu * 1 2 Quan Vuong 3 Keith Ross 1 2

Abstract
We aim to develop off-policy DRL algorithms
that not only exceed state-of-the-art performance
but are also simple and minimalistic. For standard continuous control benchmarks, Soft ActorCritic (SAC), which employs entropy maximization, currently provides state-of-the-art performance. We frst demonstrate that the entropy
term in SAC addresses action saturation due to
the bounded nature of the action spaces, with
this insight, we propose a streamlined algorithm
with a simple normalization scheme or with inverted gradients. We show that both approaches
can match SAC’s sample effciency performance
without the need of entropy maximization, we
then propose a simple non-uniform sampling
method for selecting transitions from the replay
buffer during training. Extensive experimental
results demonstrate that our proposed sampling
scheme leads to state of the art sample effciency
on challenging continuous control tasks. We
combine all of our fndings into one simple algorithm, which we call Streamlined Off Policy
with Emphasizing Recent Experience, for which
we provide robust public-domain code.

1. Introduction
Off-policy Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms
aim to improve sample effciency by reusing past experience. Recently a number of new off-policy Deep RL algorithms have been proposed for control tasks with continuous state and action spaces, including Deep Deterministic
Policy Gradient (DDPG) and Twin Delayed DDPG (TD3)
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, New
York University, New York, NY, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, NYU Shanghai, Shanghai, China 3 Department
of Computer Science, University of California San Diego, San
Diego, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Keith Ross <keithwross@nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

(Lillicrap et al., 2015; Fujimoto et al., 2018). TD3, which
introduced clipped double-Q learning, delayed policy updates and target policy smoothing, has been shown to be
signifcantly more sample effcient than popular on-policy
methods for a wide range of MuJoCo benchmarks.
The feld of Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has
also recently seen a surge in the popularity of maximum entropy RL algorithms. In particular, Soft ActorCritic (SAC), which combines off-policy learning with
maximum-entropy RL, not only has many attractive theoretical properties, but can also give superior performance
on a wide-range of MuJoCo environments, including on the
high-dimensional environment Humanoid for which both
DDPG and TD3 perform poorly (Haarnoja et al., 2018a;b;
Langlois et al., 2019). SAC and TD3 have similar offpolicy structures with clipped double-Q learning, but SAC
also employs maximum entropy reinforcement learning.
In this paper, we aim to develop off-policy DRL algorithms
that not only provide state-of-the-art performance but are
also simple and minimalistic. We frst seek to understand
the primary contribution of the entropy term to the performance of maximum entropy algorithms. For the MuJoCo benchmark, we demonstrate that when using the standard objective without entropy along with standard additive
noise exploration, there is often insuffcient exploration due
to the bounded nature of the action spaces. Specifcally,
the outputs of the policy network are often way outside the
bounds of the action space, so that they need to be squashed
to ft within the action space. The squashing results in actions persistently taking on their maximal values, resulting
in insuffcient exploration. In contrast, the entropy term in
the SAC objective forces the outputs to have sensible values, so that even with squashing, exploration is maintained.
We conclude that, for the MuJoCo environments, the entropy term in the objective for Soft Actor-Critic principally
addresses the bounded nature of the action spaces.
With this insight, we propose the Streamlined Off Policy (SOP) algorithm, which is a minimalistic off-policy
algorithm that includes a simple but crucial output normalization. The normalization addresses the bounded nature of the action spaces, allowing satisfactory exploration
throughout training. We also consider using inverting gra-

