Convergence of a Stochastic Gradient Method with Momentum
for Non-Smooth Non-Convex Optimization

Vien V. Mai 1 Mikael Johansson 1

Abstract
Stochastic gradient methods with momentum are
widely used in applications and at the core of optimization subroutines in many popular machine
learning libraries. However, their sample complexities have not been obtained for problems beyond those that are convex or smooth. This paper establishes the convergence rate of a stochastic subgradient method with a momentum term
of Polyak type for a broad class of non-smooth,
non-convex, and constrained optimization problems. Our key innovation is the construction of a
special Lyapunov function for which the proven
complexity can be achieved without any tuning
of the momentum parameter. For smooth problems, we extend the known complexity bound to
the constrained case and demonstrate how the unconstrained case can be analyzed under weaker
assumptions than the state-of-the-art. Numerical
results confirm our theoretical developments.

1. Introduction
We study the stochastic optimization problem
Z
minimize f (x) := EP [f (x; S)] =
f (x; s)dP (s), (1)
x∈X

S

where S ∼ P is a random variable; f (x; s) is the instantaneous loss parameterized by x on a sample s ∈ S; and
X ⊆ Rn is a closed convex set. In this paper, we move
beyond convex and/or smooth optimization and consider f
that belongs to a broad class of non-smooth and non-convex
functions called ρ-weakly convex, meaning that
2
x 7→ f (x) + ρ kxk2

is convex.

1

Division of Decision and Control Systems, EECS, KTH Royal
Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden. Correspondence to:
V. V. Mai <maivv@kth.se>, M. Johansson <mikaelj@kth.se>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

This function class is very rich and important in optimization (Rockafellar, 1982; Vial, 1983). It trivially includes
all convex functions, all smooth functions with Lipschitz
continuous gradient, and all additive composite functions
of the two former classes. More broadly, it includes all
compositions of the form
f (x) = h(c(x)),

(2)

m

where h : R → R is convex and Lh -Lipschitz and
c : Rn → Rm is a smooth map with Lc -Lipschitz Jacobian. Indeed, the composite function f = h ◦ c is then
weakly convex with ρ = Lh Lc (Drusvyatskiy & Paquette, 2019). Some representative applications in this problem class include nonlinear least squares (Drusvyatskiy,
2017), robust phase retrieval (Duchi & Ruan, 2018a), Robust PCA (Candès et al., 2011), robust low rank matrix
recovery (Charisopoulos et al., 2019), optimization of the
Conditional Value-at-Risk (Rockafellar & Uryasev, 2000),
graph synchronization (Singer, 2011), and many others.
Stochastic optimization algorithms for solving (1), based
on random samples Sk drawn from P , are of fundamental importance in many applied sciences (Bottou, 2010;
Shapiro et al., 2014). Since the introduction of the classical
stochastic (sub)gradient descent method (SGD) in (Robbins & Monro, 1951), several modifications of SGD have
been proposed to improve its practical and theoretical performance. A notable example is the use of a momentum
term to construct an update direction (Gupal & Bazhenov,
1972; Polyak, 1987; Ruszczynski & Syski, 1983; Tseng,
1998; Sutskever et al., 2013; Ghadimi & Lan, 2016). The
basis form of such a method (when X = Rn ) reads:
xk+1 = xk − αk zk

(3a)

zk+1 = βk gk+1 + (1 − βk )zk ,

(3b)

where zk is the search direction, gk is a stochastic subgradient; αk is the stepsize, and βk ∈ (0, 1] is the momentum
parameter. For instance, the scheme (3) reduces to the
stochastic heavy ball method (SHB) (Polyak, 1987):
xk+1 = xk − ηk gk + λk (xk − xk−1 ),
with ηk = αk βk−1 and λk = (1 − βk−1 )αk /αk−1 . Methods of this type enjoy widespread empirical success in largescale convex and non-convex optimization, especially in

