A Finite-Time Analysis of Q-Learning with Neural Network Function
Approximation

Pan Xu 1 Quanquan Gu 1

Abstract
Q-learning with neural network function approximation (neural Q-learning for short) is among
the most prevalent deep reinforcement learning
algorithms. Despite its empirical success, the
non-asymptotic convergence rate of neural Qlearning remains virtually unknown. In this paper,
we present a finite-time analysis of a neural Qlearning algorithm, where the data are generated
from a Markov decision process, and the actionvalue function is approximated by a deep ReLU
neural network. We prove that neural
√Q-learning
finds the optimal policy with O(1/ T ) convergence rate if the neural function approximator
is sufficiently overparameterized, where T is the
number of iterations. To our best knowledge, our
result is the first finite-time analysis of neural Qlearning under non-i.i.d. data assumption.

1. Introduction
Q-learning has been shown to be one of the most important
and effective learning strategies in Reinforcement Learning (RL) over the past decades (Watkins & Dayan, 1992;
Schmidhuber, 2015; Sutton & Barto, 2018), where the agent
takes an action based on the action-value function (a.k.a.,
Q-value function) at the current state. Recent advance in
deep learning has also enabled the application of Q-learning
algorithms to large-scale decision problems such as mastering Go (Silver et al., 2016; 2017), robotic motion control (Levine et al., 2015; Kalashnikov et al., 2018) and autonomous driving (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2016; Schwarting
et al., 2018). In particular, the seminal work by Mnih et al.
(2015) introduced the Deep Q-Network (DQN) to approximate the action-value function and achieved a superior
performance versus a human expert in playing Atari games,
1

Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles. Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu
<qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

which triggers a line of research on deep reinforcement
learning such as Double Deep Q-Learning (Van Hasselt
et al., 2016) and Dueling DQN (Wang et al., 2016).
Apart from its widespread empirical success in numerous applications, the convergence of Q-learning and temporal difference (TD) learning algorithms has also been extensively
studied in the literature (Jaakkola et al., 1994; Baird, 1995;
Tsitsiklis & Van Roy, 1997; Perkins & Pendrith, 2002; Melo
et al., 2008; Mehta & Meyn, 2009; Liu et al., 2015; Bhandari
et al., 2018; Lakshminarayanan & Szepesvari, 2018; Zou
et al., 2019b). However, the convergence guarantee of deep
Q-learning algorithms remains a largely open problem. The
only exceptions are Yang et al. (2019) which studied the
fitted Q-iteration (FQI) algorithm (Riedmiller, 2005; Munos
& Szepesvári, 2008) with action-value function approximation based on a sparse ReLU network, and Cai et al. (2019a)
which studied the global convergence of the Q-learning algorithm with an i.i.d. observation model and action-value
function approximation based on a two-layer neural network. The main limitation of the aforementioned work is
the unrealistic assumption that all the data used in the Qlearning algorithm are sampled i.i.d. from a fixed stationary
distribution, which fails to capture the practical setting of
neural Q-learning.
In this paper, in order to bridge the gap between the empirical success of neural Q-learning and the theory of conventional Q-learning (i.e., tabular Q-learning, and Q-learning
with linear function approximation), we study the nonasymptotic convergence of a neural Q-learning algorithm
under non-i.i.d. observations. In particular, we use a deep
neural network with the ReLU activation function to approximate the action-value function. In each iteration of the
neural Q-learning algorithm, it updates the network weight
parameters using the temporal difference (TD) error and the
gradient of the neural network function. Our work extends
existing finite-time analyses for TD learning (Bhandari et al.,
2018) and Q-learning (Zou et al., 2019b), from linear function approximation to deep neural network based function
approximation. Compared with the very recent theoretical
work for neural Q-learning (Yang et al., 2019; Cai et al.,
2019a), our analysis relaxes the non-realistic i.i.d. data assumption and applies to neural network approximation with

