Voice Separation with an Unknown Number of Multiple Speakers

Eliya Nachmani 1 2 Yossi Adi 1 Lior Wolf 1 2

Abstract
We present a new method for separating a mixed
audio sequence, in which multiple voices speak
simultaneously. The new method employs gated
neural networks that are trained to separate the
voices at multiple processing steps, while maintaining the speaker in each output channel fixed.
A different model is trained for every number of
possible speakers, and the model with the largest
number of speakers is employed to select the actual number of speakers in a given sample. Our
method greatly outperforms the current state of
the art, which, as we show, is not competitive for
more than two speakers.

1. Introduction
The ability to separate a single voice from the multiple
conversations occurring concurrently forms a challenging
perceptual task (Capon, 1969; Frost, 1972). The ability of
humans to do so has inspired many computational attempts,
with much of the earlier work focusing on multiple microphones and unsupervised learning, e.g., the independent
component analysis approach (Hyvärinen & Oja, 2000).
In this work, we focus on the problem of supervised voice
separation from a single microphone, which has seen a
great leap in performance following the advent of deep
neural networks (Hershey et al., 2016; Luo & Mesgarani,
2018). In this “single-channel source separation” problem,
given a dataset containing both the mixed audio and the
individual voices, one trains to separate a novel mixed audio
that contains multiple unseen speakers.
The current leading methodology is based on an overcomplete set of linear filters, and on separating the filter outputs
at every time step using a mask for two speakers, or a multiplexer for more speakers (Luo & Mesgarani, 2018; 2019;
Zhang et al., 2020). The audio is then reconstructed from
1

Facebook AI Research 2 Tel-Aviv University. Correspondence
to: Eliya Nachmani <enk100@gmail.com>, Yossi Adi <yossiadidrum@gmail.com>, Lior Wolf <liorwolf@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

this partial representations. Since the order of the speakers
is considered arbitrary (it is hard to sort voices), one uses
a permutation invariant loss during training, such that the
permutation that minimizes the loss is considered.
The need to work the aforementioned partial representations,
which becomes more severe as the number of voices to be
separated increases, is a limitation of this masking-based
method, since the mask needs to extract and suppress more
from the representation as the number speakers increases.
In this work, we, therefore, set out to build a mask-free
method. The method employs a sequence of RNNs that are
applied to the audio. As we show, it is beneficial to evaluate
the error after each RNN, obtaining a compound loss that
reflects the reconstruction quality after each layer.
The RNNs are bi-directional. Each RNN block is built with a
specific type of residual connection, where two RNNs run in
parallel. The output of each layer is the concatenation of the
element-wise multiplication of the two RNNs together with
the layer input that undergoes a bypass (skip) connection.
Unlike separating known sources (Défossez et al., 2019) in
this case, the outputs are given in a permutation invariant
fashion, hence, voices can switch between output-channels,
especially during transient silence episodes. In order to
tackle this, we propose a new loss that is based on a voice
representation network that is trained on the same training
set. The embedding obtained by this network is then used to
compare the output voice to the voice of the output channel.
We demonstrate that the loss is effective, even when adding
it to the baseline method. An additional improvement, that
is effective also for the baseline methods, is obtained by
starting the separation from multiple locations along the
audio file and averaging the results.
Similar to the state of the art methods, we train a single
model for each number of speakers. The gap in performance
of the obtained model in comparison to published methods
increases as the number of speaker increases, and one can
notice that the performance of our method degrades gradually, while the baseline methods show a sharp degradation
as the number of speakers increases.
To support the possibility of working with an unknown
number of speakers, we opt for a learning-free solution and
select the number of speakers by running an activity detector

