The Role of Regularization in Classification
of High-dimensional Noisy Gaussian Mixture

Francesca Mignacco 1 Florent Krzakala 2 Yue M. Lu 3 Pierfrancesco Urbani 1 Lenka Zdeborová 1

Abstract
We consider a high-dimensional mixture of two
Gaussians in the noisy regime where even an oracle knowing the centers of the clusters misclassifies a small but finite fraction of the points. We
provide a rigorous analysis of the generalization
error of regularized convex classifiers, including
ridge, hinge and logistic regression, in the highdimensional limit where the number n of samples
and their dimension d go to infinity while their
ratio is fixed to α = n/d. We discuss surprising
effects of the regularization that in some cases
allows to reach the Bayes-optimal performances.
We also illustrate the interpolation peak at low regularization, and analyze the role of the respective
sizes of the two clusters.

1. Introduction
High-dimensional statistics where both the dimensionality d,
and the number of samples n are large with a fixed ratio
α = n/d has largely non-intuitive behaviour. A number
of the associated statistical surprises are for example presented in the recent, yet already rather influential papers
(Hastie et al., 2019; Sur & Candès, 2019) that analyze highdimensional regression for rather simple models of data.
The present paper subscribes to this line of work and studies high-dimensional classification in one of the simplest
models considered in statistics — the mixture of two Gaussian clusters in d-dimensions, one of size ρn and the other
(1 − ρ)n points. The labels reflect the memberships in the
clusters. In particular, there are two centroids localized at
∗
√ , v∗ ∈ Rd , and we are given data points xi , i = 1 . . . n
±v
d
1

Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, CEA, Institut de Physique
théorique, 91191, Gif-sur-Yvette, France 2 Laboratoire de physique
de l’École normale supérieure, ENS, Université PSL, CNRS, Sorbonne Université, Université de Paris, F-75005, Paris, France 3 John
A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA . Correspondence to:
Francesca Mignacco <francesca.mignacco@ipht.fr>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

generated as

√
v∗
xi = √ yi + ∆ zi ,
d

(1)

where both zi and v∗ have components taken in N (0, 1).
The labels yi ∈ ±1 are generated randomly with a fraction ρ
of +1 (and 1 − ρ of −1). We focus on the high-dimensional
limit where√n, d → ∞ while α = n/d, ρ and ∆ are fixed.
The factor d in (1) is such that a classification better than
random is possible, yet even the oracle-classifier that knows
exactly the centroid v∗ only achieves a classification error
bounded away from zero. We focus on ridge regularized
learning performed by the empirical risk minimization of
the loss:
L(w, b) =

n
h
i 1
X
` yi ( √1d x>
w
+
b)
+ λkwk22 , (2)
i
2
i=1

where w and b are, respectively, the weight vector and
the bias to be learned, and λ is the tunable strength of the
regularization. While our result holds for any convex loss
function `(.), we will mainly concentrate on the following
classic ones: the square `(v) = 12 (1 − v)2 , the logistic
`(v) = log (1 + e−v ), and the hinge `(v) = maxv {0, 1 −
v}. We shall also study the Bayes-optimal estimator, i.e. the
one achieving the lowest possible test error on classification
given the n samples yi , xi and the model, including the
constants ρ and ∆. Crucially, the position of the centroid is
not known and can only be estimated from the data.
Our contributions and related works — The unsupervised version of the problem is the standard Gaussian mixture modeling problem in statistics (Friedman et al., 2001).
For the supervised model considered here, (Lelarge & Miolane, 2019) recently computed rigorously the performance
of the Bayes-optimal estimator (that knows the generative
model of the data, but does not have access to the vector v∗ )
for the case of equally sized clusters. We generalize these
results for arbitrary cluster sizes to provide a baseline for
the estimators obtained by empirical risk minimization.
The model was recently under investigation in a number
of papers. In (Mai & Liao, 2019), the authors study the
same data generative model in the particular case of equally
sized clusters, and analyze non-regularized losses under the

