Consistent Estimators for Learning to Defer to an Expert

Hussein Mozannar 1 David Sontag 1

Abstract
Learning algorithms are often used in conjunction
with expert decision makers in practical scenarios,
however this fact is largely ignored when designing these algorithms. In this paper we explore
how to learn predictors that can either predict
or choose to defer the decision to a downstream
expert. Given only samples of the expert’s decisions, we give a procedure based on learning a
classifier and a rejector and analyze it theoretically. Our approach is based on a novel reduction
to cost sensitive learning where we give a consistent surrogate loss for cost sensitive learning
that generalizes the cross entropy loss. We show
the effectiveness of our approach on a variety of
experimental tasks.

1. Introduction
Machine learning systems are now being deployed in settings to complement human decision makers such as in
healthcare (Hamid et al., 2017; Raghu et al., 2019a), risk
assessment (Green & Chen, 2019a) and content moderation
(Link et al., 2016). These models are either used as a tool to
help the downstream human decision maker: judges relying
on algorithmic risk assessment tools (Green & Chen, 2019b)
and risk scores being used in the ICU (Futoma et al., 2017),
or instead these learning models are solely used to make the
final prediction on a selected subset of examples (Madras
et al., 2018; Raghu et al., 2019a). A current application of
the latter setting is Facebook’s and other online platforms
content moderation approach (Vincent, 2019; Jhaver et al.,
2019): an algorithm is used to filter easily detectible inappropriate content and the rest of the examples are screened
by a team of human moderators. Another motivating application arises in health care settings, for example deep neural
networks can outperform radiologists in detecting pneumonia from chest X-rays (Irvin et al., 2019), however, many
1

CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
MA, USA. Correspondence to: Hussein Mozannar <mozannar@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

obstacles are limiting complete automation, an intermediate
step to automating this task will be the use of models as
triage tools to complement radiologist expertise. Our focus
in this work is to give theoretically sound approaches for
machine learning models that can either predict or defer
the decision to a downstream expert to complement and
augment their capabilities.
The learned model should adapt to the underlying human
expert in order to achieve better performance than deploying the model or expert individually. In situations where
we have limited data or model capacity, the gains from allowing the model to focus on regions where the expert is
less accurate are expected to be more significant. However,
even when data or model capacity are not concerns, the
expert may have access to side-information unavailable to
the learner due to privacy concerns for example, the hard
task is then to identify when we should defer without having
access to this side-information. We will only assume in this
work that we are allowed access to samples of the experts
decisions or to costs of deferring, we believe that this is a
reasonable assumption that can be achieved in practical settings. Inspired by the literature on rejection learning (Cortes
et al., 2016b), our approach will be to learn two functions:
a classifier that can predict the target and a rejector which
decides whether the classifier or the expert should predict.
We start by formulating a natural loss function for the combined machine-expert system in section 3 and show a reduction from the expert deferral setting to cost sensitive
learning. With this reduction in hand, we are able to give a
novel convex surrogate loss that upper bounds our system
loss and that is furthermore consistent in section 4. This
surrogate loss settles the open problem posed by Ni et al.
(2019) for finding a consistent loss for multiclass rejection
learning. Our proposed surrogate loss and approach requires only adding an additional output layer to existing
model architectures and changing the loss function, hence
it necessitates minimal to no added computational costs.
In section 5, we show the limitations of approaches in the
literature from a consistency point-of-view and then provide
generalization bounds for minimizing the empirical loss. To
show the efficacy of our approach, we give experimental
evidence on image classification datasets CIFAR-10 and
CIFAR-100 using synthetic and human experts based on
CIFAR10H (Peterson et al., 2019), on a hate speech and

