Overﬁtting in adversarially robust deep learning

Leslie Rice * 1 Eric Wong * 2 J. Zico Kolter 1

Abstract

*

Equal contribution 1 Computer Science Department, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA, USA 2 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA, USA. Correspondence to: Leslie Rice <larice@cs.cmu.edu>, Eric Wong
<ericwong@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

Test standard
Train standard

0.8
0.6
Error

It is common practice in deep learning to use overparameterized networks and train for as long as
possible; there are numerous studies that show,
both theoretically and empirically, that such practices surprisingly do not unduly harm the generalization performance of the classiﬁer. In this
paper, we empirically study this phenomenon
in the setting of adversarially trained deep networks, which are trained to minimize the loss
under worst-case adversarial perturbations. We
ﬁnd that overﬁtting to the training set does in
fact harm robust performance to a very large degree in adversarially robust training across multiple datasets (SVHN, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100,
and ImageNet) and perturbation models (`∞ and
`2 ). Based upon this observed effect, we show
that the performance gains of virtually all recent
algorithmic improvements upon adversarial training can be matched by simply using early stopping. We also show that effects such as the double descent curve do still occur in adversarially
trained models, yet fail to explain the observed
overﬁtting. Finally, we study several classical and
modern deep learning remedies for overﬁtting, including regularization and data augmentation, and
ﬁnd that no approach in isolation improves signiﬁcantly upon the gains achieved by early stopping. All code for reproducing the experiments
as well as pretrained model weights and training
logs can be found at https://github.com/
locuslab/robust_overfitting.

Test robust
Train robust

0.4
0.2
0.0
0

50

100
Epochs

150

200

Figure 1. The learning curves for a robustly trained model replicating the experiment done by Madry et al. (2017) on CIFAR-10.
The curves demonstrate “robust overﬁtting”; shortly after the ﬁrst
learning rate decay the model momentarily attains 43.2% robust
error, and is actually more robust than the model at the end of training, which only attains 51.4% robust test error against a 10-step
PGD adversary for `∞ radius of  = 8/255. The learning rate is
decayed at 100 and 150 epochs.

1. Introduction
One of the surprising characteristics of deep learning is the
relative lack of overﬁtting seen in practice (Zhang et al.,
2016). Deep learning models can often be trained to zero
training error, effectively memorizing the training set, seemingly without causing any detrimental effects on the generalization performance. This phenomenon has been widely
studied both from the theoretical (Neyshabur et al., 2017)
and empirical perspectives (Belkin et al., 2019), and remains such a hallmark of deep learning practice that it is
often taken for granted.
In this paper, we consider the empirical question of overﬁtting in a similar, but slightly different domain: the setting of
adversarial training for robust networks. Adversarial training is a method for hardening classiﬁers against adversarial
attacks, i.e. small perturbations to the input which can drastically change a classiﬁer’s predictions, that involves training
the network on adversarially perturbed inputs instead of
on clean data (Goodfellow et al., 2014). It is generally re-

