Online Metric Algorithms with Untrusted Predictions

Antonios Antoniadis * 1 Christian Coester * 2
Marek Eliáš * 3 Adam Polak * 4 Bertrand Simon * 5

Abstract
Machine-learned predictors, although achieving
very good results for inputs resembling training
data, cannot possibly provide perfect predictions
in all situations. Still, decision-making systems
that are based on such predictors need not only to
benefit from good predictions but also to achieve
a decent performance when the predictions are
inadequate. In this paper, we propose a prediction
setup for arbitrary metrical task systems (MTS)
(e.g., caching, k-server and convex body chasing)
and online matching on the line. We utilize results
from the theory of online algorithms to show how
to make the setup robust. Specifically for caching,
we present an algorithm whose performance, as a
function of the prediction error, is exponentially
better than what is achievable for general MTS.
Finally, we present an empirical evaluation of our
methods on real world datasets, which suggests
practicality.

1. Introduction
Metrical task systems (MTS), introduced by Borodin et al.
(1992), are a rich class containing several fundamental
problems in online optimization as special cases, including caching, k-server, convex body chasing, and convex
function chasing. MTS are capable of modeling many problems arising in computing and production systems (Sleator
& Tarjan, 1985; Manasse et al., 1990), movements of service vehicles (Dehghani et al., 2017; Coester & Koutsoupias,
*

Equal contribution 1 Saarland University and Max-Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany 2 CWI, Amsterdam,
Netherlands 3 EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland 4 Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, Jagiellonian University, Kraków,
Poland 5 University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany. Correspondence to: Antonios Antoniadis <aantonia@mpi-inf.mpg.de>,
Christian Coester <christian.coester@cwi.nl>, Marek Eliáš
<marek.elias@epfl.ch>, Adam Polak <polak@tcs.uj.edu.pl>,
Bertrand Simon <bsimon@uni-bremen.de>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

2019), power management of embedded systems as well
as data centers (Irani et al., 2003; Lin et al., 2013), and are
also related to the experts problem in online learning (see
Daniely & Mansour, 2019; Blum & Burch, 2000).
Initially, we are given a metric space M of states, which can
be interpreted for example as actions, investment strategies,
or configurations of some production machine. We start at a
predefined initial state x0 . At each time t = 1, 2, . . . , we are
presented with a cost function `t : M → R+ ∪{0, +∞} and
our task is to decide either to stay at xt−1 and pay the cost
`t (xt−1 ), or to move to some other (possibly cheaper) state
xt and pay dist(xt−1 , xt ) + `t (xt ), where dist(xt−1 , xt ) is
the cost of the transition between states xt−1 and xt . The
objective is to minimize the overall cost incurred over time.
Given that MTS is an online problem, one needs to make
each decision without any information about the future cost
functions. This makes the problem substantially difficult, as
supported by strong lower bounds for general MTS (Borodin
et al., 1992) as well as for many special MTS problems (see
e.g. Karloff et al., 1994; Fiat et al., 1998). For the recent
work on MTS, see Bubeck et al. (2019); Coester & Lee
(2019); Bubeck & Rabani (2020).
In this paper, we study how to utilize predictors (possibly
based on machine learning) in order to decrease the uncertainty about the future and achieve a better performance
for MTS. We propose a natural prediction setup for MTS
and show how to develop algorithms in this setup with the
following properties of consistency (i) and robustness (ii).
(i) Their performance improves with accuracy of the predictor and is close-to-optimal with perfect predictions.
(ii) When given poor predictions, their performance is comparable to that of the best online algorithm which does
not use predictions.
The only MTS that has been studied before in this context of
utilizing predictors is the caching problem. Algorithms by
Lykouris & Vassilvitskii (2018) and Rohatgi (2020) provide
similar guarantees by using predictions about the time of the
next occurrence of the current page in the input sequence.
However, as we show in this paper, such predictions are not
useful for more general MTS, even for weighted caching.
Using the prediction setup proposed in this paper, we can
design robust and consistent algorithms for any MTS. For

