Nonstationary Nonseparable Random Fields

Kangrui Wang 1 2 Oliver Hamelijnck 1 3 Theodoros Damoulas 1 2 3 Mark Steel 2

Abstract
We describe a framework for constructing nonstationary nonseparable random fields based on
an infinite mixture of convolved stochastic processes. When the mixing process is stationary
but the convolution function is nonstationary we
arrive at nonseparable kernels with constant nonseparability that are available in closed form.
When the mixing is nonstationary and the convolution function is stationary we arrive at nonseparable random fields that have varying nonseparability and better preserve local structure. These fields
have natural interpretations through the spectral
representation of stochastic differential equations
(SDEs) and are demonstrated on a range of synthetic benchmarks and spatio-temporal applications in geostatistics and machine learning. We
show how a single Gaussian process (GP) with
these random fields can computationally and statistically outperform both separable and existing
nonstationary nonseparable approaches such as
treed GPs and deep GP constructions.

1. Introduction
Kernel-based methods (Scholkopf & Smola, 2001) have a
long history in both machine learning and spatial statistics
(Cressie, 1990) across frequentist and Bayesian paradigms.
Standard covariance (kernel) functions, such as the Gaussian
and Matérn, are stationary (translation invariant) and separable. Although these covariance functions admit tractable
forms they are unrealistic for modelling real world phenomena that are nonstationary and exhibit strong dependencies.
In this work we focus on spatio-temporal random fields
in R3 as our motivation for proposing nonstationary non1

Data-centric Engineering, The Alan Turing Institute, London,
UK 2 Department of Statistics, University of Warwick, Coventry,
UK 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Warwick.
Correspondence to: Kangrui Wang <Kwang@turing.ac.uk>,
Theodoros Damoulas <T.Damoulas@warwick.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

separable covariance functions. However, the methodology is applicable to general RD input spaces. Consider a spatio-temporal stochastic process Z(s, t) that has
a stationary and separable structure, where s ∈ R2 indicates the spatial coordinates and t ∈ R indicates a temporal dimension. Stationarity implies that the covariance
function depends only on the distance of the observations
C(s, t, s0 , t0 ) = C(s − s0 , t − t0 ) but not on their specific
location. Separability implies independence between input dimensions, for example between space and time as
C(s, t, s0 , t0 ) = C(s, s0 )C(t, t0 ). A nonseparable covariance function captures dependencies between the dimensions; when that dependency is constant the correlation
can be expressed as C(s, t, s0 , t0 )/C(s, s0 )C(t, t0 ) = ρ for
s 6= s0 and t 6= t0 and we have constant nonseparability.
Whereas when the dependency itself is changing across input space, we define it as varying nonseparability. Fig. 1
illustrates these different levels of separability and stationarity. To ease exposition we define the following subscripts:
ZSt Sp is a stationary separable process, ZSt S̄p is a stationary
nonseparable one, ZS̄t Sp is a nonstationary separable process
and ZS̄t S̄p is nonstationary nonseparable one.
Nonstationary Separable: There is a significant body of
work in nonstationary covariance functions either through
hierarchical constructions (Paciorek & Schervish, 2004;
Remes et al., 2017; Heinonen et al., 2016), compositional
(deep) models (Damianou & Lawrence, 2013; MonterrubioGómez et al., 2018), input space partitioning approaches
(Gramacy & Lee, 2008) or spectral representations (Stein,
2005; Remes et al., 2017).
As shown by Paciorek & Schervish (2004) any stationary
covariance function can be used to construct a nonstationary
one, where input dependent local-lengthscales are used to
define the correlation between two points. This has been
extended by Remes et al. (2017); Heinonen et al. (2016) by
placing GP priors on the (log) of the lengthscales. These
functions are very flexible but suffer from identifiability
issues, inefficient inference procedures, and an increased
computational burden (Paciorek & Schervish, 2006). Cortes
et al. (2009) studies the general problem of kernel learning
with a polynomial (potentially non-linear) combination of
base kernels that can handle nonstationary data when the
combination is location-dependent.

