Imputer: Sequence Modelling via Imputation and Dynamic Programming

William Chan 1 Chitwan Saharia 1 † Geoffrey Hinton 1 Mohammad Norouzi 1 Navdeep Jaitly 2

Abstract
This paper presents the Imputer, a neural sequence model that generates output sequences
iteratively via imputations. The Imputer is an
iterative generative model, requiring only a constant number of generation steps independent of
the number of input or output tokens. The Imputer can be trained to approximately marginalize
over all possible alignments between the input
and output sequences, and all possible generation
orders. We present a tractable dynamic programming training algorithm, which yields a lower
bound on the log marginal likelihood. When applied to end-to-end speech recognition, the Imputer outperforms prior non-autoregressive models and achieves competitive results to autoregressive models. On LibriSpeech test-other, the Imputer achieves 11.1 WER, outperforming CTC at
13.0 WER and seq2seq at 12.5 WER.

1. Introduction
Neural sequence models have been widely successful across
a wide range of applications, including machine translation
(Bahdanau et al., 2015; Luong et al., 2015), speech recognition (Graves & Jaitly, 2014; Chan et al., 2016), speech
synthesis (Oord et al., 2016; 2018) and image captioning
(Vinyals et al., 2015; Xu et al., 2015). Autoregressive sequence models (e.g., Sutskever et al. (2014); Cho et al.
(2014)) enable exact likelihood estimation, at the cost of
requiring n generation steps to generate n tokens during
inference. On the other hand, non-autoregressive models
such as CTC (Graves et al., 2006) and NAT (Gu et al., 2018)
can generate sequences in a single generation step, independent of the number of output tokens. However these
†

Work done as part of the Google AI Residency. 1 Google Research, Brain Team, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 2 Work done at
Google; currently at The D. E. Shaw Group, New York, New York,
USA. Correspondence to: W. Chan <williamchan@google.com>,
C. Saharia <sahariac@google.com>, G. Hinton <geoffhinton@google.com>, M. Norouzi <mnorouzi@google.com>, N.
Jaitly <navdeep.jaitly@deshaw.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

non-autoregressive models typically make a strong conditional independence assumption between output tokens, often underperforming their autoregressive counterparts. Recently, there has been a growing interest in models that
make a trade-off between the two extremes of fully autoregressive and fully non-autoregressive generation, such
as the Insertion Transformer (Stern et al., 2019), MaskPredict (Ghazvininejad et al., 2019), Levenstein Transformer (Gu et al., 2019b) and Multilingual KERMIT (Chan
et al., 2019a). Such models sacrifice almost no performance,
while requiring a logarithmic (Chan et al., 2019c) or a constant number of generation steps (Lee et al., 2018).
In this paper, we seek to extend prior work to achieve a desirable balance between fully autoregressive and fully nonautoregressive models. We are concerned with sequence
problems in which a natural monotonic latent alignment
exists between the source and target sequences (e.g., endto-end speech recognition). Prior work typically does not
take advantage of such useful inductive biases, which become increasingly important for problems with long output
sequences. For instance, in speech recognition sequences
are typically an order of magnitude longer than sequences
seen in machine translation. The need to generate longer
sequences highlights the importance of developing sequence
generation frameworks with sub-linear inference time.
Three popular types of generative models have been developed for end-to-end speech recognition applications: CTC
(Graves et al., 2006; Graves & Jaitly, 2014), RNN-T (Graves,
2012; Graves et al., 2013) and seq2seq (Chan et al., 2016;
Bahdanau et al., 2016a). CTC is a non-autoregressive model
and makes a conditional independence assumption between
token frame predictions. Accordingly, CTC can make use
of dynamic programming to marginalize over all possible
alignments. CTC models exhibit fast inference but relatively
poor performance (Battenberg et al., 2017). RNN-T is an autoregressive model that captures conditional dependencies
between output tokens, but at the cost of n generation steps
to generate n tokens. Similar to CTC, the RNN-T relies
on dynamic programming to marginalize over all possible
alignments for exact likelihood computation. However, the
RNN-T dynamic programming framework typically relies
on a linear bottleneck for tractability (e.g., the linear bottleneck between the prediction and transcription network
(Graves, 2012)); this has typically limited the empirical

