Stochastic Coordinate Minimization with Progressive Precision
for Stochastic Convex Optimization

Sudeep Salgia 1 Qing Zhao 1 Sattar Vakili 2

Abstract

known, the expectation of F (x; ξ) over ξ cannot be analytically characterized. As a result, the objective function f (x)
is unknown.

A framework based on iterative coordinate minimization (CM) is developed for stochastic convex optimization. Given that exact coordinate
minimization is impossible due to the unknown
stochastic nature of the objective function, the
crux of the proposed optimization algorithm is an
optimal control of the minimization precision in
each iteration. We establish the optimal precision
control and the resulting order-optimal regret performance for strongly convex and separably nonsmooth functions. An interesting ﬁnding is that the
optimal progression of precision across iterations
is independent of the low-dimensional CM routine
employed, suggesting a general framework for extending low-dimensional optimization routines to
high-dimensional problems. The proposed algorithm is amenable to online implementation and
inherits the scalability and parallelizability properties of CM for large-scale optimization. Requiring
only a sublinear order of message exchanges, it
also lends itself well to distributed computing as
compared with the alternative approach of coordinate gradient descent.

With the objective function unknown, the decision maker
can only take a trial-and-error learning approach by choosing, sequentially in time, a sequence of query points
{xt }Tt=1 with the hope that the decisions improve over time.
Various error feedback models have been considered. The
zeroth-order vs. ﬁrst-order feedback pertains to whether
the random loss F (xt ; ξt ) or its gradient G(xt ; ξt ) at each
query point xt is used in the learning algorithm. The fullinformation vs. bandit feedback relates to whether the entire
loss function F (x; ξt ) over all x or only the random loss/
gradient at the queried point xt is revealed at each time.
The performance measure has traditionally focused on the
convergence of xT to the minimizer x∗ = arg min f (x)
x∈X

or f (xT ) to f (x∗ ). In an online setting, a more suitable
performance measure is the cumulative regret deﬁned as the
expected cumulative loss at the query points in excess to the
minimum loss:
" T
#
X
∗
R(T ) = E
(F (xt ; ξt ) − f (x )) .

(2)

t=1

1. Introduction
1.1. Stochastic Convex Optimization
Stochastic convex optimization aims at minimizing a random loss function F (x; ξ) in expectation:
f (x) = Eξ [F (x; ξ)] ,

(1)

where x is the decision variable in a convex and compact
set X ⊂ Rd and ξ is an endogenous random vector. The
probabilistic model of ξ is unknown, or even when it is
1

School of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 2 Prowler.io, Cambridge, UK. Correspondence
to: Sudeep Salgia <ss3827@cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

This performance measure gives rise to the explorationexploitation tradeoff: the need to explore the entire domain
X for the sake of future decisions and the desire to exploit
the currently best decision indicated by past observations to
reduce present loss. A learning algorithm with a sublinear
regret order in T implies the convergence of f (xT ) to f (x∗ ),
and the speciﬁc order measures the rate of convergence.
The archetypal statistical learning problem of classiﬁcation
based on random instances is a stochastic optimization problem, where the decision variable x is the classiﬁer and ξ
the random instance consisting of its feature vector and hidden label. The probabilistic dependence between feature
and label is unknown. Another example is the design of
large-scale complex physical systems that defy analytical
modeling. Noisy observations via stochastic simulation is
all that is available for decision making.

