Equivariant Neural Rendering

Emilien Dupont 1 Miguel Angel Bautista 2 Alex Colburn 2 Aditya Sankar 2 Joshua Susskind 2 Qi Shan 2

Abstract
We propose a framework for learning neural scene
representations directly from images, without 3D
supervision. Our key insight is that 3D structure
can be imposed by ensuring that the learned representation transforms like a real 3D scene. Specifically, we introduce a loss which enforces equivariance of the scene representation with respect
to 3D transformations. Our formulation allows
us to infer and render scenes in real time while
achieving comparable results to models requiring
minutes for inference. In addition, we introduce
two challenging new datasets for scene representation and neural rendering, including scenes with
complex lighting and backgrounds. Through experiments, we show that our model achieves compelling results on these datasets as well as on
standard ShapeNet benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Designing useful 3D scene representations for neural networks is a challenging task. While several works have used
traditional 3D representations such as voxel grids (Maturana & Scherer, 2015; Nguyen-Phuoc et al., 2018; Zhu
et al., 2018), meshes (Jack et al., 2018), point clouds (Qi
et al., 2017; Insafutdinov & Dosovitskiy, 2018) and signed
distance functions (Park et al., 2019), they each have limitations. For example, it is often difficult to scalably incorporate texture, lighting and background into these representations. Recently, neural scene representations have been
proposed to overcome these problems (Eslami et al., 2018;
Sitzmann et al., 2019a;b), usually by incorporating ideas
from graphics rendering into the model architecture.
In this paper, we argue that equivariance with respect to 3D
transformations provides a strong inductive bias for neural
rendering and scene representations. Indeed, we argue that,
1

University of Oxford, UK 2 Apple Inc, USA. Correspondence to: Emilien Dupont <dupont@stats.ox.ac.uk>, Qi Shan
<qshan@apple.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. From a single image (left), our model infers a scene
representation and generates new views of the scene (right) with a
learned neural renderer.

for many tasks, scene representations need not be explicit
(such as point clouds and meshes) as long as they transform
like explicit representations.
Our model is trained with no 3D supervision and only requires images and their relative poses to learn equivariant
scene representations. Our formulation does not pose any
restrictions on the rendering process and, as result, we are
able to model complex visual effects such as reflections
and cluttered backgrounds. Unlike most other scene representation models (Eslami et al., 2018; Sitzmann et al.,
2019a;b), our model does not require any pose information
at inference time. From a single image, we can infer a scene
representation, transform it and render it (see Fig. 1). Further, we can infer and render scene representations in real
time while many scene representation algorithms require
minutes to perform inference from an image or a set of images (Nguyen-Phuoc et al., 2018; Sitzmann et al., 2019b;
Park et al., 2019).
While several works achieve impressive results by training
models on images of a single scene and then generating
novel views of that same scene (Mildenhall et al., 2020), we
focus on generalizing across different scenes. This provides
an additional challenge as we are required to learn a prior
over shapes and textures to generalize to novel scenes. Our
approach also allows us to bypass the need for different
scenes in the training set to be aligned (or share the same
coordinate system). Indeed, since we learn scene representations that transform like real scenes, we only require relative
transformations to train the model. This is particularly advantageous when considering real scenes with complicated
backgrounds where alignment can be difficult to achieve.

