Model-free Reinforcement Learning in Infinite-horizon
Average-reward Markov Decision Processes

Chen-Yu Wei 1 Mehdi Jafarnia-Jahromi 1 Haipeng Luo 1 Hiteshi Sharma 1 Rahul Jain 1

Abstract
Model-free reinforcement learning is known to
be memory and computation efficient and more
amendable to large scale problems. In this paper, two model-free algorithms are introduced for
learning infinite-horizon average-reward Markov
Decision Processes (MDPs). The first algorithm
reduces the problem to the discounted-reward version and achieves O(T 2/3 ) regret after T steps,
under the minimal assumption of weakly communicating MDPs. To our knowledge, this is the
first model-free algorithm for general MDPs in
this setting. The second algorithm makes use
of recent advances in adaptive algorithms for adversarial multi-armed
bandits and improves the
√
regret to O( T ), albeit with a stronger ergodic
assumption. This result significantly improves
over the O(T 3/4 ) regret achieved by the only existing model-free algorithm by Abbasi-Yadkori
et al. (2019a) for ergodic MDPs in the infinitehorizon average-reward setting.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) refers to the problem of an
agent interacting with an unknown environment with the
goal of maximizing its cumulative reward through time.
The environment is usually modeled as a Markov Decision
Process (MDP) with an unknown transition kernel and/or
an unknown reward function. The fundamental trade-off
between exploration and exploitation is the key challenge
for RL: should the agent exploit the available information to
optimize the immediate performance, or should it explore
the poorly understood states and actions to gather more
information to improve future performance?
There are two broad classes of RL algorithms: model-based
1

University of Southern California. Correspondence to: ChenYu Wei <chenyu.wei@usc.edu>, Mehdi Jafarnia-Jahromi <mjafarni@usc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

and model-free. Model-based algorithms maintain an estimate of the underlying MDP and use that to determine
a policy during the learning process. Examples include
UCRL2 (Jaksch et al., 2010), REGAL (Bartlett & Tewari,
2009), PSRL (Ouyang et al., 2017b), SCAL (Fruit et al.,
2018b), UCBVI (Azar et al., 2017), EBF (Zhang & Ji, 2019)
and EULER (Zanette & Brunskill, 2019). Model-based algorithms are well-known for their sample efficiency. However,
there are two general disadvantages of model-based algorithms: First, model-based algorithms require large memory
to store the estimate of the model parameters. Second, it is
hard to extend model-based approaches to non-parametric
settings, e.g., continuous state MDPs.
Model-free algorithms, on the other hand, try to resolve
these issues by directly maintaining an estimate of the optimal Q-value function or the optimal policy. Examples
include Q-learning (Watkins, 1989), Delayed Q-learning
(Strehl et al., 2006), TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015), DQN
(Mnih et al., 2013), A3C (Mnih et al., 2016), and more.
Model-free algorithms are not only computation and memory efficient, but also easier to be extended to large scale
problems by incorporating function approximation.
It was believed that model-free algorithms are less sampleefficient compared to model-based algorithms. However, recently Jin et al. (2018) showed that (model-free) Q-learning
algorithm with UCB exploration achieves a nearly-optimal
regret bound, implying the possibility of designing algorithms with advantages of both model-free and modelbased methods. Jin et al. (2018) addressed the problem
for episodic finite-horizon MDPs. Following this work,
Dong et al. (2019) extended the result to the infinite-horizon
discounted-reward setting.
However, Q-learning based model-free algorithms with low
regret for infinite-horizon average-reward MDPs, an equally
heavily-studied setting in the RL literature, remains unknown. Designing such algorithms has proven to be rather
challenging since the Q-value function estimate may grow
unbounded over time and it is hard to control its magnitude in a way that guarantees efficient learning. Moreover,
techniques such as backward induction in the finite-horizon
setting or contraction mapping in the infinite-horizon discounted setting can not be applied to the infinite-horizon

