Representations for Stable Off-Policy Reinforcement Learning

Dibya Ghosh 1 Marc G. Bellemare 1

Abstract
Reinforcement learning with function approximation can be unstable and even divergent, especially
when combined with off-policy learning and Bellman updates. In deep reinforcement learning,
these issues have been dealt with empirically by
adapting and regularizing the representation, in
particular with auxiliary tasks. This suggests that
representation learning may provide a means to
guarantee stability. In this paper, we formally
show that there are indeed nontrivial state representations under which the canonical TD algorithm is stable, even when learning off-policy. We
analyze representation learning schemes that are
based on the transition matrix of a policy, such as
proto-value functions, along three axes: approximation error, stability, and ease of estimation. In
the most general case, we show that a Schur basis
provides convergence guarantees, but is difficult
to estimate from samples. For a fixed reward function, we find that an orthogonal basis of the corresponding Krylov subspace is an even better choice.
We conclude by empirically demonstrating that
these stable representations can be learned using
stochastic gradient descent, opening the door to
improved techniques for representation learning
with deep networks.

1. Introduction
Value function learning algorithms are known to demonstrate divergent behavior under the combination of bootstrapping, function approximation, and off-policy data, what
Sutton & Barto (2018) call the “deadly triad” (see also van
Hasselt et al., 2018). In reinforcement learning theory, it
is well-established that methods such as Q-learning and
TD(0) enjoy no general convergence guarantees under linear function approximation and off-policy data (Baird, 1995;
1
Google Research. Correspondence to:
<dibya.ghosh@berkeley.edu>.

Dibya Ghosh

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Tsitsiklis & Roy, 1996). Despite this potential for failure,
Q-learning and other temporal-difference algorithms remain
the methods of choice for learning value functions in practice due to their simplicity and scalability.
In deep reinforcement learning, instability has been mitigated empirically through the use of auxiliary tasks, which
shape and regularize the representation that is learned by the
neural network. Methods using auxiliary tasks concurrently
optimize the value function loss and an auxiliary representation learning objective such as visual reconstruction of
observation (Jaderberg et al., 2016), latent transition and
reward prediction (Gelada et al., 2019), adversarial value
functions (Bellemare et al., 2019), or inverse kinematics
(Pathak et al., 2017). In robotics, distributional reinforcement learning (Bellemare et al., 2017) in particular has
proven a surprisingly effective auxiliary task (Bodnar et al.,
2019; Vecerik et al., 2019; Cabi et al., 2019). While the
stability of such methods remains an empirical phenomenon,
it suggests that a carefully chosen representation learning algorithm may provide a means towards formally guaranteed
stability of value function learning.
In this paper, we seek procedures for discovering representations that guarantee the stability of TD(0), a canonical
algorithm for estimating the value function of a policy. We
analyze the expected dynamics of TD(0), with the aim of
characterizing representations under which TD(0) is provably stable. Learning dynamics of temporal-difference methods have been studied in depth in the context of a fixed state
representation (Tsitsiklis & Roy, 1996; Borkar & Meyn,
2000; Yu & Bertsekas, 2009; Maei et al., 2009; Dalal et al.,
2017). We go one step further by considering this representation as a component that can actively be shaped, and study
stability guarantees that emerge from various representation
learning schemes.
We show that the stability of a state representation is affected
by: 1) the space of value functions it can express, and 2)
how it parameterizes this space. We find a tight connection
between stability and the geometry of the transition matrix,
enabling us to provide stability conditions for algorithms
that learn features from the transition matrix of a policy
(Dayan, 1993; Mahadevan & Maggioni, 2007; Wu et al.,
2018; Behzadian et al., 2019) and rewards (Petrik, 2007;
Parr et al., 2007). Our analysis reveals that a number of

