Optimal Bounds between f -Divergences and Integral Probability Metrics

Rohit Agrawal * 1 Thibaut Horel * 2

Abstract
The families of f -divergences (e.g. the Kullback–
Leibler divergence) and Integral Probability Metrics (e.g. total variation distance or maximum
mean discrepancies) are commonly used in optimization and estimation. In this work, we systematically study the relationship between these
two families from the perspective of convex duality. Starting from a tight variational representation
of the f -divergence, we derive a generalization of
the moment generating function, which we show
exactly characterizes the best lower bound of the
f -divergence as a function of a given IPM. Using this characterization, we obtain new bounds
on IPMs defined by classes of unbounded functions, while also recovering in a unified manner
well-known results for bounded and subgaussian
functions (e.g. Pinsker’s inequality and Hoeffding’s lemma).

1. Introduction
Quantifying the extent to which two probability distributions differ from one another is central in most, if not all,
problems and methods in machine learning and statistics.
For example, maximum likelihood estimation is equivalent
to minimizing the Kullback–Leibler divergence between
the empirical distribution—or the ground truth distribution
in the limit of infinitely large sample—and a distribution
chosen from a parametric family.
A natural generalization of the Kullback–Leibler divergence
is provided by the family of ϕ-divergences1 (Csiszár, 1963;
1967) also known in statistics as Ali–Silvey distances (Ali
& Silvey, 1966). Informally, a ϕ-divergence quantifies the
*

Equal contribution 1 Harvard John A. Paulson School of
Engineering and Applied Sciences, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
USA 2 Institute for Data, Systems, and Society, MIT, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA. Correspondence to: Rohit Agrawal <rohitagr@seas.harvard.edu>, Thibaut Horel <thibauth@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
1
In the rest of this paper, we use ϕ-divergence instead of f divergence and reserve the letter f for a generic function.

divergence between two distributions µ and ν as an avRerage cost of the likelihood ratio, that is, Iϕ (µ ∥ ν) :=
ϕ(dµ/dν) dν for a convex cost function ϕ : R≥0 → R≥0 .
Notable examples of ϕ-divergences include the Hellinger
distance, the α-divergences (a convex transformation of the
Rényi divergences), and the χ2 -divergence.
Crucial in applications of ϕ-divergences are their so-called
variational representations. For example, the Donsker–
Varadhan representation (Donsker & Varadhan, 1976,
Theorem 5.2) expresses the Kullback–Leibler divergence
D (µ ∥ ν) between probability distributions µ and ν as
Z

Z
D (µ ∥ ν) = sup
g dµ − log eg dν ,
(1)
g∈L∞
ν

where L∞
ν is the space of functions essentially bounded
with respect to ν. Similar variational representations were
for example used by Nguyen et al. (2008; 2010); Ruderman
et al. (2012); Belghazi et al. (2018) to construct estimates
of ϕ-divergences by restricting the optimization problem
in (1) to a class of functions G ⊆ L∞
ν for which the problem becomes tractable (for example when G is a RKHS or
representable by a given neural network architecture). In
recent work, Nowozin et al. (2016); Nock et al. (2017) conceptualized an extension of generative adversarial networks
(GANs) in which the problem of minimizing a ϕ-divergence
is expressed via variational representations such as (1) as a
minimax game involving two neural networks, one minimizing over probability distributions µ, the other maximizing
over g as in (1).
Another important class of distances between probability
distributions is given by Integral Probability Metrics (IPMs)
defined by Müller (1997) and taking the form
Z

Z
dG (µ, ν) = sup
g dµ − g dν ,
(2)
g∈G

where G is a class of functions parametrizing the distance.
Notable examples include the total variation distance (G is
the class of all functions taking value in [−1, 1]), the Wasserstein metric (G is a class of Lipschitz functions) and Maximum Mean Discrepancies (G is the unit ball of a RKHS).
Being already expressed as a variational problem, IPMs are
amenable to estimation, as was exploited by Sriperumbudur
et al. (2012); Gretton et al. (2012). MMDs have also been

