ECLIPSE: An Extreme-Scale Linear Program Solver for Web-Applications
Kinjal Basu * 1 Amol Ghoting * 1 Rahul Mazumder * 2 Yao Pan * 1

Abstract
Key problems arising in web applications (with
millions of users and thousands of items) can be
formulated as linear programs involving billions
to trillions of decision variables and constraints.
Despite the appeal of linear program (LP) formulations, solving problems at these scales appear
to be well beyond the capabilities of existing LP
solvers. Often ad-hoc decomposition rules are
used to approximately solve these LPs, which
have limited optimality guarantees and may lead
to sub-optimal performance in practice. In this
work, we propose a distributed solver that solves
a perturbation of the LP problems at scale via a
gradient-based algorithm on the smooth dual of
the perturbed LP. The main workhorses of our
algorithm are distributed matrix-vector multiplications (with load balancing) and efficient projection operations on distributed machines. Experiments on real-world data show that our proposed
LP solver, ECLIPSE, can solve problems with
1012 decision variables – well beyond the capabilities of current solvers.

1. Introduction
Large scale Linear Programs arise naturally in several applications across various scientific and industrial disciplines.
In this paper, we focus on problems arising in the internet industry. Many key problems in this domain, can be
formulated via a Linear Program (LP). Examples include
optimizing the volume of emails to be sent to users (Gupta
et al., 2016; 2017), balancing multiple business metrics in a
ranking or recommendation system (Agarwal et al., 2012;
2014; 2015), optimizing internal promotions (Gupta et al.,
2019); and matching entities (Azevedo & Weyl, 2016) such
as riders to drivers in ride-sharing apps (Zheng & Wu, 2017),
items to buyers in an e-commerce platform (Linden et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 LinkedIn Corporation 2 MIT. Correspondence to: Kinjal Basu <kbasu@linkedin.com>, Rahul Mazumder
<rahulmaz@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

2003; Schafer et al., 1999), jobs to potential job-seekers
(Borisyuk et al., 2017; Kenthapadi et al., 2017), restaurants
to users, etc.
While most of these problems can be formulated as LPs,
solving them becomes difficult as the scale of the problem
increases. Consider, for instance, the task of matching items
to users—the scale of the problem can easily range from
hundreds of millions to trillions of variables, which appear
to be beyond the capabilities of generic LP solvers1 . One
common approach used in web-applications, is to translate
the primal problem to a dual problem, solve the dual problem and then derive a primal solution as a function of the
dual variables (Agarwal et al., 2011; 2012). Solving the
dual problem at scale is also extremely challenging using
current generic LP solvers.
Some ad-hoc techniques are often used in practice resulting in sub-optimal solutions. One approach is to split the
problem into several smaller problems, which makes the
system sub-optimal. Another approach is to not solve the
optimization problem at all, but rely on hyperparameter tuning to estimate these dual variables in order to maximize
business metrics (Agarwal et al., 2018; Letham et al., 2019;
Du et al., 2019). Although few specific problems can be
framed as above, tuning multiple dual variables through
an online hyperparameter tuning problem is a challenging
task (Snoek et al., 2012; Letham & Bakshy, 2019).
In this paper, we introduce ECLIPSE: An Extreme Scale
Linear Program Solver, which is a perturbation based approach (Mangasarian & Meyer, 1979) to solve the LPs at an
unprecedented scale. Our approach leads to a dual that has
Lipschitz continuous gradient (Nesterov, 2005). We present
first order optimization methods on the dual with guaranteed
convergence properties. The gradient computation at every
iteration requires a matrix-vector multiplication, which allows for a distributed implementation—this plays a key
role towards addressing several challenging LPs arising in
the internet industry. We compare ECLIPSE with some
large-scale solvers using simulated and real data. Using this
system in production for solving extreme-scale problems
1
Generic LP solvers, are mainly based on the simplex or interior
point methods. Unless one properly exploits problem-structure,
these methods can become prohibitively expensive for large scale
instances.

