Robustifying Sequential Neural Processes

Jaesik Yoon 1 Gautam Singh 2 Sungjin Ahn 2 3

Abstract
When tasks change over time, meta-transfer learning seeks to improve the efficiency of learning
a new task via both meta-learning and transferlearning. While the standard attention has been
effective in a variety of settings, we question its
effectiveness in improving meta-transfer learning since the tasks being learned are dynamic
and the amount of context can be substantially
smaller. In this paper, using a recently proposed
meta-transfer learning model, Sequential Neural
Processes (SNP), we first empirically show that
it suffers from a similar underfitting problem observed in the functions inferred by Neural Processes. However, we further demonstrate that unlike the meta-learning setting, the standard attention mechanisms are not effective in meta-transfer
setting. To resolve, we propose a new attention
mechanism, Recurrent Memory Reconstruction
(RMR), and demonstrate that providing an imaginary context that is recurrently updated and reconstructed with interaction is crucial in achieving effective attention for meta-transfer learning.
Furthermore, incorporating RMR into SNP, we
propose Attentive Sequential Neural ProcessesRMR (ASNP-RMR) and demonstrate in various
tasks that ASNP-RMR significantly outperforms
the baselines.

1. Introduction
A central challenge in machine learning is to improve
learning efficiency. Among such approaches are metalearning (Schmidhuber, 1987; Bengio et al., 1990) and transfer learning (Pratt, 1993; Pan & Yang, 2009). Meta-learning
aims to learn the learning process itself and thus enables
efficient learning (e.g., from a small amount of data) while
1
SAP 2 Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University 3 Rutgers Center for Cognitive Science. Correspondence
to: Jaesik Yoon <jaesik.yoon.kr@gmail.com>, Sungjin Ahn
<sjn.ahn@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

transfer learning allows efficient warm-start of a new task
by transferring knowledge from previously learned tasks.
In many scenarios, these two problems are not separate but
appear in a combined way. For example, to build a customer
preference model monthly, we would like to build it by
transferring knowledge from the models of the previous
months instead of starting from scratch, because the general
preference of a customer would not change much across
months. However, due to the monthly preference shift, e.g.,
due to a seasonal change, we also need to efficiently learn
from the new observations of the new month.
Sequential Neural Processes (SNP) (Singh et al., 2019)
is a new probabilistic model class to resolve the abovementioned meta-transfer learning problem. In SNP, metatransfer learning is modeled as stochastic processes that
change with time (thus, a stochastic process of stochastic
processes). At each time-step, the stochastic process—or
equivalently a task—is meta-learned from the context. SNP
represents each task by a latent state of the Neural Process
(NP) and models the temporal dynamics of such latent states
using a recurrent state-space model (Hafner et al., 2018).
This enables SNP to transfer the knowledge of the previous
tasks to learn a new task.
It is well-known that Neural Processes (NP) suffers from the
underfitting problem because all context observations are
encoded with limited expressiveness (e.g., by sum or mean
encoding) to satisfy the order-invariant property (Wagstaff
et al., 2019). In Kim et al. (2019), the authors observe
that query-dependent attention can substantially mitigate
the problem and propose Attentive Neural Processes (ANP).
Therefore, a crucial next question is whether SNP—which
is partly based on NP for task-level meta-learning but also
equipped with temporal-transfer—also suffers from underfitting, and if so, how we can resolve the problem.
In this paper, we argue not only that there is underfitting
in SNP but also that it affects the robustness more severely
in comparison to NP. We observe that this is because of
two novel problems, sparse context and obsolete context,
that occur in the novel setting of meta-transfer learning.
In Singh et al. (2019), it is shown that in comparison to metalearning, meta-transfer learning is expected to learn a task
more efficiently by using a much smaller amount of context
or even empty context due to the availability of temporal
transfer. However, this sparsity becomes an issue because

