Momentum-Based Policy Gradient Methods

Feihu Huang 1 Shangqian Gao 1 Jian Pei 2 Heng Huang 1 3

Abstract
In the paper, we propose a class of efficient
momentum-based policy gradient methods for
the model-free reinforcement learning, which
use adaptive learning rates and do not require
any large batches. Specifically, we propose a
fast important-sampling momentum-based policy gradient (IS-MBPG) method based on a new
momentum-based variance reduced technique and
the importance sampling technique. We also propose a fast Hessian-aided momentum-based policy gradient (HA-MBPG) method based on the
momentum-based variance reduced technique and
the Hessian-aided technique. Moreover, we prove
that both the IS-MBPG and HA-MBPG methods reach the best known sample complexity of
O(−3 ) for finding an -stationary point of the
nonconcave performance function, which only require one trajectory at each iteration. In particular,
we present a non-adaptive version of IS-MBPG
method, i.e., IS-MBPG*, which also reaches the
best known sample complexity of O(−3 ) without any large batches. In the experiments, we
apply four benchmark tasks to demonstrate the
effectiveness of our algorithms.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has achieved great success in
solving many sequential decision-making problems such as
autonomous driving (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2016), robot manipulation (Deisenroth et al., 2013), the game of Go (Silver
et al., 2017) and natural language processing (Wang et al.,
2018). In general, RL involves a Markov decision process
(MDP), where an agent takes actions dictated by a policy in
a stochastic environment over a sequence of time steps, and
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA 2 School of Computing Science,
Simon Fraser University, Vancouver, Canada 3 JD Finance America
Corporation, Mountain View, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Heng
Huang <heng.huang@pitt.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

then maximizes the long-term cumulative rewards to obtain
an optimal policy. Due to easy implementation and avoiding
policy degradation, policy gradient method (Williams, 1992;
Sutton et al., 2000) is widely used for finding the optimal
policy in MDPs, especially for the high dimensional continuous state and action spaces. To obtain the optimal policy,
policy gradient methods directly maximize the expected
total reward (also called as performance function J(θ)) via
using the stochastic first-order gradient of cumulative rewards. Recently, policy gradient methods have achieved
significant empirical successes in many challenging deep reinforcement learning applications (Li, 2017) such as playing
game of Go and robot manipulation.
Thus, policy gradient methods have regained much interest
in reinforcement learning, and some corresponding algorithms and theory of policy gradient (Fellows et al., 2018;
Fujimoto et al., 2018; Papini et al., 2018; Haarnoja et al.,
2018; Xu et al., 2019a; Shen et al., 2019; Cheng et al.,
2019b;a; Wang et al., 2019a) have been proposed and studied. Since the classic policy gradient methods (e.g., REINFORCE (Williams, 1992), PGT (Sutton et al., 2000),
GPOMDP (Baxter & Bartlett, 2001) and TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015a)) approximate the gradient of the expected total reward based on a batch of sampled trajectories,
they generally suffer from large variance in the estimated
gradients, which results in a poor convergence. Following the standard stochastic gradient methods (Robbins &
Monro, 1951; Ghadimi & Lan, 2013), these gradient-based
policy methods require O(−4 ) samples for finding an stationary point of non-concave performance function J(θ)
( i.e., Ek∇J(θ)k ≤ ). Thus, recently many works have
begun to study to reduce variance in the policy gradient
methods. For example, the early variance reduced policy
methods (Greensmith et al., 2004; Peters & Schaal, 2008)
mainly focused on using unbiased baseline functions to reduce the variance. Schulman et al. (2015b) presented the
generalized advantage estimation (GAE) to discover the balance between bias and variance of policy gradient. Then
Gu et al. (2016) applied both the GAE and linear baseline
function to reduce variance. Recently, Mao et al. (2018);
Wu et al. (2018) proposed the input-dependent and actiondependent baselines to reduce the variance, respectively.
More recently, Cheng et al. (2019b) leveraged the predictive
models to reduce the variance to accelerate policy learning.

