Topic Modeling via Full Dependence Mixtures

Dan Fisher 1 Mark Kozdoba 1 Shie Mannor 1 2

Abstract
In this paper we introduce a new approach to topic
modelling that scales to large datasets by using a
compact representation of the data and by leveraging the GPU architecture. In this approach,
topics are learned directly from the co-occurrence
data of the corpus. In particular, we introduce a
novel mixture model which we term the Full Dependence Mixture (FDM) model. FDMs model
second moment under general generative assumptions on the data. While there is previous work
on topic modeling using second moments, we develop a direct stochastic optimization procedure
for fitting an FDM with a single Kullback Leibler
objective. Moment methods in general have the
benefit that an iteration no longer needs to scale
with the size of the corpus. Our approach allows us to leverage standard optimizers and GPUs
for the problem of topic modeling. In particular,
we evaluate the approach on three large datasets,
NeurIPS papers, a Twitter corpus, and full English Wikipedia, with a large number of topics,
and show that the approach performs comparably
or better than the the standard benchmarks.

1. Introduction
A topic model is a probabilistic model of joint distribution in
the data, that is typically used as a dimensionality reduction
technique in a variety of applications, such as for instance
text mining, information retrieval and recommender systems.
In this paper we concentrate on topic models in text data.
Perhaps the most widely used topic model for text is the
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) model, (Blei et al., 2002).
LDA is a fully generative probabilistic model, and is typically learned through a Bayesian approach — by sampling
the parameter distribution given the data, via Collapsed
Gibbs samplers (Griffiths & Steyvers, 2004), (Steyvers &
1

Technion, Israel Institute of Technology 2 NVIDIA Research. Correspondence to: <dan.fisher.tech@gmail.com>,
<markk@technion.ac.il>, <shie@ee.technion.ac.il>.

Griffiths, 2007), variational methods, (Blei et al., 2002),
(Foulds et al., 2013), (Hoffman et al., 2013), or other related approaches. A typical learning procedure for Bayesian
methods involves an iteration over the entire corpus, where
a topic assignment is sampled per each token or document in
the corpus. In order to apply these methods to large corpora,
a variety of optimized procedures were developed, where
speed improvement is achieved either via parallelization or
via more economic sampling scheme, per token. An additional level of complexity is added by the fact that LDA
has two hyperparameters, the Dirichlet priors of the token
distribution in topics, and topic distribution in documents.
This may complicate the application of the methods since
the choice of parameters may influence the results even for
relatively large data sizes. A detailed discussion of LDA
optimization is given in Section 2.
In this paper we propose an alternative approach to topic
modeling, based on principles that are principally different from the standard LDA optimization techniques. We
show that using this approach it is possible to analyze large
datasets on a single workstation with a GPU, and to obtain results that are comparable or better than the standard
benchmarks. A reference implementation of the algorithm is
available at https://github.com/fisherd3/fdm.
In the rest of this section we introduce some necessary notation, describe our model and the related loss function, discuss the optimization procedure for this loss, and overview
the experimental results of the paper.
1.1. Method Description
We assume that the text data was generated from a
pLSA (Probabilistic Latent Semantic Allocation) probability model , (Hofmann, 1999), as follows: Denote by X the
set of distinct tokens in the corpus, and suppose that we are
given T topics, µt , t ≤ T , where each topic is a probability
distribution on the set of tokens X . Then the pLSA assumption is that each document d is generated by independently
sampling tokens from a mixture of topics, denoted νd :
νd =

X

θd (t)µt ,

(1)

t

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

P
where θd (t) ≥ 0 and t θd (t) = 1 for every document d.
Note that we do not specify the generative model for θd . In

