Topologically Densified Distributions

Christoph D. Hofer 1 Florian Graf 1 Marc Niethammer 2 Roland Kwitt 1

Abstract
We study regularization in the context of small
sample-size learning with over-parameterized neural networks. Specifically, we shift focus from
architectural properties, such as norms on the network weights, to properties of the internal representations before a linear classifier. Specifically,
we impose a topological constraint on samples
drawn from the probability measure induced in
that space. This provably leads to mass concentration effects around the representations of training
instances, i.e., a property beneficial for generalization. By leveraging previous work to impose
topological constraints in a neural network setting,
we provide empirical evidence (across various vision benchmarks) to support our claim for better
generalization.

1. Introduction
Learning neural network predictors for complex tasks typically requires large amounts of data. Although such models
are over-parameterized, they generalize well in practice. The
mechanisms that govern generalization in such settings are
still only partially understood (Zhang et al., 2017). Existing
generalization bounds (Bartlett et al., 2017; Neyshabur et al.,
2017; Golowich et al., 2018; Arora et al., 2018) offer deeper
insights, yet the vacuity of the bounds and their surprising
behavior in terms of sample size (Nagarajan & Kolter, 2019)
is a lasting concern.
In small sample-size regimes, achieving generalization is
considerably more challenging and, in general, requires careful regularization, e.g., via various norms on the network
weights, controlling the Lipschitz constants, or adaptation
and adjustment of the training data. The latter does not exert
regularization on parts of the function implemented by the
network, but acts on the training data, e.g., by regularizing
1

Department of Computer Science, Univ. of Salzburg, Austria
Univ. of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, USA. Correspondence to:
Christoph D. Hofer <chr.dav.hofer@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

zi = ϕ(xi )

un-regularized

β-connected

regularized

Figure 1. Illustration of how topological regularization affects
probability mass concentration in the internal representation space
of a neural network. Darker shading denotes regions of higher
probability mass.

its internal representations. Prominent examples include
modern augmentation techniques (Cubuk et al., 2019), or
mixing strategies (Verma et al., 2019a) to control overconfident predictions. Not only do these approaches show remarkable practical success, but, to some extent, can also be
legitimized formally, e.g., through flattening arguments in
the representation space, or through variance reduction arguments, as in case of data augmentation (Dao et al., 2019).
In this work, we contribute a regularization approach that
hinges on internal representations. We consider neural
networks as a functional composition of the form
γ ◦ ϕ : X → Y = {1, . . . , K} ,

(1)

where ϕ : X → Z denotes a high-capacity feature extractor which maps into an internal representation space Z. A
linear classifier γ : Z → Y then predicts one of K classes.
As customary, γ is typically of the form Az + b, followed
by the argmax operator. In our setting, we focus on the representation space Z and, specifically, on the push-forward
probability measure induced by ϕ on Z. We then identify a
property of this measure that is beneficial to generalization.
This shifts attention away from properties of the network
and instead focuses on its utility to implement these properties during learning, e.g., by means of regularization.
Our contributions are as follows: First, we formalize the
intuition that in a neural network regime (where training
samples are fitted perfectly), generalization is linked to probability mass concentration around the training samples in
the internal representation space Z. Second, we prove that a
topological constraint on samples from the aforementioned

