Robust Outlier Arm Identification
Yinglun Zhu 1 Sumeet Katariya 2 Robert Nowak 1

Abstract
We study the problem of Robust Outlier Arm Identification (ROAI), where the goal is to identify
arms whose expected rewards deviate substantially from the majority, by adaptively sampling
from their reward distributions. We compute the
outlier threshold using the median and median
absolute deviation of the expected rewards. This
is a robust choice for the threshold compared to
using the mean and standard deviation, since it
can identify outlier arms even in the presence of
extreme outlier values. Our setting is different
from existing pure exploration problems where
the threshold is pre-specified as a given value or
rank. This is useful in applications where the goal
is to identify the set of promising items but the
cardinality of this set is unknown, such as finding
promising drugs for a new disease or identifying items favored by a population. We propose
two δ-PAC algorithms for ROAI, which includes
the first UCB-style algorithm for outlier detection,
and derive upper bounds on their sample complexity. We also prove a matching, up to logarithmic
factors, worst case lower bound for the problem,
indicating that our upper bounds are generally
unimprovable. Experimental results show that our
algorithms are both robust and about 5x sample
efficient compared to state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Multi-armed bandits are commonly used to identify the optimal items (arms) among multiple candidates through adaptive queries (pure exploration setting (Jamieson & Nowak,
2014)). Every item is associated with an unknown probability distribution, and when a bandit algorithm selects (pulls)
an item, it observes a value (reward) sampled from this
distribution. Depending on its objective and the history of
observed values, the bandit algorithm has to decide which
1
University of Wisconsin-Madison 2 Amazon. Correspondence
to: Yinglun Zhu <yinglun@cs.wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

item to sample at every time t, so as to identify the optimal
items using as few samples as possible. Pure exploration
bandit algorithms have been proposed for various objectives,
such as identifying arms with the largest rewards (Jamieson
et al., 2014; Jamieson & Nowak, 2014; Chen et al., 2016),
identifying arms above a given threshold (Locatelli et al.,
2016; Mukherjee et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2019) or clustering
arms (Katariya et al., 2018; 2019).
In this paper, we study bandit algorithms for identifying
outlier arms. Outlier arms are defined as those with expected rewards that are outliers relative to the overall set
of expected rewards (e.g., arms with expected rewards that
are several deviations above the mean/median of the overall
set of expected rewards). The outlier detection problem
has wide applications in scientific discovery (Grün et al.,
2015; Chaudhary et al., 2015), fraud detection (Porwal &
Mukund, 2018), medicine (Schiff et al., 2017), and public
health (Hauskrecht et al., 2013). In contrast to passive outlier detection algorithms which identify outlier items using a
pre-sampled dataset, bandit algorithms actively query items
with the goal of identifying outliers using as few samples
as possible. This is important because it can lead to early
detection of fraud for example. Outlier arms subsume good
arms with expected rewards substantially above the average,
and most applications mentioned in good arm identification
(Kano et al., 2019) apply to our setting.
As observed in Zhuang et al. (2017), bandit outlier detection
cannot be reduced to best arm(s) identification in bandits
because of the inherent double exploration dilemma - the
threshold is unknown and any algorithm must balance exploring individual arms and exploring the outlier threshold.
Zhuang et al. (2017) define the outlier threshold θ̄ using the
k-sigma rule applied to the mean µ̄ and standard deviation
σ̄ of the expected rewards i.e., θ̄ = µ̄ + k · σ̄. However this
threshold can fail to identify the correct outlier arms because
the mean and standard deviation are themselves sensitive
to outlier values (non-robust estimators). It can also miss
outliers when the number of arms is small. In this paper,
we define the threshold using the k-sigma rule applied to
the median and the median absolute deviation, which are
robust estimators with the highest possible breakdown point
0.5. This is the recommended practice in literature (Hampel, 1974; Huber, 2004; Swallow & Kianifard, 1996), and
emphasized by Leys et al. (2013) in their aptly titled paper:

