SoftSort: A Continuous Relaxation for the argsort Operator

Sebastian Prillo * 1 Julian Martin Eisenschlos * 2

Abstract
While sorting is an important procedure in computer science, the argsort operator - which
takes as input a vector and returns its sorting permutation - has a discrete image and thus zero gradients almost everywhere. This prohibits end-toend, gradient-based learning of models that rely
on the argsort operator. A natural way to overcome this problem is to replace the argsort
operator with a continuous relaxation. Recent
work has shown a number of ways to do this, but
the relaxations proposed so far are computationally complex. In this work we propose a simple
continuous relaxation for the argsort operator which has the following qualities: it can be
implemented in three lines of code, achieves stateof-the-art performance, is easy to reason about
mathematically - substantially simplifying proofs
- and is faster than competing approaches. We
open source the code to reproduce all of the experiments and results.

1. Introduction
Gradient-based optimization lies at the core of the success
of deep learning. However, many common operators have
discrete images and thus exhibit zero gradients almost everywhere, making them unsuitable for gradient-based optimization. Examples include the Heaviside step function,
the argmax operator, and - the central object of this work
- the argsort operator. To overcome this limitation, continuous relaxations for these operators can be constructed.
For example, the sigmoid function serves as a continuous relaxation for the Heaviside step function, and the softmax
operator serves as a continuous relaxation for the argmax.
These continuous relaxations have the crucial property that
they provide meaningful gradients that can drive optimiza*
Equal contribution 1 University of California, Berkeley, California, USA 2 Google Research, Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence
to: Sebastian Prillo <sprillo@berkeley.edu>, Julian Martin Eisenschlos <eisenjulian@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

tion. Because of this, operators such as the softmax are
ubiquitous in deep learning. In this work we are concerned
with continuous relaxations for the argsort operator.
Formally, we define the argsort operator as the mapping argsort : Rn → Sn from n-dimensional real vectors s ∈ Rn to the set of permutations over n elements
Sn ⊆ {1, 2, . . . , n}n , where argsort(s) returns the permutation that sorts s in decreasing order1 . For example, for
the input vector s = [9, 1, 5, 2]T we have argsort(s) =
[1, 3, 4, 2]T . If we let Pn ⊆ {0, 1}n×n ⊂ Rn×n denote
the set of permutation matrices of dimension n, following (Grover et al., 2019) we can define, for a permutation
π ∈ Sn , the permutation matrix Pπ ∈ Pn as:
(
1 if j = πi ,
Pπ [i, j] =
0 otherwise
This is simply the one-hot representation of π. Note that
with these definitions, the mapping sort : Rn → Rn
that sorts s in decreasing order is sort(s) = Pargsort(s) s.
Also, if we let 1̄n = [1, 2, . . . , n]T , then the argsort
operator can be recovered from Pargsort(·) : Rn → Pn by
a simple matrix multiplication via
argsort(s) = Pargsort(s) 1̄n
Because of this reduction from the argsort operator
to the Pargsort(·) operator, in this work, as in previous
works (Mena et al., 2018; Grover et al., 2019; Cuturi et al.,
2019), our strategy to derive a continuous relaxation for
the argsort operator is to instead derive a continuous
relaxation for the Pargsort(·) operator. This is analogous
to the way that the softmax operator relaxes the argmax
operator.
The main contribution of this paper is the proposal of a
family of simple continuous relaxation for the Pargsort(·)
operator, which we call SoftSort, and define as follows:
!
−d sort(s)1T , 1sT
d
SoftSortτ (s) = softmax
τ
where the softmax operator is applied row-wise, d is any
differentiable almost everywhere, semi–metric function of
1
This is called the sort operator in (Grover et al., 2019). We
adopt the more conventional naming.

