Generalization to New Actions in Reinforcement Learning

Ayush Jain * 1 Andrew Szot * 1 Joseph J. Lim 1

Abstract
A fundamental trait of intelligence is the ability to achieve goals in the face of novel circumstances, such as making decisions from new action choices. However, standard reinforcement
learning assumes a fixed set of actions and requires expensive retraining when given a new action set. To make learning agents more adaptable, we introduce the problem of zero-shot
generalization to new actions. We propose a
two-stage framework where the agent first infers action representations from action information acquired separately from the task. A
policy flexible to varying action sets is then
trained with generalization objectives. We benchmark generalization on sequential tasks, such
as selecting from an unseen tool-set to solve
physical reasoning puzzles and stacking towers
with novel 3D shapes. Videos and code are
available at https://sites.google.com/
view/action-generalization.

1. Introduction
Imagine making a salad with an unfamiliar set of tools.
Since tools are characterized by their behaviors, you would
first inspect the tools by interacting with them. For instance,
you can observe a blade has a thin edge and infer that it
is sharp. Afterward, when you need to cut vegetables for
the salad, you decide to use this blade because you know
sharp objects are suitable for cutting. Like this, humans can
make selections from a novel set of choices by observing
the choices, inferring their properties, and finally making
decisions to satisfy the requirements of the task.
From a reinforcement learning perspective, this motivates an
important question of how agents can adapt to solve tasks
with previously unseen actions. Prior work in deep rein*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California, California, USA. Correspondence to:
Ayush Jain <ayushj@usc.edu>, Andrew Szot <szot@usc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Action

Goal

Training
Tools

Goal

New
Tools

Figure 1. An illustration of zero-shot generalization to new actions
in a sequential decision-making task, CREATE. (Left) Learning
to select and place the right tools for reaching the goal. (Right)
Generalizing the learned policy to a previously unseen set of tools.

forcement learning has explored generalization of policies
over environments (Cobbe et al., 2018; Nichol et al., 2018),
tasks (Finn et al., 2017; Parisi et al., 2018), and agent morphologies (Wang et al., 2018; Pathak et al., 2019). However,
zero-shot generalization of policies to new discrete actions
has not yet been explored. The primary goal of this paper
is to propose the problem of generalization to new actions.
In this setup, a policy that is trained on one set of discrete
actions is evaluated on its ability to solve tasks zero-shot
with new actions that were unseen during training.
Addressing this problem can enable robots to solve tasks
with a previously unseen toolkit, recommender systems to
make suggestions from newly added products, and hierarchical reinforcement learning agents to use a newly acquired
skill set. In such applications, retraining with new actions
would require prohibitively costly environment interactions.
Hence, zero-shot generalization to new actions without retraining is crucial to building robust agents. To this end, we
propose a framework and benchmark it on using new tools
in the CREATE physics environment (Figure 1), stacking
of towers with novel 3D shapes, reaching goals with unseen
navigation skills, and recommending new articles to users.
We identify three challenges faced when generalizing to
new actions. Firstly, an agent must observe or interact with
the actions to obtain data about their characteristics. This
data can be in the form of videos of a robot interacting with
various tools, images of inspecting objects from different

