Preselection Bandits
Viktor Bengs 1 Eyke Hüllermeier 1

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce the Preselection Bandit
problem, in which the learner preselects a subset
of arms (choice alternatives) for a user, which
then chooses the ﬁnal arm from this subset. The
learner is not aware of the user’s preferences, but
can learn them from observed choices. In our con­
crete setting, we allow these choices to be stochas­
tic and model the user’s actions by means of the
Plackett-Luce model. The learner’s main task is
to preselect subsets that eventually lead to highly
preferred choices. To formalize this goal, we in­
troduce a reasonable notion of regret and derive
lower bounds on the expected regret. Moreover,
we propose algorithms for which the upper bound
on expected regret matches the lower bound up to
a logarithmic term of the time horizon.

1. Introduction
The setting of preference-based multi-armed bandits or du­
eling bandits (Busa-Fekete et al., 2018) is a generalization
of the standard stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) prob­
lem (Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020). Instead of assuming
numerical rewards of individual arms (choice alternatives),
the former is based on pairwise preferences between arms.
In this paper, we introduce the Preselection Bandit (or sim­
ply Pre-Bandit) problem, which is closely related to the
preference-based setting, especially to the recent variant of
battling bandits (Saha & Gopalan, 2018).
Our setting involves an agent (learner), which preselects a
subset of arms, and a selector (a human user or another al­
gorithm), which then chooses the ﬁnal arm from this subset.
This setting is motivated by various practical applications.
In information retrieval, for example, the role of the agent
is played by a search engine, and the selector is the user
who seeks a certain information. Another example is online
1

Heinz Nixdorf Institute and Department of Computer Science,
Paderborn University, Germany. Correspondence to: Viktor Bengs
<viktor.bengs@upb.de>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

advertising, where advertisements recommended to users
can be seen as a preselection. As a concrete application, we
are currently working on the problem of algorithm (pre-)
selection (Kerschke et al., 2019), where the (presumably)
best-performing algorithm needs to be chosen from a pool
of candidates.
In the beginning, the agent is not aware of the selector’s
preferences. However, the choices made by the latter reveal
information about these preferences, from which the agent
can learn. Due to time constraints, information asymme­
try, or other reasons, we do not assume the selector to act
perfectly, which means that it may miss the actually best
among the preselected arms. In web search, for example,
a user clicks on links based on limited information such
as snippets, but without knowing the full content behind.
Likewise, in algorithm selection, the ﬁnal choice might be
made on the basis of a cross-validation study, i.e., estimated
performances that not guarantee the identiﬁcation of the
truly best algorithm. By modeling the selector’s actions
by means of the Plackett-Luce (PL) model (Luce, 1959;
Plackett, 1975), we allow some randomness in the process
of decision making. The agent’s main task is to preselect
subsets that eventually lead to highly preferred choices. To
formalize this goal, we introduce a reasonable notion of re­
gret based on utilities of preselected subsets, where an arm’s
(latent) utility is weighted with the probability of choosing
this arm from the subset. In particular, this allows for captur­
ing decision-making biases of users as studied intensively
in behavioral economics or psychology.
We study two variants of the problem. In the ﬁrst variant,
which we call restricted Pre-Bandit problem, the size of
the preselection is predeﬁned and ﬁxed throughout. In the
second variant, the ﬂexible Pre-Bandit problem, the agent
is allowed to adjust the size of the preselection in every
round. For these settings, we derive lower bounds on the
expected regret. Moreover, for both scenarios, we propose
active learning algorithms for which the upper bound on
expected regret matches the lower bound (possibly) up to a
logarithmic term of the time horizon.
We discuss related work in Section 2. In Section 3, we intro­
duce the notation used throughout the paper, and also give a
concise review of the PL model and some of its properties.
In Section 4, the Pre-Bandit problem is formally introduced,
together with a reasonable notion of regret, for which lower

