The Cost-free Nature of Optimally Tuning Tikhonov Regularizers and Other
Ordered Smoothers
Pierre C. Bellec 1 Dana Yang 2

Abstract
We consider the problem of selecting the best estimator among a family of Tikhonov regularized
estimators, or, alternatively, to select a linear combination of these regularizers that is as good as
the best regularizer in the family. Our theory reveals that if the Tikhonov regularizers share the
same penalty matrix with different tuning parameters, a convex procedure based on Q-aggregation
achieves the mean square error of the best estimator, up to a small error term no larger than Cσ 2 ,
where σ 2 is the noise level and C > 0 is an absolute constant. Remarkably, the error term does
not depend on the penalty matrix or the number of
estimators as long as they share the same penalty
matrix, i.e., it applies to any grid of tuning parameters, no matter how large the cardinality of
the grid is. This reveals the surprising “cost-free”
nature of optimally tuning Tikhonov regularizers,
in striking contrast with the existing literature on
aggregation of estimators where one typically has
to pay a cost of σ 2 log(M ) where M is the number of estimators in the family. The result holds,
more generally, for any family of ordered linear
smoothers; this encompasses Ridge regression as
well as Principal Component Regression. The result is extended to the problem of tuning Tikhonov
regularizers with different penalty matrices.

1. Introduction
Consider a learning problem where one is given a response
vector y ∈ Rn and a design matrix X ∈ Rn×p . Given a
positive definite matrix K ∈ Rp×p and a regularization parameter λ > 0, the Tikhonov regularized estimator ŵ(K, λ)
1

Department of Statistics, Busch Campus, Rutgers University,
Piscataway, New Jersey, USA 2 The Fuqua School of Business,
Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA. Correspondence
to: Pierre C. Bellec <pierre.bellec@rutgers.edu>, Dana Yang
<xiaoqian.yang@duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

is defined as the solution of the quadratic program

ŵ(K, λ) = arg min kXw − yk2 + λwT Kw ,

(1.1)

w∈Rp

where k · k is the Euclidean norm. Since we assume that
the penalty matrix K is positive definite, the above optimization problem is strongly convex and the solution is
unique. In the special case K = Ip×p , the above estimator
reduces to Ridge regression. It is well known that the above
optimization problem can be explicitly solved and that
ŵ(K, λ) = (X T X + λK)−1 X T y
=K −1/2 (K −1/2 X T XK −1/2 + λIp×p )−1 K −1/2 X T y.
Problem statement.

Consider the Gaussian mean model

y =µ+ε

ε ∼ N (0, σ 2 In×n )

with

(1.2)

where µ ∈ Rn is an unknown mean, and consider a deterministic design matrix X ∈ Rn×p . We are given a grid of
tuning parameters λ1 , ..., λM ≥ 0 and a penalty matrix K
as above. Our goal is to construct an estimator w̃ such that
the regret or excess risk
E[kX w̃ − µk2 ] −

min

j=1,...,M

E[kX ŵ(K, λj ) − µk2 ] (1.3)

is small. Beyond the construction of an estimator w̃ that has
small regret, we aim to answer the following questions:
• How does the regret scale with M , the number of tuning parameters on the grid?
• How does the regret scale with R∗
=
minj=1,...,M E[kX ŵ(K, λj ) − µk2 ], the minimal mean squared error among the tuning parameters
λ1 , ..., λM ?
Ordered linear smoothers. If Aj = X(X T X +
λj K)−1 X T is the matrix such that Aj y = X ŵ(K, λj ),
the family of estimators {Aj y, j = 1, ..., M } is an example
of ordered linear smoothers, introduced (Kneip, 1994).
Definition 1. The set of n × n matrices F ⊂ Rn×n is
referred to as a family of ordered linear smoothers if (i) for

