Efficient Proximal Mapping of the 1-path-norm of Shallow Networks

Fabian Latorre * 1 Paul Rolland * 1 Nadav Hallak * 1 Volkan Cevher 1

Abstract
We demonstrate two new important properties of
the 1-path-norm of shallow neural networks. First,
despite its non-smoothness and non-convexity it
allows a closed form proximal operator which
can be efficiently computed, allowing the use
of stochastic proximal-gradient-type methods for
regularized empirical risk minimization. Second,
when the activation functions is differentiable, it
provides an upper bound on the Lipschitz constant of the network. Such bound is tighter than
the trivial layer-wise product of Lipschitz constants, motivating its use for training networks
robust to adversarial perturbations. In practical
experiments we illustrate the advantages of using the proximal mapping and we compare the
robustness-accuracy trade-off induced by the 1path-norm, L1-norm and layer-wise constraints
on the Lipschitz constant (Parseval networks).

1. Introduction
Neural networks are the backbone of contemporary applications in machine learning and related fields, having huge influence and significance both in theory and practice. Among
the most important and desirable attributes of a trained network are robustness and sparsity. Robustness, is often defined as stability to adversarial perturbations, such as in
supervised classification methods. The apparent brittleness
of neural networks to adversarial attacks in this context has
been considered in the literature for some time, see e.g.,
(Biggio et al., 2013; Szegedy et al., 2013; Madry et al.,
2018) and references therein.
A fundamental question in this regard is how to measure robustness, or more importantly, how to encourage
it. One prominent approach supported by theory and practice (Raghunathan et al., 2018; Cisse et al., 2017), is to use
*

1

Equal contribution Laboratory for Information and Inference
Systems (LIONS), EPFL, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Fabian
Latorre <fabian.latorre@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

the Lipschitz constant of the network function to quantize
robustness, and regularization to encourage it.
This approach is also supported theoretically with generalization bounds in terms of the layer-wise product of spectral
norms (Bartlett et al., 2017; Miyato et al., 2018), which
particularly upper-bounds the Lipschitz constant. However,
a recent empirical study (Jiang* et al., 2020) has found in
practice a negative correlation of this measure with generalization. This casts doubts on its usefulness and signals the
fact that it is a rather loose upper bound for the Lipschitz
constant (Latorre et al., 2020).
Current methods that compute upper bounds on the Lipschitz constant of neural networks can be roughly classified into two classes: (i) the class of product bounds,
comprising all upper bounds obtained by the multiplication
of layer-wise matrix norms; and, (ii) the class of convexoptimization-based bounds, which addresses the network
as a whole entity (Raghunathan et al., 2018; Fazlyab et al.,
2019; Latorre et al., 2020).
A trade-off between computational complexity and quality
of the upper bound seems apparent. An ideal bound would
achieve a balance between both properties: it should provide
a good estimate of the constant while being fast and easy to
minimize with iterative first-order algorithms.
Recently, the path-norm of the network (Neyshabur et al.,
2015) has emerged as a complexity measure that is highlycorrelated with generalization (Jiang* et al., 2020). Thus,
its use as a regularizer holds an increasing interest for researchers in the field.
Despite existing generalization bounds (Neyshabur et al.,
2015), our understanding of the optimization aspects of the
path-norm-regularized objective is lacking. Jiang* et al.
(2020) refrained from using automatic-differentiation methods in this case because, as they argue, the optimization
could fail, thus providing no conclusion about its qualities.
It is then natural to ask: how do we properly optimize the
path-norm-regularized objective with theoretical guarantees? What conclusions can we draw about the robustness
and sparsity of path-norm-regularized networks? We focus
on the 1-path-norm and provide partial answers to those
questions, further advancing our understanding of this measure. Let us summarize our main contributions:

