Multi-Agent Routing Value Iteration Network

Quinlan Sykora * Mengye Ren * Raquel Urtasun

Abstract
In this paper we tackle the problem of routing
multiple agents in a coordinated manner. This
is a complex problem that has a wide range of
applications in fleet management to achieve a
common goal, such as mapping from a swarm of
robots and ride sharing. Traditional methods are
typically not designed for realistic environments
which contain sparsely connected graphs and unknown traffic, and are often too slow in runtime
to be practical. In contrast, we propose a graph
neural network based model that is able to perform multi-agent routing based on learned value
iteration in a sparsely connected graph with dynamically changing traffic conditions. Moreover,
our learned communication module enables the
agents to coordinate online and adapt to changes
more effectively. We created a simulated environment to mimic realistic mapping performed by autonomous vehicles with unknown minimum edge
coverage and traffic conditions; our approach significantly outperforms traditional solvers both in
terms of total cost and runtime. We also show
that our model trained with only two agents on
graphs with a maximum of 25 nodes can easily
generalize to situations with more agents and/or
nodes. 1

1. Introduction
As robots become ubiquitous, one of the fundamental problems is to be able to route a fleet or swarm of robots to
perform a task. Several approaches have been developed
to try to solve this task. The traveling salesman problem
(TSP) is a classic NP-Hard (Toth & Vigo, 2002) problem
in computer science, wherein an agent must visit a set of
*

Equal contribution .
Correspondence to:
Quinlan Sykora <quinlan.sykora@uber.com>, Mengye Ren
<mren3@uber.com>, Raquel Urtasun <urtasun@uber.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
1
Our code and data are released at https://github.com/
uber/MARVIN

Figure 1. A visualization of the route produced by a fleet of twenty
vehicles using our proposed algorithm. Colors denote different
vehicle trajectories.

points while traveling the shortest possible distance. The
natural multi-agent generalization of this problem is known
as the vehicle routing problem (VRP) (Toth & Vigo, 2002),
where multiple agents work in tandem to ensure that all
points are visited exactly once. Despite a plethora of classic approaches to these problems (Applegate et al., 2006;
Helsgaun, 2017), solvers are typically structured for offline
planning and generally are unable to adapt their solutions
online. Furthermore, these solvers do not incorporate online
communication between the agents which is very desirable
in many practical settings. These are not necessarily weaknesses of the solutions but rather the oversimplification of
the problem definition itself.
Recently proposed deep learning methods have presented
promising results in approximating solutions with much
faster runtime (Vinyals et al., 2015; Khalil et al., 2017;
Kool et al., 2019; Deudon et al., 2018). However, they are
often tested on simplistic planar graph benchmarks with
limited exploration on multi-agent settings. Moreover, none
of these methods were designed towards dynamic environments where online communication can be very beneficial.
We focus on the realistic multi-agent autonomous mapping
problem: given a fleet of vehicles, find the minimum total

