From Local SGD to Local Fixed-Point Methods for Federated Learning

Grigory Malinovsky 1 Dmitry Kovalev 2 Elnur Gasanov 2 Laurent Condat 2 Peter Richtárik 2

Abstract
Most algorithms for solving optimization problems or finding saddle points of convex–concave
functions are fixed-point algorithms. In this work
we consider the generic problem of finding a fixed
point of an average of operators, or an approximation thereof, in a distributed setting. Our work is
motivated by the needs of federated learning. In
this context, each local operator models the computations done locally on a mobile device. We
investigate two strategies to achieve such a consensus: one based on a fixed number of local steps,
and the other based on randomized computations.
In both cases, the goal is to limit communication
of the locally-computed variables, which is often
the bottleneck in distributed frameworks. We perform convergence analysis of both methods and
conduct a number of experiments highlighting the
benefits of our approach.

1. Introduction
In the ‘big data’ era, the explosion in size and complexity
of the data arises in parallel to a shift towards distributed
computations, as modern hardware increasingly relies on
the power of uniting many parallel units into one system.
For distributed optimization tasks, specific issues arise, such
as decentralized data storage. For instance, the huge amount
of mobile phones or smart home devices in the world contain an important volume of data captured and stored on
each of them. This data contains a wealth of potentially useful information to their owners, and more so if appropriate
machine learning models could be trained on the heterogeneous data stored across the network of such devices. Yet,
many users are increasingly sensitive to privacy concerns
and prefer their data to never leave their devices. But the
only way to share knowledge while not having all data in
1
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny,
Russia 2 King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
(KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia. Correspondence to: Laurent
Condat <see https://lcondat.github.io/>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

one place is to communicate, to keep moving towards the
solution of the overall problem. Typically, mobile phones
communicate back and forth with a distant server, so that a
global model is progressively improved and converges to a
steady state, which is globally optimal for all users. This is
precisely the purpose of the recent and rising paradigm of
federated learning (Konečný et al., 2016; McMahan et al.,
2017) where typically a global supervised model is trained
in a massively distributed manner over a network of heterogeneous devices. Communication, which can be costly
and slow, is the main bottleneck in this framework. So, it
is of primary importance to devise novel algorithmic strategies, where the computation and communication loads are
balanced.
A strategy increasingly used by practitioners is to make
use of local computations; that is, more local computations
are performed on each device before communication and
subsequent model averaging, with the hope that this will reduce the total number of communications needed to obtain
a globally meaningful solution. Thus, local gradient descent methods have been investigated (Stich, 2019; Khaled
et al., 2019; 2020; Ma et al., 2017; Haddadpour & Mahdavi,
2019). Despite their practical success, local methods are
little understood and there is much to be discovered. In this
paper, we don’t restrict ourselves to gradient descent to minimize an average of smooth functions; we consider the much
broader setting of finding a fixed point of an average of a
large number M of operators. Indeed, most, if not all, iterative methods are fixed-point methods, which aim at finding a
fixed point of some operator (Bauschke et al., 2011; Condat
et al., 2019). Fixed-point methods are typically made from
compositions and averages of gradient or proximity operators of functions (Combettes & Yamada, 2015; Bauschke
& Combettes, 2017); for instance, a sum of proximity operators corresponds to the ‘proximal average’ of functions
(Yu, 2013). Using more involved Lyapunov functions than
the distance to the solution or the objective value, convergence of methods with inertia, e.g. Nesterov’s acceleration
techniques, to a fixed point, can be established (Lessard
et al., 2016). (Block-)coordinate or alternating minimization methods are fixed-point methods as well (Richtárik &
Takáč, 2014; Pesquet & Repetti, 2015). Let us also mention that by the design of nontrivial fixed-point operators,
nonlinear inverse problems can be solved (Combettes &

