Learning Similarity Metrics for Numerical Simulations

Georg Kohl 1 Kiwon Um 1 Nils Thuerey 1

Abstract
We propose a neural network-based approach
that computes a stable and generalizing metric
(LSiM) to compare data from a variety of nu­
merical simulation sources. We focus on scalar
time-dependent 2D data that commonly arises
from motion and transport-based partial differen­
tial equations (PDEs). Our method employs a
Siamese network architecture that is motivated
by the mathematical properties of a metric. We
leverage a controllable data generation setup with
PDE solvers to create increasingly different out­
puts from a reference simulation in a controlled
environment. A central component of our learned
metric is a specialized loss function that intro­
duces knowledge about the correlation between
single data samples into the training process. To
demonstrate that the proposed approach outper­
forms existing metrics for vector spaces and other
learned, image-based metrics, we evaluate the dif­
ferent methods on a large range of test data. Addi­
tionally, we analyze generalization beneﬁts of an
adjustable training data difﬁculty and demonstrate
the robustness of LSiM via an evaluation on three
real-world data sets.

1. Introduction
Evaluating computational tasks for complex data sets is a
fundamental problem in all computational disciplines. Reg­
ular vector space metrics, such as the L2 distance, were
shown to be very unreliable (Wang et al., 2004; Zhang et al.,
2018), and the advent of deep learning techniques with con­
volutional neural networks (CNNs) made it possible to more
reliably evaluate complex data domains such as natural im­
ages, texts (Benajiba et al., 2018), or speech (Wang et al.,
2018). Our central aim is to demonstrate the usefulness of
1
Department of Informatics, Technical University of Mu­
nich, Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Georg Kohl
<georg.kohl@tum.de>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the au­
thor(s).

CNN-based evaluations in the context of numerical simulations. These simulations are the basis for a wide range of
applications ranging from blood ﬂow simulations to aircraft
design. Speciﬁcally, we propose a novel learned simulation
metric (LSiM) that allows for a reliable similarity evaluation
of simulation data.
Potential applications of such a metric arise in all areas
where numerical simulations are performed or similar data
is gathered from observations. For example, accurate evalua­
tions of existing and new simulation methods with respect to
a known ground truth solution (Oberkampf et al., 2004) can
be performed more reliably than with a regular vector norm.
Another good example is weather data for which complex
transport processes and chemical reactions make in-place
comparisons with common metrics unreliable (Jolliffe &
Stephenson, 2012). Likewise, the long-standing, open ques­
tions of turbulence (Moin & Mahesh, 1998; Lin et al., 1998)
can beneﬁt from improved methods for measuring the simi­
larity and differences in data sets and observations.
In this work, we focus on ﬁeld data, i.e., dense grids of
scalar values, similar to images, which were generated with
known partial differential equations (PDEs) in order to en­
sure the availability of ground truth solutions. While we
focus on 2D data in the following to make comparisons with
existing techniques from imaging applications possible, our
approach naturally extends to higher dimensions. Every
sample of this 2D data can be regarded a high dimensional
vector, so metrics on the corresponding vector space are
applicable to evaluate similarities. These metrics, in the
following denoted as shallow metrics, are typically simple,
element-wise functions such as L1 or L2 distances. Their
inherent problem is that they cannot compare structures on
different scales or contextual information.
Many practical problems require solutions over time and
need a vast number of non-linear operations that often re­
sult in substantial changes of the solutions even for small
changes of the inputs. Hence, despite being based on
known, continuous formulations, these systems can be seen
as chaotic. We illustrate this behavior in Fig. 1, where two
smoke ﬂows are compared to a reference simulation. A
single simulation parameter was varied for these examples,
and a visual inspection shows that smoke plume (a) is more
similar to the reference. This matches the data generation

