Spectral Graph Matching and Regularized Quadratic Relaxations:
Algorithm and Theory

Zhou Fan 1 Cheng Mao 2 Yihong Wu 1 Jiaming Xu 3

Abstract
Graph matching, also known as network alignment, aims at recovering the latent vertex
correspondence between two unlabeled, edgecorrelated weighted graphs. To tackle this task,
we propose a spectral method, GRAph Matching by Pairwise eigen-Alignments (GRAMPA),
which first constructs a similarity matrix as a
weighted sum of outer products between all pairs
of eigenvectors of the two graphs, and then outputs a matching by a simple rounding procedure.
For a universality class of correlated Wigner models, GRAMPA achieves exact recovery of the latent matching between two graphs with edge correlation 1 − 1/polylog(n) and average degree at
least polylog(n). This matches the state-of-theart guarantees for polynomial-time algorithms established for correlated Erdős-Rényi graphs, and
significantly improves over existing spectral methods. The superiority of GRAMPA is also demonstrated on a variety of synthetic and real datasets,
in terms of both statistical accuracy and computational efficiency.

1. Introduction
Given a pair of graphs, the problem of graph matching
or network alignment refers to finding a bijection between
the vertex sets so that the edge sets are maximally aligned
(Conte et al., 2004; Livi & Rizzi, 2013; Emmert-Streib
et al., 2016). This is a ubiquitous problem arising in a
variety of applications, including network de-anonymization
(Narayanan & Shmatikov, 2008; 2009), pattern recognition
(Conte et al., 2004; Schellewald & Schnörr, 2005), and
1

Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yale University,
New Haven, Connecticut, USA 2 School of Mathematics, Georgia
Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, USA 3 The Fuqua School
of Business, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
Correspondence to: Cheng Mao <cheng.mao@math.gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

computational biology (Singh et al., 2008; Kazemi et al.,
2016). Finding the best matching between two graphs with
adjacency matrices A, B ∈ Rn×n may be formalized as the
following combinatorial optimization problem over the set
of permutations Sn :
Pn
maxπ∈Sn i,j=1 Aij Bπ(i),π(j) .
(1)
This is an instance of the notoriously difficult quadratic
assignment problem (QAP) (Pardalos et al., 1994; Burkard
et al., 1998), which is NP-hard to solve or to approximate
within an approximation factor that even grows with n
(Makarychev et al., 2010).
As the worst-case computational hardness of the QAP (1)
may not be representative of typical graphs, various averagecase models have been studied. For example, when the
two graphs are isomorphic, the resulting graph isomorphism problem remains open to be solved in polynomial
time for worst-case instances, but can be solved for ErdősRényi random graphs in linear time whenever informationtheoretically possible (Bollobás, 1982; Czajka & Pandurangan, 2008). In “noisy” settings where the graphs are not
exactly isomorphic, there is a recent surge of interest in
computer science, information theory, and statistics for
studying random graph matching (Yartseva & Grossglauser,
2013; Lyzinski et al., 2014; Kazemi et al., 2015; Cullina &
Kiyavash, 2016; Shirani et al., 2017; Cullina & Kiyavash,
2017; Dai et al., 2018; Barak et al., 2018; Cullina et al.,
2018; Ding et al., 2018; Feizi et al., 2019; Mossel & Xu,
2019).
1.1. Random Weighted Graph Matching
In this work, we study the following random weighted graph
matching problem: Consider two weighted graphs with n
vertices, and a latent permutation π∗ on [n] , {1, . . . , n}
such that vertex i of the first graph corresponds to vertex π∗ (i) of the second. Denoting by A and B their
(symmetric) weighted adjacency matrices, suppose that
{(Aij , Bπ∗ (i),π∗ (j) ) : 1 ≤ i < j ≤ n} are independent
pairs of positively correlated random variables, with correlation at least 1 − σ 2 where σ ∈ [0, 1]. We aim to recover
π∗ from A and B.
Notable special cases of this model include the following:

