Progressive Graph Learning for Open-Set Domain Adaptation

Yadan Luo * 1 Zijian Wang * 1 Zi Huang 1 Mahsa Baktashmotlagh 1

Abstract
Domain shift is a fundamental problem in visual recognition which typically arises when the
source and target data follow different distributions. The existing domain adaptation approaches
which tackle this problem work in the closed-set
setting with the assumption that the source and
the target data share exactly the same classes of
objects. In this paper, we tackle a more realistic problem of open-set domain shift where the
target data contains additional classes that are
not present in the source data. More specifically,
we introduce an end-to-end Progressive Graph
Learning (PGL) framework where a graph neural network with episodic training is integrated to
suppress underlying conditional shift and adversarial learning is adopted to close the gap between
the source and target distributions. Compared to
the existing open-set adaptation approaches, our
approach guarantees to achieve a tighter upper
bound of the target error. Extensive experiments
on three standard open-set benchmarks evidence
that our approach significantly outperforms the
state-of-the-arts in open-set domain adaptation.

1. Introduction
While deep learning has made remarkable advances across
a wide variety of machine-learning tasks and applications,
it is commonly assumed that the training and test data are
drawn from the same distribution. In practice, however, this
assumption can be violated due to a number of factors, such
as the change of lighting conditions, background, environment, or data modalities, which is referred to as the domain
shift problem.
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) approaches tackle
the domain shift problem by aligning the training (source)
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Information Technology and
Electrical Engineering, The University of Queensland, Australia.
Correspondence to: Yadan Luo <lyadanluol@gmail.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

and test (target) distributions, and can be roughly divided
into statistical matching (Baktashmotlagh et al., 2013; 2014;
2016; Tzeng et al., 2014; Long et al., 2013; 2015; Ganin
et al., 2016; Tzeng et al., 2017; Li et al., 2019) or adversarial
learning (Ganin et al., 2016; Tzeng et al., 2017; Long et al.,
2017; Ghifary et al., 2016) methods. Theoretical analysis
of UDA approaches has been widely studied (Ben-David
et al., 2006; Mansour et al., 2009; Zhang et al., 2019), which
provides rigorous error bounds on the target data.
Existing UDA algorithms are developed under the assumption that the source and target domains share an identical
group of classes. Such a scenario typically refers to a closedset setting, which could be hardly guaranteed in real-world
applications. Therefore, a more realistic Open-set adaptation setting has been introduced recently (Saito et al., 2018)
which allows the target data to contain an additional “unknown” category, covering all irrelevant classes not present
in the source domain.
The core idea of unsupervised open-set domain adaptation
(OUDA) approaches (Busto & Gall, 2017; Baktashmotlagh
et al., 2019; Saito et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019; Feng et al.,
2019) is to learn a classifier from a larger hypothesis space
for both shared and unknown classes in the source and target
domains. According to (Ben-David et al., 2006; Mansour
et al., 2009), the target error is bounded by the source risk,
discrepancy distance across the domains, the shared error
coming from the conditional shift (Zhao et al., 2019), and
the open-set risk. Open-set risk contributes the most to the
error bound when a large percentage of data is unknown.
While promising, existing OUDA approaches (Busto & Gall,
2017; Saito et al., 2018; Baktashmotlagh et al., 2019; Liu
et al., 2019; Feng et al., 2019) lack an essential theoretical
analysis of the aforementioned partial risks and the upper
bound for the target risk, thus omitting potential solutions
for improvement and leading to a biased solution. With
the aim of minimising the aforementioned partial risks and
achieving a tighter error bound for open-set adaptation, we
combine the following four strategies in an end-to-end progressive learning framework:
1. To suppress the source risk, we decompose the original
hypothesis space H into two subspaces H1 and H2 ,
where H1 includes classifiers for the shared classes
of the source and target domains and H2 is specific

