Multi-Task Learning with User Preferences:
Gradient Descent with Controlled Ascent in Pareto Optimization

Debabrata Mahapatra 1 Vaibhav Rajan 2

Abstract
Multi-Task Learning (MTL) is a well established
paradigm for jointly learning models for multiple
correlated tasks. Often the tasks conflict, requiring trade-offs between them during optimization.
In such cases, multi-objective optimization based
MTL methods can be used to find one or more
Pareto optimal solutions. A common requirement
in MTL applications, that cannot be addressed by
these methods, is to find a solution satisfying userspecified preferences with respect to task-specific
losses. We advance the state-of-the-art by developing the first gradient-based multi-objective
MTL algorithm to solve this problem. Our unique
approach combines multiple gradient descent with
carefully controlled ascent to traverse the Pareto
front in a principled manner, which also makes it
robust to initialization. The scalability of our algorithm enables its use in large-scale deep networks
for MTL. Assuming only differentiability of the
task-specific loss functions, we provide theoretical guarantees for convergence. Our experiments
show that our algorithm outperforms the best competing methods on benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Multi-Task Learning (MTL) is a paradigm where data for
multiple related tasks is used to learn models for all the
tasks simultaneously. It aims to improve over learning each
task independently by utilizing the shared signal in the data
through an inductive transfer mechanism (Caruana, 1997).
Deep architectures based on MTL have led to state-of-theart models in many areas, such as computer vision (Liu et al.,
1

Department of Computer Science, National University of
Singapore 2 Department of Information Systems and Analytics,
National University of Singapore. Correspondence to: Debabrata Mahapatra <debabrata@u.nus.edu>, Vaibhav Rajan
<vaibhav.rajan@nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

2019a), natural language processing (Liu et al., 2019b) and
bioinformatics (Ramsundar et al., 2015).
A common approach to train MTL models is by minimizing the weighted sum of the empirical losses for each task,
also known as the linear scalarization approach. However,
this formulation cannot model competing tasks that arise
in many real-world applications, e.g., during drug design
we may want to simultaneously increase drug effectiveness
and decrease development cost. It may not be possible to
optimize all the objectives simultaneously and trade-offs
between tasks may be required. In such cases, Pareto optimal solutions, obtained through multi-objective optimization, are natural choices where each optimal solution is
non-dominated, i.e., no objective value can be improved
further without degrading some other objectives. There can
be multiple (possibly infinite) Pareto optimal solutions, represented by the Pareto front, each solution with a different
trade-off between the conflicting objectives.
The efficacy of multi-objective optimization for MTL was
first shown by Sener & Koltun (2018). Their algorithm extends the Multiple Gradient Descent Algorithm (Désidéri,
2012) to handle high-dimensional gradients, thereby making
it suitable for large-scale MTL with deep networks. However, their method finds a single arbitrary solution from the
Pareto set and cannot be used by MTL designers to explore
solutions with different trade-offs. This limitation was recognized by Lin et al. (2019) who partly address this problem
by decomposing the MTL problem and solving multiple subproblems with different trade-offs. Their method yields a
set of Pareto optimal solutions distributed over the Pareto
front.
In many MTL applications, the designer may want to explore solutions with specific trade-offs in the form of preferences or priorities among the tasks. For instance, in multitask recommender systems (Milojkovic et al., 2019) which
optimizes semantic relevance, content quality and revenue,
one may want (one or more) solutions that prioritizes relevance over quality. Similar requirements arise in, e.g., emotion recognition (Zhang et al., 2017) and the autonomous
driving self-localization problem (Wang et al., 2018). Formally, given preferences rj for each task, a Pareto optimal
solution is required such that for any two tasks, if ri ě rj ,

