Learning Efficient Multi-agent Communication:
An Information Bottleneck Approach

Rundong Wang 1 Xu He 1 Runsheng Yu 1 Wei qiu 1 Bo An 1 Zinovi Rabinovich 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of the limited-bandwidth
communication for multi-agent reinforcement
learning, where agents cooperate with the assistance of a communication protocol and a scheduler. The protocol and scheduler jointly determine
which agent is communicating what message and
to whom. Under the limited bandwidth constraint,
a communication protocol is required to generate
informative messages. Meanwhile, an unnecessary communication connection should not be
established because it occupies limited resources
in vain. In this paper, we develop an Informative
Multi-Agent Communication (IMAC) method to
learn efficient communication protocols as well
as scheduling. First, from the perspective of communication theory, we prove that the limited bandwidth constraint requires low-entropy messages
throughout the transmission. Then inspired by
the information bottleneck principle, we learn a
valuable and compact communication protocol
and a weight-based scheduler. To demonstrate the
efficiency of our method, we conduct extensive experiments in various cooperative and competitive
multi-agent tasks with different numbers of agents
and different bandwidths. We show that IMAC
converges faster and leads to efficient communication among agents under the limited bandwidth
as compared to many baseline methods.

1. Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has long
been a go-to tool in complex robotic and strategic domains (RoboCup, 2019; OpenAI, 2019). In these scenarios, communicated information enables action and belief
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. Correspondence to: Rundong
Wang <rundong001@e.ntu.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

correlation that benefits a group’s cooperation. Therefore,
many recent works in the field of multi-agent communication focus on learning what messages (Foerster et al., 2016;
Sukhbaatar et al., 2016; Peng et al., 2017) to send and whom
to address them (Jiang & Lu, 2018; Kilinc & Montana, 2018;
Das et al., 2019; Singh et al., 2018).
A key difficulty, faced by a group of learning agents in such
domains, is the need to efficiently exploit the available communication resources, such as limited bandwidth. The limited bandwidth exists in two processes of transmission: from
agents to the scheduler and from the scheduler to agents
as shown in Fig. 1. This problem has recently attracted
attention and one strategy has been proposed for limited
bandwidth settings: downsizing the communication group
via a scheduler (Zhang & Lesser, 2013; Kim et al., 2019;
Mao et al., 2019). The scheduler allows a part of agents
to communicate so that the bandwidth is not overwhelmed
with all agents’ messages. However, these methods limit the
number of agents who can communicate instead of the communication content. Agents may share redundant messages
which are unsustainable under bandwidth limitations. For
example, a single large message can occupy the whole bandwidth. Also, these methods need specific configurations
such as a predefined scale of agents’ communication group
(Zhang & Lesser, 2013; Kim et al., 2019) or a predefined
threshold for muting agents (Mao et al., 2019). Such manual
configuration would be of a definite detriment in complex
multi-agent domains.
In this paper, we address the limited bandwidth problem
by compressing the communication messages. First, from
the perspective of communication theory, we view the messages as random vectors and prove that a limited bandwidth
can be translated into a constraint on the communicated
message entropy. Thus, agents should generate low-entropy
messages to satisfy the limited bandwidth constraint. In
more details, derived from source coding theorem (Shannon, 1948) and Nyquist criterion (Freeman, 2004), we state
that in a noiseless channel, when a K-ary, bandwidth B,
quantization interval ∆ communication system transmits
n messages of dimension d per second, the entropy of the
messages H(m) is limited by the bandwidth according to
2K
H(m) ≤ 2B log
+ d log2 ∆.
n

