On Semi-parametric Inference for BART

Veronika Ročková 1

Abstract
There has been a growing realization of the potential of Bayesian machine learning as a platform that can provide both flexible modeling,
accurate predictions as well as coherent uncertainty statements. In particular, Bayesian Additive
Regression Trees (BART) have emerged as one
of today’s most effective general approaches to
predictive modeling under minimal assumptions.
Statistical theoretical developments for machine
learning have been mostly concerned with approximability or rates of estimation when recovering
infinite dimensional objects (curves or densities).
Despite the impressive array of available theoretical results, the literature has been largely silent
about uncertainty quantification. In this work, we
continue the theoretical investigation of BART
initiated recently by (Ročková and van der Pas,
2017). We focus on statistical inference questions. In particular, we study the Bernstein-von
Mises (BvM) phenomenon (i.e. asymptotic normality) for smooth linear functionals of the regression surface within the framework of nonparametric regression with fixed covariates. Our
semi-parametric BvM results show that, beyond
rate-optimal estimation, BART can be also used
for valid statistical inference.

1. Introduction
With visible successes on a wide range of predictive tasks,
the role of machine learning has become increasingly recognized across a wide array of application domains ranging from economics to electronic commerce. Bayesian approaches have been particularly appealing as they provide
a structured approach to uncertainty assessment via hierarchical modeling. Uncertainty quantification for inference
1

Booth
School
of
Business,
University
of
Chicago.
Correspondence to:
Veronika Ročková
<Veronika.Rockova@ChicagoBooth.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 108, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

(hypothesis testing and confidence statements) is a fundamental goal of statistics that goes beyond mere prediction.
This note studies the inferential potential of Bayesian Additive Regression Trees (BART) of (Chipman et al., 2010),
one of the workhorses of Bayesian machine learning (Hahn
et al., 2017; Hill, 2011; He et al., 2019; Bleich, 2014; Linero,
2016; Linero and Yang, 2017).
In particular, we study the Gaussian approximability of
certain aspects of posterior distributions in non-parametric
regression with trees/forest priors. Results of this type, initially due to Laplace (1810) but most commonly known as
Bernstein-von Mises (BvM) theorems, imply that posteriorbased inference asymptotically
√coincides with the one based
on traditional frequentist 1/ n-consistent estimators. In
this vein, BvM theorems provide a rigorous frequentist justification of Bayesian inference. The main thrust of this work
is to understand the extent to which this phenomenon holds
for various incarnations of BART.
In simple words, the BvM phenomenon occurs when, as
the number of observations increases, the posterior distribution has approximately the shape of a Gaussian distribution
centered at an efficient estimator of the parameter of interest. Moreover, the posterior credible sets, i.e. regions with
prescribed posterior probability, are then also confidence
regions with the same asymptotic coverage. This property
has important practical implications in the sense that constructing confidence regions via variation in MCMC draws
is relatively straightforward compared to direct constructions. Under fairly mild assumptions, BvM statements can
be expected to hold in regular finite-dimensional models
(van der Vaart, 2000).
Unfortunately, the frequentist theory on asymptotic normality does not generalize fully to semi- and non-parametric
estimation problems (Bickel and Kleijn, 2012). Freedman
initiated the discussion on the consequences of unwisely
chosen priors in the 1960’s, providing a negative BvM
result in a basic `2 -sequence Gaussian conjugate setting.
The warnings against seemingly innocuous priors that may
lead to posterior inconsistency were then reiterated many
times in the literature, including (Cox, 1993) and (Diaconis and Freedman, 1998; 1986). Other counterexamples
and anomalies of the BvM behavior in infinite-dimensional

