Error Estimation for Sketched SVD via the Bootstrap

Miles E. Lopes 1 N. Benjamin Erichson 2 Michael W. Mahoney 2

Abstract
In order to compute fast approximations to the singular value decompositions (SVD) of very large
matrices, randomized sketching algorithms have
become a leading approach. However, a key practical difﬁculty of sketching an SVD is that the
user does not know how far the sketched singular
vectors/values are from the exact ones. Indeed,
the user may be forced to rely on analytical worstcase error bounds, which may not account for the
unique structure of a given problem. As a result,
the lack of tools for error estimation often leads to
much more computation than is really necessary.
To overcome these challenges, this paper develops
a fully data-driven bootstrap method that numerically estimates the actual error of sketched singular vectors/values. Furthermore, the method is
computationally inexpensive, because it operates
only on sketched objects, and hence it requires no
extra passes over the full matrix being factored.

1. Introduction
During the past ﬁfteen years, randomized sketching algorithms have emerged as a powerful framework for computing approximate solutions to large-scale matrix problems in
machine learning, data analysis, and scientiﬁc computing.
Accordingly, given that the singular value decomposition
(SVD) is among the most essential matrix computations in
these domains, it has been a major focal point in the literature on randomized numerical linear algebra (RandNLA)
(e.g., Frieze et al., 2004; Drineas et al., 2006; Rokhlin et al.,
2010; Clarkson & Woodruff, 2009; Halko et al., 2011b;a;
Woodruff, 2014; Musco & Musco, 2015; Tropp et al., 2019,
among many others). Broadly speaking, this line of work
has led to a variety of randomized SVD algorithms that
can offer higher speed and scalability than classical deterministic algorithms — provided that the user is willing to
1

Department of Statistics, UC Davis 2 ICSI and Department
of Statistics, UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Miles E. Lopes
<melopes@ucdavis.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

tolerate some approximation error. For this reason, the
performance of a sketched SVD hinges on an appropriate
tradeoff between computational cost and approximation error. However, one of the key unresolved challenges for users
is that the actual error is unknown, and as a result, it is hard
to control the tradeoff efﬁciently.
In practice, this issue has typically been handled in one of
two ways, each with their own limitations. The simplest
option is to rely on informal rules of thumb for deciding
how much computation to spend on a sketched SVD (e.g., in
terms of the “sketch size”), but such rules give no warning
when they fail, and this creates signiﬁcant uncertainty in
downstream computations. Alternatively, a more cautious
option is to use analytical worst-case error bounds, but these
present other challenges: First, these bounds often involve
constants that are unspeciﬁed or dependent on unknown
parameters. Second, even when explicit constants are available, worst-case bounds are necessarily pessimistic, and
they may not account for the unique structure of a given
problem.
Based on these concerns, the RandNLA literature has shown
rising interest in a posteriori error estimation, which seeks
to improve upon worst-case analysis by numerically quantifying error with data-driven methods (e.g., Liberty et al.,
2007; Woolfe et al., 2008; Halko et al., 2011b; Martinsson
& Voronin, 2016; Sorensen & Embree, 2016; Duersch &
Gu, 2017; Lopes et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2018; Lopes et al.,
2019b; Tropp et al., 2019; Chen & Lopes, 2020; Martinsson
& Tropp, 2020). (Note that hereafter we will use the simpler phrase “error estimation”.) Likewise, error estimation
has the potential to make computations data-adaptive, so
that “just enough” work is done to achieve a speciﬁc error
tolerance for a speciﬁc input. Nevertheless, error estimation
methods are still scarce for many sketching algorithms, and
in particular, there has not yet been a systematic way to
directly estimate the errors of the singular vectors/values
in a sketched SVD. Therefore, the primary aim of the current paper is to develop a method for solving this problem.
(More speciﬁc contributions associated with the method will
be outlined in Section 1.3.)

