“Other-Play” for Zero-Shot Coordination

Hengyuan Hu * 1 Adam Lerer 1 Alex Peysakhovich 1 Jakob Foerster * 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of zero-shot coordination - constructing AI agents that can coordinate
with novel partners they have not seen before (e.g.
humans). Standard Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning (MARL) methods typically focus on
the self-play (SP) setting where agents construct
strategies by playing the game with themselves
repeatedly. Unfortunately, applying SP naively to
the zero-shot coordination problem can produce
agents that establish highly specialized conventions that do not carry over to novel partners they
have not been trained with. We introduce a novel
learning algorithm called other-play (OP), that
enhances self-play by looking for more robust
strategies, exploiting the presence of known symmetries in the underlying problem. We characterize OP theoretically as well as experimentally. We
study the cooperative card game Hanabi and show
that OP agents achieve higher scores when paired
with independently trained agents. In preliminary
results we also show that our OP agents obtains
higher average scores when paired with human
players, compared to state-of-the-art SP agents.

1. Introduction
A central challenge for AI is constructing agents that can
coordinate and cooperate with partners they have not seen
before (Kleiman-Weiner et al., 2016; Lerer & Peysakhovich,
2017; Carroll et al., 2019; Shum et al., 2019). This is particularly important in applications such as cooperative game
playing, communication, or autonomous driving (Foerster
et al., 2016; Lazaridou et al., 2016; Sukhbaatar et al., 2016;
Resnick et al., 2018). In this paper we consider the question
of zero-shot coordination where agents are placed into a
cooperative situation with a novel partner and must quickly
coordinate if they wish to earn high payoffs.
*

Equal contribution 1 Facebook AI Research, USA. Correspondence to: Hengyuan Hu <hengyuan@fb.com>, Jakob Foerster
<jnf@fb.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Our setting is a partially observed cooperative Markov game
(MG) which is commonly known among both agents. The
agents are able to construct strategies separately in the training phase but cannot coordinate on the strategies that they
construct. They must then play these strategies when paired
together one time. We refer to this as zero-shot coordination.
A popular way of constructing strategies for MG with unknown opponents is self-play (or “self-training”), (Tesauro,
1994). Here the agent controls both players during training and iteratively improves both players’ strategies. The
agent then uses this strategy at test time. If it converges,
self-play finds a Nash equilibrium of the game and yields
superhuman AI agents in two-player zero-sum games such
as Chess, Go and Poker (Campbell et al., 2002; Silver et al.,
2017; Brown & Sandholm, 2018). However, in complex
environments self-play agents typically construct ‘inhuman’
strategies (Carroll et al., 2019). This may be a benefit for
zero-sum games, but is less useful when it is important to
coordinate with, not trick, one’s partner.
Our main contribution is “other-play” (OP), an algorithm for
constructing good strategies for the zero-shot coordination
setting. We assume that with every MG we are provided
with a set of symmetries, i.e. arbitrary relabelings of the
state/action space that leave trajectories unchanged up to
relabeling. One source of miscoordination in zero-shot
settings is that agents have no good way to break the symmetries (e.g. should we drive on the left or the right?). In
most MDPs, there are classes of strategies that require more
or less coordinated symmetry breaking. OP’s goal is to
find a strategy that is maximally robust to partners breaking
symmetries in different ways while still playing in the same
class. OP works as follows: it uses RL to maximize reward
when matched with agents playing the same policy under
a random relabeling of states and actions under the known
symmetries.
To show the intuition behind OP consider the following
game: you need to coordinate with an unknown stranger
by independently choosing one from a set of 10 different
levers (Figure 1a). If both of you pick the same lever a
reward of 1 point is paid out, otherwise you leave the game
empty-handed. Clearly, without any prior coordination the
only option is to pick one of the levers at random, leading
to an expected reward of 1/10 = 0.1.

