LowFER: Low-rank Bilinear Pooling for Link Prediction

Saadullah Amin 1 Stalin Varanasi 1 2 Katherine Ann Dunfield 1 2 Günter Neumann 1 2

Abstract
Knowledge graphs are incomplete by nature, with
only a limited number of observed facts from the
world knowledge being represented as structured
relations between entities. To partly address this
issue, an important task in statistical relational
learning is that of link prediction or knowledge
graph completion. Both linear and non-linear
models have been proposed to solve the problem.
Bilinear models, while expressive, are prone to
overfitting and lead to quadratic growth of parameters in number of relations. Simpler models have
become more standard, with certain constraints
on bilinear map as relation parameters. In this
work, we propose a factorized bilinear pooling
model, commonly used in multi-modal learning,
for better fusion of entities and relations, leading to an efficient and constraint-free model. We
prove that our model is fully expressive, providing bounds on the embedding dimensionality and
factorization rank. Our model naturally generalizes Tucker decomposition based TuckER model,
which has been shown to generalize other models,
as efficient low-rank approximation without substantially compromising the performance. Due
to low-rank approximation, the model complexity can be controlled by the factorization rank,
avoiding the possible cubic growth of TuckER.
Empirically, we evaluate on real-world datasets,
reaching on par or state-of-the-art performance.
At extreme low-ranks, model preserves the performance while staying parameter efficient.

1. Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) are large collections of structured
knowledge, organized as subject and object entities and rela1
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI),
Saarbrücken, Germany 2 Department of Language Science and
Technology, Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany. Correspondence to: Saadullah Amin <saadullah.amin@dfki.de>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

tions, in the form of fact triples <sub, rel, obj>. The usefulness of knowledge graphs, however, is affected primarily by
their incompleteness. The task of link prediction or knowledge graph completion (KGC) aims to infer missing facts
from existing ones, by essentially scoring a relation and
entities triple for use in predicting its validity, and thereby
avoiding the cost and time of extending knowledge graphs
manually. To accomplish this, several models have been
proposed, including linear and non-linear models. Bilinear
models have additionally been used in multi-modal learning
due to their expressive nature, where the fusion of features
from different modalities plays a key role towards the performance of a model, with concatenation or element-wise
summation being commonly used fusion techniques. The
underlying assumption is that the distributions of features
across modalities may vary significantly, and the representation capacity of the fused features may be insufficient,
therefore limiting the final prediction performance (Yu et al.,
2017). In this work, we apply this assumption to knowledge
graphs by considering that the entities and relations come
from different multi-modal distributions and good fusion
between them can potentially construct a KG.
A major drawback of using bilinear modeling methods is
the quadratic growth of parameters, which results in high
computational and memory costs and risks overfitting. In
multi-modal learning, factorization techniques have therefore been researched to address these challenges (Kim et al.,
2016; Fukui et al., 2016; Yu et al., 2017; Ben-Younes et al.,
2017; Li et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2018), and constraints based
bilinear maps have become a more prevalent standard in
link prediction (Yang et al., 2015; Trouillon et al., 2016;
Kazemi & Poole, 2018). Applying constraints can be seen
as hard regularization since it allows for incorporating background knowledge (Kazemi & Poole, 2018), but restricts
the learning potential of the model due to limited parameter
sharing (Balažević et al., 2019a). We focus on a constraintfree approach, using the low-rank factorization of bilinear
models, as it offers flexibility and generalizes well, naturally
leading to other models under certain conditions. Our work
extends the multi-modal factorized bilinear pooling (MFB)
model, introduced by Yu et al. (2017), and applies it to the
link prediction task.
Our contributions are outlined as follows:

