Explaining Groups of Points in Low-Dimensional Representations
Gregory Plumb 1 Jonathan Terhorst 2 Sriram Sankararaman 3 Ameet Talwalkar 1 4

Abstract
A common workflow in data exploration is to
learn a low-dimensional representation of the data,
identify groups of points in that representation,
and examine the differences between the groups
to determine what they represent. We treat this
workflow as an interpretable machine learning
problem by leveraging the model that learned the
low-dimensional representation to help identify
the key differences between the groups. To solve
this problem, we introduce a new type of explanation, a Global Counterfactual Explanation (GCE),
and our algorithm, Transitive Global Translations
(TGT), for computing GCEs. TGT identifies
the differences between each pair of groups using compressed sensing but constrains those pairwise differences to be consistent among all of the
groups. Empirically, we demonstrate that TGT is
able to identify explanations that accurately explain the model while being relatively sparse, and
that these explanations match real patterns in the
data.

1. Introduction
A common workflow in data exploration is to: 1) learn a lowdimensional representation of the data, 2) identify groups
of points (i.e., clusters) that are similar to each other in that
representation, and 3) examine the differences between the
groups to determine what they represent. We focus on the
third step of this process: answering the question “What are
the key differences between the groups?”
For data exploration, this is an interesting question because
the groups often correspond to an unobserved concept of
interest and, by identifying which features differentiate the
groups, we can learn something about that concept of interest. For example, consider single-cell RNA analysis. These
1

Carnegie Mellon University 2 University of Michigan
University of California, Los Angeles 4 Determined AI. Correspondence to: Gregory Plumb <gdplumb@andrew.cmu.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1: A representation learned for a single-cell RNA sequence
dataset using the model from (Ding et al., 2018). Previous work
on this dataset showed that these groups of cells correspond to
different cell-types (Shekhar et al., 2016). The goal of a GCE is to
use this representation to identify the changes in gene expression
that are associated with a change of cell type.

datasets measure the expression levels of many genes for
sampled cells. Usually the cell-type of each of those cells
is unknown. Because gene expression and cell-type are
closely related, the groups of points that can be seen in a
low-dimensional representation of the dataset often correspond to different cell-types (Figure 1). By determining
which gene expressions differentiate the groups, we can
learn something about the connection between gene expression and cell-type.
One common approach for answering this question is manual interpretation. One simple way to do this, that we will
use as a naive baseline, is to calculate the Difference Between the Mean (DBM) value of each feature in the original
input space between a pair of groups. For example, consider
using DBM to explain the differences between the cells in
Group 3 and Group 17 from Figure 1. In this case, DBM’s
explanation contains many hundreds of non-zero elements,
which is far too many to be understood by a person (Figure
2). If we make DBM’s explanation sparse by thresholding it to include only the k largest changes, it is no longer
an effective explanation because it no longer reliably maps
points from Group 3 to Group 17 (Figure 3). More generally,
manual interpretation can be time-consuming and typically
ad-hoc, requiring the analyst to make arbitrary decisions
that may not be supported by the data.
Another, more principled, method is statistical hypothesis
testing for the differences between features across groups

