FedBoost: Communication-Efficient Algorithms for Federated Learning

Jenny Hamer 1 Mehryar Mohri 1 2 Ananda Theertha Suresh 1

Abstract
Communication cost is often a bottleneck in
federated learning and other client-based distributed learning scenarios. To overcome this,
several gradient compression and model compression algorithms have been proposed. In
this work, we propose an alternative approach
whereby an ensemble of pre-trained base predictors is trained via federated learning. This
method allows for training a model which may
otherwise surpass the communication bandwidth
and storage capacity of the clients to be learned
with on-device data through federated learning. Motivated by language modeling, we prove
the optimality of ensemble methods for density estimation for standard empirical risk minimization and agnostic risk minimization. We
provide communication-efficient ensemble algorithms for federated learning, where per-round
communication cost is independent of the size
of the ensemble. Furthermore, unlike previous
work on gradient compression, our algorithm
helps reduce the cost of both server-to-client and
client-to-server communication.

1. Introduction
With the growing prevalence of mobile phones, sensors,
and other edge devices, designing communication-efficient
techniques for learning using client data is an increasingly
important area in distributed machine learning. Federated
learning is a setting where a centralized model is trained on
data that remains distributed among the clients (Konečný
et al., 2016b; McMahan et al., 2017; Mohri et al., 2019).
Since the raw local data are not sent to the central server coordinating the training, federated learning does not directly
expose user data to the server and can be combined with
cryptographic techniques for additional layers of privacy.
1

Google Research, New York, NY, USA 2 Courant Institute of
Mathematical Sciences, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to:
Jenny Hamer <hamer@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Federated learning has been shown to perform well on
several tasks, including next word prediction (Hard et al.,
2018; Yang et al., 2018), emoji prediction (Ramaswamy
et al., 2019), decoder models (Chen et al., 2019b), vocabulary estimation (Chen et al., 2019a), low latency vehicleto-vehicle communication (Samarakoon et al., 2018), and
predictive models in health (Brisimi et al., 2018).
Broadly, in federated learning, at each round, the server
selects a subset of clients who receive the current model.
These clients then run a few steps of stochastic gradient
descent locally and send back the model updates to the
server. Training is repeated until convergence. Given the
distributed nature of clients, federated learning raises several research challenges, including privacy, optimization,
systems, networking, and communication bottleneck problems. Of these, communication bottleneck has been studied
extensively in terms of compression of model updates from
client to servers (Konečný et al., 2016b;a; Suresh et al.,
2017).
This line of work requires that the model size be small
enough to fit into the client devices’ memory. This assumption holds in several applications. For example, the
size of typical state-of-the-art server-side language models
is in the order of several hundreds of megabytes (Kumar
et al., 2017). Similarly, that of speech recognition models,
which admit a few million parameters, is on the order of
hundreds of megabytes (Sak et al., 2015). However, other
applications motivate the need for larger models and alternative solutions. Such larger models can be used, for example, in server-side inference. They can also be further
processed either by distillation techniques (Hinton et al.,
2015), or compressed using quantization (Wu et al., 2016)
or pruning (Han et al., 2015) for on-device inference. This
prompts the following question: Can we learn very large
models in federated learning that may not fit in client devices’ memory?
We present a solution to this problem by showing that large
models can be learned via federated learning using ensemble methods. Ensemble methods are general techniques
in machine learning for combining several base predictors
or experts to create a single more accurate model. In the
standard supervised learning setting, they include prominent techniques such as bagging, boosting, stacking, error-

