Doubly Stochastic Variational Inference for Neural Processes
with Hierarchical Latent Variables
Qi Wang 1 Herke van Hoof 1

Abstract
Neural processes (NPs) constitute a family of variational approximate models for stochastic processes with promising properties in computational
efficiency and uncertainty quantification. These
processes use neural networks with latent variable
inputs to induce predictive distributions. However,
the expressiveness of vanilla NPs is limited as
they only use a global latent variable, while targetspecific local variation may be crucial sometimes.
To address this challenge, we investigate NPs systematically and present a new variant of NP model
that we call Doubly Stochastic Variational Neural Process (DSVNP). This model combines the
global latent variable and local latent variables
for prediction. We evaluate this model in several
experiments, and our results demonstrate competitive prediction performance in multi-output
regression and uncertainty estimation in classification.

1. Introduction
In recent decades, increasingly attention has been focused
on deep neural networks, and the success of deep learning in computer vision, natural language processing and
robotics control etc. can be attributed to the great potential of function approximation with high-capacity models
(LeCun et al., 2015). Despite this, there still remain some
limitations which incur doubts from industry when applying these models to real world scenarios. Among them,
uncertainty quantification is long-standing and challenging,
and instead of point estimates we prefer probabilistic estimates with meaningful confidence values in predictions.
With uncertainty estimates at hand, we can relieve some risk
and make relatively conservative choices in cost-sensitive

decision-making (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016).
Faced with such reality, Bayesian statistics provides a
plausible schema to reason about subjective uncertainty
and stochasticity, and marrying deep neural networks and
Bayesian approaches together satisfies practical demands.
Traditionally, Gaussian processes (GPs) (Rasmussen, 2003)
as typical non-parametric models can be used to handle
uncertainties by placing Gaussian priors over functions.
The advantage of introducing distributions over functions
lies in the characterization of the underlying uncertainties from observations, enabling more reliable and flexible decision-making. For example, the uncertainty-aware
dynamics model enjoys popularity in model-based reinforcement learning, and GPs deployed in PILCO enable propagation of uncertainty in forecasting future states (Deisenroth &
Rasmussen, 2011). Another specific instance can be found
in demonstration learning; higher uncertainty in prediction
would suggest the learning system to query new observations to avoid dangerous behaviors (Thakur et al., 2019).
During the past few years, a variety of models inspired by
GPs and deep neural networks have been proposed (Salimbeni & Deisenroth, 2017; Snelson & Ghahramani, 2006;
Titsias, 2009; Titsias & Lawrence, 2010).
However, GP induced predictive distributions are met with
some concerns. One is high computational complexity in
prediction due to the matrix inversion, and another is less
flexibility in function space. Recognized as an explicit
stochastic process model, the vanilla GP strongly depends
on the assumption that the joint distribution is Gaussian,
and such a unimodal property makes it tough to scale to
more complicated cases. These issues facilitate the birth
of adaptations or approximate variants for GP related models (Garnelo et al., 2018a;b; Louizos et al., 2019), which
incorporate latent variables in modeling to account for uncertainties. Among them, Neural Processes (NPs) are relatively
representative with advantages like uncertainty-aware prediction and efficient computations.

1

Amsterdam Machine Learning Lab, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Correspondence to: Qi Wang
<q.wang3@uva.nl>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

In this paper, we investigate NP related models and explore
more expressive approximations towards general stochastic
processes (SPs). The main focus is on a novel variational
approximate model for NPs to solve learning problems in
high-dimensional cases. To improve flexibility in predictive

