Continuously Indexed Domain Adaptation

Hao Wang * 1 Hao He * 1 Dina Katabi 1

Abstract
Existing domain adaptation focuses on transferring
knowledge between domains with categorical indices
(e.g., between datasets A and B). However, many tasks
involve continuously indexed domains. For example,
in medical applications, one often needs to transfer
disease analysis and prediction across patients of different ages, where age acts as a continuous domain
index. Such tasks are challenging for prior domain
adaptation methods since they ignore the underlying
relation among domains. In this paper, we propose the
first method for continuously indexed domain adaptation. Our approach combines traditional adversarial
adaptation with a novel discriminator that models the
encoding-conditioned domain index distribution. Our
theoretical analysis demonstrates the value of leveraging the domain index to generate invariant features
across a continuous range of domains. Our empirical
results show that our approach outperforms the stateof-the-art domain adaption methods on both synthetic
and real-world medical datasets1 .

1. Introduction
Machine learning often assumes that training and test data
come from the same distribution, so that the trained model
generalizes well to the test scenario. This assumption breaks
however when the model is trained and tested in distinct
domains, i.e., different source and target domains. Domain
adaption (DA) leverages labeled data from the source domains and unlabeled data (or a limited amount of labeled
data) from the target domains to significantly improve performance (Ben-David et al., 2010; Ganin et al., 2016; Tzeng
et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2019).
Existing DA methods however focus on adaption among
*

Equal contribution 1 MIT Computer Science and Artificial
Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts, USA. Correspondence to:
Hao Wang <hoguewang@gmail.com>.

categorical domains where the domain index is just a label.
A common example would be to adapt a model from one
image dataset to another, e.g., adapting from MNIST to
SVHN. However, many real-world tasks require adaptation
among continuously index domains. For example, in medical applications, one needs to adapt disease diagnosis and
prognosis across patients of different ages, where age is a
continuous domain index. Treating the age of the source and
target domains as domain labels is unlikely to yield the best
results because it does not take advantage of the relationship between the disease manifestation and the person’s age.
Similar issues appear in robotics. For example, underwater
robots have to operate at different water depths and viscosity,
and one expects that adaptation across datasets from different depths or viscosity (e.g., lake vs. sea) should take into
account the relationship between the robot operation and the
physical properties of the liquid in which it operates. These
examples highlight the limitations of current DA methods
when applied to continuously indexed domains.
So, how should we perform domain adaption across continuously indexed domains? We note that in the above
examples the domain index plays the role of a distance
metric – i.e., it captures a similarity distance between the
domains with respect to the task. Thus, one approach for
addressing the problem is to modify traditional adversarial
adaptation to make the discriminator regress the domain
index using a distance-based loss, like the L2 or L1 loss.
Although this is better than categorical DA, we show analytically that such treatment can lead to equilibriums with
relatively poor domain alignments. A better solution is to
develop a probabilistic discriminator that models the domain
index distribution. We show that such a discriminator not
only successfully captures the underlying relation among
domains, but also enjoys better theoretical guarantees in
terms of domain alignment. We also note that our method
can be naturally generalized to handle multi-dimensional
domain indices, achieving further performance gain. For
example, in medial applications the index can be a vector of
age, blood pressure, activity level, etc.
Our contributions are as follows:

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
1
Code will soon be available at https://github.com/
hehaodele/CIDA

• We identify the problem of adaptation across continuously indexed domains and propose continuously indexed
domain adaptation (CIDA) as the first general DA method

