ROMA: Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with Emergent Roles

Tonghan Wang 1 Heng Dong 1 Victor Lesser 2 Chongjie Zhang 1

Abstract
The role concept provides a useful tool to de­
sign and understand complex multi-agent sys­
tems, which allows agents with a similar role to
share similar behaviors. However, existing rolebased methods use prior domain knowledge and
predeﬁne role structures and behaviors. In con­
trast, multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
provides ﬂexibility and adaptability, but less ef­
ﬁciency in complex tasks. In this paper, we
synergize these two paradigms and propose a
role-oriented MARL framework (ROMA). In this
framework, roles are emergent, and agents with
similar roles tend to share their learning and to
be specialized on certain sub-tasks. To this end,
we construct a stochastic role embedding space
by introducing two novel regularizers and con­
ditioning individual policies on roles. Experi­
ments show that our method can learn special­
ized, dynamic, and identiﬁable roles, which help
our method push forward the state of the art on
the StarCraft II micromanagement benchmark.
Demonstrative videos are available at https:
//sites.google.com/view/romarl/.

1. Introduction
Many real-world systems can be modeled as multi-agent sys­
tems (MAS), such as autonomous vehicle teams (Cao et al.,
2012), intelligent warehouse systems (Nowé et al., 2012),
and sensor networks (Zhang & Lesser, 2011). Coopera­
tive multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) provides a
promising approach to developing these systems, allowing
agents to deal with uncertainty and adapt to the dynamics
of an environment. In recent years, cooperative MARL has
achieved prominent progress, and many deep methods have
been proposed (Foerster et al., 2018; Sunehag et al., 2018;
1

IIIS, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 University of Mas­
sachusetts, Amherst, USA. Correspondence to: Tonghan Wang
<tonghanwang1996@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the au­
thor(s).

9

5

6

1
4

9

8
2
4

1

6
0
7

2

{0,3,5,7}

3
8

Figure 1. Visualization of our learned role representations at a
timestep. The blue agent has the maximum health, while the red
ones are dead. The corresponding policy is that agent 6 moves
towards enemies to take on more ﬁrepower, so that more seriously
injured agents are protected. Roles can change adaptively and will
aggregate according to responsibilities that are compatible with
individual characteristics, such as location, agent type, health, etc.

Rashid et al., 2018; Son et al., 2019; Vinyals et al., 2019;
Wang et al., 2020b; Baker et al., 2020).
In order to achieve scalability, these deep MARL meth­
ods adopt a simple mechanism that all agents share and
learn a decentralized value or policy network. However,
such simple sharing is often not effective for many complex
multi-agent tasks. For example, in Adam Smith’s Pin Fac­
tory, workers must complete up to eighteen different tasks
to create one pin (Smith, 1937). In this case, it is a heavy
burden for a single shared policy to represent and learn all
required skills. On the other hand, it is also unnecessary
for each agent to use a distinct policy network, which leads
to high learning complexity because some agents often per­
form similar sub-tasks from time to time. The question
is how we can give full play to agents’ specialization and
dynamic sharing for improving learning efﬁciency.
A natural concept that comes to mind is the role. A role
is a comprehensive pattern of behavior, often specialized
in some tasks. Agents with similar roles will show similar
behaviors, and thus can share their experiences to improve
performance. The role theory has been widely studied in
economics, sociology, and organization theory. Researchers
have also introduced the concept of role into MAS (Becht
et al., 1999; Stone & Veloso, 1999; Depke et al., 2001; Fer­
ber et al., 2003; Odell et al., 2004; Bonjean et al., 2014;
Lhaksmana et al., 2018). In these role-based frameworks,
the complexity of agent design is reduced via task decom­
position by deﬁning roles associated with responsibilities

