Online Control of the False Coverage Rate and False Sign Rate

Asaf Weinstein * 1 Aaditya Ramdas * 2

Abstract
The reproducibility debate has caused a renewed
interest in changing how one reports uncertainty,
from p-value for testing a null hypothesis to a
confidence interval (CI) for the corresponding parameter. When CIs for multiple selected parameters are being reported, the analog of the false
discovery rate (FDR) is the false coverage rate
(FCR), which is the expected ratio of number of
reported CIs failing to cover their respective parameters to the total number of reported CIs. Here,
we consider the general problem of FCR control
in the online setting, where one encounters an
infinite sequence of fixed unknown parameters
ordered by time. We propose a novel solution
to the problem which only requires the scientist
to be able to construct marginal CIs. As special
cases, our framework yields algorithms for online
FDR control and online sign-classification procedures that control the false sign rate (FSR). All of
our methodology applies equally well to prediction intervals, having particular implications for
selective conformal inference.

1. Introduction
While statisticians are trained to be aware of multiple testing issues, temporal multiplicity—when decisions need to
be made one at a time, rather than in a batch—is often
easy to miss. Let us examine the following simplified situation. Consider a team at a pharmaceutical company who
test a new drug every week. In week t, a new drug is under
inspection, and to assess its treatment effect θt , the team conducts a new randomized clinical trial with new participants.
Suppose that the data, such as the normalized empirical difference in means between the treatment and control groups,
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Hebrew University of Jerusalem 2 Departments of
Statistics & Data Science, and Machine Learning, Carnegie
Mellon University.
Correspondence to: Asaf Weinstein
<asaf.weinstein@mail.huji.ac.il>, Aaditya Ramdas <aramdas@cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

can be summarized by the observation Xt ∼ N (θt , 1), independent of all the previous observations {Xi }i<t .
Now consider the following selection rule: if Xt < 3, then
the analysts simply ignore drug t. If Xt > 3, then the
team reports the two-sided 99% marginal interval Xt ± 2.58
for θt to the management, who may then decide to run a
much larger second phase clinical trial since the CI does
not contain 0. This may initially seem like an innocuous
situation: each drug is different and has a different treatment
effect θt , the data Xt is always fresh and independent of the
data for other drugs, and the decision for whether or not to
construct the CI for θt (and the interval itself, if constructed)
is dependent only on Xt and independent of all other Xi .
Nonetheless, the combination of multiplicity and selection
is a cause for concern already in the offline setting, as was
insightfully pointed out by Benjamini & Yekutieli (2005).
In the online case, when there is an infinite sequence of
parameters, it is even easier to construct an example where
ignoring selection has undesirable consequences. Indeed,
consider the special case where θt = 0 for all t, in other
words, every tested drug is equivalent to a placebo. We
could equivalently assume that θt ∈ {−0.1, +0.1}, i.e.,
each drug is either slightly worse or better than the placebo.
Then, every single CI that is reported to the management
is incorrect, since Xt ± 2.58 does not contain zero when
Xt > 3. Because (an infinite number of) selections will
occur with probability one, the fraction of non-covering
CIs—the false coverage proportion, FCP—will equal one.
Of course, the second phase of the trial may correct these
errors, but at the cost of time, money and faith in the analyst.
In the example above, the problem is that the CI is reported
only if Xt is large. Indeed, Xt ± 2.58 includes θt with
probability 0.99 unconditionally or even conditionally on
which CIs were reported up to time t − 1, but not including
time t itself; we refer to such an interval as a “marginal”
CI (and define it formally in Section 3). By contrast, a
conditional CI would satisfy
Pr{θt ∈ CI | θt is selected} ≥ 1 − α;

(1)

constructing a conditional CI at each step will rectify the situation and it controls the FCR at any time T (see Section B
in supplement). This conditional solution is conceptually
simple but has two main drawbacks. First, it is impossible to
ensure that a reported CI never includes zero. This is demon-

