Option Discovery in the Absence of Rewards with Manifold Analysis

Amitay Bar 1 Ronen Talmon 1 Ron Meir 1

Abstract
Options have been shown to be an effective tool
in reinforcement learning, facilitating improved
exploration and learning. In this paper, we present
an approach based on spectral graph theory and
derive an algorithm that systematically discovers
options without access to a specific reward or task
assignment. As opposed to the common practice
used in previous methods, our algorithm makes
full use of the spectrum of the graph Laplacian.
Incorporating modes associated with higher graph
frequencies unravels domain subtleties, which are
shown to be useful for option discovery. Using geometric and manifold-based analysis, we present
a theoretical justification for the algorithm. In
addition, we showcase its performance in several
domains, demonstrating clear improvements compared to competing methods.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has attracted much attention
in recent years thanks to its success in solving a broad
range of challenging tasks. Options (a.k.a. skills) play an
important role in RL (Sutton et al., 1999) and have opened
the door to a series of studies demonstrating improvement
in both learning and exploration (Vezhnevets et al., 2017;
Nachum et al., 2018; Eysenbach et al., 2019; Tang et al.,
2017; Mannor et al., 2004; Menache et al., 2002). One
important class of options consists of options that are not
associated with any specific task and are acquired without
receiving any reward. Such generic options often lead to
efficient learning in various tasks that are not known a-priori,
(e.g., (Eysenbach et al., 2019)).
An effective approach to build such options is based on
spectral graph theory, assuming a finite state domain in
which each state is regarded as a node of a graph, and
1

Viterbi Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Technion, Israel
Institute of Technology . Correspondence to: Amitay Bar <amitayb@campus.technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

the graph edges represent the states connectivity. Such an
approach led to the introduction of proto-value functions
(PVFs)(Mahadevan & Maggioni, 2007), which are the eigenvectors of the graph Laplacian (Chung & Graham, 1997).
It was shown that the PVFs establish an efficient representation of the domain. Recently, these PVFs were used for
options representation (Machado et al., 2017; 2018). There,
eigenoptions were introduced by considering only the dominant eigenvectors (PVFs), where each eigenoption is formed
based on a single eigenvector. In a related work, Jinnai et al.
(2019) presented cover options using only the Fiedler vector
multiple times. On the one hand, option discovery with a
graph-based representation is a powerful combination, since
it facilitates options that are not task or reward-specific, yet
it naturally incorporates the geometry of the domain. On
the other hand, existing methods are based only on a single eigenvector or consider only the dominant eigenvectors
while omitting the rest, leaving room for improvement and
further investigation.
In this paper, we present a new scheme for defining options,
relying on all the eigenvectors of the graph Laplacian. More
concretely, we form a score function built from the eigenvectors, from which options can be systematically derived.
Since the agent acts without receiving reward, it is only
natural to discover and analyze the options considering the
geometry of the domain. For analysis purposes, we model
the domain as a manifold and consequently the graph as a
discrete approximation of the manifold, allowing us to incorporate concepts and results from manifold learning, such
as the diffusion distance (Coifman & Lafon, 2006). We
show that our options lead to improved performance both in
learning and exploration compared to the eigenoptions as
well as other option discovery schemes.
Our main contributions are as follows. First, we present a
new approach to principled option discovery with a theoretical foundation based on geometric and manifold analysis.
Second, this analysis includes novel results in manifold
learning involving two key components: the stationary distribution of a random walk on a graph and the diffusion
distance. To obtain these results, we employ a new concept in manifold learning, in which the entire spectrum
of the underlying graph is considered rather than only its
leading components. Third, we propose an algorithm for
option discovery, applicable in high-dimensional determin-

