Parameterized Rate-Distortion Stochastic Encoder
Quan Hoang 1 Trung Le 1 Dinh Phung 1

Abstract
We propose a novel gradient-based tractable approach for the Blahut-Arimoto (BA) algorithm to
compute the rate-distortion function where the BA
algorithm is fully parameterized. This results in a
rich and flexible framework to learn a new class of
stochastic encoders, termed PArameterized RAteDIstortion Stochastic Encoder (PARADISE). The
framework can be applied to a wide range of settings from semi-supervised, multi-task to supervised and robust learning. We show that the training objective of PARADISE can be seen as a form
of regularization that helps improve generalization. With an emphasis on robust learning we
further develop a novel posterior matching objective to encourage smoothness on the loss function
and show that PARADISE can significantly improve interpretability as well as robustness to adversarial attacks on the CIFAR-10 and ImageNet
datasets. In particular, on the CIFAR-10 dataset,
our model reduces standard and adversarial error rates in comparison to the state-of-the-art by
50% and 41%, respectively without the expensive
computational cost of adversarial training.

1. Introduction
The main objective of representation learning is to learn
good representation that can be used for downstream tasks.
From this standpoint, rate-distortion theory offers an attractive approach for representation learning where the goodness of a representation can be measured by an appropriately defined distortion function. Rate distortion theory
is however often applied in machine learning in the form
of the Information Bottleneck (IB) method (Tishby et al.,
2000), which measures goodness of a representation by the
mutual information with a relevance variable. Given the
input random variable X and a relevance random variable
1

Department of DSAI, Faculty of Information Technology,
Monash University, Australia. Correspondence to: Quan Hoang
<qhoang.ai@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Y , the objective is to compress X into a representation
Z that captures as much information about Y as possible
while retaining as little information about X as possible.
Mathematically speaking, the IB objective finds the optimal
encoding q (z|x) by minimizing the functional:
L [q (z|x)] = I (Z; X) − βI (Z; Y )

(1)

where β is the Lagrange multiplier. Unfortunately, the iterative algorithm proposed in (Tishby et al., 2000) to optimize
the IB objective was intractable and therefore infeasible to
apply in practice. Recently, Alemi et al. (2016) proposed
Deep Variational Information Bottleneck (DVIB), a variational approximation to the IB objective by using variational
lower-bound and upper-bound of mutual information, and
claimed that DVIB improves robustness to adversarial attacks. However, DVIB is just an instance of gradient obfuscation (Athalye et al., 2018) as latter shown in Sec. 3.3, thus
giving a false sense of robustness. Furthermore, by defining
“goodness” of the representation as the mutual information
with another variable, the Information Bottleneck method
significantly limits the flexibility and potential applications
of the rate distortion theory.
In this paper, we revisit the Blahut-Arimoto algorithm
(Blahut, 1972; Arimoto, 1972) and make a simple modification to make it feasible to numerically compute the
rate-distortion function with gradient-based optimization.
The result is an elegant and flexible framework for representation learning that can be applied to a wide range of
settings from unsupervised, semi-supervised, multi-task to
supervised and robust learning. The key component in our
framework is a parameterized stochastic encoder that we
term PArameterized RAte-DIstortion Stochastic Encoder or
PARADISE. We investigate the behavior of the algorithm
on the MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998) and CelebA (Liu et al.,
2015) datasets. For supervised learning, we demonstrate
that the derived objective can be seen as a form of regularization that helps improve generalization. For robust learning,
we show that introducing inductive bias to the learning of
PARADISE can significantly improve interpretability as
well as robustness to adversarial attacks on the Cifar-10
(Krizhevsky et al., 2009) and ImageNet (Russakovsky et al.,
2015) datasets. In particular, on the CIFAR-10 data set,
our model reduces standard and adversarial error rates in
comparison to the state-of-the-art (Qin et al., 2019) by 50%

