Privately Learning Markov Random Fields

Huanyu Zhang 1 Gautam Kamath * 2 Janardhan Kulkarni * 3 Zhiwei Steven Wu * 4

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning Markov Random Fields (including the prototypical example,
the Ising model) under the constraint of differential privacy. Our learning goals include both structure learning, where we try to estimate the underlying graph structure of the model, as well as the
harder goal of parameter learning, in which we
additionally estimate the parameter on each edge.
We provide algorithms and lower bounds for both
problems under a variety of privacy constraints –
namely pure, concentrated, and approximate differential privacy. While non-privately, both learning goals enjoy roughly the same complexity, we
show that this is not the case under differential
privacy. In particular, only structure learning under approximate differential privacy maintains the
non-private logarithmic dependence on the dimensionality of the data, while a change in either the
learning goal or the privacy notion would necessitate a polynomial dependence. As a result, we
show that the privacy constraint imposes a strong
separation between these two learning problems
in the high-dimensional data regime.

1. Introduction
Graphical models are a common structure used to model
high-dimensional data, which find a myriad of applications
in diverse research disciplines, including probability theory,
Markov Chain Monte Carlo, computer vision, theoretical
computer science, social network analysis, game theory,
and computational biology (Levin et al., 2009; Chatterjee,
2005; Felsenstein, 2004; Daskalakis et al., 2011; Geman &
Graffigne, 1986; Ellison, 1993; Montanari & Saberi, 2010).
While statistical tasks involving general distributions over
∗
These authors are in alphabetical order. 1 School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Cornell University 2 Cheriton
School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo 3 Microsoft
Research Redmond 4 Computer Science & Engineering, University of Minnesota. Correspondence to: Huanyu Zhang
<hz388@cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

p variables often run into the curse of dimensionality (i.e.,
an exponential sample complexity in p), Markov Random
Fields (MRFs) are a particular family of undirected graphical models which are parameterized by the “order” t of their
interactions. Restricting the order of interactions allows us
to capture most distributions which may naturally arise, and
also avoids this severe dependence on the dimension (i.e.,
we often pay an exponential dependence on t instead of
p). An MRF is defined as follows, see Section 2 for more
precise definitions and notations we will use in this paper.
Definition 1.1. Let k, t, p ∈ N, G = (V, E) be a graph on
p nodes, and Ct (G) be the set of cliques of size at most t
in G. A Markov Random Field with alphabet size k and
t-order interactions is a distribution D over [k]p such that


X
Pr [Z = z] ∝ exp 
ψI (z) ,
Z∼D

I∈Ct (G)

where ψI : [k]p → R depends only on variables in I.
We note that each node corresponds to one coordinate of
Z. Furthermore, the case when k = t = 2 corresponds to
the prototypical example of an MRF, the Ising model (Ising,
1925) (Definition 2.1). More generally, if t = 2, we call the
model pairwise (Definition 2.2), and if k = 2 but t is unrestricted, we call the model a binary MRF (Definition 2.4).
In this paper, we mainly look at these two special cases of
MRFs.
Given the wide applicability of these graphical models, there
has been a great deal of work on the problem of graphical model estimation (Ravikumar et al., 2010; Santhanam
& Wainwright, 2012; Bresler, 2015; Vuffray et al., 2016;
Klivans & Meka, 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017; Rigollet &
Hütter, 2017; Lokhov et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2018). That is,
given a dataset generated from a graphical model, can we
infer properties of the underlying distribution? Most of the
attention has focused on two related learning goals.
1. Structure learning (Definition 2.5): Recover the set of
non-zero edges in G.
2. Parameter learning (Definition 2.6): Recover the set
of non-zero edges in G, as well as ψI for all cliques I
of size at most t.
It is clear that structure learning is no harder than parameter learning. Nonetheless, the sample complexity of both

