Towards a General Theory of Infinite-Width Limits of Neural Classifiers

Eugene A. Golikov 1

Abstract
Obtaining theoretical guarantees for neural networks training appears to be a hard problem in a
general case. Recent research has been focused on
studying this problem in the limit of infinite width
and two different theories have been developed:
a mean-field (MF) and a constant kernel (NTK)
limit theories. We propose a general framework
that provides a link between these seemingly distinct theories. Our framework out of the box gives
rise to a discrete-time MF limit which was not
previously explored in the literature. We prove
a convergence theorem for it, and show that it
provides a more reasonable approximation for
finite-width nets compared to the NTK limit if
learning rates are not very small. Also, our framework suggests a limit model that coincides neither
with the MF limit nor with the NTK one. We
show that for networks with more than two hidden layers RMSProp training has a non-trivial
discrete-time MF limit but GD training does not
have one. Overall, our framework demonstrates
that both MF and NTK limits have considerable
limitations in approximating finite-sized neural
nets, indicating the need for designing more accurate infinite-width approximations for them.

1. Introduction
Despite neural networks’ great success in solving a variety of problems, theoretical guarantees for their training
are scarce and far from being practical. It turns out that
neural models of finite size are very complex objects to
study since they usually induce a non-convex loss landscape.
This makes it highly non-trivial to obtain any theoretical
guarantees for the gradient descent training.
However theoretical analysis becomes tractable in the limit
1

Neural Networks and Deep Learning lab., Moscow Institute
of Physics and Technology, Moscow, Russia. Correspondence to:
Eugene A. Golikov <golikov.ea@mipt.ru>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

of infinite width. In particular, (Jacot et al., 2018) showed
that if weights are parameterized in a certain way then the
continuous-time gradient descent on neural network parameters converges to a solution of a kernel method. The corresponding kernel is called a neural tangent kernel (NTK).
Another line of work studies a mean-field (MF) limit of the
training dynamics of neural nets with a single hidden layer
(Mei et al., 2018; 2019; Rotskoff & Vanden-Eijnden, 2019;
Sirignano & Spiliopoulos, 2020; Chizat & Bach, 2018;
Yarotsky, 2018). In these works a neural net output is scaled
differently compared to the work on NTK.
In our work we address several questions arising in this
context:
1. Which of these two limits appears to be a more reasonable approximation for a finite-width network?
2. Do the two above-mentioned limits cover all possible
limit models for neural networks?
3. Is it possible to construct a non-trivial mean-field limit
for a multi-layer network?
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we provide a brief review of the relevant studies. In Section 3 we
consider hyperparameter scalings that lead to non-trivial
infinite-width limits for neural nets with a single hidden
layer. Our analysis clearly shows that MF and NTK limits
are not the only possible ones. Also, our analysis suggests a
discrete-time MF limit which appears to be a more reasonable approximation for a finite-sized neural network than
the NTK limit if learning rates are not very small. We stress
the difference between this discrete-time MF limit and a
continuous-time one described in previous works and prove
a convergence theorem for it. In Section 4 we show that
when a neural net has at least three hidden layers a discretetime MF limit becomes vanishing. Nevertheless, training a
network with RMSProp instead of a plain gradient descent
leads to a non-trivial discrete-time MF limit for any number
of layers.

2. Related work
NTK limit. In their pioneering work Jacot et al. (2018)
considered a multi-layer feed-forward network parameter-

