Learning Opinions in Social Networks

Vincent Conitzer * 1 Debmalya Panigrahi * 1 Hanrui Zhang * 1

Abstract
We study the problem of learning opinions in social networks. The learner observes the states of
some sample nodes from a social network, and
tries to infer the states of other nodes, based on the
structure of the network. We show that sampleefficient learning is impossible when the network
exhibits strong noise, and give a polynomial-time
algorithm for the problem with nearly optimal
sample complexity when the network is sufficiently stable.

1. Introduction
Suppose we are a social media company. A new product
is about to come out, and we would like to learn whether
each individual user has heard about it or not (we will refer
to this as the current opinion of the user). This information
may be useful for further marketing of the product, or for
other purposes. To achieve this goal, we decide to run a poll,
by asking each user visiting our website a few questions
(i.e., inspecting the user). We hope to inspect as few users as
possible, because we would rather let them engage in other
activities on the site. Moreover, since we have no control
over which users will visit our website, the only thing we
can decide is the time interval during which we run the poll,
or equivalently, the rough number of users to inspect.
If our goal is to make sure that our estimates for individual users are uniformly accurate, without further knowledge
about users, we would have to inspect almost all users. However, in our role as a social media company, we have access
to the social network formed by our users. In particular,
we know which users are likely to be affected by which
other users. This enables us to infer the opinion of some
users without inspecting them at all, as long as we know
the opinions of certain other users. For example, if user u
*
Alphabetical order 1 Department of Computer Science,
Duke University, Durham, USA. Correspondence to: Vincent
Conitzer <conitzer@cs.duke.edu>, Debmalya Panigrahi <debmalya@cs.duke.edu>, Hanrui Zhang <hrzhang@cs.duke.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

strongly affects user v, and we know that user u is aware
of our product, then we are quite sure that user v is also
aware, because most likely u has told v about the product.
In an extreme case, suppose we know that all users share all
information with each other at all times. Then inspecting
only one user is enough for our purpose, because either everyone is aware of the new product, or no one is. In general,
how many users we need to inspect depends heavily on the
structure of the network formed by the users. So, given the
structure of the network, we want to know:
• How many users do we need to inspect in order to have
enough information to make an accurate estimate of
the current state? In other words, what is the sample
complexity of learning opinions in a given network?
• Given the opinions of the users inspected, how can we
infer the opinions of other users who have not been
inspected?
While we have illustrated the problem using the example of
marketing a product, the same model can be used for many
other purposes. For instance, we may want to learn whether
users are aware of a particular political candidate, or of a
particular news item. We may want to learn whether an
HIV awareness campaign has reached individual homeless
youth (Wilder et al., 2018). Or, rather than the spread of
information, we may consider the spread of a biological or
computer virus in a network, learning where it is likely to
have spread (Romano et al., 2010).
1.1. Our Results
In this paper, we give (1) a nearly tight bound on the sample
complexity of learning opinions in social networks, and (2)
a polynomial-time algorithm that outputs an approximately
correct estimate of the state of the network with high probability. Given a desired error rate ε and failure probability
δ, our goal is to design a learning algorithm that outputs,
with probability at least 1 − δ, an estimate of the state of
the network that is accurate for at least 1 − ε fraction of
the nodes. We call this an (ε, δ)-learning algorithm. The
sample complexity of such an algorithm is the number of
labeled nodes (training samples) that it observes; we obtain
an algorithm with nearly optimal sample complexity. Our
results are summarized in the next theorem.

