Upper bounds for Model-Free Row-Sparse Principal Component Analysis
Guanyi Wang 1 Santanu Dey 1

Abstract
Sparse principal component analysis (PCA) is
a widely-used dimensionality reduction tool in
statistics and machine learning. Most methods mentioned in literature are either heuristics
for good primal feasible solutions under statistical assumptions or ADMM-type algorithms with
stationary/critical points convergence property
for the regularized reformulation of sparse PCA.
However, none of these methods can efficiently
verify the quality of the solutions via comparing
current objective values with their dual bounds,
especially in model-free case. We propose a new
framework that finds upper (dual) bounds for the
sparse PCA within polynomial time via solving
a convex integer program (IP). We show that,
in the worst-case, the dual bounds provided by
the convex IP is within an affine function of the
global optimal value. Moreover, in contrast to
the semi-definition relaxation, this framework is
much easier to scale for large instances. Numerical results on both artificial and real cases are
reported to demonstrate the advantages of our
method.

1. Introduction
Principal component analysis (PCA) is one of the most
widely-used tool for dimensionality reduction and data visualization. Given a sample matrix X = (x1 , . . . , xM ) ∈
Rd×M where each column denotes a d-dimensional zeromean sample, the target is to find the top-r leading eigenvectors V := (v1 , . . . , vr ) ∈ Rd×r (principal components),
󰀃
󰀄
arg max Tr V ⊤ AV ,
(PCA)
V ⊤ V =Ir

*

Equal contribution 1 H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial & Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta, USA. Correspondence to:
Guanyi
Wang <gwang93@gatech.edu>,
Santanu Dey <santanu.dey@isye.gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1
where A := M
XX ⊤ is the sample covariance matrix,
and Ir denotes the r × r identity matrix. However, a significant disadvantage with respect to interpretation of principal component analysis is that the principal component
usually involves almost all components, especially in the
high-dimensional setting, e.g. clinical analysis, biological
gene analysis, computer version (???). Moreover, the principal component analysis is known to generate large generalization error, and therefore makes inaccurate prediction.

To enhance the interpretability, and reduce the generalization error, it is natural to consider the problem of sparse
PCA via incorporating a sparsity constraint into the original PCA problem. There are many distinct descriptions of
sparse PCA, mainly because the term “sparsity” can be defined in different ways based on the context. In this paper,
we consider the row-sparse PCA problem (see for example (?)) defined as follows: Given a sample covariance matrix A ∈ Rd×d , a sparsity parameter k (≤ d), the task is to
find the top-r k -sparsity principal components V ∈ Rd×r ,

arg max
V ⊤ V =Ir , 󰀂V 󰀂0 ≤k

󰀃
󰀄
Tr V ⊤ AV ,

(SPCA)

where the row-sparsity constraint 󰀂V 󰀂0 ≤ k denotes that
there are at most k non-zero rows in matrix V , i.e., the
principal components share the global support. Let F :=
{V : V ⊤ V = Ir , 󰀂V 󰀂0 ≤ k} denote the feasible region of SPCA and let optF (A) denote the optimal value of
SPCA with sample covariance matrix A.
1.1. “How good are primal feasible solutions?” why
should we ask this question
Finding primal feasible solutions (with ‘relatively’ large
objective value) for sparse PCA is well-studied in the field
of statistics and optimization (see discussion of literature
review below). Given a feasible solution, finding out its
quality is a very important problem. We formalize the notion of good solution.
Definition 1.1 ((1 − ∆)-approximation primal feasible solution). Let Vpri ∈ Rd×r be a primal feasible solution of
SPCA with sample covariance matrix A and sparse parameter k . We say Vpri is a (1 − ∆)-approximation primal feasible solution if there is a ∆ ∈ (0, 1) such that
⊤
Tr(Vpri
AVpri ) ≥ (1 − ∆)optF (A).

