Simultaneous Inference for Massive Data: Distributed Bootstrap
Yang Yu 1 Shih-Kang Chao 2 Guang Cheng 1

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a bootstrap method applied to massive data processed distributedly in
a large number of machines. This new method
is computationally efficient in that we bootstrap
on the master machine without over-resampling,
typically required by existing methods (Kleiner
et al., 2014; Sengupta et al., 2016), while provably achieving optimal statistical efficiency with
minimal communication. Our method does not
require repeatedly re-fitting the model but only applies multiplier bootstrap in the master machine
on the gradients received from the worker machines. Simulations validate our theory.

1. Introduction
1.1. Background
Modern massive data, with enormous sample size, are usually so hard to fit on a single machine. A master-slave
architecture is often adopted using a cluster of nodes for
data storage and processing; for example, Hadoop, as one
of the most popular distributed framework, has facilitates
distributed data processing; see Figure 1.1 for a diagram of
the master-slave architecture (Singh & Kaur, 2014), where
the master node has also a portion of the data. A shortcoming of this architecture is that inter-node communication
(between master and worker nodes) is through the TCP/IP
protocol, which can be over a thousand times slower than
intra-node computation and always comes with significant
overhead (Lan et al., 2018; Fan et al., 2019). For these reasons, statistical inference for modern distributed data is very
challenging, and communication efficiency is a desirable
feature when developing distributed learning algorithms.
However, classical statistical procedures, which typically
require hundreds or even thousands passes over the entire
1

Department of Statistics, Purdue University, USA 2 Department
of Statistics, University of Missouri, USA. Correspondence to:
Guang Cheng <chengg@purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Master M1
e
rL (✓)

✓e

2

e
rL (✓)
3

✓e

✓e

rLk ( e
✓)

......

Slave M2

Slave Mk

Slave M3

Figure 1.1. Master-worker architecture for storing and processing
distributed data.

data set, are very communication-inefficient or even impossible to perform, including popular methods such as bootstrap, Bayesian inference and many maximum likelihood
estimation procedures. Over the last few years, many papers
proposed computational procedures for estimation from the
maximum likelihood criteria (Zhang et al., 2012; Li et al.,
2013; Chen & Xie, 2014; Huang & Huo, 2015; Battey et al.,
2015; Zhao et al., 2016; Fan et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2017;
Wang & Zhang, 2017; Wang et al., 2017; Shi et al., 2018;
Jordan et al., 2019; Volgushev et al., 2019; Banerjee et al.,
2019; Fan et al., 2019).
As a popular method for approximating the sample distribution of an estimator, Bootstrap, without modifications, is
inapplicable in the environment of distributed processing. It
typically requires hundreds or thousands of resamples that
is of the same size as the original data, which is impossible
for large-scale data stored in different locations.
1.2. Our Contributions
In this paper, we first consider a naı̈ve bootstrap method,
named as k-grad, that uses local gradients from each
machine, where k is the number of machines. To provide a higher accuracy, an improved version, named as
n+k-1-grad bootstrap, is introduced. Both are (internode) communication and (intra-node) computation efficient
for (generalized) linear models. Our methods can be easily
extended to other statistical models. The statistical accuracy
and efficiency are proved theoretically, and validated by

