Working Memory Graphs

Ricky Loynd 1 Roland Fernandez 1 Asli Celikyilmaz 1 Adith Swaminathan 1 Matthew Hausknecht 1

Abstract
Transformers have increasingly outperformed
gated RNNs in obtaining new state-of-the-art results on supervised tasks involving text sequences.
Inspired by this trend, we study the question
of how Transformer-based models can improve
the performance of sequential decision-making
agents. We present the Working Memory Graph
(WMG), an agent that employs multi-head selfattention to reason over a dynamic set of vectors
representing observed and recurrent state. We
evaluate WMG in three environments featuring
factored observation spaces: a Pathfinding environment that requires complex reasoning over
past observations, BabyAI gridworld levels that
involve variable goals, and Sokoban which emphasizes future planning. We find that the combination of WMG’s Transformer-based architecture with factored observation spaces leads to
significant gains in learning efficiency compared
to baseline architectures across all tasks. WMG
demonstrates how Transformer-based models can
dramatically boost sample efficiency in RL environments for which observations can be factored.

1. Introduction
Because of their ability to process sequences of data, gated
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) have been widely applied to natural language processing (NLP) tasks such as machine translation. In the RNN-based approach of Sutskever
et al. (2014), an encoder RNN maps an input sentence in the
source language to a series of internal hidden state vectors.
The encoder’s final hidden state is copied into a decoder
RNN, which then generates another sequence of hidden
states that determine the selection of output tokens in the
target language. This model can be trained to translate sentences, but translation quality deteriorates on long sentences
1
Microsoft Research AI, Redmond, Washington, USA. Correspondence to: Ricky Loynd <riloynd@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

where long-term dependencies become critical. A plausible
conjecture attributes this drop in performance to the limited
representational capacity of RNN hidden state vectors. In
Bahdanau et al. (2015), translation quality is boosted by
applying an attention mechanism to create paths serving as
shortcuts from the input to the output sequences, routing
information outside the linear chain of the RNN’s hidden
states. Similar attention mechanisms have since gained wide
usage, culminating in the Transformer model (Vaswani et al.,
2017) which replaces the RNN with many short paths of
self-attention. Since then, Transformers have outperformed
RNNs on many NLP tasks (Devlin et al., 2019; Dong et al.,
2019; Liu et al., 2019), and have been successfully applied
to set-structured data (Lee et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019).
We seek to leverage these intuitions to improve the ability
of Reinforcement Learning (RL) agents to reason over long
time horizons in Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs) (Kaelbling et al., 1998). In a POMDP,
a single observation Obst is not sufficient to identify the
latent environment state st . Thus the agent must reason over
the history of past observations in order to select the best
action for the current timestep. A simple strategy employed
by DQN (Mnih et al., 2015) is to condition the policy on the
N most recent observations π(at |Obst−N +1 . . . Obst ). But
in complex environments, the sufficient number N may be
large, highly variable, and unknown. To address this issue,
gated RNNs such as LSTMs (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber,
1997) and GRUs (Cho et al., 2014; Chung et al., 2015) use
internal, recurrent state vectors which can in theory maintain
information from past observations (Hausknecht & Stone,
2015; Oh et al., 2016). In practice however, these methods
are limited by the single path of information flow defined
by the linear chain of RNN hidden states. As in NLP, we
hypothesize that providing alternative paths for information
to follow will be advantageous to RL agents. Building on
this intuition, we introduce the Working Memory Graph
(WMG), a Transformer-based agent that uses self-attention
to provide a multitude of shortcut paths for information to
flow from past observations to the current action through a
dynamic set of hidden state vectors called Memos, illustrated
in Figure 1 (right).
Motivated by prior work on factored representations (Russell & Norvig, 2009) and factored MDPs (Boutilier et al.,
2000; 2001), we argue that factored observations are ide-

