A Free-Energy Principle for Representation Learning

Yansong Gao 1 Pratik Chaudhari 1

Abstract
This paper employs a formal connection of machine learning with thermodynamics to characterize the quality of learnt representations for
transfer learning. We discuss how informationtheoretic functionals such as rate, distortion and
classification loss of a model lie on a convex,
so-called equilibrium surface. We prescribe dynamical processes to traverse this surface under constraints, e.g., an iso-classification process that trades off rate and distortion to keep
the classification loss unchanged. We demonstrate how this process can be used for transferring representations from a source dataset to
a target dataset while keeping the classification
loss constant. Experimental validation of the theoretical results is provided on standard imageclassification datasets.

1. Introduction
A representation is a statistic of the data that is “useful”.
Classical Information Theory creates a compressed representation and makes it easier to store or transmit data; the
goal is always to decode the representation to get the original data back. If we are given images and their labels, we
could learn a representation that is useful to predict the correct labels. This representation is thus a statistic of the data
sufficient for the task of classification. If it is also minimal—
say in its size—it would discard information in the data that
is not correlated with the labels. Such a representation is
unique to the chosen task, it would perform poorly to predict
some other labels correlated with the discarded information.
If instead the representation were to have lots of redundant
information about the data, it could potentially predict other
labels correlated with this extra information.
The premise of this paper is our desire to characterize the
1

University of Pennsylvania, USA. Correspondence to:
Yansong Gao <gaoyans@sas.upenn.edu>, Pratik Chaudhari
<pratikac@seas.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

information discarded in the representation when it is fit on
a task. We want to do so in order to learn representations
that can be transferred easily to other tasks.
Our main idea is to choose a canonical task—in this paper,
we pick reconstruction of the original data—as a way to
measure the discarded information. Although one can use
any canonical task, reconstruction is special. It is a “capture
all” task in the sense that achieving perfect reconstruction
entails that the representation is lossless; information discarded by the original task is therefore readily measured as
the one that helps solve the canonical task. This leads to the
study of the following Lagrangian which is similar to the
Information Bottlenck of Tishby et al. (2000)
F (λ, γ) =

min

R + λD + γC

θ∈Θ,eθ (z|x),mθ (z),
dθ (x|z),cθ (y|z)

where the rate R is an upper bound on the mutual information of the representation learnt by the encoder eθ (z|x)
with the input data x, distortion D measures the quality
of reconstruction of the decoder dθ (x|z) and C measures
the classification loss of the classifier cθ (y|z). As Alemi
& Fischer (2018) show, this Lagrangian can be formally
connected to ideas in thermodynamics. We heavily exploit
and specialize this point of view, as summarized next.
1.1. Summary of contributions
Our main technical observation is that F (λ, γ) can be intepreted as a free-energy and a stochastic learning process
that minimizes its corresponding Hamiltonian converges
to the optimal free-energy. This corresponds to an “equilibrium surface” of information-theoretic functionals R, D
and C and a surface Θλ,γ of the model parameters at convergence. We prove that the equilibrium surface is convex
and its dual, the free-energy F (λ, γ), is concave. The freeenergy is only a function of Lagrange multipliers (λ, γ), the
family of model parameters Θ, and the task, and is therefore
invariant of the learning dynamics.
Second, we design a quasi-static stochastic process, akin
to an equilibrium process in thermodynamics, to keep the
model parameters θ on the equilibrium surface. Such a
process allow us to travel to any feasible values of (R, D, C)
while ensuring that the parameters θ of the model are on
the equilibrium surface. We focus on one process, the “iso-

