Fiduciary Bandits

Gal Bahar 1 Omer Ben-Porat 1 Kevin Leyton-Brown 2 Moshe Tennenholtz 1

Abstract
Recommendation systems often face explorationexploitation tradeoffs: the system can only learn
about the desirability of new options by recommending them to some user. Such systems
can thus be modeled as multi-armed bandit settings; however, users are self-interested and cannot be made to follow recommendations. We
ask whether exploration can nevertheless be performed in a way that scrupulously respects agents’
interests—i.e., by a system that acts as a fiduciary.
More formally, we introduce a model in which
a recommendation system faces an explorationexploitation tradeoff under the constraint that it
can never recommend any action that it knows
yields lower reward in expectation than an agent
would achieve if it acted alone. Our main contribution is a positive result: an asymptotically
optimal, incentive compatible, and ex-ante individually rational recommendation algorithm.

1. Introduction
Multi-armed bandits (henceforth MABs) (Bubeck et al.,
2012; Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006) is a well-studied problem domain in online learning. In that setting, several arms
(i.e., actions) are available to a planner; each arm is associated with an unknown reward distribution, from which
rewards are sampled independently each time the arm is
pulled. The planner selects arms sequentially, aiming to
maximize her sum of rewards. This often involves a tradeoff between exploiting arms that have been observed to
yield good rewards and exploring arms that could yield even
higher rewards. Many variations of this model exist, including stochastic (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011; Karnin et al.,
2013), Bayesian (Chapelle & Li, 2011; Agrawal & Goyal,
2012), contextual (Chu et al., 2011; Slivkins, 2014), adver1

Technion – Israel Institute of Technology 2 University of
British Columbia, Canada. Correspondence to: Omer Ben-Porat
<omerbp@campus.technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

sarial (Auer et al., 1995) and non-stationary (Besbes et al.,
2014; Levine et al., 2017) bandits.
This paper considers a setting motivated by recommender
systems. Such systems suggest actions to agents based
on a set of current beliefs and assess agents’ experiences to
update these beliefs. For instance, in navigation applications
(e.g., Waze; Google maps) the system recommends routes
to drivers based on beliefs about current traffic congestion.
The planner’s objective is to minimize users’ average travel
time. The system cannot be sure of the congestion on a
road segment that no agents have recently traversed; thus,
navigation systems offer the best known route most of the
time and explore occasionally. Of course, users are not
eager to perform such exploration; they are self-interested
in the sense that they care more about minimizing their
own travel times than they do about conducting surveillance
about traffic conditions for the system.
A recent line of work (Kremer et al., 2014; Mansour et al.,
2015), inspired by the viewpoint of algorithmic mechanism
design (Nisan & Ronen, 1999; Nisan et al., 2007), deals
with that challenge by incentivizing exploration—that is,
setting up the system in such a way that no user would
ever rationally choose to decline an action that was recommended to him. The key reason that it is possible to achieve
this property while still performing a sufficient amount of
exploration is that the planner has more information than the
agents. At each point in time, each agent holds beliefs about
the arms’ reward distributions; the planner has the same
information, but also knows about all of the arms previously
pulled and the rewards obtained in each case. More specifically, Kremer et al. (2014) consider a restricted setting and
devise an MAB algorithm that is incentive compatible (IC),
meaning that whenever the algorithm recommends arm i to
an agent, the best response of the agent is to select arm i.
Although this approach explicitly reasons about agents’ incentives, it does not treat agents fairly: agents who are asked
to explore receive lower expected rewards. More precisely,
in their attempt to reach optimality (in the static setting) or
minimize regret (in the online setting), these IC MAB algorithms are intentionally providing (a priori) sub-optimal
recommendations to some of the agents. In particular, some
of the agents could be better off by not using the system and
follow their default arm—the a priori superior arm, which

