Tensor denoising and completion based on ordinal observations

Chanwoo Lee 1 Miaoyan Wang 1

Abstract
Higher-order tensors arise frequently in applications such as neuroimaging, recommendation system, and social network analysis. We consider the
problem of low-rank tensor estimation from possibly incomplete, ordinal-valued observations. Two
related problems are studied, one on tensor denoising and another on tensor completion. We propose
a multi-linear cumulative link model, develop a
rank-constrained M-estimator, and obtain theoretical accuracy guarantees. Our mean squared
error bound enjoys a faster convergence rate than
previous results, and we show that the proposed
estimator is minimax optimal under the class of
low-rank models. Furthermore, the procedure developed serves as an efficient completion method
which guarantees consistent recovery of an orderK (d, . . . , d)-dimensional low-rank tensor using
only Õ(Kd) noisy, quantized observations. We
demonstrate the outperformance of our approach
over previous methods on the tasks of clustering
and collaborative filtering.

1. Introduction
Multidimensional arrays, a.k.a. tensors, arise in a variety
of applications including recommendation systems (Baltrunas et al., 2011), social networks (Nickel et al., 2011),
genomics (Wang et al., 2019), and neuroimaging (Zhou
et al., 2013). There is a growing need to develop general
methods that can address two main problems for analyzing
these noisy, high-dimensional datasets. The first problem
is tensor denoising which aims to recover a signal tensor
from its noisy entries (Hong et al., 2020; Wang & Zeng,
2019). The second problem is tensor completion which
examines the minimum number of entries needed for a consistent recovery (Ghadermarzy et al., 2018; Montanari &
Sun, 2018). Low-rankness is often imposed to the signal
1

Department of Statistics, University of WisconsinMadison, Wisconsin, USA. Correspondence to: Miaoyan Wang
<miaoyan.wang@wisc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

tensor, thereby efficiently reducing the intrinsic dimension
in both problems.
A number of low-rank tensor estimation methods have been
proposed (Hong et al., 2020; Wang & Song, 2017), revitalizing classical methods such as CANDECOMP/PARAFAC
(CP) decomposition (Hitchcock, 1927) and Tucker decomposition (Tucker, 1966). These tensor methods treat the
entries as continuous-valued. In many cases, however, we
encounter datasets of which the entries are qualitative. For
example, the Netflix problem records the ratings of users on
movies over time. Each data entry is a rating on a nominal
scale {very like, like, neutral, dislike, very dislike}. Another
example is in the signal processing, where the digits are
frequently rounded or truncated so that only integer values
are available. The qualitative observations take values in
a limited set of categories, making the learning problem
harder compared to continuous observations.
Ordinal entries are categorical variables with an ordering
among the categories; for example, very like ≺ like ≺ neutral ≺ · · · . The analyses of tensors with the ordinal entries
are mainly complicated by two key properties needed for a
reasonable model. First, the model should be invariant under
a reversal of categories, say, from the Netflix example, very
like  like  neutral  · · · , but not under arbitrary label
permutations. Second, the parameter interpretations should
be consistent under merging or splitting of contiguous categories. The classical continuous tensor model (Kolda &
Bader, 2009; Ghadermarzy et al., 2019) fails in the first aspect, whereas the binary tensor model (Ghadermarzy et al.,
2018) lacks the second property. An appropriate model for
ordinal tensors has yet to be studied.
Our contributions. We are among the first to establish the
recovery theory for signal tensors and quantization operators
simultaneously from a limited number of highly discrete entries. Our main contributions are summarized in Table 1. We
propose a cumulative link model for higher-order tensors,
develop a rank-constrained M-estimator, and obtain theoretical accuracy guarantees. The mean squared error bound is
established, and we show that the obtained bound has minimax optimal rate in high dimensions under the low-rank
model. Furthermore, our proposal guarantees consistent
recovery of an order-K (d, . . . , d)-dimensional low-rank
tensor using only Õ(Kd) noisy, quantized observations.

