NetGAN without GAN:
From Random Walks to Low-Rank Approximations
Luca Rendsburg 1 Holger Heidrich 1 Ulrike von Luxburg 1 2

Abstract
A graph generative model takes a graph as input
and is supposed to generate new graphs that “look
like” the input graph. While most classical models
focus on few, hand-selected graph statistics and
are too simplistic to reproduce real-world graphs,
NetGAN recently emerged as an attractive alternative: by training a GAN to learn the random
walk distribution of the input graph, the algorithm
is able to reproduce a large number of important
network patterns simultaneously, without explicitly specifying any of them. In this paper, we
investigate the implicit bias of NetGAN. We ﬁnd
that the root of its generalization properties does
not lie in the GAN architecture, but in an inconspicuous low-rank approximation of the logits
random walk transition matrix. Step by step we
can strip NetGAN of all unnecessary parts, including the GAN, and obtain a highly simpliﬁed
reformulation that achieves comparable generalization results, but is orders of magnitudes faster
and easier to adapt. Being much simpler on the
conceptual side, we reveal the implicit inductive
bias of the algorithm — an important step towards
increasing the interpretability, transparency and
acceptance of machine learning systems.

1. Introduction
A graph generative model is a mechanism to achieve the
following task: for a given input graph (or a set of input
graphs), generate new graphs that have a similar structure
as the input graph. The mechanism is supposed to slightly
perturb the graph, but should not change its characteristic
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Tübingen, Germany 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems,
Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to: Luca Rendsburg
<luca.rendsburg@uni-tuebingen.de>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

structure (such as the community structure, the characteristic path lengths, etc). Being able to create perturbed copies
of a graph is useful in many different scenarios, for example:
comparing a small sample of brain networks for Alzheimer
patients (just one, in the extreme case) to a large population
of healthy subjects, making robustness statements about a
climate network by running a sensitivity analysis on perturbed copies, or performing a generic bootstrap analysis.
A recent graph generative model that has received a lot of
attention is NetGAN (Bojchevski et al., 2018). First, it samples a set of random walks from the input graph to train
a GAN (Goodfellow et al., 2014), whose generator learns
to produce node-sequences that resemble random walks
over the input graph. Generated graphs are then obtained
as reconstructions based on these sequences. The inherent
assumption of this approach is that random walks describe
graphs in a reasonably holistic way: local statistics such as
motifs are observable in the individual random walks, while
global statistics such as cluster structure and diameter are
encoded in the distribution over random walk sequences.
As opposed to other approaches, NetGAN does not make
any explicit model assumptions; rather, it is supposed to
implicitly learn many local and global graph statistics simultaneously by reproducing random walk statistics. However,
if the goal is to generalize (perturb) the input graph, there
has to be an implicit bias as to which type of generalization
(perturbation) is preferred (no free lunch). The goal of our
paper is to characterize this bias of NetGAN, which we will
achieve by reformulating it in terms of a distance function
between graphs. This formulation provides insights on the
inﬂuence of design choices and model parameters, such as
the length of the random walks. Scrutinizing the NetGAN
architecture, we observe that many of its components can
be considerably simpliﬁed. Step by step we strip all the
unnecessary parts until we are left with the only crucial
ingredient, a low-rank approximation of the logits random
walk transition matrix. Our main contributions are:
‚ Reformulation of NetGAN. We reformulate NetGAN
as a low-rank approximation with respect to the
Kullback-Leibler divergence between transition matrices, which requires neither a GAN nor any sampling.
‚ Huge speedup. Our algorithm retains the generalization

