On the (In)tractability of Computing Normalizing Constants
for the Product of Determinantal Point Processes
Naoto Ohsaka 1 Tatsuya Matsuoka 1

Abstract
We consider the product of determinantal point
processes (DPPs), a point process whose probability mass is proportional to the product of principal minors of multiple matrices as a natural,
promising generalization of DPPs. We study the
computational complexity of computing its normalizing constant, which is among the most essential probabilistic inference tasks. Our complexitytheoretic results (almost) rule out the existence
of efficient algorithms for this task, unless input
matrices are forced to have favorable structures.
In particular, wePprove the following:
(1) Computing S det(AS,S )p exactly for every
(fixed) positive even integer p is UP-hard and
Mod3 P-hard, which gives a negative answer to an
openPquestion posed by Kulesza & Taskar (2012).
(2) S det(AS,S ) det(BS,S ) det(CS,S ) is NP1−
hard to approximate within a factor of 2O(|I| )
for any  > 0, where |I| is the input size. This
result is stronger than #P-hardness for the case
of two matrices by Gillenwater (2014).
O(k)
(3) There exists
|I|O(1) -time algorithm
Pa k
for computing S det(AS,S ) det(BS,S ), where
k is “the maximum rank of A and B” or “the
treewidth of the graph induced by nonzero entries
of A and B.” Such parameterized algorithms are
said to be fixed-parameter tractable.

1. Introduction
Determinantal point processes (DPPs) offer an appealing
probabilistic model to compactly express negative correlation among combinatorial objects (Macchi, 1975; Borodin
& Rains, 2005). Given an n × n matrix A, a DPP defines a
probability measure on 2[n] such that the probability of drawing subset S ⊆ [n] is proportional to the principal minor
1

NEC Corporation.
<ohsaka@nec.com>.

Correspondence to: Naoto Ohsaka

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

det(AS,S ). Consider a subset selection task: given n items
(e.g., images (Kulesza & Taskar, 2011)) associated with
quality scores qi and feature vectors φi for each i ∈ [n], we
are asked to choose a small group of high-quality, diverse
items. One can then construct A as Ai,j = qi qj φ>
i φj ,
resulting in that det(AS,S ) is the squared volume of the
parallelepiped spanned by {qi φi }i∈S , which balances item
quality and set diversity. Encouraged by efficient algorithms
for many inference tasks such as normalization, sampling,
and marginalization, DPPs have been applied to numerous machine learning tasks, e.g., image search (Kulesza &
Taskar, 2011), video summarization (Gong et al., 2014),
object retrieval (Affandi et al., 2014), sensor placement
(Krause et al., 2008), and Nyström method (Li et al., 2016).
One of the recent research trends is to extend or generalize
DPPs to express more complicated distributions. Computing the normalizing constant (a.k.a. partition function) for
such new models is at the heart of efficient probabilistic
inference. For example, we can efficiently sample a subset
from partition DPPs (Celis et al., 2017), which are restricted
to include a few elements from each group, by quickly evaluating their normalizing constant. Such tractability is, of
course, not necessarily the case for every generalization.
In this paper, we consider a natural, (seemingly) promising generalization of DPPs involving multiple matrices.
The product DPP (Π-DPP) given m matrices A1 , . . . , Am
defines the probability mass for each subset S as ∝
det(A1S,S ) · · · det(Am
S,S ), which can be significantly expressive: It enables to embed some constraints to DPPs,
e.g., those that are defined by partitions (Celis et al., 2017)
and bipartite matching, and it contains exponentiated DPPs
(Mariet et al., 2018) of an integer exponent as a special case.
The computational complexity of its normalizing constant,
X

det(A1S,S ) · · · det(Am
S,S ),

S⊆[n]

is almost nebulous, except for m ≤ 2 (Gurvits, 2005; Gillenwater, 2014; Anari & Gharan, 2017) (see Section 1.2). Our
research question is thus the following:
How hard (or easy) is it to compute
normalizing constants for Π-DPPs?

