Data-Efficient Image Recognition with Contrastive Predictive Coding

Olivier J. Hénaff 1 Aravind Srinivas 2 Jeffrey De Fauw 1 Ali Razavi 1
Carl Doersch 1 S. M. Ali Eslami 1 Aaron van den Oord 1

Abstract
Human observers can learn to recognize new categories of images from a handful of examples, yet
doing so with artificial ones remains an open challenge. We hypothesize that data-efficient recognition is enabled by representations which make the
variability in natural signals more predictable. We
therefore revisit and improve Contrastive Predictive Coding, an unsupervised objective for learning such representations. This new implementation produces features which support state-of-theart linear classification accuracy on the ImageNet
dataset. When used as input for non-linear classification with deep neural networks, this representation allows us to use 2–5× less labels than classifiers trained directly on image pixels. Finally,
this unsupervised representation substantially improves transfer learning to object detection on the
PASCAL VOC dataset, surpassing fully supervised pre-trained ImageNet classifiers.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks excel at perceptual tasks when labeled data are abundant, yet their performance degrades
substantially when provided with limited supervision (Fig.
1, red). In contrast, humans and animals can learn about new
classes of images from a small number of examples (Landau
et al., 1988; Markman, 1989). What accounts for this monumental difference in data-efficiency between biological
and machine vision? While highly structured representations (e.g. as proposed by Lake et al. (2015)) may improve
data-efficiency, it remains unclear how to program explicit
structures that capture the enormous complexity of realworld visual scenes, such as those present in the ImageNet
dataset (Russakovsky et al., 2015). An alternative hypothesis has therefore proposed that intelligent systems need
not be structured a priori, but can instead learn about the
1
DeepMind, London, UK 2 University of California, Berkeley.
Correspondence to: Olivier J. Hénaff <henaff@google.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

2x fewer
labels
5x fewer
labels

Figure 1. Data-efficient image recognition with Contrastive Predictive Coding. With decreasing amounts of labeled data, supervised networks trained on pixels fail to generalize (red). When
trained on unsupervised representations learned with CPC, these
networks retain a much higher accuracy in this low-data regime
(blue). Equivalently, the accuracy of supervised networks can be
matched with significantly fewer labels (horizontal arrows).

structure of the world in an unsupervised manner (Barlow,
1989; Hinton et al., 1999; LeCun et al., 2015). Choosing
an appropriate training objective is an open problem, but
a potential guiding principle is that useful representations
should make the variability in natural signals more predictable (Tishby et al., 1999; Wiskott & Sejnowski, 2002;
Richthofer & Wiskott, 2016). Indeed, human perceptual representations have been shown to linearize (or ‘straighten’)
the temporal transformations found in natural videos, a
property lacking from current supervised image recognition
models (Hénaff et al., 2019), and theories of both spatial and
temporal predictability have succeeded in describing properties of early visual areas (Rao & Ballard, 1999; Palmer
et al., 2015). In this work, we hypothesize that spatially
predictable representations may allow artificial systems to
benefit from human-like data-efficiency.
Contrastive Predictive Coding (CPC, van den Oord et al.
(2018)) is an unsupervised objective which learns predictable representations. CPC is a general technique that
only requires in its definition that observations be ordered

