Recht–Ré Noncommutative Arithmetic-Geometric Mean Conjecture is False

Zehua Lai 1 Lek-Heng Lim 1

Abstract
Stochastic optimization algorithms have become
indispensable in modern machine learning. An unresolved foundational question in this area is the
difference between with-replacement sampling
and without-replacement sampling — does the
latter have superior convergence rate compared
to the former? A groundbreaking result of Recht
and Ré reduces the problem to a noncommutative analogue of the arithmetic-geometric mean
inequality where n positive numbers are replaced
by n positive defnite matrices. If this inequality
holds for all n, then without-replacement sampling (also known as random reshuffing) indeed
outperforms with-replacement sampling in some
important optimization problems. The conjectured Recht–Ré inequality has so far only been
established for n = 2 and a special case of n = 3.
We will show that the Recht–Ré conjecture is false
for general n. Our approach relies on the noncommutative Positivstellensatz, which allows us to
reduce the conjectured inequality to a semidefnite program and the validity of the conjecture to
certain bounds for the optimum values, which we
show are false as soon as n = 5.

1. Introduction
The breathtaking reach of deep learning, permeating every
area of science and technology, has led to an outsize role for
randomized optimization algorithms. It is probably fair to
say that in the absence of randomized algorithms, deep learning would not have achieved its spectacular level of success.
Fitting an exceedingly high-dimensional model with an exceedingly large training set would have been prohibitively
expensive without some form of random sampling, which in
addition provides other crucial benefts such as saddle-point
*

Equal contribution 1 Computational and Applied Mathematics Initiative, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
Correspondence to: Zehua Lai <laizehua@uchicago.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

avoidance (Fang et al., 2019; Jin et al., 2017). As such,
in machine learning computations, stochastic variants of
gradient descent (Bottou, 2010; Johnson & Zhang, 2013;
Nemirovski et al., 2008), alternating projections (Strohmer
& Vershynin, 2009), coordinate descent (Nesterov, 2012),
and other algorithms have largely overtaken their classical
deterministic counterparts in relevance and utility.
There are numerous random sampling strategies but the
most fundamental question, before all other considerations,
is deciding between sampling with replacement or sampling
without replacement. In the vast majority of randomized
algorithms, a random sample is selected or a random action is performed with replacement from a pool, making the
randomness in each iteration independent and thus easier
(often much easier) to analyze. However, when it comes
to practical realizations of these algorithms, one invariably
samples without replacement, since they are easier (often
much easier) to implement. Take the ubiquitous stochastic
gradient descent for example, many if not most implementations would pass through each item exactly once in a
random order — this is sampling without replacement, also
called random reshuffing. Likewise, in implementations
of randomized coordinate descent, coordinates are usually
just chosen in a random order — again sampling without
replacement.
Apart from its ease of implementation, there are other reasons for favoring without-replacement sampling. Empirical evidence (Bottou, 2009; Beck & Tetruashvili, 2013;
Wright, 2015) suggests that in stochastic gradient descent,
without-replacement sampling regularly outperforms withreplacement sampling. Theoretical results also point towards without-replacement sampling: Under standard convexity assumptions, the convergence rate of a withoutreplacement sampling algorithm typically beats a withreplacement sampling one by a factor of O(n−1 ) (Shamir,
2016; Nagaraj et al., 2019; Gürbüzbalaban et al., 2019).
Recht & Ré (2012) proposed a matrix theoretic approach to
compare the effcacy of with- and without-replacement sampling methods. Since nearly every common optimization
algorithm, deterministic or randomized, works with a linear
or quadratic approximation of the objective function locally,
it suffces to examine the two sampling strategies on linear
or quadratic functions to understand their local convergence

