Sparse Convex Optimization via Adaptively Regularized Hard Thresholding

Kyriakos Axiotis 1 Maxim Sviridenko 2

Abstract
The goal of Sparse Convex Optimization is to
optimize a convex function f under a sparsity
constraint s ≤ s∗ γ, where s∗ is the target number of non-zero entries in a feasible solution
(sparsity) and γ ≥ 1 is an approximation factor.
There has been a lot of work to analyze the sparsity guarantees of various algorithms (LASSO,
Orthogonal Matching Pursuit (OMP), Iterative
Hard Thresholding (IHT)) in terms of the Restricted Condition Number κ. The best known
algorithms guarantee to find an approximate solu∗
tion of value
f (x

n ) +  with the sparsity
o bound of
0

∗

(x )
γ = O κ min log f (x )−f
, κ , where x∗

is the target solution. We present a new Adaptively
Regularized Hard Thresholding (ARHT) algorithm that makes significant progress on this problem by bringing the bound down to γ = O(κ),
which has been shown to be tight for a general
class of algorithms including LASSO, OMP, and
IHT. This is achieved without significant sacrifice in the runtime efficiency compared to the
fastest known algorithms. We also provide a new
analysis of OMP with Replacement (OMPR) for
2
general f , under the condition s > s∗ κ4 , which
yields Compressed Sensing bounds under the Restricted Isometry Property (RIP). When compared
to other Compressed Sensing approaches, it has
the advantage of providing a strong tradeoff between the RIP condition and the solution sparsity,
while working for any general function f that
meets the RIP condition.

lution (its number of non-zero entries). Variants and special
cases of this problem have been studied for many years, and
there have been countless applications in Machine Learning,
Signal Processing, and Statistics. In Machine Learning it
is used to regularize models by enforcing parameter sparsity, since a sparse set of parameters often leads to better
model generalization. Furthermore, in a lot of large scale
applications the number of parameters of a trained model
is a significant factor in computational efficiency, thus improved sparsity can lead to improved time and memory
performance. In applied statistics, a single extra feature
translates to a real cost from increasing the number of samples. In Compressed Sensing, finding a sparse solution to
a Linear Regression problem can be used to significantly
reduce the sample size for the recovery of a target signal.
In the context of these applications, decreasing sparsity by
even a small amount while not increasing the accuracy can
have a significant impact.
Sparse Optimization Given a function f : Rn → R
and any s∗ -sparse (unknown) target solution x∗ , the Sparse
Optimization problem is to find an s-sparse solution x, i.e.
a solution with at most s non-zero entries, such that f (x) ≤
f (x∗ ) +  and s ≤ s∗ γ, where  > 0 is a desired accuracy
and γ ≥ 1 is an approximation factor for the target sparsity.
Even if f is a convex function, the sparsity constraint makes
this problem non-convex, and it has been 
shown that 
it
1−δ
is an intractable problem, even when γ = O 2log n
and f is the Linear Regression objective (Natarajan, 1995;
Foster et al., 2015). However, this worst-case behavior is not
observed in practice, and so a large body of work has been
devoted to the analysis of algorithms under the assumption
ρ+

∗

s+s
that the restricted condition number κs+s∗ = ρ−
(or
s+s∗

+

1. Introduction
Sparse Convex Optimization is the problem of optimizing a
convex objective, while constraining the sparsity of the so1

MIT 2 Yahoo! Research. Correspondence to: Kyriakos Axiotis <kaxiotis@mit.edu>, Maxim Sviridenko
<sviri@verizonmedia.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

just κ = ρρ− ) of f is bounded (Natarajan, 1995; ShalevShwartz et al., 2010; Zhang, 2011; Bahmani et al., 2013;
Liu et al., 2014; Jain et al., 2014; Yuan et al., 2016; Shen &
Li, 2017a;b; Jain et al., 2014; Somani et al., 2018). Note:
Here, ρ+
s+s∗ is the maximum smoothness constant of any
restriction of f on an (s + s∗ )-sparse subset of coordinates
and ρ−
s+s∗ is the minimum strong convexity constant of any
restriction of f on an (s + s∗ )-sparse subset of coordinates.
The first algorithm for this problem, often called Orthogonal Matching Pursuit (OMP) or Greedy, was analyzed by

