k-means++: Few More Steps Yield Constant Approximation

Davin Choo * 1 Christoph Grunau * 1 Julian Portmann * 1 Václav Rozhoň * 1

Abstract
The k-means++ algorithm of Arthur and
Vassilvitskii (SODA 2007) is a state-of-the-art
algorithm for solving the k-means clustering
problem and is known to give an
O(log k)-approximation in expectation. Recently,
Lattanzi and Sohler (ICML 2019) proposed
augmenting k-means++ with O(k log log k)
local search steps to yield a constant
approximation (in expectation) to the k-means
clustering problem. In this paper, we improve
their analysis to show that, for any arbitrarily
small constant ε > 0, with only εk additional
local search steps, one can achieve a constant
approximation guarantee (with high probability
in k), resolving an open problem in their paper.

1. Introduction
k-means clustering is an important unsupervised learning
task often used to analyze datasets. Given a set P of points
in d-dimensional Euclidean space Rd and an integer k, the
task is to partition P into k clusters while minimizing the
total cost of the partition. Formally, the goal is to find a set
C ∈ Rd of k centers minimizing the following objective:
X
min kp − ck2 ,
p∈P

c∈C

where points p ∈ P are assigned to the closest candidate
center c ∈ C.
Finding an optimal solution to this objective was proven to
be NP-hard (Aloise et al., 2009; Mahajan et al., 2009), and
the problem was even shown to be hard to approximate to
arbitrary precision (Awasthi et al., 2015; Lee et al., 2017).
The currently best known approximation ratio is 6.357
(Ahmadian et al., 2019), while other constant factor
*
1
Equal contribution
ETH Zürich.
Correspondence
to:
Davin Choo <chood@ethz.ch>, Christoph Grunau
<cgrunau@ethz.ch>, Julian Portmann <pjulian@ethz.ch>,
Václav Rozhoň <rozhonv@ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the
author(s).

approximation algorithms exist (Jain & Vazirani, 2001;
Kanungo et al., 2004). For constant dimensions d or
constant k, (1 + ε)-approximation algorithms are known
(Kumar et al., 2004; Bandyapadhyay & Varadarajan, 2015;
Cohen-Addad, 2018; Cohen-Addad et al., 2019; Friggstad
et al., 2019). However, these algorithms are mainly of
theoretical interest and not known to be efficient in practice.
On the practical side of things, the canonical k-means
algorithm (Lloyd, 1982) proved to be a good heuristic.
Starting with k initial points (e.g. chosen at random),
Lloyd’s algorithm iteratively, in an alternating minimization
manner, assigns points to the nearest center and updates the
centers to be the centroids of each cluster, until
convergence. Although the alternating minimization
provides no provable approximation guarantee, Lloyd’s
algorithm never increases the cost of the initial clustering.
Thus, one way to obtain theoretical guarantees is to provide
Lloyd’s algorithm with a provably good initialization.
The k-means++ algorithm (see Algorithm 1) of Arthur
and Vassilvitskii (2007) is a well-known algorithm for
computing an initial set of k centers with provable
approximation guarantees. The initialization is performed
by incrementally choosing k initial seeds for Lloyd using
D2 -sampling, i.e., sample a point with probability
proportional to its squared distance to the closest existing
center. They showed that the resultant clustering is an
O(log k)-approximation in expectation. This theoretical
guarantee is substantiated by empirical results showing that
k-means++ can heavily outperform random initialization,
with only a small amount of additional computation time on
top of running Lloyd’s algorithm. However, lower bound
analyses (Brunsch & Röglin, 2013; Bhattacharya et al.,
2016) show that there exist inputs where k-means++ is
Ω(log k)-competitive with high probability in k.
Recently, Lattanzi and Sohler (2019) proposed a variant of
local search after picking k initial centers via k-means++
(see Algorithm 2): In each step, a new point is sampled
with probability proportional to its current cost and used to
replace an existing center such as to maximize the cost
reduction. If all possible swaps increase the objective cost,
the new sampled point is discarded. Following their
notation, we refer to this local search procedure as
LocalSearch++.
They showed that performing

