Minimax Weight and Q-Function Learning for Off-Policy Evaluation

Masatoshi Uehara 1 Jiawei Huang 2 Nan Jiang 2

Abstract
We provide theoretical investigations into offpolicy evaluation in reinforcement learning using
function approximators for (marginalized) importance weights and value functions. Our contributions include:
(1) A new estimator, MWL, that directly estimates
importance ratios over the state-action distributions, removing the reliance on knowledge of the
behavior policy as in prior work (Liu et al., 2018).
(2) Another new estimator, MQL, obtained by
swapping the roles of importance weights and
value-functions in MWL. MQL has an intuitive
interpretation of minimizing average Bellman errors and can be combined with MWL in a doubly
robust manner.
(3) Several additional results that offer further
insights, including the sample complexities of
MWL and MQL, their asymptotic optimality in
the tabular setting, how the learned importance
weights depend the choice of the discriminator
class, and how our methods provide a unified view
of some old and new algorithms in RL.

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL), off-policy evaluation (OPE)
refers to the problem of estimating the performance of a
new policy using historical data collected from a different
policy, which is of crucial importance to the real-world
applications of RL. The problem is genuinely hard as any
unbiased estimator has to suffer a variance exponential in
horizon in the worst case (Li et al., 2015; Jiang and Li,
2016), known as the curse of horizon.
Recently, a new family of estimators based on marginalized
importance sampling (MIS) receive significant attention
1
Harvard University, Massachusetts , Boston, USA
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois, USA. Correspondence to: Masatoshi Uehara <ueharamasatoshi136@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

from the community (Liu et al., 2018; Xie et al., 2019),
as they overcome the curse of horizon with relatively mild
representation assumptions. The basic idea is to learn the
marginalized importance weight that converts the state distribution in the data to that induced by the target policy, which
sometimes has much smaller variance than the importance
weight on action sequences used by standard sequential IS.
Among these works, Liu et al. (2018) learn the importance
weights by solving a minimax optimization problem defined
with the help of a discriminator value-function class.
In this work, we investigate more deeply the space of algorithms that utilize a value-function class and an importance
weight class for OPE. Our main contributions are:
• (Section 4) A new estimator, MWL, that directly estimates importance ratios over the state-action distributions,
removing the reliance on knowledge of the behavior policy as in prior work (Liu et al., 2018).
• (Section 5) By swapping the roles of importance weights
and Q-functions in MWL, we obtain a new estimator
that learns a Q-function using importance weights as
discriminators. The procedure and the guarantees of MQL
exhibit an interesting symmetry w.r.t. MWL. We also
combine MWL and MQL in a doubly robust manner and
provide their sample complexity guarantees (Section 6).
• (Section 7) We examine the statistical efficiency of MWL
and MQL, and show that by modeling state-action functions, MWL and MQL are able to achieve the semiparametric lower bound of OPE in the tabular setting while
their state-function variants fail to do so.
• Our work provides a unified view of many old and new
algorithms in RL. For example, when both importance
weights and value functions are modeled using the same
linear class, we recover LSTDQ (Lagoudakis and Parr,
2004) and off-policy LSTD (Bertsekas and Yu, 2009;
Dann et al., 2014) as special cases of MWL/MQL and
their state-function variants. This gives LSTD algorithms
a novel interpretation that is very different from the standard TD intuition. As another example, (tabular) modelbased OPE and step-wise importance sampling—two algorithms that are so different that we seldom connect
them to each other—are both special cases of MWL.

