Predictive Sampling with Forecasting Autoregressive Models

Auke Wiggers 1 Emiel Hoogeboom 2 3

Abstract
Autoregressive models (ARMs) currently hold
state-of-the-art performance in likelihood-based
modeling of image and audio data. Generally, neural network based ARMs are designed to allow
fast inference, but sampling from these models
is impractically slow. In this paper, we introduce
the predictive sampling algorithm: a procedure
that exploits the fast inference property of ARMs
in order to speed up sampling, while keeping the
model intact. We propose two variations of predictive sampling, namely sampling with ARM fixedpoint iteration and learned forecasting modules.
Their effectiveness is demonstrated in two settings: i) explicit likelihood modeling on binary
MNIST, SVHN and CIFAR10, and ii) discrete latent modeling in an autoencoder trained on SVHN,
CIFAR10 and Imagenet32. Empirically, we show
considerable improvements over baselines in number of ARM inference calls and sampling speed.

1. Introduction
Deep generative models aim to approximate the joint distribution P(x) of high-dimensional objects, such as images,
video and audio. When a model of the distribution is available, it may be used for numerous applications such as
anomaly detection, inpainting, super-resolution and denoising. However, modeling high-dimensional objects remains
a notoriously challenging task.
A powerful class of distribution models called deep autoregressive models (ARMs) (Bengio & Bengio, 2000;
Larochelle & Murray, 2011) decomposes the highdimensional joint distribution into single-dimensional conditional distributions, using the chain rule from probability
1
Qualcomm AI Research, Qualcomm Technologies Netherlands B.V.. Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc. 2 University of Amsterdam, Netherlands. 3 Research done while completing an internship at
Qualcomm AI Research.. Correspondence to: Auke Wiggers
<auke@qti.qualcomm.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Overview of predictive sampling. A sequence-sofar of ARM samples x0 , . . . , xi−1 is extended with forecasts
x̃i , x̃i+1 , . . . and given as input to the ARM. As the ARM has
strict triangular dependence, its first output x0i is valid: the conditioning consists only of ARM samples. If the forecast x̃i is equal
to x0i , the next output x0i+1 is also valid.

theory. Neural network based ARMs currently hold stateof-the-art likelihood in image and audio domains (van den
Oord et al., 2016a;b; Salimans et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2018;
Menick & Kalchbrenner, 2018; Child et al., 2019).
A major limitation of ARMs is that the autoregressive computation can be parallelized only in a single direction: either
evaluation or sampling. Generally, these models are trained
using likelihood evaluation and empirical computational
cost of training is substantially higher than that of sampling.
As such, ARMs are designed to allow for fast evaluation,
but sampling from these models is prohibitively slow. In the
literature, there are methods that try to accelerate sampling
by breaking autoregressive structure a priori, but consequently suffer from a decrease in likelihood performance
(Reed et al., 2017). Another approach approximates an autoregressive density model via distillation (van den Oord
et al., 2018), but this method provides no guarantees that
samples from the distilled model originate from the original
model distribution.
This paper proposes a new algorithm termed predictive sampling, which 1) accelerates discrete ARM sampling, 2) keeps
autoregressive structure intact, and 3) samples from the true
model distribution. Predictive sampling forecasts which
values are likely to be sampled, and uses the parallel inference property of the ARM to reduce the total number of
required ARM forward passes. To forecast future values,

