Interpretable Off-Policy Evaluation in Reinforcement Learning
by Highlighting Influential Transitions

Omer Gottesman 1 Joseph Futoma 1 Yao Liu 2 Sonali Parbhoo 1 Leo Anthony Celi 3 Emma Brunskill 2
Finale Doshi-Velez 1

Abstract
Off-policy evaluation in reinforcement learning
offers the chance of using observational data to improve future outcomes in domains such as healthcare and education, but safe deployment in high
stakes settings requires ways of assessing its validity. Traditional measures such as confidence
intervals may be insufficient due to noise, limited
data and confounding. In this paper we develop
a method that could serve as a hybrid human-AI
system, to enable human experts to analyze the
validity of policy evaluation estimates. This is
accomplished by highlighting observations in the
data whose removal will have a large effect on
the OPE estimate, and formulating a set of rules
for choosing which ones to present to domain
experts for validation. We develop methods to
compute exactly the influence functions for fitted
Q-evaluation with two different function classes:
kernel-based and linear least squares, as well as
importance sampling methods. Experiments on
medical simulations and real-world intensive care
unit data demonstrate that our method can be used
to identify limitations in the evaluation process
and make evaluation more robust.

1. Introduction
Within reinforcement learning (RL), off-policy evaluation
(OPE) is the task of estimating the value of a given evaluation policy, using data collected by interaction with the
environment under a different behavior policy (Sutton &
Barto, 2018; Precup, 2000). OPE is particularly valuable
when interaction and experimentation with the environment
is expensive, risky, or unethical—for example, in healthcare
or with self-driving cars. However, despite recent interest
1
Harvard University 2 Stanford University 3 MIT. Correspondence to: Omer Gottesman <gottesman@fas.harvard.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

and progress, state-of-the-art OPE methods still often fail
to differentiate between obviously good and obviously bad
policies, e.g. in healthcare (Gottesman et al., 2018).
Most of the OPE literature focuses on sub-problems such
as improving asymptotic sample efficiency or bounding the
error on OPE estimators for the value of a policy. However, while these bounds are theoretically sound, they are
often too conservative to be useful in practice (though see
e.g. Thomas et al. (2019) for an exception). This is not
surprising, as there is a theoretical limit to the statistical
information contained in a given dataset, no matter which
estimation technique is used. Furthermore, many of the common assumptions underlying these theoretical guarantees
are usually not met in practice: observational healthcare
data, for example, often contains many unobserved confounders (Gottesman et al., 2019a).
Given the limitations of OPE, we argue that in high stakes
scenarios domain experts should be integrated into the evaluation process in order to provide useful actionable results.
For example, senior clinicians may be able to provide insights that reduce our uncertainty of our value estimates.
In this light, the explicit integration of expert knowledge
into the OPE pipeline is a natural way for researchers to
receive feedback and continually update their policies until one can make a responsible decision about whether to
pursue gathering prospective data.
The question is then what information can humans provide
that might help assess and potentially improve our confidence in an OPE estimate? In this work, we consider how
human input could improve our confidence in the recently
proposed OPE estimator, fitted Q-evaluation (FQE) (Le
et al., 2019), as well as importance sampling (IS) methods.
We develop an efficient approach to identify the most influential transitions in a batch of observational data, that is,
transitions whose removal would have large effects on the
OPE estimate. By presenting these influential transitions
to a domain expert and verifying that they are indeed representative of the data, we can increase our confidence that
our estimated evaluation policy value is not dependent on
outliers, confounded observations, or measurement errors.
The main contributions of this work are:

