Near Input Sparsity Time Kernel Embeddings via Adaptive Sampling

David P. Woodruff * 1 Amir Zandieh * 2

Abstract
To accelerate kernel methods, we propose a near
input sparsity time algorithm for sampling the
high-dimensional feature space implicitly defined
by a kernel transformation. Our main contribution is an importance sampling method for subsampling the feature space of a degree q tensoring
of data points in almost input sparsity time, improving the recent oblivious sketching method of
(Ahle et al., 2020) by a factor of q 5/2 /2 . This
leads to a subspace embedding for the polynomial
kernel, as well as the Gaussian kernel, with a target dimension that is only linearly dependent on
the statistical dimension of the kernel and in time
which is only linearly dependent on the sparsity
of the input dataset. We show how our subspace
embedding bounds imply new statistical guarantees for kernel ridge regression. Furthermore, we
empirically show that in large-scale regression
tasks, our algorithm outperforms state-of-the-art
kernel approximation methods.

producing compressed and low-rank approximations to kernel matrices (Rahimi & Recht, 2008; Alaoui & Mahoney,
2015; Avron et al., 2017a; Musco & Musco, 2017; Avron
et al., 2017b; 2014; Ahle et al., 2020; Zandieh et al., 2020).
1.1. Problem Definition
For a given kernel function k : Rd × Rd → R and a
dataset of d-dimensional vectors x1 , x2 , · · · xn ∈ Rd , let
K ∈ Rn×n be the kernel matrix corresponding to this
dataset defined as Kij = k(xi , xj ) for every i, j ∈ [n].
A classical solution for scaling up kernel methods is via
kernel low-rank approximation, where one seeks to find a
low-rank matrix Z ∈ Rs×n such that Z > Z can serve as a
proxy to the kernel matrix K. In order to obtain statistical
and algorithmic guarantees for downstream kernel-based
learning applications, such as kernel regression, PCR, CCA,
etc., one needs to have spectral approximation bounds on the
entire surrogate kernel matrix. Formally, for given , λ > 0
we need Z > Z to be an (, λ)-spectral approximation to the
kernel matrix K, meaning that Z > Z has to satisfy,
K + λI
K + λI
 Z > Z + λI 
.
1+
1−

(1)

1. Introduction
Kernel methods provide a simple, yet powerful framework
for applying non-parametric modeling techniques to a number of important problems in statistics and machine learning, such as kernel ridge regression, SVM, PCA, CCA,
etc. While kernel methods are statistically well understood
and perform well empirically, they often pose scalability
challenges as they operate on the kernel matrix (Gram matrix) of the data, whose size scales quadratically in the size
of the training dataset. Primitives such as kernel PCA or
kernel ridge regression generally take a prohibitively large
quadratic amount of space and at least quadratic time. Thus,
much work has focused on scaling up kernel methods by
*

Equal contribution 1 Carnegie Mellon University, USA 2 Ecole
polytechnique federale de Lausanne, Switzerland. Part of this work
was done while the author was visiting CMU. Correspondence
to: David P. Woodruff <dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu>, Amir Zandieh
<amir.zandieh@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Intuitively, if λ is much larger than the operator norm of K
then Z = 0 is a good solution that satisfies (1). On the other
hand if λ = 0, then the target dimension s has to be at least
equal to the rank of K. In general, the statistical dimension
(or effective
captures this tradeoff, defined as
Pn dimension)
i
sλ := i=1 λiλ+λ
, where the λi are the eigenvalues of K.
The goal is to find a matrix Z ∈ Rs×n with a target dimension s which depends only linearly on sλ , using a runtime
that is nearly equal to the number of non-zero entries (i.e.,
the sparsity) of the input dataset, denoted by nnz(X). The
main motivation of this paper is the following:
P : Given a dataset x1 , x2 , · · · xn ∈ Rd , and a
kernel function k(·), if K is the kernel matrix corresponding to this dataset with statistical dimension
sλ = tr K(K + λI)−1 , can we compute
 a matrix Z ∈ Rs×n with s = O sλ2 log n , using
O poly(sλ , 1 , log n) · n + poly(log n) · nnz(X) runtime,
such that Z > Z is an (, λ)-spectral approximation to K as
per (1)?
The runtime that (P) is asking for requires the poly(sλ , −1 )

