Robustness to Programmable String Transformations
via Augmented Abstract Training

Yuhao Zhang 1 Aws Albarghouthi 1 Loris D’Antoni 1

Abstract
Deep neural networks for natural language processing tasks are vulnerable to adversarial input
perturbations. In this paper, we present a versatile
language for programmatically specifying string
transformations—e.g., insertions, deletions, substitutions, swaps, etc.—that are relevant to the
task at hand. We then present an approach to adversarially training models that are robust to such
user-defined string transformations. Our approach
combines the advantages of search-based techniques for adversarial training with abstractionbased techniques. Specifically, we show how to
decompose a set of user-defined string transformations into two component specifications, one that
benefits from search and another from abstraction.
We use our technique to train models on the AG
and SST2 datasets and show that the resulting
models are robust to combinations of user-defined
transformations mimicking spelling mistakes and
other meaning-preserving transformations.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have proven incredibly powerful in a
huge range of machine-learning tasks. However, deep neural
networks are highly sensitive to small input perturbations
that cause the network’s accuracy to plummet (Carlini &
Wagner, 2017; Szegedy et al., 2013). In the context of
natural language processing, these adversarial examples
come in the form of spelling mistakes, use of synonyms,
etc.—essentially, meaning-preserving transformations that
cause the network to change its prediction (Ebrahimi et al.,
2018; Zhang et al., 2019a; Michel et al., 2019).
In this paper, we are interested in the problem of training
models over natural language—or, generally, sequences over
1

Department of Computer Science, University of WisconsinMadison, Madison, USA. Correspondence to: Yuhao Zhang
<yuhaoz@cs.wisc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

a finite alphabet—that are robust to adversarial examples.
Sequences over finite alphabets are unique in that the space
of adversarial examples is discrete and therefore hard to explore efficiently using gradient-based optimization as in the
computer-vision setting. The common approach to achieving robustness is adversarial training (Goodfellow et al.,
2015; Madry et al., 2018), which has seen a great deal of research in computer vision and, more recently, in natural language processing (Ebrahimi et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019a;
Michel et al., 2019). Suppose we have defined a space of
perturbations R(x) of a sample x—e.g., if x is a sentence,
R(x) contains every possible misspelling of words in x, up
to some bound on the number of misspellings. The idea
of adversarial training is to model an adversary within the
training objective function: Instead of computing the loss
for a sample (x, y) from the dataset, we compute the loss
for the worst-case perturbed sample z ∈ R(x). Formally,
the adversarial loss for (x, y) is maxz∈R(x) L(z, y, θ).
The question we ask in this paper is:
Can we train models that are robust against rich
perturbation spaces over strings?
The practical challenge in answering this question is computing the worst-case loss. This is because the perturbation
space R(x) can be enormous and therefore impractical to
enumerate. This is particularly true for NLP tasks, where the
perturbation space R(x) should contain inputs that are semantically equivalent to x—e.g., variations of the sentence
x with typos or words replaced by synonyms. Therefore,
we need to approximate the adversarial loss. There are two
such classes of approximation techniques:
Augmentation The first class of techniques computes a
lower bound on the adversarial loss by exploring a
finite number of points in R(x). This is usually
done by applying a gradient-based attack, like HotFlip (Ebrahimi et al., 2018) for natural-language tasks
or PGD (Madry et al., 2018) for computer-vision tasks.
We call this class of techniques augmentation-based,
as they essentially search for a perturbed sample with
which to augment the training set.
Abstraction The second class of techniques computes an

