Dynamic Knapsack Optimization Towards Efficient
Multi-Channel Sequential Advertising

Xiaotian Hao * 1 Zhaoqing Peng * 2 Yi Ma * 1 Guan Wang 3 Junqi Jin 2 Jianye Hao 1 Shan Chen 2
Rongquan Bai 2 Mingzhou Xie 2 Miao Xu 2 Zhenzhe Zheng 4 Chuan Yu 2 Han Li 2 Jian Xu 2 Kun Gai 2

Abstract
In E-commerce, advertising is essential for merchants to reach their target users. The typical
objective is to maximize the advertiser’s cumulative revenue over a period of time under a budget
constraint. In real applications, an advertisement
(ad) usually needs to be exposed to the same user
multiple times until the user finally contributes
revenue (e.g., places an order). However, existing
advertising systems mainly focus on the immediate revenue with single ad exposures, ignoring the
contribution of each exposure to the final conversion, thus usually falls into suboptimal solutions.
In this paper, we formulate the sequential advertising strategy optimization as a dynamic knapsack
problem. We propose a theoretically guaranteed
bilevel optimization framework, which significantly reduces the solution space of the original
optimization space while ensuring the solution
quality. To improve the exploration efficiency of
reinforcement learning, we also devise an effective action space reduction approach. Extensive
offline and online experiments show the superior
performance of our approaches over state-of-theart baselines in terms of cumulative revenue.

1. Introduction
In E-commerce, online advertising plays an essential role
for merchants to reach their target users, in which Real-time
Bidding (RTB) (Zhang et al., 2014; 2016; Zhu et al., 2017)
is an important mechanism. In RTB, each advertiser is al*

Equal contribution 1 College of Intelligence and Computing,
Tianjin University, Tianjin, China 2 Alimama, Alibaba Group, Beijing, China 3 Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 4 Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Junqi Jin <junqi.jjq@alibaba-inc.com>, Jianye Hao
<jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

lowed to bid for every individual ad impression opportunity.
Within a period of time, there are a number of impression
opportunities (user requests) arriving sequentially. For each
impression, each advertiser offers a bid based on the impression value (e.g., revenue) and competes with other bidders
in real-time. The advertiser with the highest bid wins the
auction and thus display ad and enjoys the impression value.
Displaying an ad also associates with a cost: in Generalized
Second-Price (GSP) Auction (Edelman et al., 2007), the
winner is charged for fees according to the second highest
bid. The typical advertising objective for an advertiser is to
maximize its cumulative revenue of winning impressions
over a time period under a fixed budget constraint.
In a digital age, to drive conversion, advertisers can reach
and influence users across various channels such as display
ad, social ad, paid search ad (Ren et al., 2018). As illustrated in Figure 1, the user’s decision to convert (purchase a
product) is usually driven by multiple interactions with ads.
Each ad exposure would influence the user’s preferences and
interests, and therefore contributes to the final conversion.
However, existing advertising systems (Yuan et al., 2013;
Zhang et al., 2014; Ren et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2017; Jin
et al., 2018; Ren et al., 2019) mainly focus on maximizing
the single-step revenue, while ignoring the contribution of
previous exposure to the final conversion, and thus usually
falls into suboptimal solutions. The reason is that simply
optimizing the total immediate revenue cannot guarantee
the maximazation of the long-term cumulative revenue. Besides, there exist some works (Boutilier & Lu, 2016; Du
et al., 2017; Cai et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2018) which optimize
the overall revenue under an extra-long (billions) request
sequence using a single Constrained Markov Decision Process (CMDP) (Altman, 1999). However, the optimization
of these methods above is myopic as they ignore the mental
evolution of each user and the long-term advertising effects.
The learning is particularly inefficient as well.
Apart from the myopic approaches, there exists some literatures considering the long-term effect of each ad exposure.
Multi-touch attribution (MTA) (Ji & Wang, 2017; Ren et al.,
2018; Du et al., 2019) study the credits assignment to the
previous ad displays before conversion. However, these

