Federated Learning with Only Positive Labels

Felix X. Yu 1 Ankit Singh Rawat 1 Aditya Krishna Menon 1 Sanjiv Kumar 1

Abstract
We consider learning a multi-class classification
model in the federated setting, where each user
has access to the positive data associated with
only a single class. As a result, during each federated learning round, the users need to locally
update the classifier without having access to the
features and the model parameters for the negative classes. Thus, naïvely employing conventional decentralized learning such as distributed
SGD or Federated Averaging may lead to trivial
or extremely poor classifiers. In particular, for
embedding based classifiers, all the class embeddings might collapse to a single point. To address
this problem, we propose a generic framework for
training with only positive labels, namely Federated Averaging with Spreadout (FedAwS), where
the server imposes a geometric regularizer after
each round to encourage classes to be spreadout in
the embedding space. We show, both theoretically
and empirically, that FedAwS can almost match
the performance of conventional learning where
users have access to negative labels. We further
extend the proposed method to settings with large
output spaces.

1. Introduction
We consider learning a classification model in the federated
learning (McMahan et al., 2017) setup, where each user has
only access to a single class. The users are not allowed to
communicate with each other, nor do they have access to the
classification model parameters associated with other users’
classes. Examples of such settings include decentralized
training of face recognition models or speaker identification
models, where in addition to the user specific facial images
and voice samples, the classifiers of the users also constitute
sensitive information that cannot be shared with other users.
1

Google Research, New York. Correspondence to: Felix X. Yu <felixyu@google.com>, Ankit Singh Rawat <ankitsrawat@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

This setting can also be extended to the case where each
user has access to data associated with a small number of
classes. For example, one application is deep retrieval in the
federated setting: training a query to document relevance
model based on user interactions such as clicked documents
after issuing a query, assuming that the clicks do not get
recorded by a central server.
In this work, we assume that the classification models are
“embedding-based” discriminative models (Krizhevsky et al.,
2012; Vaswani et al., 2017; Konečnỳ et al., 2016): both the
classes and the input instances are embedded into the same
space, and the similarity between the class embedding and
the input embedding (i.e. logit or score) captures the likelihood of the input belonging to the class. A popular example
of this framework is neural network based classification.
Here, given an input instance x ∈ X, a neural network
gθ : X → Rd (parameterized by θ ) embeds the instance into
a d dimensional vector gθ (x ). The class embeddings are
learned as a matrix W ∈ RC×d , commonly referred to as
the classification matrix, where C denotes the number of
classes. Finally, the logits for the instance x are computed
as W · gθ (x ).
In the federated learning setup, one collaboratively learns
the classification model with the help of a server which
facilitates the iterative training process by keeping track of
a global model. During each round of the training process:
• The server sends the current global model to a set of
participating users.
• Each user updates the model with its local data, and
sends the model delta to the server.
• The server averages (“Federated Averaging”) the deltas
collected from the participating users and updates the
global model.
Notice that the conventional synchronized distributed SGD
falls into the federated learning framework if each user runs
a single step of SGD, and the data at different users is i.i.d.
Federated learning has been widely studied in distributed
training of neural networks due to its appealing characteristics such as leveraging the computational power of edge
devices (Li et al., 2019), removing the necessity of sending
user data to server (McMahan et al., 2017), and various improvements on trust/security (Bonawitz et al., 2016), privacy
(Agarwal et al., 2018), and fairness (Mohri et al., 2019).

