No-Regret Exploration in Goal-Oriented Reinforcement Learning
Jean Tarbouriech 1 2 Evrard Garcelon 1 Michal Valko 2 Matteo Pirotta 1 Alessandro Lazaric 1

Abstract
Many popular reinforcement learning problems
(e.g., navigation in a maze, some Atari games,
mountain car) are instances of the episodic setting under its stochastic shortest path (SSP) formulation, where an agent has to achieve a goal
state while minimizing the cumulative cost. Despite the popularity of this setting, the explorationexploitation dilemma has been sparsely studied
in general SSP problems, with most of the theoretical literature focusing on different problems
(i.e., finite-horizon and infinite-horizon) or making the restrictive loop-free SSP assumption (i.e.,
no state can be visited twice during an episode).
In this paper, we study the general SSP problem with no assumption on its dynamics (some
policies may actually never reach the goal). We
introduce UC-SSP, the first no-regret algorithm
in this setting,
p and prove a regret bound scaling
as e
O(DS ADK) after K episodes for any unknown SSP with S states, A actions, positive costs
and SSP-diameter D, defined as the smallest expected hitting time from any starting state to the
goal. We achieve this result by crafting a novel
stopping rule, such that UC-SSP may interrupt the
current policy if it is taking too long to achieve
the goal and switch to alternative policies that are
designed to rapidly terminate the episode.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of exploration-exploitation in
episodic Markov decision processes (MDPs), where the
objective is to minimize the expected cost to reach a specific goal state. Several popular reinforcement learning
(RL) problems fall into this framework, such as navigation
problems, many Atari games (e.g., breakout) and Mujoco
environments (e.g., reacher). In all these problems, the
1

Facebook AI Research, Paris, France 2 SequeL team, Inria
Lille - Nord Europe, France. Correspondence to: Jean Tarbouriech
<jean.tarbouriech@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

length of an episode (i.e., the time to reach the goal state)
is unknown and depends on the policy executed during the
episode. Furthermore, the performance is not directly connected to the length of the episode, as the objective is to
minimize the cost over time rather than reaching the goal
state as fast as possible. The conditions for the existence and
the computation of an optimal policy have been studied in
the MDP literature under the name of the stochastic shortest
path (SSP) problem (Bertsekas, 2012, Sect. 3).
The exploration-exploitation dilemma has been extensively
studied in the finite-horizon (see e.g., Azar et al., 2017;
Zanette & Brunskill, 2019) and infinite-horizon settings (see
e.g., Jaksch et al., 2010; Fruit et al., 2018a;b). In the former,
the performance is optimized over a fixed and known horizon of H steps. Typically, this model is used to solve SSP
problems by setting H large enough. While for H ! 1 the
optimal finite-horizon policy converges to the optimal SSP
policy, for any finite H, this approach may introduce a bias
leading exploration algorithms to converge to suboptimal
policies and suffer linear regret (see e.g., Toromanoff et al.,
2019, for a discussion of this problem in Atari games). In
the latter, the performance is optimized for the asymptotic
average cost. While this removes any strict “deadline”, it
does not introduce any incentive to reach the goal state. This
may favor policies with small average cost and yet poor performance in the SSP sense, as they may never terminate.
Note that SSP forms an important class of MDPs as both
infinite-horizon (discounted) and finite-horizon MDPs, two
much more extensively researched settings, are a subtype of
SSP-MDPs (Bertsekas, 2012; Guillot & Stauffer, 2020).
Prior work on exploration in SSPs can be divided in two
cases. The first is the online shortest path routing problem,
which has deterministic dynamics and stochastic rewards.
In this case, the optimal policy is open-loop (i.e., it is a sequence of actions independent from the states) and it can be
solved as an instance of a combinatorial bandit problem (see
e.g., György et al., 2007; Talebi et al., 2017). Exploration
algorithms know the set of admissible paths of bounded
length and regret bounds are available in both the semi- and
full-bandit setting. The second case allows for stochastic
transitions and mostly considers adversarial problems, but
it is restricted to loop-free environments (see e.g., Jin et al.,
2020; Rosenberg & Mansour, 2019a;b; Neu et al., 2012;
2010; Zimin & Neu, 2013). Under this assumption, the state

