Thompson Sampling via Local Uncertainty

Zhendong Wang 1 Mingyuan Zhou 1

Abstract
Thompson sampling is an efficient algorithm for
sequential decision making, which exploits the
posterior uncertainty to address the explorationexploitation dilemma. There has been significant
recent interest in integrating Bayesian neural networks into Thompson sampling. Most of these
methods rely on global variable uncertainty for
exploration. In this paper, we propose a new probabilistic modeling framework for Thompson sampling, where local latent variable uncertainty is
used to sample the mean reward. Variational inference is used to approximate the posterior of
the local variable, and semi-implicit structure is
further introduced to enhance its expressiveness.
Our experimental results on eight contextual bandit benchmark datasets show that Thompson sampling guided by local uncertainty achieves stateof-the-art performance while having low computational complexity.

1. Introduction
There has been significant recent interest in employing deep
neural networks to better solve sequential decision-making
problems, such as these in reinforcement learning (Mnih
et al., 2013; 2015; 2016; Arulkumaran et al., 2017; FrançoisLavet et al., 2018) and contextual bandits (Riquelme et al.,
2018; Russo et al., 2018). In a typical setting, by sequentially interacting with the environment, the agent or algorithm needs to learn how to take a sequence of decisions in
order to maximize the expected cumulative reward. These
problems are frequently encountered in various practical
applications, ranging from clinical trials to recommender
systems to anomaly detection (Djallel & Irina, 2019). Using
a deep neural network as a powerful function approximator,
whose task is to learn the mapping from an observed contextual feature vector to the hidden reward distributions, has
1

McCombs School of Business, The University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA. Correspondence to: Mingyuan
Zhou <mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

become a common practice. Since the model training and
data collection usually happen at the same time, the model
needs to not only accurately approximate the distribution of
the observed data, but also gain enough flexibility to predict
that of the future data.
Addressing the exploration-exploitation dilemma is a vital
part of sequential decision making. To maximize the expected cumulative reward, the agent needs to balance its
effort in exploration, which chooses actions that may potentially increase its understanding of the environment, and
its effort in exploitation, which takes the action that is expected to be the best given existing information. Typically,
under-exploration will possibly trap the agent at a bad local optimal solution, while over-exploration could lead to
a significant exploration cost. Various strategies have been
proposed to tackle the exploration-exploitation dilemma,
such as -greedy (Sutton & Barto, 1998), upper-confidence
bound (Auer, 2002), Boltzmann exploration (Cesa-Bianchi
et al., 2017; Sutton & Barto, 1998), and Thompson sampling (Thompson, 1933). More recently, carefully adding
random noise to model parameters (Plappert et al., 2017;
Fortunato et al., 2017; Gal & Ghahramani, 2016) or bootstrap sampling (Osband et al., 2016) before decision making
also provide effective ways to encourage exploration.
Thompson sampling (TS) (Thompson, 1933), an elegant
and widely used exploration strategy, is known for both its
simplicity and good practical performance (Chapelle & Li,
2011; Agrawal & Goyal, 2012; 2013; Russo et al., 2018).
TS will keep updating the posteriors of the parameters of the
hidden reward distributions, and take actions according to
the posterior predictive distributions of the rewards. Relying
on posterior uncertainty to do exploration is the promising
point of TS. Unfortunately, the exact posteriors are tractable
for only a few models with limited representation power.
Therefore, significant effort has been dedicated to posterior
approximation. A recent development along this direction
is empowering TS with Bayesian neural networks (Hinton
& Van Camp, 1993; Bishop, 2006; Graves, 2011; Neal,
2012; Hernández-Lobato & Adams, 2015), and relying on
the posteriors of the neural network weights to perform
exploration under the TS framework (Riquelme et al., 2018).
Various inference methods have been employed to capture
the uncertainty of the neural network weights, including

