Learning to Learn Kernels with Variational Random Features
Xiantong Zhen * 1 2 Haoliang Sun * 3 Yingjun Du * 2 Jun Xu 4 Yilong Yin 3 Ling Shao 5 1 Cees Snoek 2

Abstract
We introduce kernels with random Fourier features in the meta-learning framework for few-shot
learning. We propose meta variational random
features (MetaVRF) to learn adaptive kernels for
the base-learner, which is developed in a latent
variable model by treating the random feature
basis as the latent variable. We formulate the optimization of MetaVRF as a variational inference
problem by deriving an evidence lower bound under the meta-learning framework. To incorporate
shared knowledge from related tasks, we propose
a context inference of the posterior, which is established by an LSTM architecture. The LSTMbased inference network effectively integrates the
context information of previous tasks with taskspecific information, generating informative and
adaptive features. The learned MetaVRF is able
to produce kernels of high representational power
with a relatively low spectral sampling rate and
also enables fast adaptation to new tasks. Experimental results on a variety of few-shot regression and classification tasks demonstrate that
MetaVRF can deliver much better, or at least competitive, performance compared to existing metalearning alternatives.

1. Introduction
Learning to learn, or meta-learning (Schmidhuber, 1992;
Thrun & Pratt, 2012), offers a promising tool for few-shot
learning (Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Ravi & Larochelle,
2017; Finn et al., 2017) and has recently generated increasing popularity in machine learning. The crux of metalearning for few-shot learning is to extract prior knowledge
*
Equal contribution 1 Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE 2 Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam,
The Netherlands 3 School of Software, Shandong University,
China 4 College of Computer Science, Nankai University, China
5
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu
Dhabi, UAE. Correspondence to: X. Zhen <zhenxt@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

from related tasks to enable fast adaptation to a new task
with a limited amount of data. Generally speaking, existing meta-learning algorithms (Ravi & Larochelle, 2017;
Bertinetto et al., 2019) design the meta-learner to extract
meta-knowledge that improves the performance of the baselearner on individual tasks. Meta knowledge, like a good
parameter initialization (Finn et al., 2017), or an efficient
optimization update rule shared across tasks (Andrychowicz
et al., 2016; Ravi & Larochelle, 2017) has been extensively
explored in general learning framework, but how to define
and use in few-shot learning remains an open question.
An effective base-learner should be powerful enough to
solve individual tasks and able to absorb information provided by the meta-learner to improve its own performance.
While potentially strong base-learners, kernels (Hofmann
et al., 2008) have not yet been studied in the meta-learning
scenario for few-shot learning. Learning adaptive kernels (Bach et al., 2004) in a data-driven way via random
features (Rahimi & Recht, 2007) has demonstrated great success in regular learning tasks and remains of broad interest
in machine learning (Sinha & Duchi, 2016; Hensman et al.,
2017; Carratino et al., 2018; Bullins et al., 2018; Li et al.,
2019). However, due to the limited availability of data, it is
challenging for few-shot learning to establish informative
and discriminant kernels. We thus explore the relatedness
among distinctive but relevant tasks to generate rich random
features to build strong kernels for base-learners, while still
maintaining their ability to adapt quickly to individual tasks.
In this paper, we make three important contributions. First,
we propose meta variational random features (MetaVRF),
integrating, for the first time, kernel learning with random
features and variational inference into the meta-learning
framework for few-shot learning. We develop MetaVRF
in a latent variable model by treating the random Fourier
basis of translation-invariant kernels as the latent variable.
Second, we formulate the optimization of MetaVRF as a
variational inference problem by deriving a new evidence
lower bound (ELBO) in the meta-learning setting, where
the posterior over the random feature basis corresponds to
the spectral distribution associated with the kernel. This
formulation under probabilistic modeling provides a principled way of learning data-driven kernels with random
Fourier features and more importantly, fits well in the metalearning framework for few-shot learning allowing us to

