Multi-ﬁdelity Bayesian Optimization with Max-value Entropy Search
and its Parallelization
Shion Takeno 1 2 Hitoshi Fukuoka 3 Yuhki Tsukada 3 4 Toshiyuki Koyama 3 Motoki Shiga 2 4 5
Ichiro Takeuchi 1 2 Masayuki Karasuyama 1 4 6

Abstract
In a standard setting of Bayesian optimization (BO), the objective function evaluation
is assumed to be highly expensive. Multiﬁdelity Bayesian optimization (MFBO) accelerates BO by incorporating lower ﬁdelity observations available with a lower sampling cost. We
propose a novel information-theoretic approach
to MFBO, called multi-ﬁdelity max-value entropy search (MF-MES), that enables us to obtain a more reliable evaluation of the information
gain compared with existing information-based
methods for MFBO. Further, we also propose a
parallelization of MF-MES mainly for the asynchronous setting because queries typically occur asynchronously in MFBO due to a variety
of sampling costs. We show that most of computations in our acquisition functions can be derived analytically, except for at most only two dimensional numerical integration that can be performed efﬁciently by simple approximations. We
demonstrate effectiveness of our approach by using benchmark datasets and a real-world application to materials science data.

1. Introduction
Bayesian optimization (BO) is a popular machine-learning
technique for the black-box optimization problem. Efﬁ1
Department of Computer Science, Nagoya Institute of
Technology, Aichi, Japan 2 Center for Advanced Intelligence
Project, RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan 3 Department of Materials Design Innovation Engineering, Nagoya University, Aichi, Japan
4
PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Saitama,
Japan 5 Department of Electrical, Electronic and Computer Engineering, Gifu University, Gifu, Japan 6 Center for Materials Research by Information Integration, National Institute for Material Science, Ibaraki, Japan. Correspondence to: M. Karasuyama
<karasuyama@nitech.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

ciency of BO has been widely shown in a variety of application areas such as scientiﬁc experiments (Wigley et al.,
2016), simulation calculations (Ramprasad et al., 2017),
and tuning of machine-learning methods (Snoek et al.,
2012). In these scenarios, observing an objective function
value is usually quite expensive and thus achieving the optimal value with low querying cost is strongly demanded.
Although standard BO only considers directly querying
to an objective function f (x), in many practical problems, lower ﬁdelity approximations of the original objective function can be observed. For example, theoretical
computations of physical processes often have multiple levels of approximations by which the trade-off between the
computational cost and accuracy can be controlled. The
goal of multi-ﬁdelity Bayesian optimization (MFBO) is to
accelerate BO by utilizing those lower ﬁdelity observations
to reduce the total cost of the optimization.
In this paper, we focus on the information-based approach.
For usual BO without multi-ﬁdelity, which we call single ﬁdelity BO, seminal works of this direction are entropy search (ES) and predictive entropy search (PES) proposed by Hennig & Schuler (2012) and Hernández-Lobato
et al. (2014), respectively. They deﬁne acquisition functions by using information gain for the optimal solution
x∗ := argmaxx f (x). Unlike classical evaluation measures
such as expected improvement, the information-based criterion is a measure of global utility which does not require
any additional exploit-explore trade-off parameter. The
superior performance of information-based methods have
been shown empirically, and then, the same approach has
also been extended to the multi-ﬁdelity setting (Swersky
et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2017).
Even in the case of single ﬁdelity BO, however, accurately
evaluating information gain is notoriously difﬁcult, which
often requires complicated numerical approximations. For
MFBO, evaluating information across multiple ﬁdelities is
further difﬁcult. To overcome this difﬁculty, we consider
a novel information-based approach to MFBO, which is
based on a variant of ES called max-value entropy search
(MES), proposed by Wang & Jegelka (2017). MES considers the information gain for f∗ := maxx f (x) instead

