Invariant Risk Minimization Games
Kartik Ahuja 1 Karthikeyan Shanmugam 1 Kush R. Varshney 1 Amit Dhurandhar 1

Abstract
The standard risk minimization paradigm of machine learning is brittle when operating in environments whose test distributions are different from
the training distribution due to spurious correlations. Training on data from many environments
and ﬁnding invariant predictors reduces the effect
of spurious features by concentrating models on
features that have a causal relationship with the
outcome. In this work, we pose such invariant risk
minimization as ﬁnding the Nash equilibrium of
an ensemble game among several environments.
By doing so, we develop a simple training algorithm that uses best response dynamics and, in
our experiments, yields similar or better empirical accuracy with much lower variance than the
challenging bi-level optimization problem of Arjovsky et al. (2019). One key theoretical contribution is showing that the set of Nash equilibria
for the proposed game are equivalent to the set
of invariant predictors for any ﬁnite number of
environments, even with nonlinear classiﬁers and
transformations. As a result, our method also retains the generalization guarantees to a large set
of environments shown in Arjovsky et al. (2019).
The proposed algorithm adds to the collection of
successful game-theoretic machine learning algorithms such as generative adversarial networks.

1. Introduction
The annals of machine learning are rife with embarrassing
examples of spurious correlations that fail to hold outside
a speciﬁc training (and identically distributed test) distribution. Beery et al. (2018) trained a convolutional neural
network (CNN) to classify camels from cows. The training
dataset had one source of bias, i.e., most of the pictures
of cows had green pastures, while most pictures of camels
1

IBM Research, Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY. Correspondence to: Kartik Ahuja <kartik.ahuja@ibm.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

were in deserts. The CNN picked up the spurious correlation, i.e., it associated green pastures with cows and failed
to classify pictures of cows on sandy beaches correctly. In
another case, a neural network used a brake light indicator to
continue applying brakes, which was a spurious correlation
in the training data (de Haan et al., 2019); the list of such
examples goes on.
To address the problem of models inheriting spurious correlations, Arjovsky et al. (2019) show that one can exploit
the varying degrees of spurious correlation naturally present
in data collected from multiple data sources to learn robust
predictors. The authors propose to ﬁnd a representation Φ
such that the optimal classiﬁer given Φ is invariant across
training environments. This formulation leads to a challenging bi-level optimization, which the authors relax by ﬁxing
a simple linear classiﬁer and learning a representation Φ
such that the classiﬁer is “approximately locally optimal” in
all the training environments.
In this work, we take a very different approach. We create
an ensemble of classiﬁers with each environment controlling
one component of the ensemble. Each environment uses
the entire ensemble to make predictions. We let all the
environments play a game where each environment’s action
is to decide its contribution to the ensemble such that it
minimizes its risk. Remarkably, we establish that the set of
predictors that solve the ensemble game is equal to the set
of invariant predictors across the training environments; this
result holds for a large class of nonlinear classiﬁers.
This brings us to the question: how do we solve the
game? We use classic best response dynamics (Fudenberg
& Levine, 1998), which has a very simple implementation.
Each environment periodically takes its turn and moves its
classiﬁer in the direction that minimizes the risk speciﬁc to
its environment. Empirically, we establish that the invariant
predictors found by our approach lead to better or comparable performance with much lower standard deviation than
Arjovsky et al. (2019) on several different datasets. A nice
consequence of our approach is we do not restrict classiﬁers to be linear, which was emphasized as an important
direction for future work by Arjovsky et al. (2019).
Broadly speaking, we believe that the game-theoretic perspective herein can open up a totally new paradigm to address the problem of invariance.

