Interference and Generalization in Temporal Difference Learning

Emmanuel Bengio 1 2 Joelle Pineau 1 Doina Precup 1 3
the interference between tasks in multi-task and continual
learning (Lopez-Paz & Ranzato, 2017; Schaul et al., 2019),
it forms the Neural Tangent Kernel (Jacot et al., 2018), it is
the Taylor expansion around θ of a gradient update (Achiam
et al., 2019), as well as the Taylor expansion of pointwise
loss differences (Liu et al., 2019b; Fort et al., 2019).

Abstract
We study the link between generalization and interference in temporal-difference (TD) learning.
Interference is defined as the inner product of two
different gradients, representing their alignment;
this quantity emerges as being of interest from
a variety of observations about neural networks,
parameter sharing and the dynamics of learning.
We find that TD easily leads to low-interference,
under-generalizing parameters, while the effect
seems reversed in supervised learning. We hypothesize that the cause can be traced back to the
interplay between the dynamics of interference
and bootstrapping. This is supported empirically
by several observations: the negative relationship
between the generalization gap and interference
in TD, the negative effect of bootstrapping on interference and the local coherence of targets, and
the contrast between the propagation rate of information in TD(0) versus TD(λ) and regression
tasks such as Monte-Carlo policy evaluation. We
hope that these new findings can guide the future
discovery of better bootstrapping methods.

Interestingly, and as noted by works cited above, this quantity is intimately related to generalization. If the interference
between two processes is positive, then updating θ using
gradients from one process will positively impact the other.
Such processes can take many forms, for example, J1 being
the loss on training data and J2 the loss on test data, or J1
and J2 being the loss on two i.i.d. samples.
The main claim of this work is that in Temporal Difference Learning (TD), interference evolves differently during training than in supervised learning (SL). More specifically, we find that in TD learning lower interference correlates with a higher generalization gap while the opposite seems to be true in SL, where low interference correlates with a low generalization gap (the difference between
test error and train error) when early stopping.

1. Introduction
The interference between two gradient-based processes, objectives J1 , J2 , sharing parameters θ is often characterized
in the first order by the inner product of their gradients:
ρ1,2 = ∇θ J1T ∇θ J2 ,

(1)

and can be seen as the influence, constructive (ρ > 0) or
destructive (ρ < 0), of applying a gradient update using
∇θ J1 on the value of J2 .

This quantity arises in a variety of ways (for completeness
we rederive this quantity and others in appendix A); it is
1

Mila, McGill University 2 Work partly done while the author
was an intern at Deepmind 3 Deepmind. Correspondence to: Emmanuel Bengio <bengioe@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

In supervised learning, there is a wealth of literature suggesting that SGD has a regularization effect (Hardt et al.,
2016; Zhang et al., 2016; Keskar et al., 2016, and references
therein), pushing the parameters in flat highly-connected
(Draxler et al., 2018; Garipov et al., 2018) optimal regions
of the loss landscape. It would be unsurprising for such
regions of parameters to be on the threshold at the balance
of bias and variance (in the traditional sense1 ) and thus have
low interference2 as well as a low generalization gap.
Why is the situation then different with TD? This may be
due to a multitude of factors. The evaluation methods of
new algorithms in the recent union of neural networks and
TD, despite an earlier recognition of the problem (Whiteson
et al., 2011), often do not include generalization measures,
1

We refer here to the recently studied phase transition between
generalizing and overfitting, i.e. when DNNs stop learning general
patterns and start fitting dataset noise.
2
Fort et al. (2019) suggest that stiffness, the cosine similarity
of gradients, drops but stays positive once a model starts overfitting, it is also known that overfitting networks start having larger
weights and thus larger gradients; this should result in the smallest
ρ precisely before overfitting happens.

