Self-Concordant Analysis of Frank-Wolfe Algorithms

Pavel Dvurechensky 1 2 3 Petr Ostroukhov 4 Kamil Safin 4 Shimrit Shtern 5 Mathias Staudigl 6

Abstract
Projection-free optimization via different variants of the Frank-Wolfe (FW), a.k.a. Conditional
Gradient method has become one of the cornerstones in optimization for machine learning since
in many cases the linear minimization oracle is
much cheaper to implement than projections and
some sparsity needs to be preserved. In a number
of applications, e.g. Poisson inverse problems or
quantum state tomography, the loss is given by a
self-concordant (SC) function having unbounded
curvature, implying absence of theoretical guarantees for the existing FW methods. We use the
theory of SC functions to provide a new adaptive
step size for FW methods and prove global convergence rate O(1/k) after k iterations. If the
problem admits a stronger local linear minimization oracle, we construct a novel FW method with
linear convergence rate for SC functions.

1. Introduction
Statistical analysis using (generalized) self-concordant (SC)
functions as a loss function is gaining increasing attention in
the machine learning community (Bach, 2010; Owen, 2013;
Ostrovskii & Bach, 2018; Marteau-Ferey et al., 2019). This
class of loss functions allows to obtain faster statistical rates
akin to least-squares. At the same time, the minimization of
empirical risk in this setting is a challenging optimization
problem in high dimensions. The reason is that for largescale problems usually a First-order method (FOM) is the
method of choice. Yet, self-concordant functions are usually
not strongly convex and do not have Lipschitz continuous
*

Equal contribution 1 Weierstrass Institute for Applied Analysis
and Stochastics, Berlin, Germany. 2 National Research University
Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russia 3 Institute for Information Transmission Problems RAS, Moscow, Russia 4 Moscow
Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Russia 5 Grand
Fellow, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.
6
Department of Data Science and Knowledge Engineering, Maastricht University, The Netherlands,. Correspondence to: Mathias
Staudigl <mathias.staudigl@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

gradients. Hence, unless we can verify a relative smoothness
condition (Bauschke et al., 2017; Lu et al., 2018), the cornerstone assumptions for FOM do not apply when minimizing
SC functions. Further, many machine learning problems
involve some sparsity constraint usually admitting a Linear
minimization oracle (LMO) (Jaggi, 2013), meaning that
for a reasonable computational price one can minimize a
linear function over the feasible set; Examples include `1
regularization, Spectrahedron constraints (Hazan, 2008),
and ordered weighted `1 regularization (Zeng & Figueiredo,
2014). In such settings an attractive method of choice is
the Frank-Wolfe (FW) method (Frank & Wolfe, 1956), also
known as the Conditional Gradient (CG). The modern convergence analysis of FW, starting with (Jaggi, 2013), relies
on bounded curvature of the objective function f . A sufficient condition for this is that the objective function has a
Lipschitz continuous gradient over the domain of interest.
In general, SC functions have unbounded curvature and are
not strongly convex. In fact, to the best of our knowledge,
there is no existing convergence guarantee for FW when
minimizing a general SC function. Given the plethora of
examples of SC loss functions, and the importance of FW in
machine learning, we focus on the question of convergence
and complexity of FW for minimizing a SC function f over
a set X with LMO.
Our Contributions. In this paper we demonstrate that FW
indeed works when minimizing a SC function over a compact convex domain. However, since the standard arguments
for FW are not applicable, we have to develop some new
ideas. Section 3 constructs new adaptive variants of the FW
method, whose main innovation is the construction of new
step-size policies ensuring global convergence and O(1/k)
convergence rates. One of the keys to our results is to develop step-sizes which ensure monotonicity of the method,
leading to Lipschitz smoothness and strong convexity of the
objective on a level set. While the Lipschitz smoothness
on a level set is used in the analysis, the algorithms do not
require knowledge of the Lipschitz constant but rather rely
only on basic properties of SC functions. Section 4 gives
a linear convergence result for FW, under the assumption
that we have access to the strong convexity parameter on the
level set and a Local Linear minimization oracle (LLOO),
first constructed in Garber & Hazan (2016).
Previous work.

Despite its great scalability properties,

