Complexity of Finding Stationary Points of Nonsmooth Nonconvex Functions

Jingzhao Zhang 1 Hongzhou Lin 1 Stefanie Jegelka 1 Suvrit Sra 1 Ali Jadbabaie 1

Abstract
We provide the first non-asymptotic analysis for
finding stationary points of nonsmooth, nonconvex functions. In particular, we study the class
of Hadamard semi-differentiable functions, perhaps the largest class of nonsmooth functions for
which the chain rule of calculus holds. This class
contains examples such as ReLU neural networks
and others with non-differentiable activation functions. We first show that finding an -stationary
point with first-order methods is impossible in
finite time. We then introduce the notion of (δ, )stationarity, which allows for an -approximate
gradient to be the convex combination of generalized gradients evaluated at points within distance
δ to the solution. We propose a series of randomized first-order methods and analyze their complexity of finding a (δ, )-stationary point. Furthermore, we provide a lower bound and show
that our stochastic algorithm has min-max optimal dependence on δ. Empirically, our methods
perform well for training ReLU neural networks.

1. Introduction
Gradient based optimization underlies most of machine
learning and it has attracted tremendous research attention
over the years. While non-asymptotic complexity analysis
of gradient based methods is well-established for convex
and smooth nonconvex problems, little is known for nonsmooth nonconvex problems. We summarize the known
rates (black) in Table 1 based on the references (Nesterov,
2018; Carmon et al., 2017; Arjevani et al., 2019).
Within the nonsmooth nonconvex setting, recent research
results have focused on asymptotic convergence analysis (Benaı̈m et al., 2005; Kiwiel, 2007; Majewski et al.,
2018; Davis et al., 2018; Bolte & Pauwels, 2019). Despite
their advances, these results fail to address finite-time, nonasymptotic convergence rates. Given the widespread use

Table 1. When the problem is nonconvex and nonsmooth, finding a -stationary point is intractable, see Theorem 11. Thus we
introduce a refined notion, (δ, )-stationarity, and provide nonasymptotic convergence rates for finding (δ, )-stationary point.
D ETERMINISTIC RATES
L- SMOOTH
L-L IPSCHITZ
S TOCHASTIC RATES
L- SMOOTH
L-L IPSCHITZ

C ONVEX

N ONCONVEX

−0.5

O(−2 )
Õ(−3 δ −1 )

O(
)
O(−2 )
C ONVEX
−2

O( )
O(−2 )

N ONCONVEX
O(−4 )
Õ(−4 δ −1 )

of nonsmooth nonconvex problems in machine learning,
a canonical example being deep ReLU neural networks,
obtaining a non-asymptotic convergence analysis is an important open problem of fundamental interest.
We tackle this problem for nonsmooth functions that are
Lipschitz and directionally differentiable. This class is rich
enough to cover common machine learning problems, including ReLU neural networks. Surprisingly, even for this
seemingly restricted class, finding an -stationary point, i.e.,
a point x̄ for which d(0, ∂f (x̄)) ≤ , is intractable. In other
words, no algorithm can guarantee to find an -stationary
point within a finite number of iterations.
This intractability suggests that, to obtain meaningful nonasymptotic results, we need to refine the notion of stationarity. We introduce such a notion and base our analysis on it,
leading to the following main contributions of the paper:
• We show that a traditional -stationary point cannot be
obtained in finite time (Theorem 5).
• We study the notion of (δ, )-stationary points (see Definition 4). For smooth functions, this notion reduces to
usual -stationarity by setting δ = O(/L). We provide a
Ω(δ −1 ) lower bound on the number of calls if algorithms
are only allowed access to a generalized gradient oracle.

Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to:
Jingzhao Zhang <jzhzhang@mit.edu>.

• We propose a normalized “gradient descent” style algorithm that achieves Õ(−3 δ −1 ) complexity in finding a
(δ, )-stationary point in the deterministic setting.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

• We propose a momentum based algorithm that achieves
Õ(−4 δ −1 ) complexity in finding a (δ, )-stationary point
in the stochastic finite variance setting.

1

