Predictive Coding for Locally-Linear Control
Rui Shu * 1 Tung Nguyen * 2 3 Yinlam Chow 4 Tuan Pham 2 3 Khoat Than 2 3 Mohammad Ghavamzadeh 5
Stefano Ermon 1 Hung Bui 2

Abstract
High-dimensional observations and unknown dynamics are major challenges when applying optimal control to many real-world decision making tasks. The Learning Controllable Embedding
(LCE) framework addresses these challenges by
embedding the observations into a lower dimensional latent space, estimating the latent dynamics,
and then performing control directly in the latent space. To ensure the learned latent dynamics
are predictive of next-observations, all existing
LCE approaches decode back into the observation space and explicitly perform next-observation
prediction—a challenging high-dimensional task
that furthermore introduces a large number of nuisance parameters (i.e., the decoder) which are discarded during control. In this paper, we propose
a novel information-theoretic LCE approach and
show theoretically that explicit next-observation
prediction can be replaced with predictive coding. We then use predictive coding to develop
a decoder-free LCE model whose latent dynamics are amenable to locally-linear control. Extensive experiments on benchmark tasks show
that our model reliably learns a controllable latent
space that leads to superior performance when
compared with state-of-the-art LCE baselines.

1. Introduction
With the rapid growth of systems equipped with powerful
sensing devices, it is important to develop algorithms that
are capable of controlling systems from high-dimensional
raw sensory inputs (e.g., pixel input). However, scaling
stochastic optimal control and reinforcement learning (RL)
methods to high-dimensional unknown environments re*
Equal contribution 1 Stanford University 2 VinAI 3 Hanoi
University of Science and Technology 4 Google Research
5
Facebook AI Research.
Correspondence to: Rui Shu
<ruishu@stanford.edu>, Tung Nguyen <v.tungnd13@vinai.io>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

mains an open challenge. To tackle this problem, a common approach is to employ various heuristics to embed the
high-dimensional observations into a lower-dimensional latent space (Finn et al., 2016; Kurutach et al., 2018; Kaiser
et al., 2019). The class of Learning Controllable Embedding
(LCE) algorithms (Watter et al., 2015; Banijamali et al.,
2018; Hafner et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019; Levine et al.,
2020) further supplies the latent space with a latent dynamics model to enable planning directly in latent space.
Our present work focuses on this class of LCE algorithms
and takes a critical look at the prevailing heuristic used to
learn the controllable latent space: next-observation prediction. To ensure that the learned embedding and latent
dynamics are predictive of future observations, existing LCE
algorithms introduce a decoder during training and explicitly perform next-observation prediction by decoding the
predicted latent states back into the observation space. Despite its empirical success (Watter et al., 2015; Banijamali
et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019; Levine et al., 2020), this
approach suffers from two critical drawbacks that motivate
the search for better alternatives: (i) it requires the model to
handle the challenging task of high-dimensional prediction;
(ii) it does so in a parameter-inefficient manner—requiring
the use of a decoder that is discarded during control.
To address these concerns, we propose a novel informationtheoretic LCE approach for learning a controllable latent
space. Our contributions are as follows.
1. We characterize the quality of the learned embedding
through the lens of predictive suboptimality and show
that predictive coding (van den Oord et al., 2018) is
sufficient for minimizing predictive suboptimality.
2. Based on predictive coding, we propose a simpler and
parameter-efficient model that jointly learns a controllable latent space and latent dynamics specifically
amenable to locally-linear controllers.
3. We conduct detailed analyses and empirically characterize how model ablation impacts the learned latent
space and control performance.
4. Finally, we show that our method out-performs stateof-the-art LCE algorithms on several benchmark tasks,

