Learning and Evaluating Contextual Embedding of Source Code

Aditya Kanade * 1 2 Petros Maniatis * 2 Gogul Balakrishnan 2 Kensen Shi 2

Abstract

Recent research has achieved impressive results
on understanding and improving source code by
building up on machine-learning techniques developed for natural languages. A significant advancement in natural-language understanding has
come with the development of pre-trained contextual embeddings, such as BERT, which can
be fine-tuned for downstream tasks with less labeled data and training budget, while achieving
better accuracies. However, there is no attempt
yet to obtain a high-quality contextual embedding of source code, and to evaluate it on multiple
program-understanding tasks simultaneously; that
is the gap that this paper aims to mitigate. Specifically, first, we curate a massive, deduplicated corpus of 7.4M Python files from GitHub, which we
use to pre-train CuBERT, an open-sourced codeunderstanding BERT model; and, second, we create an open-sourced benchmark that comprises
five classification tasks and one program-repair
task, akin to code-understanding tasks proposed
in the literature before. We fine-tune CuBERT on
our benchmark tasks, and compare the resulting
models to different variants of Word2Vec token
embeddings, BiLSTM and Transformer models,
as well as published state-of-the-art models, showing that CuBERT outperforms them all, even with
shorter training, and with fewer labeled examples. Future work on source-code embedding can
benefit from reusing our benchmark, and from
comparing against CuBERT models as a strong
baseline.

*
Equal contribution 1 Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore,
India 2 Google Brain, Mountain View, USA. Correspondence to:
Aditya Kanade <kanade@iisc.ac.in>, Petros Maniatis <maniatis@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Modern software engineering places a high value on writing
clean and readable code. This helps other developers understand the author’s intent so that they can maintain and extend
the code. Developers use meaningful identifier names and
natural-language documentation to make this happen (Martin, 2008). As a result, source code contains substantial
information that can be exploited by machine-learning algorithms. Indeed, sequence modeling on source code has been
shown to be successful in a variety of software-engineering
tasks, such as code completion (Hindle et al., 2012; Raychev
et al., 2014), source code to pseudo-code mapping (Oda
et al., 2015), API-sequence prediction (Gu et al., 2016), program repair (Pu et al., 2016; Gupta et al., 2017), and natural
language to code mapping (Iyer et al., 2018), among others.
The distributed vector representations of tokens, called token (or word) embeddings, are a crucial component of
neural methods for sequence modeling. Learning useful
embeddings in a supervised setting with limited data is
often difficult. Therefore, many unsupervised learning approaches have been proposed to take advantage of large
amounts of unlabeled data that are more readily available.
This has resulted in ever more useful pre-trained token embeddings (Mikolov et al., 2013a; Pennington et al., 2014;
Bojanowski et al., 2017). However, the subtle differences
in the meaning of a token in varying contexts are lost when
each word is associated with a single representation. Recent
techniques for learning contextual embeddings (McCann
et al., 2017; Peters et al., 2018; Radford et al., 2018; 2019;
Devlin et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019) provide ways to compute representations of tokens based on their surrounding
context, and have shown significant accuracy improvements
in downstream tasks, even with only a small number of
task-specific parameters.
Inspired by the success of pre-trained contextual embeddings for natural languages, we present the first attempt to
apply the underlying techniques to source code. In particular, BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) produces a bidirectional
Transformer encoder (Vaswani et al., 2017) by training it to
predict values of masked tokens, and whether two sentences
follow each other in a natural discourse. The pre-trained
model can be fine-tuned for downstream supervised tasks
and has been shown to produce state-of-the-art results on

