Transformers are RNNs:
Fast Autoregressive Transformers with Linear Attention

Angelos Katharopoulos 1 2 Apoorv Vyas 1 2 Nikolaos Pappas 3 François Fleuret 2 4 *

Abstract
Transformers achieve remarkable performance in
several tasks but due to their quadratic complexity, with respect to the input’s length, they are
prohibitively slow for very long sequences. To address this limitation, we express the self-attention
as a linear dot-product of kernel feature maps and
make use of the associativity property of matrix
products to reduce the complexity from O N 2
to O (N ), where N is the sequence length. We
show that this formulation permits an iterative
implementation that dramatically accelerates autoregressive transformers and reveals their relationship to recurrent neural networks. Our linear transformers achieve similar performance to
vanilla transformers and they are up to 4000x
faster on autoregressive prediction of very long
sequences.

1. Introduction
Transformer models were originally introduced by Vaswani
et al. (2017) in the context of neural machine translation
(Sutskever et al., 2014; Bahdanau et al., 2015) and have
demonstrated impressive results on a variety of tasks dealing
with natural language (Devlin et al., 2019), audio (Sperber
et al., 2018), and images (Parmar et al., 2019). Apart from
tasks with ample supervision, transformers are also effective in transferring knowledge to tasks with limited or no
supervision when they are pretrained with autoregressive
(Radford et al., 2018; 2019) or masked language modeling
objectives (Devlin et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019; Song et al.,
2019; Liu et al., 2020).
However, these benefits often come with a very high computational and memory cost. The bottleneck is mainly caused
1
Idiap Research Institute, Switzerland 2 EPFL, Switzerland
University of Washington, Seattle, USA 4 University of Geneva,
Switzerland. * Work done at Idiap. Correspondence to: Angelos
Katharopoulos <firstname.lastname@idiap.ch>.
3

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

by the global receptive field of self-attention, which processes contexts of N inputs
 with a quadratic memory and
time complexity O N 2 . As a result, in practice transformers are slow to train and their context is limited. This
disrupts temporal coherence and hinders the capturing of
long-term dependencies. Dai et al. (2019) addressed the latter by attending to memories from previous contexts albeit
at the expense of computational efficiency.
Lately, researchers shifted their attention to approaches that
increase the context length without sacrificing efficiency.
Towards this end, Child et al. (2019) introduced sparse
factorizations of the
attention
matrix to reduce the self
√ 
attention complexity to O N N . Kitaev et al. (2020) further reduced the complexity to O (N log N ) using localitysensitive hashing. This made scaling to long sequences
possible. Even though the aforementioned models can be
efficiently trained on large sequences, they do not speed-up
autoregressive inference.
In this paper, we introduce the linear transformer model
that significantly reduces the memory footprint and scales
linearly with respect to the context length. We achieve this
by using a kernel-based formulation of self-attention and
the associative property of matrix products to calculate the
self-attention weights (§ 3.2). Using our linear formulation, we also express causal masking with linear complexity
and constant memory (§ 3.3). This reveals the relation between transformers and RNNs, which enables us to perform
autoregressive inference orders of magnitude faster (§ 3.4).
Our evaluation on image generation and automatic speech
recognition demonstrates that linear transformer can reach
the performance levels of transformer, while being up to
three orders of magnitude faster during inference.

2. Related Work
In this section, we provide an overview of the most relevant
works that seek to address the large memory and computational requirements of transformers. Furthermore, we discuss methods that theoretically analyze the core component
of the transformer model, namely self-attention. Finally,
we present another line of work that seeks to alleviate the
softmax bottleneck in the attention computation.

