Mutual Transfer Learning for Massive Data

Ching-Wei Cheng 1 Xingye Qiao 2 Guang Cheng 1

Abstract
In the transfer learning problem, the target and
the source data domains are typically known. In
this article, we study a new paradigm called mutual transfer learning where among many heterogeneous data domains, every data domain could
potentially be the target of interest, and it could
also be a useful source to help the learning in
other data domains. However, it is important to
note that given a target not every data domain
can be a successful source; only data sets that are
similar enough to be thought as from the same
population can be useful sources for each other.
Under this mutual learnability assumption, a confidence distribution fusion approach is proposed
to recover the mutual learnability relation in the
transfer learning regime. Our proposed method
achieves the same oracle statistical inferential accuracy as if the true learnability structure were
known. It can be implemented in an efficient
parallel fashion to deal with large-scale data. Simulated and real examples are analyzed to illustrate
the usefulness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Transfer Learning (TL) aims to leverage knowledge from
a related domain (called source domain) to improve the
predictive and inferential performance in a target domain,
on which the availability of the training data is limited.
Source data are drawn from a source distribution P on S P ,
and a relatively small quantity of labeled or unlabeled data
are from the target distribution Q on S Q . We focus on the
homogeneous TL setting with S P = S Q , on which P and
Q are different but related distributions. See surveys of TL
in Pan & Yang (2009); Zhuang et al. (2019).
In the TL problem, it is typically known a priori which
1

Department of Statistics, Purdue University 2 Department of
Mathematical Sciences, Binghamton University. Correspondence
to: Xingye Qiao <qiao@math.binghamton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

data domain is the target and which data will be used as
the source. However, this is not necessarily the case in
many contemporary applications. For example, one of the
4V’s for Big Data is variety. Big Data are often collections
of multiple data sets (called “data units” hereafter) from
different data domains. These data units are of the same
nature but are distributed differently, due to, for example,
that they are collected in different time periods, at different
locations, or possibly using different data collection devices.
It hence may be desirable to leverage TL techniques to transfer knowledge between these related data domains so as to
improve the predictive performance or statistical inference
in a target domain. However, in the applications we consider
in this article and many other cases, literally, every data domain could potentially be a target of interest, and every data
domain could potentially be useful as a source to help the
learning performance in other domains. In other words, the
target and source domains are not known a priori.
Moreover, due to the variety among the data units, it is quite
possible that given a target domain, although all data units
could be useful for transferring knowledge to some extent,
some data units are less useful as source data than the others.
Hence, a second feature of the problem considered here is
that one must identify source data units that are more useful
for each possible target. While the existing TL literature is
fairly diverse and extensive, fewer efforts have been made
to make successful transfers in this setting.
In this article, we consider a mutual transfer learning (MTL)
framework in which every data unit could potentially be
the target. The goal of MTL is to simultaneously identify
useful source data units for each target domain and use such
information to improve learning performance. We propose
a mutual learnability assumption, which suggests that only
data sets that are similar enough to be thought as from
the same population can be useful sources for each other.
Under this assumption, we propose a confidence distribution
fusion approach to recover the mutual learnability structure
in the transfer learning regime, using regression problem as
a working example. Incorporating the recovered learnability
structure, we fit a statistical model for both predictive and
inferential purposes. Our proposed method achieves the
same oracle statistical inferential accuracy as if the true
learnability structure were known.

