A Generic First-Order Algorithmic Framework for Bi-Level Programming
Beyond Lower-Level Singleton

Risheng Liu 1 2 Pan Mu 1 2 Xiaoming Yuan 3 Shangzhi Zeng 3 Jin Zhang 4

Abstract

where the Upper-Level (UL) objective F is a jointly continuous function, the UL constraint X is a compact set, and the
set-valued mapping S(x) indicates the parameterized solution set of the Lower-Level (LL) subproblem. Without loss
of generality, we consider the following LL subproblem:

In recent years, a variety of gradient-based bilevel optimization methods have been developed
for learning tasks. However, theoretical guarantees of these existing approaches often heavily rely on the simplification that for each fixed upperlevel variable, the lower-level solution must be
a singleton (a.k.a., Lower-Level Singleton, LLS). In this work, by formulating bi-level models
from the optimistic viewpoint and aggregating
hierarchical objective information, we establish
Bi-level Descent Aggregation (BDA), a flexible
and modularized algorithmic framework for bilevel programming. Theoretically, we derive a
new methodology to prove the convergence of
BDA without the LLS condition. Furthermore,
we improve the convergence properties of conventional first-order bi-level schemes (under the LLS
simplification) based on our proof recipe. Extensive experiments justify our theoretical results and
demonstrate the superiority of the proposed BDA
for different tasks, including hyper-parameter optimization and meta learning.

S(x) = arg min f (x, y),
y

where f is another jointly continuous function. Indeed,
the BLPs model formulated in Eqs. (1)-(2) is a hierarchical optimization problem with two coupled variables
(x, y) ∈ Rn × Rm . Specifically, given the UL variable x
from the feasible set X (i.e., x ∈ X ), the LL variable y
is an optimal solution of the LL subproblem governed by
x (i.e., y ∈ S(x)). Due to the hierarchical structure and
the complicated dependency between UL and LL variables,
solving the above BLPs problem is challenging in general,
especially when the LL solution set S(x) in Eq. (2) is not
a singleton (Jeroslow, 1985; Dempe, 2018). In this work,
we always call the condition that S(x) is a singleton as
Lower-Level Singleton (or LLS for short).
1.1. Related Work

1. Introduction
Bi-Level Programs (BLPs) are mathematical programs with
optimization problems in their constraints and recently have
been recognized as powerful theoretical tools for a variety of
machine learning applications. Mathematically, BLPs can
be (re)formulated as the following optimization problem:
min

x∈X ,y∈Rm

F (x, y), s.t. y ∈ S(x),

(2)

(1)

1

DUT-RU International School of Information Science and
Engineering, Dalian University of Technology. 2 Key Laboratory for Ubiquitous Network and Service Software of Liaoning
Province. 3 Department of Mathematics, The University of Hong
Kong. 4 SUSTech International Center for Mathematics and Department of Mathematics, Southern University of Science and Technology. Correspondence to: Jin Zhang <zhangj9@sustech.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Although early works on BLPs can date back to the nineteen
seventies (Dempe, 2018), it was not until the last decade
that a large amount of bi-level optimization models were
established to formulate specific machine learning problems,
include meta learning (Franceschi et al., 2018; Rajeswaran
et al., 2019; Zügner & Günnemann, 2019), hyper-parameter
optimization (Franceschi et al., 2017; Okuno et al., 2018;
MacKay et al., 2019), reinforcement learning (Yang et al.,
2019), generative adversarial learning (Pfau & Vinyals,
2016), and image processing (Kunisch & Pock, 2013; De los
Reyes et al., 2017), just to name a few.
A large number of optimization techniques have been developed to solve BLPs in Eqs. (1)-(2). For example, the works
in (Kunapuli et al., 2008; Moore, 2010; Okuno et al., 2018)
aimed to reformulate the original BLPs in Eqs. (1)-(2) as a
single-level optimization problem based on the first-order
optimality conditions. However, these approaches involve
too many auxiliary variables, thus are not applicable for
complex machine learning tasks.

