On the Number of Linear Regions of Convolutional Neural Networks

Huan Xiong 1 Lei Huang 2 Mengyang Yu 2 Li Liu 2 Fan Zhu 2 Ling Shao 1 2

Abstract
One fundamental problem in deep learning is understanding the outstanding performance of deep
Neural Networks (NNs) in practice. One explanation for the superiority of NNs is that they can
realize a large class of complicated functions, i.e.,
they have powerful expressivity. The expressivity
of a ReLU NN can be quantified by the maximal number of linear regions it can separate its
input space into. In this paper, we provide several mathematical results needed for studying the
linear regions of CNNs, and use them to derive
the maximal and average numbers of linear regions for one-layer ReLU CNNs. Furthermore,
we obtain upper and lower bounds for the number of linear regions of multi-layer ReLU CNNs.
Our results suggest that deeper CNNs have more
powerful expressivity than their shallow counterparts, while CNNs have more expressivity than
fully-connected NNs per parameter.

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, deep Neural Networks (NNs), especially deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), have
attracted much attention and achieved state-of-the-art results
in many machine learning tasks, such as speech recognition,
image classification, and video games (Hinton et al., 2012;
Goodfellow et al., 2013; Sainath et al., 2013; Abdel-Hamid
et al., 2014; Silver et al., 2016). Various popular and powerful CNNs, such as AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), VGGNet (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014), GoogleNet (Szegedy
et al., 2015) and ResNet (He et al., 2016), have empirically
shown that applying deeper networks can significantly improve the performance of various network architectures. A
key problem in the study of deep learning is to understand
why neural networks, especially very deep neural networks,
perform well in practice.
1

Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE.
Correspondence to: Huan Xiong <huan.xiong@mbzuai.ac.ae>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

One explanation for the superiority of NNs is their powerful expressivity, i.e., they can represent a large classes
of functions arisen in practice. It has been shown that an
NN with only one hidden layer can adequately approximate
any given continuous function if its width is large enough
(Cybenko, 1989; Funahashi, 1989; Hornik, 1991; Barron,
1994). However, normally the width of such a hidden layer
has to be exponentially large in order to approximate a given
function to arbitrary precision. In contrast, if multiple layers are involved, (Hanin, 2019; Hanin & Sellke, 2017; Lu
et al., 2017) proved that to approximate any given Lebesgueintegrable function from Rn to R to arbitrary precision, one
only needs to apply some multi-layer NN with width at
most n + 1, while the depth depends on the given function and may be very large. Although these approximate
results show that NNs can represent a large class of functions, there are few hints on how to determine the suitable
architectures needed to realise a given function or which
architectures are more efficient. Recently, several theoretical studies have been conducted to compare the efficiency
of distinct architectures. It was proved in (Telgarsky, 2015;
2016; Arora et al., 2018) that certain functions realized by
some deep architectures will require a shallow network with
exponentially more parameters to represent. For example,
(Telgarsky, 2016) showed that, for any positive integer n,
there exist some networks with depth Θ(n3 ), width Θ(1),
and Θ(1) parameters, that cannot be approximated by an
O(n)-layer network unless it has a width of Ω(2n ). Their
results reveal that deeper networks usually have more powerful expressivity of functions, which provides an explanation
for why deeper networks outperform shallow networks with
the same number of parameters in many practical tasks.
A natural measure for characterizing the expressivity of NNs
is the maximal number of distinct linear regions (Pascanu
et al., 2013) in the domain of functions that can be computed
by NNs. Among this direction, people mainly focus on NNs
whose activation functions are Rectified Linear Units (ReLUs), which were first introduced in 2000 (Hahnloser et al.,
2000; Hahnloser & Seung, 2001) and have been widely
adopted in various architectures since 2011 (Glorot et al.,
2011). It is known that the composition of piecewise linear1
functions is still piecewise linear; thus, every feed-forward
1
Although “piecewise affine” would be more accurate, we use
“piecewise linear” here since it is a conventional concept.

