Measuring Non-Expert Comprehension of Machine Learning Fairness Metrics

Debjani Saha 1 Candice Schumann 1 Duncan C. McElfresh 1 John P. Dickerson 1 Michelle L. Mazurek 1
Michael Carl Tschantz 2

Abstract
Bias in machine learning has manifested injustice in several areas, such as medicine, hiring,
and criminal justice. In response, computer scientists have developed myriad definitions of fairness
to correct this bias in fielded algorithms. While
some definitions are based on established legal
and ethical norms, others are largely mathematical. It is unclear whether the general public agrees
with these fairness definitions, and perhaps more
importantly, whether they understand these definitions. We take initial steps toward bridging this
gap between ML researchers and the public, by
addressing the question: does a lay audience understand a basic definition of ML fairness? We
develop a metric to measure comprehension of
three such definitions–demographic parity, equal
opportunity, and equalized odds. We evaluate this
metric using an online survey, and investigate the
relationship between comprehension and sentiment, demographics, and the definition itself.

1. Introduction
Research into algorithmic fairness has grown in both importance and volume over the past few years, driven in part
by the emergence of a grassroots Fairness, Accountability, Transparency, and Ethics (FATE) in Machine Learning
(ML) community. Different metrics and approaches to algorithmic fairness have been proposed, many of which are
based on prior legal and philosophical concepts, such as disparate impact and disparate treatment (Feldman et al., 2015;
Chouldechova, 2017; Binns, 2017). However, definitions of
ML fairness do not always fit well within pre-existing legal
and moral frameworks. The rapid expansion of this field
makes it difficult for professionals to keep up, let alone the
general public. Furthermore, misinformation about notions
1

University of Maryland, College Park, MD 2 ICSI,
Berkeley, CA. Correspondence to: Michelle L. Mazurek
<mmazurek@cs.umd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

of fairness can have significant legal implications.1
Computer scientists have largely focused on developing
mathematical notions of fairness and incorporating them
into ML systems. A much smaller collection of studies have
measured public perception of bias and (un)fairness in algorithmic decision-making. However, as both the academic
community and society in general continue to discuss issues
of ML fairness, it remains unclear whether non-experts–
who will be impacted by ML-guided decisions–understand
various mathematical definitions of fairness sufficiently to
provide opinions and critiques. We emphasize that these
technologies are likely to have greater impact on marginalized populations, and those with lower levels of education,
as in the case of hiring and criminal justice (Barocas &
Selbst, 2016; Frey & Osborne, 2017). For this reason, we
focus on a non-expert audience and a context (hiring) that
most people would find relatively familiar.
Our Contributions. We take a step toward addressing this
issue by studying peoples’ comprehension and perceptions
of three definitions of ML fairness: demographic parity,
equal opportunity, and equalized odds (Hardt et al., 2016).
Specifically, we address the following research questions:
RQ1 When provided with an explanation intended for a
non-technical audience, do non-experts comprehend
each definition and its implications?
RQ2 What factors play a role in comprehension?
RQ3 How are comprehension and sentiment related?
RQ4 How do the different definitions compare in terms of
comprehension?
We developed two online surveys to address these research
questions. We presented participants with a simplified
decision-making scenario and an accompanying fairness
rule expressed in the scenario’s context. We asked questions
related to the participants’ comprehension of and sentiment
toward this rule. Tallying the number of correct responses
to the comprehension questions gives us a comprehension
score for each participant. In Study-1, we found that this
comprehension score is a consistent and reliable indicator
of understanding demographic parity.
1

https://www.cato.org/blog/misleadingveritas-accusation-google-bias-couldresult-bad-law

