Learning Optimal Tree Models under Beam Search

Jingwei Zhuo 1 Ziru Xu 1 Wei Dai 1 Han Zhu 1 Han Li 1 Jian Xu 1 Kun Gai 1

Abstract
Retrieving relevant targets from an extremely
large target set under computational limits is a
common challenge for information retrieval and
recommendation systems. Tree models, which
formulate targets as leaves of a tree with trainable
node-wise scorers, have attracted a lot of interests
in tackling this challenge due to their logarithmic computational complexity in both training
and testing. Tree-based deep models (TDMs) and
probabilistic label trees (PLTs) are two representative kinds of them. Though achieving many practical successes, existing tree models suffer from the
training-testing discrepancy, where the retrieval
performance deterioration caused by beam search
in testing is not considered in training. This leads
to an intrinsic gap between the most relevant targets and those retrieved by beam search with even
the optimally trained node-wise scorers. We take
a first step towards understanding and analyzing
this problem theoretically, and develop the concept of Bayes optimality under beam search and
calibration under beam search as general analyzing tools for this purpose. Moreover, to eliminate
the discrepancy, we propose a novel algorithm for
learning optimal tree models under beam search.
Experiments on both synthetic and real data verify the rationality of our theoretical analysis and
demonstrate the superiority of our algorithm compared to state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Extremely large-scale retrieval problems prevail in modern
industrial applications of information retrieval and recommendation systems. For example, in online advertising
systems, several advertisements need to be retrieved from a
target set containing tens of millions of advertisements and
1
Alibaba Group.
Correspondence to:
<zjw169463@alibaba-inc.com>.

Jingwei Zhuo

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

presented to a user in tens of milliseconds. The limits of
computational resources and response time make models,
whose computational complexity scales linearly with the
size of target set, become unacceptable in practice.
Tree models are of special interest to solve these problems
because of their ability in achieving logarithmic complexity in both training and testing. Tree-based deep models
(TDMs) (Zhu et al., 2018; 2019; You et al., 2019) and Probabilistic label trees (PLTs) (Jasinska et al., 2016; Prabhu
et al., 2018; Wydmuch et al., 2018) are two representative
kinds of tree models. These models introduce a tree hierarchy in which each leaf node corresponds to a target and
each non-leaf node defines a pseudo target for measuring
the existence of relevant targets on the subtree rooted at it.
Each node is also associated with a node-wise scorer which
is trained to estimate the probability that the corresponding
(pseudo) target is relevant. To achieve logarithmic training
complexity, a subsampling method is leveraged to select logarithmic number of nodes on which the scorers are trained
for each training instance. In testing, beam search is usually
used to retrieve relevant targets in logarithmic complexity.
As a greedy method, beam search only expands parts of
nodes with larger scores while pruning other nodes. This
character achieves logarithmic computational complexity
but may result in deteriorating retrieval performance if ancestor nodes of the most relevant targets are pruned. An
ideal tree model should guarantee no performance deterioration when its node-wise scorers are leveraged for beam
search. However, existing tree models ignore this and treat
training as a separated task to testing: (1) Node-wise scorers
are trained as probability estimators of pseudo targets which
are not designed for optimal retrieval; (2) They are also
trained on subsampled nodes which are different to those
queried by beam search in testing. Such discrepancy makes
even the optimal node-wise scorers w.r.t. training loss can
lead to suboptimal retrieval results when they are used in
testing to retrieve relevant targets via beam search. To the
best of our knowledge, there is little work discussing this
problem either theoretically or experimentally.
We take a first step towards understanding and resolving
the training-testing discrepancy on tree models. To analyze
this formally, we develop the concept of Bayes optimality
under beam search and calibration under beam search as

