Expert Learning through Generalized Inverse Multiobjective Optimization:
Models, Insights, and Algorithms

Chaosheng Dong 1 Bo Zeng 1

Abstract
We consider a new unsupervised learning task of
inferring parameters of a multiobjective decision
making model, based on a set of observed decisions from the human expert. This setting is important in applications (such as the task of portfolio management) where it may be difficult to obtain the human expert’s intrinsic decision making
model. We formulate such a learning problem as
an inverse multiobjective optimization problem
(IMOP) and propose its first sophisticated model
with statistical guarantees. Then, we reveal several fundamental connections between IMOP, Kmeans clustering, and manifold learning. Leveraging these critical insights and connections, we
propose two algorithms to solve IMOP through
manifold learning and clustering. Numerical results confirm the effectiveness of our model and
the computational efficacy of algorithms.

1. Introduction
Human decision makers are often confronted with multiple objectives when making decisions. For example, comfort and cost are two often conflicting criteria when customers make purchases (Greco et al., 2016). Actually,
in economics, science, and engineering, the multiobjective decision making problem (DMP) is quite common and
many decision making processes naturally involve multiple conflicting objectives (Hwang & Masud, 2012). These
underlying multiobjective decision making schemes, once
learned by artificial intelligence (AI) system, would presumably assist and accelerate the human expert’s decision
making process, such as supporting organizations in designing products or in providing services to customers.
Nevertheless, as in most scenarios, one can only observe
1

Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA. Correspondence to: Chaosheng Dong
and Bo Zeng <chaosheng@pitt.edu, bzeng@pitt.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

the human decision maker’s decisions while cannot directly
access her underlying decision making schemes. Consider
the recommender system used by retailers to support customers for online shopping. The customer’s historical purchasing behaviors (Aggarwal et al.) are known to the system. To make personalized recommendations, it is especially crucial for the system to quickly learn the customer’s
needs and desires from these observed decisions.
In this paper, we investigate learning the parameters, e.g.,
objectives functions or constraints, from an expert by observing her decisions. Specifically, the learner observes a
set of decisions {yi }i∈[N ] and each yi with i ∈ [N ] is an
observation of the Pareto optimal solution of the multiobjective optimization problem (MOP):
min

x∈Rn

s.t.

{f1 (x, θ), f2 (x, θ), . . . , fp (x, θ)}
x ∈ X(θ),

where θ is the true but unknown parameter for the expert’s multiobjective decision making problem. Formally,
we seek to answer the following fundamental question
how do we learn θ given {yi }i∈[N ] ?
This question naturally occurs in many settings. For example, a portfolio manager typically uses the Markovitz meanvariance model to make investment decisions (Markowitz,
1952). One analyst might be interested in learning the key
parameter of this model, e.g., the expected returns of the assets, by observing the portfolio manager’s historical investment records. To learn the parameter θ, we formulate an
inverse multiobjective optimization problem (IMOP), assuming that the human expert is rational or bounded rational. Given the fact that the learner often only has access to
human expert’s decisions and no other data, we show that
IMOP essentially is an unsupervised learning task.
Subsequently, we reveal connections between IMOP and
two seemingly unrelated unsupervised learning problems.
The first one is the K-means clustering problem (MacQueen, 1967; Lloyd, 1982; Arthur & Vassilvitskii, 2007).
Specifically, we prove that every K-means clustering problem can be transformed equivalently to an IMOP. As solving K-means clustering problem is NP-hard (Aloise et al.,

