Interferometric Graph Transform:
a Deep Unsupervised Graph Representation

Edouard Oyallon 1

Abstract
We propose the Interferometric Graph Transform
(IGT), which is a new class of deep unsupervised
graph convolutional neural network for building
graph representations. Our first contribution is to
propose a generic, complex-valued spectral graph
architecture obtained from a generalization of the
Euclidean Fourier transform. We show that our
learned representation consists of both discriminative and invariant features, thanks to a novel
greedy concave objective. From our experiments,
we conclude that our learning procedure exploits
the topology of the spectral domain, which is normally a flaw of spectral methods, and in particular
our method can recover an analytic operator for
vision tasks. We test our algorithm on various
and challenging tasks such as image classification (MNIST, CIFAR-10), community detection
(Authorship, Facebook graph) and action recognition from 3D skeletons videos (SBU, NTU),
exhibiting a new state-of-the-art in spectral graph
unsupervised settings.

1. Introduction
Recently, a huge interest has arisen in canonical representations for non-Euclidean domains, which has lead to
the development of Graph Convolutional Neural Networks
(GCNN) (Bronstein et al., 2017; Kipf & Welling, 2016).
They are useful to describe many types of data: social networks (Wu et al., 2019b), manifolds (Henaff et al., 2015),
3D-skeletons (Mazari & Sahbi, 2019), molecules (De Cao &
Kipf, 2018), and text (Defferrard et al., 2016), etc. Mainly
two classes of architectures address this representation learning task: on one side, the spatial graph convolution methods (Wu et al., 2019b) which rely on node neighborhoods
of a given graph, and on the other side, spectral methods
1
CNRS, LIP6. Correspondence to:
<edouard.oyallon@lip6.fr>.

Edouard Oyallon

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

(Defferrard et al., 2016), which heavily rely on spectral
representations estimated from a given Laplacian operator.
We consider the latter: in this setting, typical successful
representations are obtained from deep GCNN, whose filters are often learned through supervision (Bronstein et al.,
2017). We also note that GCNNs on regular grid exhibit a
significant performance gap with their Euclidean domain
counterpart, indicating that more effort must be done to incorporate efficiently this geometry. In this work, we propose
a new class of spectral architecture which is unsupervisedly
infered from a graph’s Laplacian.
By design, standard spectral methods suffer from several
inherent issues, which also apply to Euclidean domain. A
first issue is the lack of topology of the Laplacian’s eigenvectors. For the sake of illustration, observe that for a smooth
f ∈ L2 (Rk ), k ≥ 0, the Fourier transform of its Laplacian
satisfies:
c (ω) = −kωk2 fˆ(ω) .
∀ω ∈ Rk , ∆f
Here, the topology of the eigenbasis (e.g., a cosine family)
is difficult to exhibit from its corresponding eigenvalues.
For instance, two rather different frequencies (e.g., ω1 6=
ω2 ) with the same amplitude (e.g., kω1 k = kω2 k) will not
be distinguished by a spectral clustering algorithm based
solely on kωk. This typically leads to filters which are
isotropic and not selective to a specific direction, which also
holds for spatial methods (Bronstein et al., 2017). A second
issue is that the graph convolution employs filters which
are built from local operators such as a Laplacian matrix:
this typically leads to a smoothing operator (Kampffmeyer
et al., 2019; Li et al., 2018; NT & Maehara, 2020; Wu
et al., 2019a). Thus, in those settings, spectral GCNN lose
the ability to discriminate high-frequency attributes of a
signal, which are also usually unstable and thus difficult to
capture (Mallat, 1999). In our work, we address those two
issues by learning a complex-valued isometry in the spectral
domain, which has, for instance, the ability to recover the
spectral topology of 2D frequencies, without incorporating
any specific prior: the filters are anisotropic and smooth in
frequencies.
With GCNN, many architecture choices and design remain

