Neural Clustering Processes

Ari Pakman 1 Yueqi Wang 1 2 Catalin Mitelut 1 JinHyung Lee 1 Liam Paninski 1

Abstract
Probabilistic clustering models (or equivalently,
mixture models) are basic building blocks in
countless statistical models and involve latent random variables over discrete spaces. For these
models, posterior inference methods can be inaccurate and/or very slow. In this work we introduce
deep network architectures trained with labeled
samples from any generative model of clustered
datasets. At test time, the networks generate approximate posterior samples of cluster labels for
any new dataset of arbitrary size. We develop two
complementary approaches to this task, requiring
either O(N) or O(K) network forward passes per
dataset, where N is the dataset size and K the number of clusters. Unlike previous approaches, our
methods sample the labels of all the data points
from a well-defined posterior, and can learn nonparametric Bayesian posteriors since they do not
limit the number of mixture components. As a scientific application, we present a novel approach
to neural spike sorting for high-density multielectrode arrays.

1. Introduction
Probabilistic clustering models (or equivalently, mixture
models) are a staple of statistical modelling in which a
discrete latent variable is introduced for each observation,
indicating its mixture component identity. Popular inference methods in these models fall into two main classes.
When exploring the full posterior is crucial (e.g. there is
irreducible uncertainty about the latent structure or many
separate local optima exist), the method of choice is Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) (Neal, 2000; Jain & Neal,
2004). This method is asymptotically accurate but timeconsuming, with convergence that is difficult to assess. Models whose likelihood and prior are non-conjugate are par1

2

Columbia University Now at Google. Correspondence to:
Ari Pakman <aripakman@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

ticularly challenging, since in general in these cases the
model parameters cannot be marginalized and must be kept
as part of the state of the Markov chain. Alternatively, variational methods (Blei & Jordan, 2004; Kurihara et al., 2007;
Hughes et al., 2015) are typically much faster but do not
come with accuracy guarantees.
As a third alternative, in recent years there has been steady
progress on amortized inference methods, and such is the
spirit of this work. Concretely, we propose novel techniques
to perform amortized approximate posterior inference over
discrete latent variables in mixture models. We consider two
possible product expansions of the mixture posteriors, and
in each expansion we use neural networks to express conditional factors in terms of fixed-dimensional, distributed
representations that respect the permutation symmetries imposed by the discrete variables. A major advantage of our
approach, compared to previous approaches to amortized
clustering, is its ability to handle an arbitrary number of
clusters from a well defined posterior. This makes the methods a natural choice for nonparametric Bayesian models,
such as Dirichlet process mixture models (DPMM), and
their extensions. Moreover, the methods can be applied to
both conjugate and non-conjugate models.
The term ‘amortization’ refers to the process of investing
computational resources to train a model that is later used
for very fast posterior inference (Gershman & Goodman,
2014). Concretely, in a model with observations x and latent
variables z, the amortized approach learns a parametrized
function qθ (z|x) that approximates p(z|x) for any x; learning the parameters θ may be challenging, but once θ is in
hand evaluating qθ (z|x) for new data x is fast.
The amortized inference literature can be coarsely divided
into two approaches. On one side, the variational autoencoder (VAE) approach (Kingma & Welling, 2013), with
roots in the wake-sleep algorithm (Hinton et al., 1995),
learns qθ (z|x) along with the generative model pφ (x|z).
Here p(z) is usually a known simple distribution.
Our work corresponds to the alternative case: a generative
model p(x, z) is postulated, and posterior inference is the
main focus of the learning phase. Amortized methods in this
case usually involve a degree of specialization to the particular generative model of interest. Examples include methods
developed for Bayesian networks (Stuhlmüller et al., 2013),

