Calibration, Entropy Rates, and Memory in Language Models
Mark Braverman 1 Xinyi Chen 1 2 Sham Kakade 3 4 Karthik Narasimhan 1 Cyril Zhang 1 2 Yi Zhang 1

Abstract
Building accurate language models that capture
meaningful long-term dependencies is a core
challenge in natural language processing. Towards this end, we present a calibration-based
approach to measure long-term discrepancies between a generative sequence model and the true
distribution, and use these discrepancies to improve the model. Empirically, we show that stateof-the-art language models, including LSTMs
and Transformers, are miscalibrated: the entropy
rates of their generations drift dramatically upward over time. We then provide provable methods to mitigate this phenomenon. Furthermore,
we show how this calibration-based approach can
also be used to measure the amount of memory
that language models use for prediction.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in language modeling have resulted in
significant improvements on a wide variety of benchmarks (Dai et al., 2018; Gong et al., 2018; Takase et al.,
2018). Capturing long-term dependencies has especially
been a major focus, with approaches ranging from explicit memory-based neural networks (Grave et al., 2016;
Ke et al., 2018) to optimization improvements to stabilize
learning (Le et al., 2015; Trinh et al., 2018). However,
while these techniques seem to improve on standard metrics like perplexity and even produce remarkably coherent
text (Radford et al., 2019), we still do not have appropriate
measures to assess long-term properties in language models, making it difficult to choose between different model
options for downstream tasks.
1

Department of Computer Science, Princeton University,
Princeton, New Jersey, USA 2 Google AI Princeton, Princeton,
New Jersey, USA 3 University of Washington, Allen School of
Computer Science and Engineering and Department of Statistics, Seattle, Washington, USA 4 Microsoft Research, New
York, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Cyril Zhang
<cyril.zhang@princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Model
1) AWD-LSTM
2) CNN-LSTM
3) Transformer
4) GPT-2

Corpus
PTB
GBW
GBW
WebText

Test ppl.
58.3
29.8
28.1
23.7

eEntRate
93.1
49.4
34.7
61.2

Table 1: Perplexity degradations for generations from popular language models. State-of-the-art performance is usually reported via perplexity with respect to the test corpus
(one-step prediction loss), but there is a striking blowup
in the perplexity (i.e. exponential of the entropy) of these
models’ long-term generations. Test ppl. is the exponential of the cross-entropy of the model with respect to the
test corpus. The listed models are (1) Merity et al. (2017),
(2) Jozefowicz et al. (2016), (3) Vaswani et al. (2017b),
(4) Radford et al. (2019).

Starting from Shannon’s seminal work that essentially introduced statistical language modeling (Shannon, 1951),
the most classical and widely studied long-term property of
a language model is its entropy rate — the average amount
of information contained per word, conditioned on the preceding words. A learned model provides an upper bound
for the entropy rate of a language, via its cross-entropy
loss. The exponential of the entropy rate can be interpreted
as the effective support size of the distribution of the next
word (intuitively, the average number of “plausible” word
choices to continue a document), and the perplexity score
of a model (the exponential of the cross entropy loss) is
an upper bound for this quantity. In state-of-the-art models trained on billion-scale corpora, this number ranges between 10 and 30 (Melis et al., 2017; Radford et al., 2019).
A natural diagnostic question, with which we begin our
work, is whether the long-term generations of these models
exhibit the same entropy rates as the underlying languages
they are modeling predictively.
Empirically, and perhaps surprisingly, it turns out that the
entropy rate of generated text is substantially higher than
the estimate for true text derived from the model’s one-step
predictions. As seen in Table 1 (see also Figure 1), this
is true for both state-of-the-art LSTMs and Transformers
trained on a variety of datasets. As a timely example, the
GPT-2 model (Radford et al., 2019), the object of much recent attention for its seemingly coherent and on-topic gen-

