Infinite attention: NNGP and NTK for deep attention networks

Jiri Hron 1 Yasaman Bahri 2 Jascha Sohl-Dickstein 2 Roman Novak 2

Abstract
There is a growing literature on the relationship
between wide neural networks (NNs) and Gaussian processes (GPs), identifying an equivalence
between the two for a variety of NN architectures. This equivalence enables, for instance, accurate approximation of the behaviour of wide
Bayesian NNs without MCMC or variational approximations, or characterisation of the distribution of randomly initialised wide NNs optimised
by gradient descent without ever running an optimiser. We provide a rigorous extension of these
results to NNs with attention layers, showing that
unlike single-head attention which induces nonGaussian behaviour, multi-head attention architectures behave as GPs as the number of heads
tends to infinity. We discuss the effects of positional encodings and layer normalisation, and
propose modifications of the attention mechanism
which improve performance of both finite and infinitely wide NNs. We evaluate attention kernels
empirically, leading to a moderate improvement
upon the previous state-of-the-art on CIFAR-10
for GPs without trainable kernels and advanced
data preprocessing. Finally, we introduce new features to the Neural Tangents library (Novak et al.,
2020) allowing applications of NNGP/NTK models, with and without attention, to variable-length
sequences, with an example on the IMDb dataset.

1. Introduction
One of the currently most active research directions in theoretical deep learning is the study of NN behaviour as the
number of parameters in each layer goes to infinity (e.g.,
Matthews et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2018; Garriga-Alonso
et al., 2019; Novak et al., 2019; Li & Liang, 2018; AllenZhu et al., 2019; Du et al., 2019; Arora et al., 2019; Yang,
1

University of Cambridge. Work done while interning at
Google Brain. 2 Google Brain. Correspondence to: Jiri Hron
<jh2084@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

2019b). Building upon these efforts, we study the asymptotic behaviour of NNs with attention layers (Bahdanau
et al., 2015; Vaswani et al., 2017) and derive the corresponding neural network Gaussian proccess (NNGP) and Neural
Tangent kernels (NTK, Jacot et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2019).
Beyond their recent empirical successes (e.g., Radford et al.,
2019; Devlin et al., 2019), attention layers are also interesting from the theoretical perspective as the standard proof
techniques used to establish asymptotic Gaussianity of the
input-to-output mappings represented by wide NNs (Matthews et al., 2018; Yang, 2019b) cannot be applied.
To understand why, consider the following simplified ats
0
tention layer model: let x ∈ Rd ×d be the input with ds
0
spatial and d embedding dimensions (by spatial, we mean,
e.g., the number of tokens in a string or pixels in an image),
0
W Q , W K , W V ∈ Rd ×d be weight matrices, and define
Q
queries Q(x) := xW , keys K(x) := xW K , and values
V (x) := xW V as usual. The attention layer output is then


Q(x)K(x)>
√
f (x) := ζ
V (x) = ζ(G(x))V (x) , (1)
d
where ζ is the row-wise softmax function.
Now observe that dim G(x) = ds × ds where the spatial
dimension ds stays finite even as the number of parameters—
here proportional to d—goes to infinity. As we will show
rigorously in Section 3, this fact combined with the d−1/2
scaling causes each column of f (x) to be a linear combination of the same stochastic matrix ζ(G(x)), and thus
statistically dependent even in the infinite width limit.
Since the exchangeability based arguments (Matthews et al.,
2018; Garriga-Alonso et al., 2019) require that certain
moment statistics of f (x) asymptotically behave as if its
columns were independent (see condition b in lemma 10,
Matthews et al., 2018), they do not extend to attention layers
in a straightforward manner. Similarly, the proofs based on
Gaussian conditioning (Novak et al., 2019; Yang, 2019b)
require that given the input x, the conditional covariance of
each column of f (x) converges (in probability) to the same
deterministic positive semidefinite matrix (see propositions
5.5 and G.4 in Yang, 2019b) which will not be the case due
to the aforementioned stochasticity of ζ(G(x)).
Among the many interesting contributions in (Yang, 2019b),
the author proposes to resolve the above issue by replacing

