Decoupled Greedy Learning of CNNs

Eugene Belilovsky 1 Michael Eickenberg 2 Edouard Oyallon 3

Abstract
A commonly cited inefficiency of neural network
training by back-propagation is the update locking problem: each layer must wait for the signal
to propagate through the full network before updating. Several alternatives that can alleviate this
issue have been proposed. In this context, we consider a simpler, but more effective, substitute that
uses minimal feedback, which we call Decoupled
Greedy Learning (DGL). It is based on a greedy
relaxation of the joint training objective, recently
shown to be effective in the context of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) on large-scale
image classification. We consider an optimization
of this objective that permits us to decouple the
layer training, allowing for layers or modules in
networks to be trained with a potentially linear
parallelization in layers. With the use of a replay
buffer we show this approach can be extended
to asynchronous settings, where modules can operate with possibly large communication delays.
We show theoretically and empirically that this approach converges. Then, we empirically find that
it can lead to better generalization than sequential
greedy optimization. We demonstrate the effectiveness of DGL against alternative approaches
on the CIFAR-10 dataset and on the large-scale
ImageNet dataset.

1. Introduction
Jointly training all layers using back-propagation is the standard method for learning neural networks, including the
computationally intensive Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs). Due to the sequential nature of gradient processing,
standard back-propagation has several well-known ineffi1
MILA 2 Center for Computational Mathematics, Flatiron Institute 3 CNRS, LIP6. Correspondence to: Eugene Belilovsky
<eugene.belilovsky@mila.quebec>, Michael Eickenberg <meickenberg@flatironinstitute.org>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

ciencies that prohibit parallelization of the computations of
the different constituent modules. Jaderberg et al. (2017)
characterize these in order of severity as the forward, update, and backward locking problems. Backward unlocking
would permit updates of all modules once forward signals have propagated to all subsequent modules, update
unlocking would permit updates of a module before a signal
has reached all subsequent modules, and forward unlocking
would permit a module to operate asynchronously from its
predecessor and dependent modules.
Methods addressing backward locking to a certain degree
have been proposed in (Huo et al., 2018b;a; Choromanska
et al., 2018; Nø kland, 2016). However, update locking is
a far more severe inefficiency. Thus Jaderberg et al. (2017)
and Czarnecki et al. (2017) propose and analyze Decoupled
Neural Interfaces (DNI), a method that uses an auxiliary
network to predict the gradient of the backward pass directly
from the input. This method unfortunately does not scale
well computationally or in terms of accuracy, especially
in the case of CNNs (Huo et al., 2018a;b). Indeed, auxiliary networks must predict a weight gradient, usually high
dimensional for larger models and input sizes.
A major obstacle to update unlocking is the heavy reliance
on the upper modules for feedback. Several works have
recently revisited the classic (Ivakhnenko & Lapa, 1965;
Bengio et al., 2007) approach of supervised greedy layerwise training of neural networks (Huang et al., 2018a;
Marquez et al., 2018). In Belilovsky et al. (2019) it is shown
that such an approach, which relaxes the joint learning objective, and does not require global feedback, can lead to
high-performance deep CNNs on large-scale datasets. We
will show that the greedy learning objective used in these
papers can be solved with an alternative optimization algorithm, which permits decoupling the computations and
achieves update unlocking. It can be augmented with replay
buffers (Lin, 1992) to permit forward unlocking which is
a challenge not effectively addressed by any of the prior
work. This simpler strategy can be shown to be a superior
baseline for parallelizing the training across modules of a
neural network.
The paper is structured as follows. In Sec. 2 we propose an
optimization procedure for a decoupled greedy learning objective that achieves update unlocking and then extend it to

