Active World Model Learning with Progress Curiosity
Kuno Kim 1 Megumi Sano 1 Julian De Freitas 2 Nick Haber * 3 Daniel Yamins * 1 4

Abstract
World models are self-supervised predictive models of how the world evolves. Humans learn world
models by curiously exploring their environment,
in the process acquiring compact abstractions of
high bandwidth sensory inputs, the ability to plan
across long temporal horizons, and an understanding of the behavioral patterns of other agents. In
this work, we study how to design such a curiositydriven Active World Model Learning (AWML)
system. To do so, we construct a curious agent
building world models while visually exploring a
3D physical environment rich with distillations of
representative real-world agents. We propose an
AWML system driven by -Progress: a scalable
and effective learning progress-based curiosity
signal. We show that -Progress naturally gives
rise to an exploration policy that directs attention
to complex but learnable dynamics in a balanced
manner, as a result overcoming the “white noise
problem”. As a result, our -Progress-driven controller achieves significantly higher AWML performance than baseline controllers equipped with
state-of-the-art exploration strategies such as Random Network Distillation and Model Disagreement.

1. Introduction
Imagine yourself as an infant in your parent’s arms, sitting
on a playground bench. You are surrounded by a variety of
potentially interesting stimuli, from the constantly whirring
merry-go-round, to the wildly rustling leaves, to your parent’s smiling and cooing face. After briefly staring at the
motionless ball, you grow bored. You consider the merrygo-round a bit more seriously, but its periodic motion is
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University 2 Department of Psychology, Harvard University
3
Graduate School of Education, Stanford University 4 Department
of Psychology, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Kuno
Kim <khkim@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

ultimately too predictable to keep your attention long. The
leaves are quite entertaining, but after watching their random motions for a while, your gaze lands on your parent.
Here you find something really interesting: you can anticipate, elicit, and guide your parents’ changes in expression
as you engage them in a game of peekaboo. Though just an
infant, you have efficiently explored and interacted with the
environment, in the process gaining strong intuitions about
how different things in your world will behave.
Here, you have learned a powerful world model — a selfsupervised predictive model of how the world evolves, both
due to its intrinsic dynamics and your actions. Through
learning world models, humans acquire compact abstractions of high bandwidth sensory inputs, the ability to plan
across long temporal horizons, and the capacity to anticipate
the behavioral patterns of other agents. Devising algorithms
that can efficiently construct such world models is an important goal for the next generation of socially-integrated AI
and robotic systems.
A key challenge in world model learning is that real-world
environments contain a diverse range of dynamics with varying levels of learnability. The inanimate ball and periodic
merry-go-round display dynamics that are easy to learn. On
the other end of the spectrum, stimuli such as falling leaves
exhibit random noise-like dynamics. Lying in a “sweet spot”
on this spectrum are animate agents that have interesting and
complex yet learnable dynamics, e.g. your parent’s expressions and play offerings. Balancing attention amidst a sea
of stimuli with diverse dynamics in a way that maximizes
learning progress is a challenging problem. Particularly
difficult is the white noise problem (Schmidhuber, 2010;
Pathak et al., 2017; Burda et al., 2018b; Pathak et al., 2019),
perseverating on unlearnable stimuli rather than pursuing
learnable dynamics. Thus, it is a natural hypothesis that
behind the infant’s ability to learn powerful world models
must be an equally powerful active learning algorithm that
directs its attention to maximize learning progress.
In this work, we formalize and study Active World Model
Learning (AWML) – the problem of determining a directed
exploration policy that enables efficient construction of better world models. To do so, we construct a progress-driven
curious neural agent performing AWML in a custom-built
3D virtual world environment. Specifically, our contribu-

