Rank Aggregation from Pairwise Comparisons
in the Presence of Adversarial Corruptions

Arpit Agarwal * 1 Shivani Agarwal * 1 Sanjeev Khanna * 1 Prathamesh Patil * 1

Abstract

Rank aggregation from pairwise preferences has
widespread applications in recommendation systems and information retrieval. Given the enormous economic and societal impact of these applications, and the consequent incentives for malicious players to manipulate ranking outcomes in
their favor, making rank aggregation algorithms
robust to adversarial manipulations in data is a crucial challenge. In this paper, we initiate the study
of robustness in rank aggregation under the popular Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) model for pairwise
comparisons. We consider a setting where pairwise comparisons are initially generated according to a BTL model, but a fraction of these comparisons are corrupted adversarially prior to being
reported to us. We consider a strong contamination model, where an adversary having complete
knowledge of the initial truthful data and the true
BTL weights, can corrupt this data by inserting,
deleting, or changing data points. The goal is to
recover the true BTL weights given this corrupted
data. We characterize the extent of corruption
under which the true BTL weights are uniquely
identifiable. We also provide a novel algorithm
that provably filters out the adversarial corruption
from data under reasonable conditions on data
generation and corruption. We support our theory with experiments on both synthetic as well
as real data, showing the resilience of our algorithm to a substantial degree of corruption and the
vulnerability of existing approaches to even small
amounts of corruption.

∗

Alphabetical order 1 Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylvania, Philadephia, PA, USA.
Correspondence to: Prathamesh Patil <pprath@seas.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
The problem of rank aggregation from pairwise comparisons, where the goal is to aggregate pairwise preferences
between items into rankings/scores for each item, has a
wide range of applications in the areas of recommendation
systems and information retrieval (Dwork et al., 2001; Negahban et al., 2017; Maystre & Grossglauser, 2015; Agarwal et al., 2018; Hendrickx et al., 2019; Wauthier et al.,
2013; Ailon et al., 2008; Gleich & Lim, 2011; Guiver &
Snelson, 2009; Volkovs & Zemel, 2012). In these large
scale web-applications for recommendation and retrieval,
one obtains pairwise preferences from different users either
explicitly through survey questions or implicitly through
clicks, ratings, reviews etc. and aggregates these preferences
to score/rank items/products for these users.
The massive economic and societal impact of these applications has also meant that some players are trying to boost the
ranking/scores of their products by resorting to malicious
practices such as creating fake user accounts, manufacturing fake reviews and ratings, click-fraud etc. Hence, it has
become increasingly important to guard against these malicious players by designing ranking algorithms that are
robust to adversarial corruption in data.
In order to address this challenge, we initiate the study of
robustness in rank aggregation under the Bradley-TerryLuce (BTL) model (Bradley & Terry, 1952; Luce, 1959),
which is arguably the most popular parametric model for
rank aggregation using pairwise comparisons. We describe
the exact setting below.
1.1. Problem Formulation
Given a set of n items, the BTL model associates a positive weight/score wi∗ with each item i ∈ [n], and postulates that item i wins in a pairwise comparison against
item j with probability p∗ij = wi∗ /(wi∗ + wj∗ ). Since this
model is invariant under multiplicative scaling, for uniqueness, it is assumed that w∗ ∈ ∆n , the open n-simplex,
where w∗ is the vector of the aforementioned BTL weights.
In our framework, nature first draws a comparison graph
G∗ = (V, E ∗ ) which is an undirected graph with vertex
m∗
set V = [n] and edge set E ∗ = {({ui , vi }, p̂ui vi )}i=1

