Non-Stationary Delayed Bandits with Intermediate Observations
Claire Vernade * 1 András György * 1 Timothy A. Mann 1

Abstract
Online recommender systems often face long delays in receiving feedback, especially when optimizing for some long-term metrics. While mitigating the effects of delays in learning is wellunderstood in stationary environments, the problem becomes much more challenging when the
environment changes. In fact, if the timescale
of the change is comparable to the delay, it is
impossible to learn about the environment, since
the available observations are already obsolete.
However, the arising issues can be addressed if
intermediate signals are available without delay,
such that given those signals, the long-term behavior of the system is stationary. To model this
situation, we introduce the problem of stochastic,
non-stationary, delayed bandits with intermediate observations. We develop a computationally
efficient algorithm based on UCRL2, and prove
sublinear regret guarantees for its performance.
Experimental results demonstrate that our method
is able to learn in non-stationary delayed environments where existing methods fail.

1. Introduction
Optimizing long-term metrics is an important challenges for
online recommender systems (Wu et al., 2017). Consider,
for instance, the media recommendation problem, where the
final feedback on the content is only given after the customer
spent time watching or reading it. Another major case is that
of conversion optimization in online marketing (Yoshikawa
& Imai, 2018): Here a user’s click on an advertisement/recommendation might be observed almost immediately,
but whether the click is converted into a long-term commitment, such as a purchase, can be observed usually only after
some much longer delay (Chapelle, 2014), which causes
modelling issues for robust inference.
*

Equal contribution 1 DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence
to: Claire Vernade <vernade@google.com>, András György
<agyorgy@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Delayed feedback in online learning have been addressed
both in the full information setting (see, e.g., Joulani et al.,
2013, and the references therein), and in the bandit setting
(see, e.g., Mandel et al., 2015; Vernade et al., 2017; CesaBianchi et al., 2019, and the references therein), assuming
both stochastic and adversarial environments. The main
take-away message from these studies is that, for bandits,
thep
impact of a constant delay D results in an extra additive
O( DT ) term in the regret in adversarial settings, or an additive O(D) term in stochastic settings. The aforementioned
approaches often provide efficient and provably optimal
algorithms for delayed-feedback scenarios. Nonetheless,
the algorithms naturally wait for having received enough
feedback before actually learning something. This is, in
general, sufficient in stationary environments or when comparing with the best fixed action in the adversarial setting.
Such methods, however, may be quite unsuitable in a nonstationary environment. For example, it is easy to see that
in an environment that changes abruptly, every change results in an extra regret term mentioned above. An extreme
example of a bad situation is when the environment changes
(abruptly) every D steps, in which case, by the time any
feedback is received by the recommender system, its value
becomes obsolete, thus no learning is possible. Accordingly,
the extra regret terms above sum up to T , for example, in
the stochastic case a regret of D is suffered for each of the
T /D changes. Delays and non-stationarity are, in general,
strongly entangled, which badly affects the performance of
any online learning algorithm.
In fact, real world problems are non-stationary in most cases.
For example, trending or boredom phenomena may affect
the conversion rates (Agarwal et al., 2009a), forcing the
systems to have estimators as local as possible in time. As
such, algorithms developed for non-stationary online learning (see, e.g., Auer et al., 2002a; Garivier & Moulines, 2011;
György et al., 2012; Gajane et al., 2018) crucially depend
on the availability of recent observations, which is often not
possible in the presence of delays. To alleviate this problem,
practical systems often monitor – and sometimes optimize
for – some proxy information instead of the real target. Typically, the web industry optimizes for click-through rate
instead of conversions (Agarwal et al., 2009b).
One step further in utilizing proxy information is to directly
model the connection between the proxies and the final out-

