Logarithmic Regret for Learning Linear Quadratic Regulators Efficiently

Asaf Cassel 1 Alon Cohen 2 Tomer Koren 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning in Linear Quadratic Control systems whose transition parameters are initially unknown. Recent
results in this setting have demonstrated efficient learning algorithms with regret growing
with the square root of the number of decision
steps. We present new efficient algorithms that
achieve, perhaps surprisingly, regret that scales
only (poly)logarithmically with the number of
steps in two scenarios: when only the state transition matrix A is unknown, and when only the stateaction transition matrix B is unknown and the
optimal policy satisfies a certain non-degeneracy
condition. On the other hand, we give a lower
bound that shows that when the latter condition is
violated, square root regret is unavoidable.

1. Introduction
The linear-quadratic regulator model (LQR) is a classic
model in optimal control theory. In this model, the dynamics
of the environment are given as
xt+1 = A? xt + B? ut + wt ,
where xt and ut are the state and the action vectors at time
t, A? and B? are transition matrices, and wt is a zero-mean
i.i.d. Gaussian noise. The cost function is quadratic in both
the state and the action. An interesting property of LQR
systems is that a linear control policy minimizes the cost
while keeping the system at a steady-state (stable) position.
In this work, we study the problem of designing an adaptive
controller that regulates the system while learning its parameters. This problem has recently been approached through
the lens of regret minimization, beginning in the work of
Abbasi-Yadkori and Szepesvári (2011) that established an
1
School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University 2 Google
Research, Tel Aviv. Correspondence to: Assaf Cassel <acassel@mail.tau.ac.il>, Alon Cohen <aloncohen@google.com>,
Tomer Koren <tkoren@tauex.tau.ac.il>.

√
O( T) regret bound for this setting albeit with a computationally inefficient algorithm. The√problem of designing an
efficient algorithm that enjoys O( T) was later resolved by
Cohen et al. (2019) and Mania et al. (2019). The former
work relied on the “optimism in the face of uncertainty”
principle and a reduction to an online semi-definite problem,
and the latter work used a simpler greedy strategy.
Following
this line of work, it has been believed that an
√
O( T) regret is tight for the problem. This appears natural
as it is the typical rate for many imperfect information (bandit) optimization problems (e.g., Shamir, 2013).1 On the
other hand, one could suspect that better, polylogarithmic
regret bounds, are possible in the LQR setting thanks to
the strongly convex structure of the cost functions. Often
in optimization, this structure gives rise to faster convergence/regret rates, and indeed, in a recent work, Agarwal
et al. (2019b) have demonstrated that such fast rates are
attainable in the related, yet full-information online LQR
problem endowed with any strongly convex loss functions.
In this paper, we show two interesting scenarios of learning unknown LQR systems in which an expected regret
of O(log2 T) is, in fact, achievable. In the first, we assume
that the matrix B? is known and show that polylogarithmic
regret can be attained by harnessing the intrinsic noise in the
system dynamics for exploration. In the second, we assume
that A? is known and that the optimal control policy K? is
given by a full-rank matrix. Both results are attained using
simple and efficient algorithms whose runtime per time step
is polynomial in the natural parameters of the problem.
We complement our results with a lower bound showing
that our assumptions are indeed necessary for obtaining improved regret guarantees. Specifically, we show that when
B? is unknown and the optimal policy K? is near-degenerate
(i.e., with very small singular values), any online√algorithm,
whether efficient or not, must suffer at least Ω( √T) regret.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first Ω( T) lower
bound for learning linear quadratic regulators (that particularly holds even when the learner knows the entire set of
system parameters but the matrix B? , and even in a singleinput single-output scenario). Concurrent to this work, Sim1

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

More precisely, this is very often the regret rate in bandit problems with no “gap” assumptions regarding the difference between
the best and second-best actions/policies.

