Faster Graph Embeddings via Coarsening

Matthew Fahrbach * 1 Gramoz Goranci * 2 Richard Peng * 3 Sushant Sachdeva * 2 Chi Wang * 4

Abstract
Graph embeddings are a ubiquitous tool for machine learning tasks, such as node classification
and link prediction, on graph-structured data.
However, computing the embeddings for largescale graphs is prohibitively inefficient even if we
are interested only in a small subset of relevant
vertices. To address this, we present an efficient
graph coarsening approach, based on Schur complements, for computing the embedding of the
relevant vertices. We prove that these embeddings
are preserved exactly by the Schur complement
graph that is obtained via Gaussian elimination
on the non-relevant vertices. As computing Schur
complements is expensive, we give a nearly-linear
time algorithm that generates a coarsened graph
on the relevant vertices that provably matches
the Schur complement in expectation in each iteration. Our experiments involving prediction
tasks on graphs demonstrate that computing embeddings on the coarsened graph, rather than the
entire graph, leads to significant time savings without sacrificing accuracy.

1. Introduction
Over the past several years, network embeddings have been
demonstrated to be a remarkably powerful tool for learning
unsupervised representations for nodes in a network (Perozzi et al., 2014; Tang et al., 2015; Grover & Leskovec,
2016). Broadly speaking, the objective is to learn a lowdimensional vector for each node that captures the structure
of its neighborhood. These embeddings have proved to be
very effective for downstream machine learning tasks in networks such as node classification and link prediction (Tang
et al., 2015; Hamilton et al., 2017).
*

Equal contribution 1 Google Research, New York, NY, USA
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Canada 3 Department of Computer Science, Georgia Institute of
Technology, GA, USA 4 Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, USA.
Correspondence to: Matthew Fahrbach <fahrbach@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

While some of these graph embedding approaches are explicitly based on matrix-factorization (Tang & Liu, 2011;
Bruna et al., 2014; Cao et al., 2015), some of the other
popular methods, such as DeepWalk (Perozzi et al., 2014)
and LINE (Tang et al., 2015), can be viewed as approximately factoring random walk matrices constructed from
the graph (Qiu et al., 2018). A new approach proposed
by (Qiu et al., 2018) called NetMF explicitly computes a
low-rank approximation of random-walk matrices using a
Singular Value Decomposition (SVD), and significantly outperforms the DeepWalk and LINE embeddings for benchmark network-mining tasks.
Despite the performance gains, explicit matrix factorization results in poor scaling performance. The matrix
factorization-based approaches typically require computing
the singular value decomposition (SVD) of an n × n matrix,
where n is the number of vertices in the graph. In cases
where this matrix is constructed by taking several steps of
random walks, e.g., NetMF (Qiu et al., 2018), the matrix is
often dense even though the original graph is sparse. This
makes matrix factorization-based embeddings extremely expensive to compute, both in terms of the time and memory
required, even for graphs with 100,000 vertices.
There are two main approaches for reducing the size of a
graph to improve the efficiency and scalability of graphbased learning. The first method reduces the number of
edges in the graphs while preserving properties essential to
the relevant applications. This approach is often known as
graph sparsification (see (Batson et al., 2013) for a survey).
Recently, (Qiu et al., 2019) introduced NetSMF, a novel
approach for computing embeddings that leverages spectral
sparsification for random walk matrices (Cheng et al., 2015)
to dramatically improve the sparsity of the matrix that is
factorized by NetMF, resulting in improved space and time
efficiency, with comparable prediction accuracy.
The second approach is vertex sparsification, i.e., eliminating vertices, also known as graph coarsening. However,
there has been significantly less rigorous treatment of vertex
sparsification for network embeddings, which is useful for
many downstream tasks that only require embedding a relevant subset of the vertices, e.g., (1) core-peripheral networks
where data collection and the analysis focus on a subset of
vertices (Borgatti & Everett, 2000), (2) clustering or training

