On the Power of Compressed Sensing with Generative Models

Akshay Kamath 1 Sushrut Karmalkar 1 Eric Price 1

Abstract
The goal of compressed sensing is to learn a
structured signal x from a limited number of
noisy linear measurements y ≈ Ax. In traditional compressed sensing, “structure” is represented by sparsity in some known basis. Inspired by the success of deep learning in modeling images, recent work starting with (Bora et al.,
2017) has instead considered structure to come
from a generative model G : Rk → Rn . We
present two results establishing the difficulty and
strength of this latter task, showing that existing
bounds are tight: First, we provide a lower bound
matching the (Bora et al., 2017) upper bound
for compressed sensing with L-Lipschitz generative models G which holds even for the more relaxed goal of non-uniform recovery. Second, we
show that generative models generalize sparsity
as a representation of structure by constructing a
ReLU-based neural network with 2 hidden layers and O(n) activations per layer whose range
is precisely the set of all k-sparse vectors.

1. Introduction
In compressed sensing, one would like to learn a structured signal x ∈ Rn from a limited number of linear measurements y ≈ Ax. This is motivated by two observations: first, there are many situations where linear measurements are easy, in settings as varied as streaming algorithms, single-pixel cameras, genetic testing, and MRIs.
Second, the unknown signals x being observed are structured or “compressible”: although x lies in Rn , it would
take far fewer than n floating point numbers to describe x.
In such a situation, one can hope to estimate x well from
a number of linear measurements that is closer to the size
*

1
Equal contribution
Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas, Austin, Texas.
Correspondence to: Akshay Kamath <kamath@cs.utexas.edu>,
Sushrut Karmalkar <sushrutk@cs.utexas.edu>, Eric Price
<ecprice@cs.utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

of the compressed representation of x than to its ambient
dimension n.
In order to do compressed sensing, you need a formal notion of how signals are expected to be structured. The classic answer is to use sparsity. Given linear measurements1
y = Ax of an arbitrary vector x ∈ Rn , one can hope to
recover an estimate x̂ of x satisfying
kx − x̂k ≤ C

min kx − x0 k

k-sparse x0

(1)

for some constant C and norm k·k. In this paper, we
will focus on achieving the guarantee with 3/4 probability. Thus, if x is well-approximated by a k-sparse vector
x0 , it should be accurately recovered. Classic results such
as (Candès et al., 2006) show that (1) is achievable when A
consists of m = O(k log nk ) independent Gaussian linear
measurements. This bound is tight, and in fact no distribution of matrices with fewer rows can achieve this guarantee
in either `1 or `2 (Do Ba et al., 2010).
Although compressed sensing has had success, sparsity is
a limited notion of structure. Can we learn a richer model
of signal structure from data, and use this to perform recovery? In recent years, deep convolutional neural networks have had great success in producing rich models
for representing the manifold of images, notably with generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.,
2014) and variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma &
Welling, 2014). These methods produce generative models G : Rk → Rn that allow approximate sampling from
the distribution of images. So a natural question is whether
these generative models can be used for compressed sensing.
In (Bora et al., 2017) it was shown how to use generative
models to achieve a guarantee analogous to (1): for any
L-Lipschitz G : Rk → Rn , one can achieve
kx − x̂k2 ≤ C

min kx − G(z 0 )k2 + δ,

z 0 ∈Bk2 (r)

(2)

where r, δ > 0 are parameters, Bk2 (r) denotes the radiusr `2 ball in Rk and Lipschitzness is defined with respect
1
The algorithms we discuss can also handle post-measurement
noise, where y = Ax + η. We remove this term for simplicity:
this paper focuses on lower bounds, and handling this term could
only make things harder.

