Low-Rank Bottleneck in Multi-head Attention Models
Srinadh Bhojanapalli 1 Chulhee Yun 2 Ankit Singh Rawat 1 Sashank Reddi 1 Sanjiv Kumar 1

Abstract
Attention based Transformer architecture has enabled significant advances in the field of natural language processing. In addition to new
pre-training techniques, recent improvements crucially rely on working with a relatively larger embedding dimension for tokens. Unfortunately, this
leads to models that are prohibitively large to be
employed in the downstream tasks. In this paper
we identify one of the important factors contributing to the large embedding size requirement. In
particular, our analysis highlights that the scaling
between the number of heads and the size of each
head in the current architecture gives rise to a lowrank bottleneck in attention heads, causing this
limitation. We further validate this in our experiments. As a solution we propose to set the head
size of an attention unit to input sequence length,
and independent of the number of heads, resulting in multi-head attention layers with provably
more expressive power. We empirically show that
this allows us to train models with a relatively
smaller embedding dimension and with better performance scaling.

1. Introduction
Attention based architectures, such as Transformers, have
been effective for sequence modelling tasks such as machine
translation (Gehring et al., 2017; Vaswani et al., 2017), question answering, sentence classification (Radford et al., 2018;
Devlin et al., 2018) and document generation (Liu et al.,
2018). These models have emerged as better alternatives
to the recurrent models - RNNs (Sutskever et al., 2014),
LSTMs (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) and GRUs (Cho
et al., 2014). This is mainly due to their feed forward structure, which removes the sequential processing bottleneck
for sequence data, making them easier to train compared
1

Google Research New York 2 Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. Correspondence to: Srinadh Bhojanapalli <bsrinadh@google.com>, Chulhee Yun <chulheey@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

to the recurrent models. Self attention models also have
found applications in vision (Wang et al., 2018), adversarial
networks (Zhang et al., 2018), reinforcement learning (Zambaldi et al., 2018; Li, 2017) and speech recognition (Chiu
et al., 2018).
Recent advances in using the self attention models in natural
language tasks have been made by first using a language
modeling task to pre-train the models and then fine tuning
the learned models on specific downstream tasks. Radford
et al. (2018) and Devlin et al. (2018) used Transformers to
pre-train a language model and showed that the fine tuned
model outperforms LSTMs on many natural language understanding and question answering tasks. For example, BERT
(Devlin et al., 2018), a 24 layer transformer model, is shown
to achieve the state of the art performance on several NLP
tasks, including on the SQuAD dataset. These advances, in
addition to novel pre-training tasks, relied on bigger models
with a larger embedding size. BERT model uses an embedding size of 1024 (Devlin et al., 2018); GPT-2 uses models
with embedding size up to 1600 (Radford et al., 2019).
A single Transformer block consists of two key components:
a multi-head self attention layer followed by a feed forward
layer (Vaswani et al., 2017). A single head in a multi-head
attention layer, computes self attention between the tokens
in the input sequence, which it then uses to compute a
weighted average of embeddings for each token. Each head
projects the data into a lower dimensional subspace, and
computes the self attention in this subspace. This projection
size for each head is commonly referred to as the head size.
To keep the number of parameters fixed in the attention layer
regardless of the number of heads, the prevalent heuristic
is to scale the head size with 1/(number of heads). This
heuristic was initially proposed in Vaswani et al. (2017)
and has become a de facto standard heuristic in multi-head
attention models (Radford et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2018).
However, increasing the number of heads decreases the head
size, decreasing the expressive power of individual heads.
We prove that reducing the head size to a value below the input sequence length harms the representation power of each
head (see Theorem 1). This is because a smaller head size
introduces a rank constraint on the projection matrices in
each head, and limits their representation power. We indeed
notice this effect in practice: while the performance improves with increasing the number of heads in the beginning

