Nonparametric Score Estimators
Yuhao Zhou 1 Jiaxin Shi 1 Jun Zhu 1

Abstract
Estimating the score, i.e., the gradient of log density function, from a set of samples generated by
an unknown distribution is a fundamental task
in inference and learning of probabilistic models that involve flexible yet intractable densities.
Kernel estimators based on Stein’s methods or
score matching have shown promise, however
their theoretical properties and relationships have
not been fully-understood. We provide a unifying
view of these estimators under the framework of
regularized nonparametric regression. It allows
us to analyse existing estimators and construct
new ones with desirable properties by choosing
different hypothesis spaces and regularizers. A
unified convergence analysis is provided for such
estimators. Finally, we propose score estimators
based on iterative regularization that enjoy computational benefits from curl-free kernels and fast
convergence.

1. Introduction
Intractability of density functions has long been a central
challenge in probabilistic learning. This may arise from
various situations such as training implicit models like
GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014), or marginalizing over a
non-conjugate hierarchical model, e.g., evaluating the output density of stochastic neural networks (Sun et al., 2019).
In these situations, inference and learning often require evaluating such intractable densities or optimizing an objective
that involves them.
Among various solutions, one important family of methods are based on score estimation, which rely on a key
step of estimating the score, i.e., the derivative of the
log density ∇x log p(x) from a set of samples drawn from
some unknown probability density p. These methods in1

Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., BNRist Center, Institute for AI,
Tsinghua-Bosch ML Center, Tsinghua University. Correspondence
to: J. Zhu <dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

clude parametric score matching (Hyvärinen, 2005; Sasaki
et al., 2014; Song et al., 2019), its denoising variants as
autoencoders (Vincent, 2011), nonparametric score matching (Sriperumbudur et al., 2017; Sutherland et al., 2018),
and kernel score estimators based on Stein’s methods (Li
& Turner, 2018; Shi et al., 2018). They have been successfully applied to applications such as estimating gradients of
mutual information for representation learning (Wen et al.,
2020), score-based generative modeling (Song & Ermon,
2019; Saremi & Hyvarinen, 2019), gradient-free adaptive
MCMC (Strathmann et al., 2015), learning implicit models (Warde-Farley & Bengio, 2016), and solving intractability in approximate inference algorithms (Sun et al., 2019).
Recently, nonparametric score estimators are growing in
popularity, mainly because they are flexible, have wellstudied statistical properties, and perform well when samples are very limited. Despite a common goal, they have
different motivations and expositions. For example, the
work Sriperumbudur et al. (2017) is motivated from the
density estimation perspective and the richness of kernel exponential families (Canu & Smola, 2006; Fukumizu, 2009),
where the estimator is obtained by score matching. Li &
Turner (2018) and Shi et al. (2018) are mainly motivated
by Stein’s methods. The solution of Li & Turner (2018)
gives the score prediction at sample points by minimizing
the kernelized Stein discrepancy (Chwialkowski et al., 2016;
Liu et al., 2016) and at an out-of-sample point by adding it
to the training data, while the estimator of Shi et al. (2018)
is obtained by a spectral analysis in function space.
As these estimators are studied in different contexts,
their relationships and theoretical properties are not fullyunderstood. In this paper, we provide a unifying view of
them under the regularized nonparametric regression framework. This framework allows us to construct new estimators
with desirable properties, and to justify the consistency and
improve the convergence rate of existing estimators. It also
allows us to clarify the relationships between these estimators. We show that they differ only in hypothesis spaces and
regularization schemes.
Our contributions are both theoretical and algorithmic:
• We provide a unifying perspective of nonparametric
score estimators. We show that the major distinction of
the KEF estimator (Sriperumbudur et al., 2017) from

