Generalized and Scalable Optimal Sparse Decision Trees

Jimmy Lin * 1 Chudi Zhong * 2 Diane Hu 2 Cynthia Rudin 2 Margo Seltzer 1

Abstract
Decision tree optimization is notoriously difficult from a computational perspective but essential for the field of interpretable machine learning. Despite efforts over the past 40 years, only
recently have optimization breakthroughs been
made that have allowed practical algorithms to
find optimal decision trees. These new techniques have the potential to trigger a paradigm
shift where it is possible to construct sparse decision trees to efficiently optimize a variety of objective functions without relying on greedy splitting and pruning heuristics that often lead to suboptimal solutions. The contribution in this work
is to provide a general framework for decision
tree optimization that addresses the two significant open problems in the area: treatment of imbalanced data and fully optimizing over continuous variables. We present techniques that produce optimal decision trees over a variety of objectives including F-score, AUC, and partial area
under the ROC convex hull. We also introduce
a scalable algorithm that produces provably optimal results in the presence of continuous variables and speeds up decision tree construction by
several orders of magnitude relative to the stateof-the art.

1. Introduction
Decision tree learning has served as a foundation for interpretable artificial intelligence and machine learning for
over half a century (Morgan & Sonquist, 1963; Payne &
Meisel, 1977; Loh, 2014). The major approach since the
1980’s has been decision tree induction, where heuristic splitting and pruning procedures grow a tree from the
top down and prune it back afterwards (Quinlan, 1993;
Breiman et al., 1984). The problem with these methods
*

Equal contribution 1 University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada 2 Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
Correspondence to: Cynthia Rudin <cynthia@cs.duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

is that they tend to produce suboptimal trees with no way
of knowing how suboptimal the solution is. This leaves
a gap between the performance that a decision tree might
obtain and the performance that one actually attains, with
no way to check on (or remedy) the size of this gap–and
sometimes, the gap can be large.
Full decision tree optimization is NP-hard, with no
polynomial-time approximation (Laurent & Rivest, 1976),
leading to challenges in proving optimality or bounding the
optimality gap in a reasonable amount of time, even for
small datasets. It is possible to create assumptions that reduce hard decision tree optimization to cases where greedy
algorithms suffice, such as independence between features
(Klivans & Servedio, 2006), but these assumptions do not
hold in reality. If the data can be perfectly separated with
zero error, SAT solvers can be used to find optimal decision
trees rapidly (Narodytska et al., 2018); however, real data
is generally not separable, leaving us with no choice other
than to actually solve the problem.
Decision tree optimization is amenable to branch-andbound methods, implemented either via generic mathematical programming solvers or by customized algorithms.
Solvers have been used from the 1990’s (Bennett, 1992;
Bennett & Blue, 1996) to the present (Verwer & Zhang,
2019; Blanquero et al., 2018; Nijssen et al., 2020; Bertsimas & Dunn, 2017; Rudin & Ertekin, 2018; Menickelly
et al., 2018; Vilas Boas et al., 2019), but these generic
solvers tend to be slow. A common way to speed them
up is to make approximations in preprocessing to reduce
the size of the search space. For instance, “bucketization”
preprocessing is used in both generic solvers (Verwer &
Zhang, 2019) and customized algorithms (Nijssen et al.,
2020) to handle continuous variables. Continuous variables
pose challenges to optimality; even one continuous variable
increases the number of possible splits by the number of
possible values of that variable in the entire database, and
each additional split leads to an exponential increase in the
size of the optimization problem. Bucketization is tempting and seems innocuous, but we prove in Section 3 that it
sacrifices optimality.
Dynamic programming methods have been used for various decision tree optimization problems since as far back
as the early 1970’s (Garey, 1972; Meisel & Michalopou-

