Neural Datalog Through Time:
Informed Temporal Modeling via Logical Speciﬁcation

Hongyuan Mei 1 Guanghui Qin 1 Minjie Xu 2 Jason Eisner 1

Abstract
Learning how to predict future events from
patterns of past events is difﬁcult when the set of
possible event types is large. Training an unrestricted neural model might overﬁt to spurious
patterns. To exploit domain-speciﬁc knowledge
of how past events might affect an event’s present
probability, we propose using a temporal deductive database to track structured facts over time.
Rules serve to prove facts from other facts and
from past events. Each fact has a time-varying
state—a vector computed by a neural net whose
topology is determined by the fact’s provenance,
including its experience of past events. The possible event types at any time are given by special
facts, whose probabilities are neurally modeled
alongside their states. In both synthetic and realworld domains, we show that neural probabilistic
models derived from concise Datalog programs
improve prediction by encoding appropriate
domain knowledge in their architecture.

1. Introduction
Temporal sequences are abundant in applied machine
learning. A common task is to predict the future from
the past or to impute other missing events. Often this is
done by ﬁtting a generative probability model. For evenly
spaced sequences, historically popular generative models
have included hidden Markov models and discrete-time linear dynamical systems, with more recent interest in recurrent neural network models such as LSTMs. For irregularly
spaced sequences, a good starting point is the Hawkes process (a self-exciting temporal point process) and its many
variants, including neuralized versions based on LSTMs.
Under any of these models, each event ei updates the
state of the system from si to si+1 , which then determines
1
Computer Science Dept., Johns Hopkins Univ. 2 Bloomberg
LP. Correspondence to: Hongyuan Mei <hmei@cs.jhu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

the distribution from which the next event ei+1 is drawn.
Alas, when the relationship between events and the system
state is unrestricted—when anything can potentially affect
anything—ﬁtting an accurate model is very difﬁcult, particularly in a real-world domain that allows millions of event
types including many rare types. Thus, one would like to
introduce domain-speciﬁc structure into the model.
For example, one might declare that the probability that
Alice travels to Chicago is determined entirely by Alice’s
state, the states of Alice’s coworkers such as Bob, and the
state of affairs in Chicago. Given that modeling assumption, parameter estimation can no longer incorrectly overﬁt
this probability using spurious features based on unrelated
temporal patterns of (say) wheat sales and soccer goals.
To improve extrapolation, one can reuse this “Alice travels
to Chicago” model for any person A traveling to any place
C. Our main contribution is a modeling language that can
travel(A,C) probabilities using
concisely model all these travel
a few rules over variables A, B, C. Here B ranges over A’s
coworkers, where the coworker relation is also governed
by rules and can itself be affected by stochastic events.
In our paradigm, a domain expert simply writes down the
rules of a temporal deductive database, which tracks the
possible event types and other boolean facts over time. This
logic program is then used to automatically construct a
deep recurrent neural architecture, whose distributed state
consists of vector-space embeddings of all present facts. Its
output speciﬁes the distribution of the next event.
What sort of rules? An event has a structured description
with zero or more participating entities. When an event
happens, pattern-matching against its description triggers
update rules, which modify the database facts to reﬂect
the new properties and relationships of these entities. Updates may have a cascading effect if the database contains
deductive rules that derive further facts from existing
ones at any time. (For example, coworker(A,B) is jointly
implied by boss(U,A) and boss(U,B)). In particular, deductive rules can state that entities combine into a possible
event type whenever they have the appropriate properties
travel(A,C) is possible
and relationships. (For example, travel
if C is a place and A is a person who is not already at C.)

