Energy-Based Processes for Exchangeable Data
Mengjiao Yang * 1 Bo Dai * 1 Hanjun Dai 1 Dale Schuurmans 1 2

Abstract
Recently there has been growing interest in modeling sets with exchangeability such as point clouds.
A shortcoming of current approaches is that they
restrict the cardinality of the sets considered or
can only express limited forms of distribution over
unobserved data. To overcome these limitations,
we introduce Energy-Based Processes (EBPs),
which extend energy based models to exchangeable data while allowing neural network parameterizations of the energy function. A key advantage of these models is the ability to express more
flexible distributions over sets without restricting
their cardinality. We develop an efficient training
procedure for EBPs that demonstrates state-ofthe-art performance on a variety of tasks such as
point cloud generation, classification, denoising,
and image completion1 .

1. Introduction
Many machine learning problems consider data where each
instance is, itself, an unordered set of elements; i.e., such
that each observation is a set. Data of this kind arises in a
variety of applications, ranging from document modeling
(Blei et al., 2003; Garnelo et al., 2018a) and multi-task
learning (Zaheer et al., 2017; Edwards & Storkey, 2016;
Liu et al., 2019) to 3D point cloud modeling (Li et al.,
2018; Yang et al., 2019). In unsupervised settings, a dataset
typically consists of a set of such sets, while in supervised
learning, it consists of a set of (set, label) pairs.
Modeling a distribution over a space of instances, where
each instance is, itself, an unordered set of elements involves two key considerations: (1) the elements within a
single instance are exchangeable, i.e., the elements are order
invariant; and (2) the cardinalities of the instances (sets)
*

Equal contribution 1 Google Research, Brain Team 2 University
of Alberta.
Correspondence to: Mengjiao Yang <sherryy@google.com>, Bo Dai <bodai@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).
1
The code is available at https://github.com/googleresearch/google-research/tree/master/ebp.

vary, i.e., instances need not exhibit the same cardinality.
Modeling both unconditional and conditional distributions
over instances (sets) are relevant to consider, since these
support unsupervised and supervised tasks respectively.
For unconditional distribution modeling, there has been significant prior work on modeling set distributions, which has
sought to balance competing needs to expand model flexibility and preserve tractability on the one hand, with respecting
exchangeability and varying instance cardinalities on the
other hand. However, managing these trade-offs has proved
to be quite difficult, and current approaches remain limited
in different respects.
For example, a particularly straightforward strategy for modeling distributions over instances x = {x1 , ..., xn } without
assuming fixed cardinality is simply to use a recurrent neural network (RNNs) to encode
Qn instance probability autoregressively via p (x) = i=1 p (xi |x1:i 1 ) for a permutation of its elements. Such an approach allows the full
flexibility of RNNs to be applied, and has been empirically
successful (Larochelle & Murray, 2011; Bahdanau et al.,
2015), but does not respect exchangeability nor is it clear
how to tractably enforce exchangeability with RNNs.
To explicitly ensure exchangeability, a natural idea has been
to exploit De Finetti’s theorem, which assures us that for
any distribution over an infinitely exchangeable sequence,
its finite projection distribution on arbitrary finite elements
x = {x1 , ..., xn } can be decomposed as
Z Y
n
p (x) =
p (xi |✓) p (✓) d✓, 2
(1)
i=1

for some latent variable ✓. In other words, there always
exists a latent variable ✓ such that conditioning on ✓ renn
ders the instance elements {xi }i=1 i.i.d.. Latent variable
models are therefore a natural choice for expressing an
exchangeable distribution. Bayesian sets (Ghahramani &
Heller, 2005), latent Dirichlet allocation (Blei et al., 2003),
and related variants (Blei & Lafferty, 2007; Teh et al., 2006)
are classical examples of this kind of approach, where the
likelihood and prior in (1) are expressed by simple known
distributions. Although the restriction to simple distributions severely limits the expressiveness of these models,
2
For simplicity, we consider the distributions with density function exist in this paper.

