Linear Lower Bounds and Conditioning of Differentiable Games

Adam Ibrahim 1 Waïss Azizian 2 Gauthier Gidel 1 Ioannis Mitliagkas 1

Abstract
Recent successes of game-theoretic formulations
in ML have caused a resurgence of research interest in differentiable games. Overwhelmingly, that
research focuses on methods and upper bounds on
their speed of convergence. In this work, we approach the question of fundamental iteration complexity by providing lower bounds to complement
the linear (i.e. geometric) upper bounds observed
in the literature on a wide class of problems. We
cast saddle-point and min-max problems as 2player games. We leverage tools from singleobjective convex optimisation to propose new linear lower bounds for convex-concave games. Notably, we give a linear lower bound for n-player
differentiable games, by using the spectral properties of the update operator. We then propose
a new definition of the condition number arising
from our lower bound analysis. Unlike past definitions, our condition number captures the fact
that linear rates are possible in games, even in the
absence of strong convexity or strong concavity
in the variables.

1. Introduction
Game formulations arise commonly in many fields, such
as game theory (Harker and Pang, 1990), machine learning
(Kim and Boyd, 2008; Goodfellow et al., 2014), and computer vision (Chambolle and Pock, 2011; Wang et al., 2014)
among others, and encompass saddle-point problems (Palaniappan and Bach, 2016; Chambolle and Pock, 2011; Chen
et al., 2017).
The machine learning community has been overwhelmingly using gradient-based methods to train differentiable
games (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Salimans et al., 2016).
These methods are not designed with game dynamics in
*

Equal contribution 1 Mila, University of Montreal 2 Ecole
Normale Supérieure, Paris. Correspondence to: Adam Ibrahim
<<first>.<last>@umontreal.ca>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

mind (Mescheder et al., 2017), and to make matters worse,
have been often tuned suboptimally (Gidel et al., 2019b).
A recent series of publications in machine learning brings
in tools from the minimax and game theory literature to offer better, faster alternatives (Daskalakis et al., 2018; Gidel
et al., 2019a;b). This exciting trend begs the question: how
fast can we go? Knowing the fundamental limits of this
class of problems is critical in steering future algorithmic
research.
In order to answer this question, the optimisation literature
contains a few different approaches based on the distance
between the iterates at a step t and the optimal choice of
parameters. Given an optimisation algorithm, it is possible
to show under certain assumptions on the objectives that this
error is in O (ρt ), where the rate of convergence ρ depends
on the algorithm (Nesterov, 2004). If ρ ∈ (0, 1), we say
that the rate of convergence is linear, which corresponds to
the error decaying exponentially fast. Hence, a lower bound
on the rate of convergence limits how fast an algorithm may
converge. This is important as it helps establish the tightness of upper bounds, which happens when they are matched
by the lower bounds, and may otherwise indicate possible
acceleration of the method considered. For example, in
single-objective optimisation, the lower bound on the rate
of convergence of first-order black box algorithms is known
to be linear for smooth, strongly convex objectives, and can
be derived via a domino-like coverage argument by Nesterov (2004). Another recent, spectral approach by Arjevani et al. (2016) complement these results by proposing
linear lower bounds for a large class of optimisers in finitedimensional settings. As the lower bounds for Nesterov’s
accelerated gradient obtained by those techniques match the
upper bound, we know that Nesterov’s accelerated gradient is optimal within a large class of methods for smooth,
strongly convex objectives. Additionally, in optimisation, a
natural concept of condition number arises to describe the
difficulty of µ-strongly convex, L-smooth objectives. This
condition number is the only problem-dependent quantity
that appears in both the upper and lower bounds and is given
by κ = L/µ (Nesterov, 2004). In optimisation, there is a
clear distinction between strongly convex objectives, where
the condition number is finite and linear rates are achievable,
and general convex objectives where the condition number
can be undefined and only sublinear rates are possible in

