Scalable Deep Generative Modeling for Sparse Graphs

Hanjun Dai 1 Azade Nazi 1 Yujia Li 2 Bo Dai 1 Dale Schuurmans 1

Abstract
Learning graph generative models is a challenging task for deep learning and has wide applicability to a range of domains like chemistry, biology and social science. However current deep
neural methods suffer from limited scalability:
for a graph with n nodes and m edges, existing deep neural methods require Ω(n2 ) complexity by building up the adjacency matrix. On the
other hand, many real world graphs are actually
sparse in the sense that m  n2 . Based on this,
we develop a novel autoregressive model, named
BiGG, that utilizes this sparsity to avoid generating the full adjacency matrix, and importantly
reduces the graph generation time complexity to
O((n + m) log n). Furthermore, during training
this autoregressive model can be parallelized with
O(log n) synchronization stages, which makes
it much more efficient than other autoregressive
models that require Ω(n). Experiments on several
benchmarks show that the proposed approach not
only scales to orders of magnitude larger graphs
than previously possible with deep autoregressive
graph generative models, but also yields better
graph generation quality.

1. Introduction
Representing a distribution over graphs provides a principled foundation for tackling many important problems in
knowledge graph completion (Xiao et al., 2016), de novo
drug design (Li et al., 2018; Simonovsky & Komodakis,
2018), architecture search (Xie et al., 2019) and program
synthesis (Brockschmidt et al., 2018). The effectiveness of
graph generative modeling usually depends on learning the
distribution given a collection of relevant training graphs.
However, training a generative model over graphs is usually
quite difficult due to their discrete and combinatorial nature.
1
Google Research, Brain Team 2 DeepMind. Correspondence
to: Hanjun Dai <hadai@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Classical generative models of graphs, based on random
graph theory (Erdős & Rényi, 1960; Barabási & Albert,
1999; Watts & Strogatz, 1998), have been long studied but
typically only capture a small set of specific graph properties, such as degree distribution. Despite their computational
efficiency, these distribution models are usually too inexpressive to yield competitive results in challenging applications.
Recently, deep graph generative models that exploit the
increased capacity of neural networks to learn more expressive graph distributions have been successfully applied to
real-world tasks. Prominent examples include VAE-based
methods (Kipf & Welling, 2016; Simonovsky & Komodakis,
2018), GAN-based methods (Bojchevski et al., 2018), flow
models (Liu et al., 2019; Shi et al., 2020) and autoregressive
models (Li et al., 2018; You et al., 2018; Liao et al., 2019).
Despite the success of these approaches in modeling small
graphs, e.g. molecules with hundreds of nodes, they are not
able to scale to graphs with over 10,000 nodes.
A key shortcoming of current deep graph generative models
is that they attempt to generate a full graph adjacency matrix,
implying a computational cost of Ω(n2 ) for a graph with n
nodes and m edges. For large graphs, it is impractical to
sustain such a quadratic time and space complexity, which
creates an inherent trade-off between expressiveness and
efficiency. To balance this trade-off, most recent work has
introduced various conditional independence assumptions
(Liao et al., 2019), ranging from the fully auto-regressive
but slow GraphRNN (You et al., 2018), to the fast but fully
factorial GraphVAE (Simonovsky & Komodakis, 2018).
In this paper, we propose an alternative approach that does
not commit to explicit conditional independence assumptions, but instead exploits the fact that most interesting realworld graphs are sparse, in the sense that m  n2 . By
leveraging sparsity, we develop a new graph generative
model, BiGG (BIg Graph Generation), that streamlines the
generative process and avoids explicit consideration of every entry in an adjacency matrix. The approach is based on
three key elements: (1) an O(log n) process for generating
each edge using a binary tree data structure, inspired by
R-MAT (Chakrabarti et al., 2004); (2) a tree-structured autoregressive model for generating the set of edges associated
with each node; and (3) an autoregressive model defined
over the sequence of nodes. By combining these elements,
BiGG can generate a sparse graph in O((n+m) log n) time,

