Do We Need Zero Training Loss After Achieving Zero Training Error?

Takashi Ishida 1 2 Ikko Yamane 1 Tomoya Sakai 3 Gang Niu 2 Masashi Sugiyama 2 1

Abstract
Overparameterized deep networks have the capacity to memorize training data with zero training
error. Even after memorization, the training loss
continues to approach zero, making the model
overconfident and the test performance degraded.
Since existing regularizers do not directly aim to
avoid zero training loss, it is hard to tune their hyperparameters in order to maintain a fixed/preset
level of training loss. We propose a direct solution
called flooding that intentionally prevents further
reduction of the training loss when it reaches a
reasonably small value, which we call the flood
level. Our approach makes the loss float around
the flood level by doing mini-batched gradient
descent as usual but gradient ascent if the training
loss is below the flood level. This can be implemented with one line of code and is compatible
with any stochastic optimizer and other regularizers. With flooding, the model will continue to
“random walk” with the same non-zero training
loss, and we expect it to drift into an area with
a flat loss landscape that leads to better generalization. We experimentally show that flooding
improves performance and, as a byproduct, induces a double descent curve of the test loss.

1. Introduction

(a) w/o Flooding
[A]

(b) w/ Flooding

[B]
test loss

training loss

test loss

training loss

[C]

flooded area
Epochs

(c) C10 w/o Flooding

Epochs

(d) C10 w/ Flooding

Figure 1. (a) shows 3 different concepts related to overfitting. [A]
shows the generalization gap increases, while the training and test
losses decrease. [B] also shows the increasing gap, but the test loss
starts to rise. [C] shows the training loss becoming (near-)zero.
We avoid [C] by flooding the bottom area, visualized in (b), which
forces the training loss to stay around a constant. This leads to
a decreasing test loss once again. We confirm these claims in
experiments with CIFAR-10 shown in (c)–(d).

loss is decreasing faster than the test loss ([A] in Fig. 1(a).)
The next stage is when the training loss is decreasing, but
the test loss is increasing.

1
The University of Tokyo 2 RIKEN 3 NEC Corporation. Correspondence to: Takashi Ishida <ishida@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.

Within stage [B], after learning for even more epochs, the
training loss will continue to decrease and may become
(near-)zero. This is shown as [C] in Fig. 1(a). If we continue
training even after the model has memorized (Zhang et al.,
2017; Arpit et al., 2017; Belkin et al., 2018) the training
data completely with zero error, the training loss can easily become (near-)zero especially with overparametrized
models. Recent works on overparametrization and double
descent curves (Belkin et al., 2019; Nakkiran et al., 2020)
have shown that learning until zero training error is meaningful to achieve a lower generalization error. However,
whether zero training loss is necessary after achieving zero
training error remains an open issue.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

In this paper, we propose a method to make the training
loss float around a small constant value, in order to prevent
the training loss from approaching zero. This is analogous

“Overfitting” is one of the biggest interests and concerns
in the machine learning community (Ng, 1997; Caruana
et al., 2000; Belkin et al., 2018; Roelofs et al., 2019; Werpachowski et al., 2019). One way of identifying overfitting
is to see whether the generalization gap, the test minus the
training loss, is increasing or not (Goodfellow et al., 2016).
We can further decompose the situation of the generalization
gap increasing into two stages: The first stage is when both
the training and test losses are decreasing, but the training

