A Distributional Framework for Data Valuation
Amirata Ghorbani * 1 Michael P. Kim * 2 James Zou 3

Abstract
Shapley value is a classic notion from game theory, historically used to quantify the contributions
of individuals within groups, and more recently
applied to assign values to data points when training machine learning models. Despite its foundational role, a key limitation of the data Shapley
framework is that it only provides valuations for
points within a fixed data set. It does not account
for statistical aspects of the data and does not give
a way to reason about points outside the data set.
To address these limitations, we propose a novel
framework – distributional Shapley – where the
value of a point is defined in the context of an
underlying data distribution. We prove that distributional Shapley has several desirable statistical
properties; for example, the values are stable under perturbations to the data points themselves
and to the underlying data distribution. We leverage these properties to develop a new algorithm
for estimating values from data, which comes
with formal guarantees and runs two orders of
magnitude faster than state-of-the-art algorithms
for computing the (non-distributional) data Shapley values. We apply distributional Shapley to
diverse data sets and demonstrate its utility in a
data market setting.

1. Introduction
As data becomes an essential driver of innovation and service, how to quantify the value of data is an increasingly
important topic of inquiry with policy, economic, and machine learning (ML) implications. In the policy arena, recent
proposals, such as the Dashboard Act in the U.S. Senate,
stipulate that large companies quantify the value of data
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering,
Stanford University, CA, USA 2 Department of Computer Science,
Stanford University, CA, USA 3 Department of Biomedical Data
Science, Stanford University, CA, USA. Correspondence to: James
Zou <jamesz@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

they collect. In the global economy, the business model of
many companies involves buying and selling data. For ML
engineering, it is often beneficial to know which type of
training data is most valuable and, hence, most deserving of
resources towards collection and annotation. As such, a principled framework for data valuation would be tremendously
useful in all of these domains.
Recent works initiated a formal study of data valuation in
ML (Ghorbani & Zou, 2019; Jia et al., 2019b). In a typical
setting, a data set B = {zi } is used to train a ML model,
which achieves certain performance, say classification accuracy 0.9. The data valuation problem is to assign credit
amongst the training set, so that each point gets an “equitable” share for its contribution towards achieving the 0.9
accuracy. Most works have focused on leveraging Shapley
value as the metric to quantify the contribution of individual
zi . The focus on Shapley value is in large part due to the fact
that Shapley uniquely satisfies basic properties for equitable
credit allocation (Shapley, 1953). Empirical experiments
also show that data Shapley is very effective – more so than
leave-one-out scores – at identifying points whose addition
or removal substantially impacts learning (Ghorbani et al.,
2017; Ghorbani & Zou, 2019).
At a high-level, prior works on data Shapley require three
ingredients: (1) a fixed training data set of m points; (2) a
learning algorithm; and (3) a performance metric that measures the overall value of a trained model. The goal of this
work is to significantly reduce the dependency on the first ingredient. While convenient, formulating the value based on
a fixed data set disregards crucial statistical considerations
and, thus, poses significant practical limitations.
In standard settings, we imagine that data is sampled from a
distribution D; measuring the Shapley value with respect to
a fixed data set ignores this underlying distribution. It also
means that the value of a data point computed within one
data set may not make sense when the point is transferred
to a new data set. If we actually want to buy and sell data,
then it is important that the value of a given data point
represents some intrinsic quality of the datum within the
distribution. For example, a data seller might determine that
z has high value based on their data set Bs and sell z to
a buyer at a high price. Even if the buyer’s data set Bb is
drawn from a similar distribution as Bs , the existing data
Shapley framework provides no guarantee of consistency

