Second-Order Provable Defenses against Adversarial Attacks

Sahil Singla 1 Soheil Feizi 1

Abstract

1

1. Introduction

A robustness certificate against adversarial examples is the minimum distance of a given input
to the decision boundary of the classifier (or its
lower bound). For any perturbation of the input
with a magnitude smaller than the certificate value,
the classification output will provably remain unchanged. Computing exact robustness certificates
for neural networks is difficult in general since it
requires solving a non-convex optimization. In
this paper, we provide computationally-efficient
robustness certificates for neural networks with
differentiable activation functions in two steps.
First, we show that if the eigenvalues of the Hessian of the network (curvatures of the network)
are bounded (globally or locally), we can compute a robustness certificate in the l2 norm efficiently using convex optimization. Second, we
derive a computationally-efficient differentiable
upper bound on the curvature of a deep network.
We also use the curvature bound as a regularization term during the training of the network to
boost its certified robustness. Putting these results
together leads to our proposed Curvature-based
Robustness Certificate (CRC) and Curvaturebased Robust Training (CRT). Our numerical results show that CRT leads to significantly higher
certified robust accuracy compared to intervalbound propagation (IBP) based training. We
achieve certified robust accuracy 69.79%, 57.78%
and 53.19% while IBP-based methods achieve
44.96%, 44.74% and 44.66% on 2,3 and 4 layer
networks respectively on the MNIST-dataset.

Modern neural networks achieve high accuracy on tasks
such as image classification and speech recognition, but are
known to be brittle to small, adversarially chosen perturbations of their inputs (Szegedy et al., 2014). A classifier
which correctly classifies an image x, can be fooled by an
adversary to misclassify an adversarial example x + δ, such
that x + δ is indistinguishable from x to a human. Adversarial examples can also fool systems when they are printed out
on a paper and photographed with a smart phone (Kurakin
et al., 2016a). Even in a black box threat model, where the
adversary has no access to the model parameters, attackers
could target autonomous vehicles by using stickers or paint
to create an adversarial stop sign that the vehicle would
interpret as a ‘yield’ or another sign (Papernot et al., 2016).
This trend is worrisome and suggests that adversarial vulnerabilities need to be appropriately addressed before neural
networks can be deployed in security critical applications.

Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College
Park. Correspondence to: Sahil Singla <ssingla@cs.umd.edu>,
Soheil Feizi <sfeizi@cs.umd.edu>.

Although the problem of finding the closest adversarial example to a given point for deep nets leads to a non-convex
optimization problem, our proposed Curvature-based Robustness Certificate (CRC), under some verifiable conditions, is able to compute points on the decision boundary
that are provably closest to the input. That is, it provides

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

In this work, we propose a new approach for developing
provable defenses against `2 -bounded adversarial attacks as
well as computing robustness certifications of pre-trained
deep networks with differentiable activations. In contrast
to the existing certificates (Weng et al., 2018; Zhang et al.,
2018b) that use the first-order information (upper and lower
bounds on the slope), our approach is based on the secondorder information (upper and lower bounds on curvature values i.e. eigenvalues of the Hessian). Our approach is based
on two key theoretically-justified steps: First, in Theorems 1
and 2, we show that if the eigenvalues of the Hessian of the
network (curvatures of the network) are bounded (globally
or locally), we can efficiently compute a robustness certificate and develop a defense method against `2 -bounded
adversarial attacks using convex optimization. Second, in
Theorem 4, we derive a computationally-efficient differentiable bound on the curvature (eigenvalues of the Hessian)
of a deep network. We derive this bound by explicitly characterizing the Hessian of a deep network in Lemma 1.

