Few-shot Domain Adaptation by Causal Mechanism Transfer

Takeshi Teshima 1 2 Issei Sato 1 2 Masashi Sugiyama 2 1

Abstract
We study few-shot supervised domain adaptation
(DA) for regression problems, where only a few labeled target domain data and many labeled source
domain data are available. Many of the current
DA methods base their transfer assumptions on
either parametrized distribution shift or apparent
distribution similarities, e.g., identical conditionals or small distributional discrepancies. However,
these assumptions may preclude the possibility
of adaptation from intricately shifted and apparently very different distributions. To overcome
this problem, we propose mechanism transfer, a
meta-distributional scenario in which a data generating mechanism is invariant across domains.
This transfer assumption can accommodate nonparametric shifts resulting in apparently different
distributions while providing a solid statistical
basis for DA. We take the structural equations
in causal modeling as an example and propose
a novel DA method, which is shown to be useful both theoretically and experimentally. Our
method can be seen as the first attempt to fully
leverage the structural causal models for DA.

Figure 1: Nonparametric generative model of nonlinear independent component analysis.
Our meta-distributional transfer
assumption is built on the model,
where there exists an invertible
function f representing the mechanism to generate the labeled
data (X, Y ) from the independent components (ICs), S, sampled from q. As a result, each pair
(f, q) defines a joint distribution
p.

Figure 2: Our assumption of common generative mechanism. By
capturing the common data generation mechanism, we enable
domain adaptation among seemingly very different distributions
without relying on parametric assumptions.

1. Introduction
Learning from a limited amount of data is a long-standing
yet actively studied problem of machine learning. Domain
adaptation (DA) (Ben-David et al., 2010) tackles this problem by leveraging auxiliary data sampled from related but
different domains. In particular, we consider few-shot supervised DA for regression problems, where only a few labeled
target domain data and many labeled source domain data
are available.
A key component of DA methods is the transfer assumption (TA) to relate the source and the target distributions.
1

The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan 2 RIKEN, Tokyo,
Japan. Correspondence to: Takeshi Teshima <teshima@ms.k.utokyo.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Many of the previously explored TAs have relied on certain
direct distributional similarities, e.g., identical conditionals (Shimodaira, 2000) or small distributional discrepancies
(Ben-David et al., 2007). However, these TAs may preclude
the possibility of adaptation from apparently very different
distributions. Many others assume parametric forms of the
distribution shift (Zhang et al., 2013) or the distribution family (Storkey & Sugiyama, 2007) which can highly limit the
considered set of distributions. (we further review related
work in Section 5.1).
To alleviate the intrinsic limitation of previous TAs due to
relying on apparent distribution similarities or parametric
assumptions, we focus on a meta-distributional scenario
where there exists a common generative mechanism behind
the data distributions (Figures 1,2). Such a common mechanism may be more conceivable in applications involving
structured table data such as medical records (Yadav et al.,

