More Data Can Expand the Generalization Gap
Between Adversarially Robust and Standard Models

Lin Chen * 1 Yifei Min * 2 Mingrui Zhang 2 Amin Karbasi 1

Abstract
Despite remarkable success in practice, modern
machine learning models have been found to
be susceptible to adversarial attacks that make
human-imperceptible perturbations to the data,
but result in serious and potentially dangerous prediction errors. To address this issue, practitioners
often use adversarial training to learn models that
are robust against such attacks at the cost of higher
generalization error on unperturbed test sets. The
conventional wisdom is that more training data
should shrink the gap between the generalization
error of adversarially-trained models and standard
models. However, we study the training of robust classifiers for both Gaussian and Bernoulli
models under `∞ attacks, and we prove that more
data may actually increase this gap. Furthermore,
our theoretical results identify if and when additional data will finally begin to shrink the gap.
Lastly, we experimentally demonstrate that our results also hold for linear regression models, which
may indicate that this phenomenon occurs more
broadly.

1. Introduction
As modern machine learning models continue to gain traction in the real world, a wide variety of novel problems
have come to the forefront of the research community. One
particularly important challenge has been that of adversarial
attacks (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2015; Kos
et al., 2018; Carlini & Wagner, 2018). To be specific, given
a model with excellent performance on a standard data set,
one can add small perturbations to the test data that can fool
the model and cause it to make wrong predictions. What is
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering,
Yale University 2 Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yale
University. Correspondence to: Lin Chen <lin.chen@yale.edu>,
Yifei Min <yifei.min@yale.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

more worrying is that these small perturbations can possibly
be designed to be imperceptible to human beings, which
raises concerns about potential safety issues and risks, especially when it comes to applications such as autonomous
vehicles where human lives are at stake.
The problem of adversarial robustness in machine learning
models has been explored from several different perspectives since its discovery. One direction has been to propose
attacks that challenge these models and their training procedures (Gu & Rigazio, 2015; Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016;
Papernot et al., 2016; Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Athalye
et al., 2018). In response, there have been works that propose more robust training techniques that can defend against
these adversarial attacks (He et al., 2017; Raghunathan et al.,
2018a;b; Shaham et al., 2018; Weng et al., 2018; Wong &
Kolter, 2018; Zhang et al., 2018; Cohen et al., 2019; Lecuyer
et al., 2019; Stutz et al., 2020). For robust training, one
promising approach is to treat the problem as a minimax
optimization problem, where we try to select model parameters that minimize the loss function under the strongest
feasible perturbations (Xu & Mannor, 2012; Madry et al.,
2018). Overall, adversarial training may be computationally
expensive (Bubeck et al., 2019; Nakkiran, 2019), but it can
lead to enhanced resistance towards adversarially modified
inputs.
Although adversarially robust models tend to outperform
standard models when it comes to perturbed test sets, recent
studies have found that such robust models are also likely to
perform worse on standard (unperturbed) test sets (Raghunathan et al., 2019; Tsipras et al., 2019). We refer to the
difference in test loss on unperturbed test sets as the cross
generalization gap. This paper focuses on the question of
whether or not this gap can be closed.
Theoretical work by Schmidt et al. (2018) has shown that
adversarial models require far more data than their standard
counterparts to reach a certain level of test accuracy. This
supports the general understanding that adversarial training
is harder than standard training, as well as the conventional
wisdom that more data helps with generalization. However,
when it comes to the cross generalization gap, things may
not be so simple.

