Inducing and Exploiting Activation Sparsity for Fast Neural Network Inference

Mark Kurtz * 1 Justin Kopinsky * 1 Rati Gelashvili 1 Alexander Matveev 1 John Carr 1 Michael Goin 1
William Leiserson 1 Sage Moore 1 Bill Nell 1 Nir Shavit 1 Dan Alistarh 1 2

Abstract
Optimizing deep neural networks for inference
has recently become an extremely active area
of research. One of the go-to solutions in this
context is weight pruning, which aims to reduce
computational and memory footprint by removing large subsets of the connections in a neural
network. Surprisingly, much less attention has
been given to exploiting sparsity in the activation
maps, which tend to be naturally sparse in many
settings thanks to the structure of rectified linear
(ReLU) activation functions. In this paper, we
present an analysis of methods for maximizing
the sparsity of the activations in a trained neural network, and show that, when coupled with
an efficient sparse-input convolution algorithm,
we can leverage this sparsity for significant performance gains. To induce highly sparse activation maps without accuracy loss, we introduce a
new regularization technique, coupled with a new
threshold-based sparsification method based on a
parameterized activation function called ForcedActivation-Threshold Rectified Linear Unit (FATReLU). We examine the impact of our methods
on popular image classification models, showing
that most architectures can adapt to significantly
sparser activation maps without any accuracy loss.
Our second contribution is showing that these
these compression gains can be translated into inference speedups: we provide a new algorithm to
enable fast convolution operations over networks
with sparse activations, and show that it can enable significant speedups for end-to-end inference
on a range of popular models on the large-scale
ImageNet image classification task on modern
Intel CPUs, with relatively low retraining cost.
*
Equal contribution 1 Neural Magic 2 IST Austria. Correspondence to: Dan Alistarh <dan@neuralmagic.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are able to achieve state-ofthe-art performance in several application domains, such
as image classification, speech recognition, and automated
decision making, e.g. (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Vaswani
et al., 2017; Silver et al., 2016). Along with this wide array of applications comes the need to reduce the significant
computational and memory footprint of DNNs. To this end,
several techniques have been designed to obtain optimized,
resource-efficient variants of a given deep model. Pruning and quantization are arguably the standard methods for
achieving resource-efficient models, which have received
considerable attention, e.g. (Liu et al., 2017; Luo et al., 2017;
Gray et al., 2017; Han et al., 2015; Li et al., 2016; Mishra
et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2016). However, the vast majority
of existing work has focused on compressing the weights
(connections) in the neural network, for which several regularization (Molchanov et al., 2017) and thresholding-based
methods (Han et al., 2015; Gale et al., 2019) are now known.
It is therefore perhaps surprising that sparsifying activation
maps has received relatively little attention. A non-trivial
fraction of the activations are sparse as a natural consequence of the structure of Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU)
activation functions. This observation has been leveraged
by hardware accelerators, e.g. (Albericio et al., 2016; Han
et al., 2016; Parashar et al., 2017), and reference (Rhu et al.,
2018) performed an analysis of naturally-occurring activation sparsity. Recently, (Georgiadis, 2019) explored L1
regularization to increase the number of zeroes in the activation maps, showing that sparsity can be increased by up
to 60% for image classification models.
A second gap in the literature is the absence of software
support for sparsity, and in particular activation sparsity, on
common hardware. Currently, running models with higher
activation sparsity rates on common CPU or GPU platforms
will not result in computational speedups, and improvements
are only reported in relative sparsity percentage, or synthetic
memory compression rates (Georgiadis, 2019). It is not at
all clear how these compression rates will relate to speedup
in real-world implementations, and it is therefore difficult
to evaluate the practical impact of existing methods.
In this paper, we address both these gaps with respect to

