Neural Contextual Bandits with UCB-based Exploration

Dongruo Zhou 1 Lihong Li 2 Quanquan Gu 1

Abstract
We study the stochastic contextual bandit problem, where the reward is generated from an unknown function with additive noise. No assumption is made about the reward function other
than boundedness. We propose a new algorithm,
NeuralUCB, which leverages the representation
power of deep neural networks and uses a neural
network-based random feature mapping to construct an upper confidence bound (UCB) of reward for efficient exploration. We prove that, under√standard assumptions, NeuralUCB achieves
e
O( T ) regret, where T is the number of rounds.
To the best of our knowledge, it is the first neural
network-based contextual bandit algorithm with a
near-optimal regret guarantee. We also show the
algorithm is empirically competitive against representative baselines in a number of benchmarks.

1. Introduction
The stochastic contextual bandit problem has been extensively studied in machine learning (Langford & Zhang,
2008; Bubeck & Cesa-Bianchi, 2012; Lattimore &
Szepesvári, 2019): at round t ∈ {1, 2, . . . , T }, an agent
is presented with a set of K actions, each of which is associated with a d-dimensional feature vector. After choosing
an action, the agent will receive a stochastic reward generated from some unknown distribution conditioned on the
action’s feature vector. The goal of the agent is to maximize
the expected cumulative rewards over T rounds. Contextual
bandit algorithms have been applied to many real-world
applications, such as personalized recommendation, advertising and Web search.
The most studied model in the literature is linear contextual
bandits (Auer, 2002; Abe et al., 2003; Dani et al., 2008;
Rusmevichientong & Tsitsiklis, 2010), which assumes that
1

Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA 2 Google Research, USA. Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu <qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

the expected reward at each round is linear in the feature
vector. While successful in both theory and practice (Li
et al., 2010; Chu et al., 2011; Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011),
the linear-reward assumption it makes often fails to hold in
practice, which motivates the study of nonlinear or nonparametric contextual bandits (Filippi et al., 2010; Srinivas et al.,
2010; Bubeck et al., 2011; Valko et al., 2013). However,
they still require fairly restrictive assumptions on the reward
function. For instance, Filippi et al. (2010) make a generalized linear model assumption on the reward, Bubeck et al.
(2011) require it to have a Lipschitz continuous property
in a proper metric space, and Valko et al. (2013) assume
the reward function belongs to some Reproducing Kernel
Hilbert Space (RKHS).
In order to overcome the above shortcomings, deep neural networks (DNNs) (Goodfellow et al., 2016) have been
introduced to learn the underlying reward function in contextual bandit problem, thanks to their strong representation
power. We call these approaches collectively as neural
contextual bandit algorithms. Given the fact that DNNs
enable the agent to make use of nonlinear models with less
domain knowledge, existing work (Riquelme et al., 2018;
Zahavy & Mannor, 2019) study neural-linear bandits. That
is, they use all but the last layers of a DNN as a feature map,
which transforms contexts from the raw input space to a
low-dimensional space, usually with better representation
and less frequent updates. Then they learn a linear exploration policy on top of the last hidden layer of the DNN with
more frequent updates. These attempts have achieved great
empirical success, but no regret guarantees are provided.
In this paper, we consider provably efficient neural contextual bandit algorithms. The new algorithm, NeuralUCB,
uses a neural network to learn the unknown reward function,
and follows a UCB strategy for exploration. At the core
of the algorithm is the novel use of DNN-based random
feature mappings to construct the UCB. Its regret analysis is
built on recent advances on optimization and generalization
of deep neural networks (Jacot et al., 2018; Arora et al.,
2019; Cao & Gu, 2019). Crucially, the analysis makes no
modeling assumptions about the reward function, other than
that it be bounded. While the main focus of our paper is
theoretical, we also show in a few benchmark problems the
effectiveness of NeuralUCB, and demonstrate its benefits
against several representative baselines.

