More Information Supervised Probabilistic Deep Face Embedding Learning

Ying Huang * 1 Shangfeng Qiu * 1 Wenwei Zhang 1 Xianghui Luo 1 Jinzhuo Wang 2

Abstract
Researches using margin based comparison loss
demonstrate the effectiveness of penalizing the
distance between face feature and their corresponding class centers. Despite their popularity
and excellent performance, they do not explicitly
encourage the generic embedding learning for an
open set recognition problem. In this paper, we
analyse margin based softmax loss in probability view. With this perspective, we propose two
general principles: 1) monotonically decreasing
and 2) margin probability penalty, for designing
new margin loss functions. Unlike methods optimized with single comparison metric, we provide
a new perspective to treat open set face recognition as a problem of information transmission.
And the generalization capability for face embedding is gained with more clean information. An
auto-encoder architecture called Linear-Auto-TSEncoder(LATSE) is proposed to corroborate this
finding. Extensive experiments on several benchmarks demonstrate that LATSE help face embedding to gain more generalization capability and
it boost the single model performance with open
training dataset to more than 99% on MegaFace
test.

1. Introduction
Face recognition performance has gained dramatic improvement in recent years. Margin based loss functions(Schroff
et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2017b) play an important role in this
process. The most common solutions treat face recognition as a classification problem. These works utilize deep
convolutional network, such as VGGNet (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014) or ResNet (He et al., 2016), to transfer the
landmark aligned face images to their corresponding class
*

1

Equal contribution Guangzhou Huya Technology Co., Ltd,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China 2 Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, Oxfordshire, United Kingdom.
Correspondence to: Ying Huang <huanying@huya.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Examples of generated frontal face from different identity. In rows top to bottom: original input face image, the generated
frontal face image from the corresponding feature, the absolute
difference between input image and the generated one.

label. And comparison loss function(Hadsell et al., 2006) is
employed in the learning process, such as softmax cross entropy loss. Recent researches demonstrate that we can gain
more discriminative face embedding by explicitly adding
margin to loss. FaceNet (Schroff et al., 2015) adds margin
by penalizing the distance between face feature and their
corresponding class centers in euclidean space (triplet loss).
While SphereFace (Liu et al., 2017b) penalizes this distance
in hyperspherical angle space (angular margin softmax loss).
However, all these methods strengthen the embedding learning process from the perspective of comparison. So these
recognition algorithms optimize single discriminative ability metric. At the same time, they do not give a general
guidance for new margin loss function designing.
While robust face embedding learning is an open set problem(Geng et al., 2018; Boult et al., 2019). We can not
involve images of all possible human identities in the training dataset. So we seek to solve some primary questions:
How to gain more discriminative power with appropriate
margin definition? Whether discriminative ability equals
generative capability in open set situation?
Following these questions, we firstly explore the effect of
margin in softmax cross entropy loss (Liu et al., 2016; Wang
et al., 2018b; Deng et al., 2019a) from probabilistic view.
Through detailed analysis, this work proposes two principles to guide the definition of new margin loss function. One
is monotonically decreasing. Let θ be the angle between
face feature and their class center. The definition of transformation function, which transforms θ to probability value,

