Causal Strategic Linear Regression

Yonadav Shavit 1 Benjamin L. Edelman 1 Brian Axelrod 2

Abstract
In many predictive decision-making scenarios,
such as credit scoring and academic testing, a
decision-maker must construct a model that accounts for agents’ propensity to “game” the decision rule by changing their features so as to
receive better decisions. Whereas the strategic
classification literature has previously assumed
that agents’ outcomes are not causally affected by
their features (and thus that strategic agents’ goal
is deceiving the decision-maker), we join concurrent work in modeling agents’ outcomes as a function of their changeable attributes. As our main
contribution, we provide efficient algorithms for
learning decision rules that optimize three distinct
decision-maker objectives in a realizable linear
setting: accurately predicting agents’ post-gaming
outcomes (prediction risk minimization), incentivizing agents to improve these outcomes (agent
outcome maximization), and estimating the coefficients of the true underlying model (parameter
estimation). Our algorithms circumvent a hardness result of Miller et al. (2020) by allowing
the decision maker to test a sequence of decision
rules and observe agents’ responses, in effect performing causal interventions through the decision
rules.

1. Introduction
As individuals, we want algorithmic transparency in decisions that affect us. Transparency lets us audit models for
fairness and correctness, and allows us to understand what
changes we can make to receive a different decision. Why,
then, are some models kept hidden from the view of those
subject to their decisions?
1
Harvard School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 Stanford Computer Science Department, Palo
Alto, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Yonadav Shavit <yonadav@g.harvard.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Beyond setting-specific concerns like intellectual property
theft or training-data extraction, the canonical answer is
that transparency would allow strategic individual agents
to “game” the model. These individual agents will act
to change their features to receive better decisions. An
accuracy-minded decision-maker, meanwhile, chooses a decision rule based on how well it predicts individuals’ true
future outcomes. Strategic agents, the conventional wisdom
goes, make superficial changes to their features that will
lead to them receiving more desirable decisions, but these
feature changes will not affect their true outcomes, reducing
the decision rule’s accuracy and harming the decision-maker.
The field of strategic classification (Hardt et al., 2016) has
until recently sought to design algorithms that are robust
to such superficial changes. At their core, these algorithms
treat transparency as a reluctant concession and propose
ways for decision-makers to get by nonetheless.
But what if decision-makers could benefit from transparency? What if in some settings, gaming could help
accomplish the decision-makers’ goals, by causing agents
to truly improve their outcomes without loss of predictive
accuracy?
Consider the case of car insurance companies, who wish to
choose a pricing decision rule that charges a customer in
line with the expected costs that customer will incur through
accidents. Insurers will often charge lower prices to drivers
who have completed a “driver’s ed” course, which teaches
comprehensive driving skills. In response, new drivers will
often complete such courses to reduce their insurance costs.
One view may be that only ex ante responsible drivers seek
out such courses, and that were an unsafe driver to complete
such a course it would not affect their expected cost of car
accidents.
But another interpretation is that drivers in these courses
learn safer driving practices, and truly become safer drivers
because they take the course. In this case, a car insurer’s decision rule remains predictive of accident probability when
agents strategically game the decision rule, while also incentivizing the population of drivers to act in a way that
truly causes them to have fewer accidents, which means the
insurer needs to pay out fewer reimbursements.
This same dynamic appears in many decision settings where
the decision-maker has a meaningful stake in the true future

