Generalization Error of Generalized Linear Models in High Dimensions

Melikasadat Emami 1 Mojtaba Sahraee-Ardakan 1 2 Parthe Pandit 1 2 Sundeep Rangan 3 Alyson K. Fletcher 1 2

Abstract

a class of generalized linear models (GLMs) of the form

At the heart of machine learning lies the question
of generalizability of learned rules over previously
unseen data. While over-parameterized models
based on neural networks are now ubiquitous in
machine learning applications, our understanding
of their generalization capabilities is incomplete
and this task is made harder by the non-convexity
of the underlying learning problems. We provide
a general framework to characterize the asymptotic generalization error for single-layer neural
networks (i.e., generalized linear models) with
arbitrary non-linearities, making it applicable to
regression as well as classification problems. This
framework enables analyzing the effect of (i) overparameterization and non-linearity during modeling; (ii) choices of loss function, initialization,
and regularizer during learning; and (iii) mismatch between training and test distributions. As
examples, we analyze a few special cases, namely
linear regression and logistic regression. We are
also able to rigorously and analytically explain
the double descent phenomenon in generalized
linear models.

y = φout ( x, w0 , d),

1. Introduction
A fundamental goal of machine learning is generalization:
the ability to draw inferences about unseen data from finite
training examples. Methods to quantify the generalization
error are therefore critical in assessing the performance of
any machine learning approach.
This paper seeks to characterize the generalization error for
Code available at:
https://github.com/
melikaemami/Generalization-Error-of-GLMs
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University
of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, USA 2 Department of
Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
USA 3 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, New
York University, Brooklyn, New York, USA. Correspondence to:
Melikasadat Emami <emami@ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

(1)

where x ∈ Rp is a vector of input features, y is a scalar output, w0 ∈ Rp are weights to be learned, φout (·) is a known
link function, and d is random noise. The notation x, w0
denotes an inner product. We use the superscript “0” to
denote the “true” values in contrast to estimated or postulated quantities. The output may be continuous or discrete
to model either regression or classification problems.
We measure the generalization error in a standard manner: we are given training data (xi , yi ), i = 1, . . . , N from
b via a regularized
which we learn some parameter estimate w
empirical risk minimization of the form
b = argmin Fout (y, Xw) + Fin (w),
w

(2)

w

where X = [x1 x2 . . . xN ]T , is the data matrix, Fout is
some output loss function, and Fin is some regularizer on
the weights. We are then given a new test sample, xts , for
which the true and predicted values are given by
yts = φout ( xts , w0 , dts ),

b
ybts = φ(hxts , wi),

(3)

where dts is the noise in the test sample, and φ(·) is a postulated inverse link function that may be different from the
true function φout (·). The generalization error is then defined as the expectation of some expected loss between yts
and ybts of the form
E fts (yts , ybts ),

(4)

for some test loss function fts (·) such as squared error or
prediction error.
Even for this relatively simple GLM model, the behavior
of the generalization error is not fully understood. Recent
works (Montanari et al., 2019; Deng et al., 2019; Mei &
Montanari, 2019; Salehi et al., 2019) have characterized
the generalization error of various linear models for classification and regression in certain large random problem
instances. Specifically, the number of samples N and number of features p both grow without bound with their ratio
satisfying p/N → β ∈ (0, ∞), and the samples in the
training data xi are drawn randomly. In this limit, the generalization error can be exactly computed. The analysis can

