DRWR: A Differentiable Renderer without Rendering for Unsupervised 3D
Structure Learning from Silhouette Images

Zhizhong Han 1 2 Chao Chen 1 Yu-Shen Liu 1 Matthias Zwicker 2

Abstract
Differentiable renderers have been used successfully for unsupervised 3D structure learning from
2D images because they can bridge the gap between 3D and 2D. To optimize 3D shape parameters, current renderers rely on pixel-wise losses
between rendered images of 3D reconstructions and ground truth images from corresponding
viewpoints. Hence they require interpolation of
the recovered 3D structure at each pixel, visibility handling, and optionally evaluating a shading
model. In contrast, here we propose a Differentiable Renderer Without Rendering (DRWR) that
omits these steps. DRWR only relies on a simple
but effective loss that evaluates how well the projections of reconstructed 3D point clouds cover
the ground truth object silhouette. Specifically,
DRWR employs a smooth silhouette loss to pull
the projection of each individual 3D point inside
the object silhouette, and a structure-aware repulsion loss to push each pair of projections that fall
inside the silhouette far away from each other. Although we omit surface interpolation, visibility
handling, and shading, our results demonstrate
that DRWR achieves state-of-the-art accuracies
under widely used benchmarks, outperforming
previous methods both qualitatively and quantitatively. In addition, our training times are significantly lower due to the simplicity of DRWR.

1. Introduction
Learning to represent and reconstruct 3D structure is a core
problem in 3D computer vision. Supervised deep learning
methods (Mescheder et al., 2019; Qi et al., 2017a;b; Wang
1
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing
100084, P. R. China 2 Department of Computer Science, University
of Maryland, College Park, USA. Correspondence to: Yu-Shen
Liu <liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

et al., 2019) have been highly successful by directly learning
from 3D data provided as meshes, point clouds, or voxel
volumes. However, these methods require large amounts of
3D data in training, which is expensive and time consuming
to obtain. In contrast, unsupervised 3D structure learning,
that is, 3D structure learning without 3D supervision, is an
attractive and promising alternative because it requires only
images as training data.
Differentiable renderers (Insafutdinov & Dosovitskiy, 2018;
L. et al., 2019; Navaneet et al., 2019; Yifan et al., 2019)
are a core component of unsupervised 3D structure learning
methods. They can bridge the gap between 3D to 2D by
enabling the computation of gradients of 2D loss functions
with respect to 3D structure. 2D loss functions are usually defined based on differences in RGB pixel values or
pixel-wise silhouette coverage. By rendering a predicted 3D
structure from a specific view angle into an image, and then
evaluating a loss function based on the difference between
the rendered and ground truth image, the parameters of deep
learning models can be optimized to recover 3D structures
that are consistent with the ground truth image, as illustrated
in Fig. 1(a). To evaluate pixel-wise loss functions, previous
techniques render images using some form of interpolation
of the recovered 3D structure at each pixel, such as rasterization, visibility handling (e.g., z-buffering), and optionally
per-pixel shading. For point cloud reconstruction, differentiable renderers have been proposed based on rasterizing
Gaussian functions into 3D grids (Insafutdinov & Dosovitskiy, 2018) and on 2D planes (L. et al., 2019; Navaneet et al.,
2019), or using surface splatting (Yifan et al., 2019). While
pixel-wise interpolation, visibility handling, and shading in
these approaches significantly increase the computational
cost, one of our main insights here is that these steps do not
actually contribute to accurate 3D structure learning.
To show this, we propose a Differentiable Renderer Without Rendering (DRWR) for unsupervised 3D point cloud
reconstruction from 2D silhouette images. In contrast to
pixel-wise losses in previous differentiable renderers, DRWR produces a loss only from the 2D projections of the 3D
points, without pixel-wise interpolation, visibility handling,
or shading, as shown in Fig. 1(b). Intuitively, the DRWR
loss captures how well the projected points cover the object

