Evaluating the Performance of Reinforcement Learning Algorithms

Scott M. Jordan 1 Yash Chandak 1 Daniel Cohen 1 Mengxue Zhang 1 Philip S. Thomas 1

Abstract
Performance evaluations are critical for quantifying algorithmic advances in reinforcement learning. Recent reproducibility analyses have shown
that reported performance results are often inconsistent and difficult to replicate. In this work, we
argue that the inconsistency of performance stems
from the use of flawed evaluation metrics. Taking a step towards ensuring that reported results
are consistent, we propose a new comprehensive
evaluation methodology for reinforcement learning algorithms that produces reliable measurements of performance both on a single environment and when aggregated across environments.
We demonstrate this method by evaluating a broad
class of reinforcement learning algorithms on standard benchmark tasks.

1. Introduction
When applying reinforcement learning (RL), particularly to
real-world applications, it is desirable to have algorithms
that reliably achieve high levels of performance without requiring expert knowledge or significant human intervention.
For researchers, having algorithms of this type would mean
spending less time tuning algorithms to solve benchmark
tasks and more time developing solutions to harder problems. Current evaluation practices do not properly account
for the uncertainty in the results (Henderson et al., 2018)
and neglect the difficulty of applying RL algorithms to a
given problem. Consequently, existing RL algorithms are
difficult to apply to real-world applications (Dulac-Arnold
et al., 2019). To both make and track progress towards developing reliable and easy-to-use algorithms, we propose a
principled evaluation procedure that quantifies the difficulty
of using an algorithm.
For an evaluation procedure to be useful for measuring the
1

College of Information and Computer Sciences, University
of Massachusetts, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Scott Jordan
<sjordan@cs.umass.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

usability of RL algorithms, we suggest that it should have
four properties. First, to ensure accuracy and reliability,
an evaluation procedure should be scientific, such that it
provides information to answer a research question, tests
a specific hypothesis, and quantifies any uncertainty in the
results. Second, the performance metric captures the usability of the algorithm over a wide variety of environments.
For a performance metric to capture the usability of an algorithm, it should include the time and effort spent tuning the
algorithm’s hyperparameters (e.g., step-size and policy structure). Third, the evaluation procedure should be nonexploitative (Balduzzi et al., 2018), meaning no algorithm should be
favored by performing well on an over-represented subset
of environments or by abusing a particular score normalization method. Fourth, an evaluation procedure should be
computationally tractable, meaning that a typical researcher
should be able to run the procedure and repeat experiments
found in the literature.
As an evaluation procedure requires a question to answer, we
pose the following to use throughout the paper: which algorithm(s) perform well across a wide variety of environments
with little or no environment-specific tuning? Throughout
this work, we refer to this question as the general evaluation question. This question is different from the one
commonly asked in articles proposing a new algorithm, e.g.,
the common question is, can algorithm X outperform other
algorithms on tasks A, B, and C? In contrast to the common
question, the expected outcome for the general evaluation
question is not to find methods that maximize performance
with optimal hyperparameters but to identify algorithms that
do not require extensive hyperparameter tuning and thus are
easy to apply to new problems.
In this paper, we contend that the standard evaluation approaches do not satisfy the above properties, and are not
able to answer the general evaluation question. Thus, we
develop a new procedure for evaluating RL algorithms that
overcomes these limitations and can accurately quantify the
uncertainty of performance. The main ideas in our approach
are as follows. We present an alternative view of an algorithm such that sampling its performance can be used to
answer the general evaluation question. We define a new
normalized performance measure, performance percentiles,
which uses a relative measure of performance to compare
algorithms across environments. We show how to use a

