Counterfactual Cross-Validation:
Stable Model Selection Procedure for Causal Inference Models
Yuta Saito 1 Shota Yasui 2

Abstract
We study the model selection problem in conditional average treatment effect (CATE) prediction.
Unlike previous works on this topic, we focus on
preserving the rank order of the performance of
candidate CATE predictors to enable accurate and
stable model selection. To this end, we analyze
the model performance ranking problem and formulate guidelines to obtain a better evaluation
metric. We then propose a novel metric that can
identify the ranking of the performance of CATE
predictors with high confidence. Empirical evaluations demonstrate that our metric outperforms
existing metrics in both model selection and hyperparameter tuning tasks.

1. Introduction
Predicting conditional average treatment effect (CATE) for
certain actions is essential for optimizing metrics of interest
in various domains. In digital marketing, incrementality
is becoming increasingly important as a performance metric (Diemert et al., 2018). For instance, for a given product,
users who will be shown its ads should be chosen based on
CATE. It can help avoid showing ads to a user who will
buy that product even without seeing the ads. There can be
significant applications of CATE prediction in the healthcare segment as well (Alaa & van der Schaar, 2017). This
is because, for pursuing an optimal precision medicine, we
need to know which treatments will be beneficial or harmful
for a particular patient.
To achieve high-accuracy CATE prediction, one has to address the fundamental problem of causal inference, which
is that both treated and untreated outcomes can never be observed simultaneously from the same unit (Holland, 1986).
Hence we are unable to observe a causal effect and to use it
1

Tokyo Institute of Technology, 2 CyberAgent, Inc. Correspondence to: Yuta Saito <saito.y.bj@m.titech.ac.jp>, Shota Yasui
<yasui shota@cyberagent.co.jp>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

as label to train prediction models. Most previous studies
related to the CATE prediction focused on developing methods that can address this fundamental problem and achieve
high prediction accuracy (Yoon et al., 2018; Yao et al., 2018;
Louizos et al., 2017; Shalit et al., 2017; Du et al., 2019; Alaa
& Schaar, 2018).
In model evaluation and selection, the fundamental problem
of causal inference poses an additional critical challenge.
Because labels are not observed directly, we are unable to
calculate loss metrics such as mean squared error (MSE).
Therefore, data-driven validation procedures such as crossvalidation are not directly applicable to model selection and
hyperparameter tuning of CATE prediction models. This
makes it challenging to identify the suitable model and
appropriate hyperparameter values that should be used when
applying CATE prediction to real-world problems.
Several prior studies tackle the model evaluation problem in
CATE prediction. (Gutierrez & Gérardy, 2017) proposed
using the inverse probability weighting (IPW) outcome as
the pseudo-label for the true CATE for the calculation of an
evaluation metric. (Schuler et al., 2018) used the loss function of R-learner (Nie & Wager, 2017) for the evaluation.
(Alaa & Van Der Schaar, 2019) used influence functions to
obtain a more efficient estimator for the loss. These works
are mainly focused on improving the accuracy of estimating
the evaluation metric of interest.
Unlike previous works, we focus on choosing the best model
or hyperparameters from potential candidates. For this purpose, we only need to know the rank order of the performance of candidate predictors, which is easier than directly
estimating the true performance. To achieve this, we first
theoretically analyze the problem of ranking the true performance of CATE predictors and identify the conditions that
an ideal metric should satisfy. Building on the analysis, we
propose a novel evaluation procedure that preserves the true
performance ranking of candidate predictors and minimizes
the upper bound of the finite sample uncertainty in model selection. Through empirical evaluations, we demonstrate that
the proposed metric performs better than existing heuristic
metrics in model selection and hyperparameter tuning of
CATE predictors.

