Information Particle Filter Tree: An Online Algorithm for POMDPs
with Belief-Based Rewards on Continuous Domains

Johannes Fischer * 1 2 Ömer Şahin Taş * 1 2

Abstract
Planning in Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs) inherently gathers the
information necessary to act optimally under uncertainties. The framework can be extended to
model pure information gathering tasks by considering belief-based rewards. This allows us to
use reward shaping to guide POMDP planning
to informative beliefs by using a weighted combination of the original reward and the expected
information gain as the objective. In this work
we propose a novel online algorithm, Information
Particle Filter Tree (IPFT), to solve problems with
belief-dependent rewards on continuous domains.
It simulates particle-based belief trajectories in a
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) approach to
construct a search tree in the belief space. The
evaluation shows that the consideration of information gain greatly improves the performance
in problems where information gathering is an
essential part of the optimal policy.

Index Terms — Continuous POMDP, Planning, Monte Carlo
Tree Search, Particle Filter Tree, IPFT, Reward Shaping,
Information Gathering.

1. Introduction
Uncertainty is decisive in many decision making problems.
While information retrieval is the sole objective of some
problems, in others it is only a means to disambiguate the
current situation and select optimal actions. These types of
problem can be modeled with POMDPs. The optimal policy
for many POMDPs can be found only approximately since
finding the exact solution is computationally intractable (Pa*
Equal contribution 1 Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT),
Karlsruhe, Germany 2 FZI Research Center for Information Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany. Correspondence to: Johannes Fischer
<johannes.fischer@kit.edu>, Ömer Şahin Taş <tas@fzi.de>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

padimitriou & Tsitsiklis, 1987). In real-world applications,
planning algorithms frequently have to deal with (1) problems on continuous domains and (2) a limited time available
for online planning.
Online algorithms for large or continuous state spaces are derived from MCTS, the most prominent ones being POMCP
(Silver & Veness, 2010), DESPOT (Somani et al., 2013),
and ABT (Kurniawati & Yadav, 2016). Besides having
continuous state spaces, many problems in robotics are
modeled with continuous observation spaces. The further
development of the mentioned algorithms resulted in the
state-of-the-art solvers POMCPOW and PFT-DPW (Sunberg & Kochenderfer, 2018) and DESPOT-α (Garg et al.,
2019), which can deal with continuous state and observation
spaces and therefore solve the first issue.
While MCTS-based algorithms are capable of solving problems online, they can suffer from suboptimal behavior when
limited planning time is available. This problem arises when
rewards are sparse, e.g. only indicate success or failure at
the end of each episode. Hence, the planning algorithm
is required to explore many suboptimal paths until finding
promising actions, especially in problems with high uncertainty. To resolve this issue, Potential-Based Reward
Shaping (PBRS) can be used to implicitly guide the agent
to large future rewards (Eck et al., 2016). The potentials
are functions over beliefs and reflect how much reward
can potentially be gained in a certain situation. This additional guidance considerably speeds up planning and thus
addresses the second issue.
In this paper, we propose to combine PBRS with MCTS for
solving POMDPs on continuous spaces. This tackles the
two issues mentioned for planning in real-world problems.
Previous research has only considered reward shaping for
problems on discrete spaces. We use potentials based on
information measures to guide the agent to informative beliefs. Since information gathering is typically part of the
optimal policy, this significantly helps to solve the problem.
The resulting belief-based reward functions can be modeled
within the ρPOMDP framework, for which solution methods
only exist for discrete problems (Araya-López et al., 2010).
For this reason, we develop a novel online algorithm, Information Particle Filter Tree (IPFT), for solving ρPOMDPs

