Minimax Pareto Fairness: A Multi Objective Perspective
Natalia Martinez * 1 Martin Bertran * 1 Guillermo Sapiro 1

Abstract
In this work we formulate and formally characterize group fairness as a multi-objective optimization problem, where each sensitive group risk is
a separate objective. We propose a fairness criterion where a classifier achieves minimax risk and
is Pareto-efficient w.r.t. all groups, avoiding unnecessary harm, and can lead to the best zero-gap
model if policy dictates so. We provide a simple
optimization algorithm compatible with deep neural networks to satisfy these constraints. Since
our method does not require test-time access to
sensitive attributes, it can be applied to reduce
worst-case classification errors between outcomes
in unbalanced classification problems. We test
the proposed methodology on real case-studies
of predicting income, ICU patient mortality, skin
lesions classification, and assessing credit risk,
demonstrating how our framework compares favorably to other approaches.

1. Introduction
Machine learning algorithms play an important role in decision making in society. When these are used to make
high-impact decisions such as hiring, credit-lending, predicting mortality for intensive care unit patients, or classifying
skin lesions, it is paramount to guarantee that the prediction
is both accurate and unbiased with respect to sensitive attributes such as gender or ethnicity. A model that is trained
naively may not have these properties by default; see, for
example (Barocas & Selbst, 2016).
In these critical applications, it is desirable to impose some
fairness criteria. Some well-known definitions of group
fairness in the machine learning literature attempt to make
algorithms whose predictions are independent of the sensitive populations (e.g., Demographic Parity, (Louizos et al.,
2015; Zemel et al., 2013; Feldman et al., 2015)); or al*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electircal and Computer
Engineering, Duke University. Correspondence to: Natalia Martinez <natalia.martinez@duke.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

gorithms whose outputs are independent of the sensitive
attribute given the objective’s ground truth (e.g., Equality of
Odds, Equality of Opportunity, (Hardt et al., 2016; Woodworth et al., 2017)). Notions of Individual Fairness have
also been proposed (Dwork et al., 2012; Joseph et al., 2016;
Zemel et al., 2013). These can be appropriate in many scenarios, but in domains where quality of service is paramount,
such as healthcare, we argue that it is necessary to strive for
models that are as close to fair as possible without introducing unnecessary harm (Ustun et al., 2019). Additionally, a
model satisfying these characteristics can be post-processed
to introduce a controlled performance degradation that results in a perfectly fair, albeit harmful classifier. This is a
decision beyond algorithmic design and is left to the policymaker, but machine-learning should inform fairness policy
and provide the necessary tools to implement it.
Here we focus on group fairness in terms of predictive risk
disparities, a metric that has been explored in recent works
such as (Calders & Verwer, 2010; Dwork et al., 2012; Feldman et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2018; Ustun et al., 2019). We
formulate fairness as a Multi-Objective Optimization Problem and use Pareto optimality (Mas-Colell et al., 1995) to
define the set of all efficient classifiers, meaning that the
increase in predictive risk on one group is due to a decrease
in the risk of another (no unnecessary harm). We consider
problems where target labels available for training are trustworthy (not affected by discrimination), and tackle fairness
as a minimax problem where the goal is to find the classifier
with the smallest maximum group risk among all efficient
models. As a design choice, this implies that a system’s risk
is as good as its worst group performance, but we do not
enforce zero risk disparity if the disadvantaged groups do
not benefit directly. When perfect fairness is achievable, this
reduces to finding the efficient classifier in our hypothesis
class that has the same risks among all groups. Our approach
differs from post-hoc correction methods like the ones proposed in (Hardt et al., 2016; Woodworth et al., 2017), where
zero-disparity is enforced by design, and test-time access to
sensitive attributes is needed. Since our proposed methodology does not require the latter, and is not restricted to
binary sensitive and target variables, it can also be used to
reduce worst-case classification error between outcomes in
imbalanced classification scenarions.

