Graph Filtration Learning

Christoph D. Hofer 1 Florian Graf 1 Bastian Rieck 2 Marc Niethammer 3 Roland Kwitt 1
Gradient

Abstract
We propose an approach to learning with graphstructured data in the problem domain of graph
classification. In particular, we present a novel
type of readout operation to aggregate node features into a graph-level representation. To this
end, we leverage persistent homology computed
via a real-valued, learnable, filter function. We establish the theoretical foundation for differentiating through the persistent homology computation.
Empirically, we show that this type of readout
operation compares favorably to previous techniques, especially when the graph connectivity
structure is informative for the learning problem.

1. Introduction
We consider the task of learning a function from the space
of (finite) undirected graphs, G, to a (discrete/continuous)
target domain Y. Additionally, graphs might have discrete,
or continuous attributes attached to each node. Prominent
examples for this class of learning problem appear in the
context of classifying molecule structures, chemical compounds or social networks.
A substantial amount of research has been devoted to developing techniques for supervised learning with graphstructured data, ranging from kernel-based methods (Shervashidze et al., 2009; 2011; Feragen et al., 2013; Kriege
et al., 2016), to more recent approaches based on graph
neural networks (GNN) (Scarselli et al., 2009; Hamilton
et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2018b; Morris et al., 2019; Xu
et al., 2019; Ying et al., 2018). Most of the latter works use
an iterative message passing scheme (Gilmer et al., 2017)
to learn node representations, followed by a graph-level
pooling operation that aggregates node-level features. This
aggregation step is typically referred to as a readout opera1
Department of Computer Science, University of Salzburg,
Austria 2 Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering,
ETH Zurich, Switzerland 3 UNC Chapel Hill. Correspondence
to: Christoph D. Hofer <chr.dav.hofer@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

B0

f (θ, K, v)

v

v

Input graph G

phfk

B0∞

k = 0, 1

B1∞
Barcodes

V

MLP

L

Classifier
Vectorization

Homological readout

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed homological readout. Given a
graph/simplicial complex, we use a vertex-based graph functional
f to assign a real-valued score to each node. A practical choice
is to implement f as a GNN, with one level of message passing.
We then compute persistence barcodes, Bk , using the filtration
induced by f . Finally, barcodes are fed through a vectorization
scheme V and passed to a classifier (e.g., an MLP). Our approach
allows passing a learning signal through the persistent homology
computation, allowing to optimize f for the classification task.

tion. While research has mostly focused on variants of the
message passing function, the readout step may have a significant impact, as it aims to capture properties of the entire
graph. Importantly, both simple and more refined readout
operations, such as summation, differentiable pooling (Ying
et al., 2018), or sort pooling (Zhang et al., 2018a), are inherently coupled to the amount of information carried over via
multiple rounds of message passing. Hence, architectural
GNN choices are typically guided by dataset characteristics, e.g., requiring to tune the number of message passing
rounds to the expected size of graphs.
Contribution. We propose a homological readout operation that captures the full global structure of a graph, while
relying only on node representations learned from immediate neighbors. This not only alleviates the aforementioned
design challenge, but potentially offers additional discriminative information. Similar to previous works, we consider
a graph, G, as a simplicial complex, K, and use persistent
homology (Edelsbrunner & Harer, 2010) to capture homological changes that occur when constructing the graph one
part at a time (i.e., revealing changes in the number of connected components or loops). As this hinges on an ordering
of the parts, prior works rely on a suitable filter function
f : K → R to establish this ordering. Our idea differs in

