Scalable Differentiable Physics for Learning and Control
Yi-Ling Qiao 1 Junbang Liang 1 Vladlen Koltun 2 Ming C. Lin 1

Abstract
Differentiable physics is a powerful approach to
learning and control problems that involve physical objects and environments. While notable
progress has been made, the capabilities of differentiable physics solvers remain limited. We
develop a scalable framework for differentiable
physics that can support a large number of objects and their interactions. To accommodate objects with arbitrary geometry and topology, we
adopt meshes as our representation and leverage
the sparsity of contacts for scalable differentiable
collision handling. Collisions are resolved in localized regions to minimize the number of optimization variables even when the number of
simulated objects is high. We further accelerate implicit differentiation of optimization with
nonlinear constraints. Experiments demonstrate
that the presented framework requires up to two
orders of magnitude less memory and computation in comparison to recent particle-based methods. We further validate the approach on inverse
problems and control scenarios, where it outperforms derivative-free and model-free baselines by
at least an order of magnitude.

1. Introduction
Differentiable physics enables gradient-based learning systems to strictly adhere to physical dynamics. By making
physics simulation differentiable, we can backpropagate
through the physical consequences of actions. This enables
agents to quickly learn to achieve desired effects in the physical world. It is also a principled and effective approach to
inverse problems that involve physical systems (Degrave
et al., 2019; de Avila Belbute-Peres et al., 2018; Toussaint
et al., 2018; Schenck & Fox, 2018).
1
University of Maryland, College Park 2 Intel Labs. Correspondence to: Yi-Ling Qiao, Junbang Liang, and Ming
C. Lin <{yilingq,liangjb,lin}@cs.umd.edu>, Vladlen Koltun
<vladlen.koltun@intel.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Recent efforts have significantly advanced the understanding
of differentiable physics in machine learning and robotics.
Automatic differentiation and analytical methods have been
applied to derive a variety of differentiable simulation engines (Ingraham et al., 2019; Liang et al., 2019; Holl et al.,
2020; Hu et al., 2020). Yet existing differentiable frameworks are still limited in their ability to simulate complex
scenes composed of many detailed interacting objects. For
example, modeling assumptions have limited some existing frameworks to restricted object classes, such as balls or
two-dimensional polygons (de Avila Belbute-Peres et al.,
2018; Degrave et al., 2019). Other approaches adopt expressive grid- or particle-based formulations, which are general
in principle but have not scaled to detailed simulation of
large scenes due to the cubic growth rates of volumetric
grids and particles (Mrowca et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2019;
Li et al., 2019a). For example, a grid of size 10243 has on
the order of a billion elements, and this resolution is still
quite coarse in comparison to the scale and detail of physical environments we encounter in daily life, such as city
streets. Particle-based representations likewise suffer from
explosive growth rates or limited resolution: Macklin et al.
(2014) suggest a maximum size ratio of 1:10 between the
smallest and largest feature, or placing particles only around
boundaries, which runs the risk of object tunneling.
In this paper, we develop a differentiable physics framework
that addresses these limitations. We adopt meshes as a
general representation of objects. Meshes are the most
widely used specification for object geometry in computer
graphics and scientific computing. Meshes are inherently
sparse, can model objects of any shape, and can compactly
specify environments with both large spatial extent and
highly detailed features (Botsch et al., 2010).
The use of meshes brings up the challenge of collision handling, since collisions can occur anywhere on the surface
of the mesh. Prior frameworks adopted global LCP-based
formulations, which severely limited scalability (Degrave
et al., 2019; de Avila Belbute-Peres et al., 2018). In contrast, we leverage the structure of contacts by grouping them
into localized impact zones, which can be efficiently represented and processed (Bridson et al., 2002; Harmon et al.,
2008). This substantially reduces the number of variables
and constraints involved in specifying dynamical scenes and
dramatically speeds up backpropagation.

