A Flexible Latent Space Model for Multilayer Networks

Xuefei Zhang 1 Songkai Xue 1 Ji Zhu 1

Abstract
Entities often interact with each other through
multiple types of relations, which can be represented as multilayer networks. Multilayer networks among the same set of nodes usually share
common structures, while each layer can also possess its distinct node connecting behaviors. This
paper proposes a ﬂexible latent space model for
multilayer networks for the purpose of capturing
such characteristics. Speciﬁcally, the proposed
model embeds each node with a latent vector
shared among layers and a layer-speciﬁc effect for
each layer; both elements together with a layerspeciﬁc connectivity matrix determine edge formations. To ﬁt the model, we develop a projected
gradient descent algorithm for efﬁcient parameter
estimation. We also establish theoretical properties of the maximum likelihood estimators and
show that the upper bound of the common latent
structure’s estimation error is inversely proportional to the number of layers under mild conditions. The superior performance of the proposed
model is demonstrated through simulation studies
and applications to two real-world data examples.

1. Introduction
Network data represent relationships among entities and are
ubiquitous in various ﬁelds, such as social media, neuroscience, and computer science (Newman, 2010; Kolaczyk &
Csárdi, 2014). In many applications, individuals often interact with each other through more than one type of relations.
For example, people can be coworkers or friends (Lazega
et al., 2001); or interactions among individuals can happen through social activities or money exchanges (Banerjee
et al., 2013). Multiple types of relationships among entities
naturally introduce multilayer networks, where different networks share matched node set, while each single network
1
Department of Statistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
MI, USA. Correspondence to: Ji Zhu <jizhu@umich.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

has a distinct edge type deﬁned through a type of relationship. Tools designed for a single network can be naively
used to deal with multilayer networks in two ways: either aggregating multiple layers into a single network or analyzing
each single network separately. However, aggregating multilayer networks may lose the speciﬁc information contained
in each layer, while analyzing each network separately does
not leverage the information that may be shared across different relations. Therefore, it is of importance to design
tailored tools for multilayer network data.
Real-world multilayer networks are often observed with
both homogeneity shared between different layers and heterogeneity retained within each layer. For example, nodes
usually have their own intrinsic traits that are consistent
across different relations, and at the same time, speciﬁc
activity levels of individual nodes and the overall network
connecting characteristics, such as the edge density or homophily patterns, may vary across different layers. Figure 3
provides an example on multiple social networks among the
same set of people and demonstrates the heterogeneous node
individual behaviors in different social relations. In this paper, we propose a ﬂexible model for multilayer networks
which uses the latent space model for a single network (Hoff
et al., 2002) as building blocks, with the goal of capturing
aforementioned observed characteristics for multilayer networks. Speciﬁcally, we assume each node is represented by
a common latent vector shared across layers such that the
commonality among layers is kept. Moreover, we assume
within each layer, nodes have layer-speciﬁc individual effects and connecting patterns, accommodating distinctions
between layers. Model speciﬁcations and a scalable model
ﬁtting algorithm are introduced in Section 3. In Section 4,
we establish theoretical properties of the maximum likelihood estimators of the proposed model. In particular, we
study the relationship between the estimation of nodes’ common latent representations and the number of layers. The
theoretical properties are further supported by simulation
studies in Section 5. We also demonstrate the performance
of the proposed model in terms of latent variables estimation
and link prediction on real-world examples in Section 6.
The main contributions of this paper include two aspects.
The ﬁrst one is on the model speciﬁcation. Our proposed
model is more ﬂexible in comparison to existing models in
the literature (summarized in Section 2) in the sense that it

