Dispersed Exponential Family Mixture VAEs for Interpretable Text Generation

Wenxian Shi 1 Hao Zhou 1 Ning Miao 1 Lei Li 1

Abstract
Deep generative models are commonly used for
generating images and text. Interpretability of
these models is one important pursuit, other than
the generation quality. Variational auto-encoder
(VAE) with Gaussian distribution as prior has
been successfully applied in text generation, but
it is hard to interpret the meaning of the latent
variable. To enhance the controllability and interpretability, one can replace the Gaussian prior
with a mixture of Gaussian distributions (GMVAE), whose mixture components could be related to hidden semantic aspects of data. In this
paper, we generalize the practice and introduce
DEM-VAE, a class of models for text generation using VAEs with a mixture distribution of
exponential family. Unfortunately, a standard
variational training algorithm fails due to the
mode-collapse problem. We theoretically identify the root cause of the problem and propose
an effective algorithm to train DEM-VAE. Our
method penalizes the training with an extra dispersion term to induce a well-structured latent
space. Experimental results show that our approach does obtain a meaningful space, and it
outperforms strong baselines in text generation
benchmarks. The code is available at https:
//github.com/wenxianxian/demvae.

1. Introduction
Text generation is one of the most challenging problems
in Natural Language Processing (NLP), which is widely
applied to tasks such as machine translation (Brown et al.,
1993) and dialog system (Young et al., 2013). Though
generation quality is the main concern of most work, the
interpretability for generation process is also of great im1
ByteDance AI lab.
Correspondence to:
Wenxian Shi <shiwenxian@bytedance.com>,
Hao Zhou
<zhouhao.nlp@bytedance.com>,
Ning Miao <miaoning@bytedance.com>, Lei Li <lileilab@bytedance.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

portance. Interpretable generation models could explore
the latent data structures, such as topics (Wang et al., 2019)
and dialog actions (Zhao et al., 2018b), and uses them to
guide text classification and further generation. Among
deep generative models, variational auto-encoder (Kingma
& Welling, 2013; Rezende et al., 2014, VAE) is especially
suitable for interpretable text generation because it maps
sentences to a regularized latent variable z, which can be
used to derive interpretable structures (Bowman et al., 2016;
Miao et al., 2016; Semeniuta et al., 2017; Xu & Durrett,
2018).
However, the continuous latent variable z of vanilla VAE
makes it difficult to interpret discrete attributes, such as
topics and dialog actions. Recently, Zhao et al. (2018b)
propose to replace the continuous latent variable with a
discrete one for better interpretation in generating dialog,
where the discrete latent variable represents the dialog actions in their system, producing promising results even in
an unsupervised setting. Unfortunately, the expressiveness
of VAE with only a discrete latent variable c is very limited.
It only contains log(#c) bits of information, where #c is
the number of all possible values of c. So it is impossible
for discrete VAE to express the complicated sentence space.
To solve the above concern, Gaussian mixture VAE (GMVAE) offers a natural choice, which enjoys the benefits
of both discrete and continuous latent space. Each component c represents a discrete attribute, while continuous
latent variable z in each component represents different
sentences with the same attribute. However, GM-VAE is
prone to mode-collapse, which makes it difficult to train. In
other words, different components tend to have very close
means and variances after training, which makes GM-VAE
degenerate to vanilla VAE with only one Gaussian component (Fig. 1). As a result, GM-VAE fails to capture the
multi-modal data structure, and cannot effectively utilize
the discrete latent variables. For example, as illustrated in
Fig. 1a, utterances ask about the weather and requesting
appointments are mapped into the same mode. In this paper,
we theoretically demonstrate that mode-collapse does not
only occur in GM-VAE, which is a general problem for
VAEs with exponential family mixture priors (EM-VAE).
We find that the problem is intrinsically caused by a “dispersion” term in the evidence lower bound (ELBO), which
makes it extremely easy to fall into the solution of mode

