Enhancing Simple Models by Exploiting What They Already Know

Amit Dhurandhar 1 Karthikeyan Shanmugam 1 Ronny Luss 1

Abstract

There has been recent interest in improving performance of simple models for multiple reasons
such as interpretability, robust learning from small
data, deployment in memory constrained settings
as well as environmental considerations. In this
paper, we propose a novel method SRatio that can
utilize information from high performing complex
models (viz. deep neural networks, boosted trees,
random forests) to reweight a training dataset for a
potentially low performing simple model of much
lower complexity such as a decision tree or a
shallow network enhancing its performance. Our
method also leverages the per sample hardness estimate of the simple model which is not the case
with the prior works which primarily consider the
complex model’s confidences/predictions and is
thus conceptually novel. Moreover, we generalize
and formalize the concept of attaching probes to
intermediate layers of a neural network to other
commonly used classifiers and incorporate this
into our method. The benefit of these contributions is witnessed in the experiments where on
6 UCI datasets and CIFAR-10 we outperform
competitors in a majority (16 out of 27) of the
cases and tie for best performance in the remaining cases. In fact, in a couple of cases, we even
approach the complex model’s performance. We
also conduct further experiments to validate assertions and intuitively understand why our method
works. Theoretically, we motivate our approach
by showing that the weighted loss minimized by
simple models using our weighting upper bounds
the loss of the complex model.

1
IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA. Correspondence
to: Amit Dhurandhar <adhuran@us.ibm.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Simple models such as decision trees or rule lists or shallow neural networks still find use in multiple settings where
a) (global) interpretability is needed, b) small data sizes
are available, or c) memory/computational constraints are
prevalent (Dhurandhar et al., 2018b). In such settings compact or understandable models are often preferred over high
performing complex models, where the combination of a
human with an interpretable model can have better on-field
performance than simply using the best performing black
box model (Varshney et al., 2018). For example, a manufacturing engineer with an interpretable model may be able
to obtain precise knowledge of how an out-of-spec product
was produced and can potentially go back to fix the process
as opposed to having little-to-no knowledge of how the decision was reached. Posthoc local explainability methods
(Ribeiro et al., 2016; Bach et al., 2015; Dhurandhar et al.,
2018a) can help delve into the local behavior of black box
models, however, besides the explanations being only local,
there is no guarantee that they are in fact true (Rudin, 2018).
There is also a growing concern of the carbon footprint left
behind in training complex deep models (Strubell et al.,
2019), which for some popular architectures is more than
that left behind by a car over its entire lifetime.
In this paper, we propose a method, SRatio, which reweights
the training set to improve simple models given access to a
highly accurate complex model such as a deep neural network, boosted trees, or some other predictive model. Given
the applications we are interested in, such as interpretability
or deployment of models in resource limited settings, we
assume the complexity of the simple models to be predetermined or fixed (viz. decision tree of height ≤ 5). We
cannot grow arbitrary size ensembles such as in boosting or
bagging (Freund & Schapire, 1997). Our method applies potentially to any complex-simple model combination which is
not the case for some state-of-the-art methods in this space
such as Knowledge Distillation (Geoffrey Hinton, 2015) or
Profweight (Dhurandhar et al., 2018b), where the complex
model is assumed to be a deep neural network. In addition,
we generalize and formalize the concept of probes presented
in (Dhurandhar et al., 2018b) and provide examples of what
they would correspond to for classifiers other than neural
networks. Our method also uses the a priori low performing
simple model’s confidences to enhance its performance. We

