Unsupervised Transfer Learning for Spatiotemporal Predictive Networks

Zhiyu Yao * 1 Yunbo Wang * 1 Mingsheng Long 1 Jianmin Wang 1

Abstract
This paper explores a new research problem of unsupervised transfer learning across multiple spatiotemporal prediction tasks. Unlike most existing
transfer learning methods that focus on fixing the
discrepancy between supervised tasks, we study
how to transfer knowledge from a zoo of unsupervisedly learned models towards another predictive
network. Our motivation is that models from different sources are expected to understand the complex spatiotemporal dynamics from different perspectives, thereby effectively supplementing the
new task, even if the task has sufficient training
samples. Technically, we propose a differentiable
framework named transferable memory. It adaptively distills knowledge from a bank of memory
states of multiple pretrained RNNs, and applies it
to the target network via a novel recurrent structure called the Transferable Memory Unit (TMU).
Compared with finetuning, our approach yields
significant improvements on three benchmarks for
spatiotemporal prediction, and benefits the target
task even from less relevant pretext ones.

1. Introduction
Existing transfer learning methods mainly focus on how
to fix the discrepancy between supervised tasks. However,
unsupervised learning has achieved remarkable advances in
recent years and has become a hot topic in the deep learning
community. Then new questions arise: Is it necessary to do
transfer learning between unsupervised tasks, and how to
do it?
As a typical unsupervised learning paradigm, predictive
learning has shown great research significance in discovering the underlying structure of unlabeled spatiotemporal
data without human supervision and learning generalizable
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Software, BNRist, Research
Center for Big Data, Tsinghua University. Correspondence to:
Mingsheng Long <mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

deep representations from the consequences of complex
video events. The studies of the spatiotemporal predictive
learning can benefit many practical applications and downstream tasks, such as precipitation nowcasting (Shi et al.,
2015), traffic flow prediction (Xu et al., 2018), physical
scene understanding (Wu et al., 2017), early activity recognition (Wang et al., 2019a), deep reinforcement learning
(Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018), and vision-based model predictive control (Finn & Levine, 2017). Different from all
the above work, in this paper, we explore how to transfer
knowledge from a zoo of pretrained models towards a novel
predictive learning task. Models from both the source and
target domains are trained to predict sequences of future
frames.
Transferring knowledge across these tasks is yet to be explored, but important. In many scenarios, deep networks
may suffer from the serious problem of long-tail data distribution in the target domain. A natural solution is to finetune
another model that was well-pretrained with large-scale and
more effective training data. For example, when we train
precipitation forecasting models for arid areas, we may exploit the laws of weather changes that are learned from other
areas with abundant rainfall. However, it is a challenging
transfer learning problem, because, in the first place, not
all knowledge of the pretrained models can be directly applied to the target task due to the discrepancy of various
domains. After all, different areas may have their unique
climate characteristics. We have to explore how to distill
the transferable representations from the pretrained models
without labeled data. In the second place, with a zoo of
source models, we need to dynamically adjust their impact
on the training process of the target network.
To solve these problems, we propose a novel differentiable
framework named transferable memory along with the new
Transferable Memory Unit (TMU). Different from finetuning, our approach enables the target model to adaptively
learn from a zoo of source models. It provides diverse understandings of the underlying, complex data structure of
the target domain. Technically, we perform unsupervised
knowledge distillation on the memory states of multiple pretrained recurrent networks, and then introduce a new gating
mechanism to dynamically find the transferable part of the
distilled representations. In this way, we use the spatiotemporal dynamics of source domains as the prior knowledge

