Understanding Self-Training for Gradual Domain Adaptation

Ananya Kumar 1 Tengyu Ma 1 Percy Liang 1

Abstract
Machine learning systems must adapt to data distributions that evolve over time, in applications
ranging from sensor networks and self-driving car
perception modules to brain-machine interfaces.
Traditional domain adaptation is only guaranteed
to work when the distribution shift is small; empirical methods combine several heuristics for larger
shifts but can be dataset specific. To adapt to
larger shifts we consider gradual domain adaptation, where the goal is to adapt an initial classifier
trained on a source domain given only unlabeled
data that shifts gradually in distribution towards a
target domain. We prove the first non-vacuous upper bound on the error of self-training with gradual shifts, under settings where directly adapting
to the target domain can result in unbounded error. The theoretical analysis leads to algorithmic
insights, highlighting that regularization and label
sharpening are essential even when we have infinite data. Leveraging the gradual shift structure
leads to higher accuracies on a rotating MNIST
dataset, a forest Cover Type dataset, and a realistic
Portraits dataset.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models are typically trained and tested
on the same data distribution. However, when a model
is deployed in the real world, the data distribution typically evolves over time, leading to a drop in performance.
This problem is widespread: sensor measurements drift
over time due to sensor aging (Vergara et al., 2012), selfdriving car vision modules have to deal with evolving road
conditions (Bobu et al., 2018), and neural signals received
by brain-machine interfaces change within the span of a
day (Farshchian et al., 2019). Repeatedly gathering large
sets of labeled examples to retrain the model can be imprac1
Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA. Correspondence to: Ananya Kumar <ananya@cs.stanford.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. In gradual domain adaptation we are given labeled data
from a source domain, and unlabeled data from intermediate domains that shift gradually in distribution towards a target domain.
Here, blue = female, red = male, and gray = unlabeled data.

tical, so we would like to leverage unlabeled examples to
adapt the model to maintain high accuracy (Farshchian et al.,
2019; Sethi and Kantardzic, 2017).
The traditional solution to adapt to the distribution shift
is unsupervised domain adaptation, but existing methods
are only guaranteed to work when the distribution shift is
small—when the source and target distributions cannot be
easily distinguished from each other (Zhao et al., 2019).
To adapt to larger shifts, recent empirical papers propose
combining several heuristics (Hoffman et al., 2018; Shu
et al., 2018), but these methods can be brittle, working well
on some datasets but not on others (Peng et al., 2019) and
requiring substantial tuning for new domains.
In many real applications the domain shift does not happen
at one time, but happens gradually, although this structure
is ignored by most domain adaptation methods. We show
that the gradual shift structure allows us to reliably adapt
to very different distributions, both in theory and practice.
We analyze self-training (also known as pseudolabeling), a
method for semi-supervised learning (Chapelle et al., 2006)
that has led to state-of-the-art results on ImageNet (Xie
et al., 2020) and adversarial robustness on CIFAR-10 (Uesato et al., 2019; Carmon et al., 2019; Najafi et al., 2019).
Intuitively, it is easier to handle smaller shifts, but for each
shift we can incur some error so the more steps, the more
degradation—making it unclear whether leveraging the gradual shift structure is better than directly adapting to the tar-

