An end-to-end Differentially Private Latent Dirichlet Allocation Using a
Spectral Algorithm
Christopher DeCarolis 1 Mukul Ram 1 Seyed Esmaeili 1 Yu-Xiang Wang 2 Furong Huang 1

Abstract
We provide an end-to-end differentially private
spectral algorithm for learning LDA, based on
matrix/tensor decompositions, and establish theoretical guarantees on utility/consistency of the
estimated model parameters. We represent the
spectral algorithm as a computational graph.
Noise can be injected along the edges of this
graph to obtain differential privacy. We identify
subsets of edges, named “configurations”, such
that adding noise to all edges in such a subset
guarantees differential privacy of the end-to-end
spectral algorithm. We characterize the sensitivity of the edges with respect to the input and
thus estimate the amount of noise to be added
to each edge for any required privacy level. We
then characterize the utility loss for each configuration as a function of injected noise. Overall,
by combining the sensitivity and utility characterization, we obtain an end-to-end differentially
private spectral algorithm for LDA and identify which configurations outperform others under specific regimes. We are the first to achieve
utility guarantees under a required level of differential privacy for learning in LDA. We additionally show that our method systematically outperforms differentially private variational inference.

1. Introduction
Topic modeling has been used extensively in document
categorization, social sciences, machine translation and so
forth. Learning topic modeling involves projecting high
dimensional observations (documents) to a lower dimensional latent structure (topics), and outputting a model pa*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
University of Maryland 2 Department of Computer Science,
UC Santa Barbara.
Correspondence to: Furong Huang
<furongh@cs.umd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

rameter estimation that describes the generative process of
observed documents. This paper focuses on the popular
topic model — Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Blei
et al., 2003). There exist multiple learning algorithms for
LDA, but the output of these algorithms may leak sensitive information in domains where privacy is a concern.
This can limit the applicability of LDA in legal, financial,
and medical domains. For instance, consider a situation in
which the corpus D contains medical records, an adversary
could potentially trace a learned topic t of an LDA learning algorithm back to an individual document d. This is a
realistic threat model because topic t is high-dimensional
and may contain a unique combination of words that only
appear in d. We refer readers to (Carlini et al., 2019) for
a concrete example of a learned high-dimensional machine
learning model leaking credit card and social security numbers. Differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006) is a formal definition of privacy that provides provable and quantifiable protection against such re-identification attacks. A
generic method to convert an algorithm A to be differentially private is to add sufficient noise to A’s output.
The existing state-of-the-art differentially private algorithm
for learning LDA is differentially private variational inference (DP VI) (Park et al., 2016; 2020), in which noise is
added at each iteration of variational inference to guarantee privacy. However, VI (Blei et al., 2003)-based LDA
— even without privacy considerations — is not guaranteed to consistently learn LDA in polynomial time1 . After
all, it aims at solving a non-convex optimization problem
that maximizes the likelihood function with (a variational
approximation) of expectation-maximization.
The spectral learning method for LDA (Anandkumar et al.,
2014a), on the other hand, circumvents the nonconvex optimization problem by solving a moment-matching equation using tensor decomposition, thereby enjoying provable
computational efficiency and statistical consistency.
The goals of our work are twofolds. (1) to introduce a fam1

Note that VI is shown to be statistically consistent (Wang &
Blei, 2018) if the optimal variational posterior can be found, but
it requires a potentially unbounded number of iterations. The DP
extension has a total privacy loss that composes over the many
iterations, therefore cannot afford to run many iterations.

