Uniform Convergence of Rank-weighted Learning

Justin Khim 1 Liu Leqi 1 Adarsh Prasad 1 Pradeep Ravikumar 1

Abstract
The decision-theoretic foundations of classical
machine learning models have largely focused
on estimating model parameters that minimize
the expectation of a given loss function. However, as machine learning models are deployed in
varied contexts, such as in high-stakes decisionmaking and societal settings, it is clear that these
models are not just evaluated by their average performances. In this work, we propose and study
a novel notion of L-Risk based on the classical
idea of rank-weighted learning. These L-Risks,
induced by rank-dependent weighting functions
with bounded variation, is a unification of popular risk measures such as conditional value-atrisk and those defined by cumulative prospect
theory. We give uniform convergence bounds of
this broad class of risk measures and study their
consequences on a logistic regression example.

1. Introduction
The statistical decision-theoretic foundations of modern machine learning have largely focused on solving tasks by
minimizing the expectation of some loss function. This
ensures that the resulting models have high average case
performance. However, as machine learning models are
deployed along side humans in decision-making, it is clear
that they are not just evaluated by their average case performance but also properties like fairness. There has been
increasing interest in capturing these additional properties
via appropriate modifications of the classical objective of expected loss (Duchi et al., 2019; Garcıa & Fernández, 2015;
Sra et al., 2012).
In parallel, there is a long line of work exploring alternatives to expected loss based risk measures in decisionmaking (Howard & Matheson, 1972), and in reinforcement
1

Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA. Correspondence to: Justin Khim
<jkhim@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 𝑡ℎ International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

learning, where percentile based risk measures have been
used to quantify the tail-risk of models. A recent line of
work borrows classical ideas from behavioral economics
for use in machine learning to make models more humanaligned. In particular, Prashanth et al. (2016) have brought
ideas from cumulative prospect theory (Tversky & Kahneman, 1992) into reinforcement learning and bandits and Leqi
et al. (2019) have used cumulative prospect theory to introduce the notion of human-aligned risk measures.
A common theme in these prior works is the notion of rankweighted risks. The aforementioned risk measures weight
each loss by its relative rank, and are based upon the classical rank-dependent expected utility theory (Diecidue &
Wakker, 2001). These rank-dependent utilities have also
been used in several different contexts in machine learning. For example, such rank-weighted risks have been used
to speed up training of deep networks (Jiang et al., 2019).
They have also played a key role in designing estimators
which are robust to outliers in data. In particular, trimming
procedures that simply throw away data with high losses
have been used to design estimators that are robust to outliers (Daniell, 1920; Bhatia et al., 2015; Lai et al., 2016;
Prasad et al., 2018; Lugosi & Mendelson, 2019; Prasad
et al., 2019; Shah et al., 2020).
While these rank-based objectives have found widespread
use in machine learning, establishing their statistical properties has remained elusive. On the other hand, we have
a clear understanding of the generalization properties for
average-case risk measures. Loosely speaking, given a collection of models and finite training data, and suppose we
choose a model by minimizing average training error, then,
we can roughly guarantee on how well this chosen model
performs in an average sense. Such guarantees are typically
obtained by studying uniform convergence of average-case
risk measures.
However, as noted before, uniform convergence of rankweighted risk measures have not been explored in detail.
This difficulty comes from the weights being dependent
on the whole data, thereby, inducing complex dependencies. Hence, existing work on generalization has been on
the weaker notion of pointwise concentration bounds (Bhat,
2019; Duchi & Namkoong, 2018) or have focused on specific forms of rank-weighted risk measures such as condi-

