Defense Through Diverse Directions

Christopher M. Bender 1 Yang Li 1 Yifeng Shi 1 Michael K. Reiter 1 Junier B. Oliva 1

Abstract
In this work we develop a novel Bayesian neural
network methodology to achieve strong adversarial robustness without the need for online adversarial training. Unlike previous efforts in this
direction, we do not rely solely on the stochasticity of network weights by minimizing the divergence between the learned parameter distribution
and a prior. Instead, we additionally require that
the model maintain some expected uncertainty
with respect to all input covariates. We demonstrate that by encouraging the network to distribute evenly across inputs, the network becomes
less susceptible to localized, brittle features which
imparts a natural robustness to targeted perturbations. We show empirical robustness on several
benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Neural networks currently achieve greater-than-human performance in a variety of tasks such as object recognition (He
et al., 2016), language understanding (Vaswani et al., 2017;
Devlin et al., 2018), and game playing (Silver et al., 2016;
2017). Despite their incredible successes, these same networks are easily fooled by seemingly-trivial perturbations
that humans overcome with minimal difficulty (Goodfellow
et al., 2014). This weakness poses considerable concern in a
world that is increasingly reliant on machines from the perspectives of both security (e.g., face recognition) and safety
(driverless cars). Despite considerable effort to overcome
these difficulties, the problem persists (Elsayed et al., 2018;
Athalye et al., 2018).
The most successful methods for improving adversarial robustness utilize online adversarial training (Madry et al.,
2017). Online adversarial training requires an iterative training procedure where adversarial examples are produced
based on a particular attack scheme with respect to the cur1
The University of North Carolina, North Carolina, USA. Correspondence to: Christopher M. Bender <bender@cs.unc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

rent network state and the model is updated to resist the
particular attack. Unfortunately, this method is computationally expensive, as attacks must be generated and the
model updated multiple times. Zhang et al. and Sharma
& Chen have demonstrated that while this process makes
the model robust to the particular type of attack used in the
training process, the model can be susceptible to attacks
from alternate schemes.
To scale adversarial training, researchers have tried to transfer adversarial examples from another model. Tramèr et al.
has found that this offline adversarial training scheme can
perform equitably well in practice but can be much more
efficient since it decouples the adversarial examples generation from the training process.
Alternative lines of research introduce randomness into the
model. Early attempts include adding Gaussian noise to the
inputs (Zantedeschi et al., 2017) and randomly pruning the
network (Wang et al., 2018; Dhillon et al., 2018). Liu et al.
propose to add Gaussian noise to all the intermediate activations. Wang et al. train multiple copies for each block of the
network and randomly select one during inference. Along
these lines, we utilize Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) as
a principled way to inject noise into the model.
Recent work (Liu et al., 2018a;b) has incorporated stochasticity by utilizing BNNs. Similar to our method, they demonstrate that randomness of BNNs alone is not sufficient for
robust classification. They turn to an online adversarial
training scheme to implicitly boost the randomness.
We instead choose to explicitly penalize the model so that
it evenly distributes the sensitivity of the output w.r.t. the
input elements. We estimate the output sensitivity for each
input through a first order Taylor approximation and exploit
the inherent ensembling of BNNs to evaluate statistics for
each input example. These statistics become the basis for
a defense-promoting regularization scheme by diversifying
the directions of the output.
Our contributions are as follows:
• We propose several general penalties that can be added
to the loss function of any Bayesian neural network to
diversify the output variation with respect to the input
covariates.

