Self-PU: Self Boosted and Calibrated Positive-Unlabeled Training

Xuxi Chen* 1 Wuyang Chen* 2 Tianlong Chen 2 Ye Yuan 2 Chen Gong 3 Kewei Chen 4 Zhangyang Wang 2

Abstract
Many real-world applications have to tackle the
Positive-Unlabeled (PU) learning problem, i.e.,
learning binary classifiers from a large amount
of unlabeled data and a few labeled positive examples. While current state-of-the-art methods
employ importance reweighting to design various risk estimators, they ignored the learning capability of the model itself, which could have
provided reliable supervision. This motivates
us to propose a novel Self-PU1 learning framework, which seamlessly integrates PU learning
and self-training. Self-PU highlights three “self”oriented building blocks: a self-paced training
algorithm that adaptively discovers and augments
confident positive/negative examples as the training proceeds; a self-calibrated instance-aware
loss; and a self-distillation scheme that introduces teacher-students learning as an effective
regularization for PU learning. We demonstrate
the state-of-the-art performance of Self-PU on
common PU learning benchmarks (MNIST and
CIFAR-10), which compare favorably against the
latest competitors. Moreover, we study a realworld application of PU learning, i.e., classifying brain images of Alzheimer’s Disease. SelfPU obtains significantly improved results on the
renowned Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database over existing methods.

1. Introduction
For standard supervised learning of binary classifiers, both
positive and negative classes need to be collected for train*

Equal contribution The work was done when Xuxi Chen was
mentored by Zhangyang Wang. 1 University of Science and Technology of China 2 Texas A&M University 3 Nanjing University of
Science and Technology 4 Banner Alzheimer’s Institute. Correspondence to: Zhangyang Wang <atlaswang@tamu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
1
The code is publicly available at: https://github.com/
TAMU-VITA/Self-PU.

ing purposes. However, this is not always a realistic setting
in many applications, where one certain class of data could
be difficult to be collected or annotated. For example, in
chronic disease diagnosis, while we might safely consider a
diagnosed patient to be “positive”, the much larger population of “undiagnosed” individuals are practically mixed with
both “positive” (patient) and “negative” (healthy) examples,
since people might be undergoing the disease’s incubation
period (Armenian & Lilienfeld, 1974) or might just have
not seen doctors. Roughly labeling the “undiagnosed” examples all as negative will hence lead to biased classifiers
that inevitably underestimate the risk of chronic disease.
Given those practical demands, Positive-Unlabeled (PU)
Learning has been increasingly studied in recent years,
where a binary classifier is to be learned from a part of
positive examples, plus an unlabeled sample pool of mixed
and unspecified positive and negative examples. Because
of this weak supervision, PU learning is more challenging
than standard supervised or semi-supervised classification
problems. Early works tried to identify reliable negative
examples from the unlabeled data by hand-crafted heuristics
or standard semi-supervised learning methods (Liu et al.,
2002; Li & Liu, 2003). Recently, importance reweighting
methods such as unbiased PU (uPU) (Du Plessis et al., 2014;
2015) and non-negative PU (nnPU) (Kiryo et al., 2017) treat
unlabeled data as weighted negative ones.
Despite these successes, self-supervision via auxiliary or
surrogate tasks was never considered, which could potentially supply another means of reliable supervision. This
motivates us to explore the learning capability of the model
itself. Our proposed Self-PU learning framework exploits
three aspects of such “self-boosts”: (a) we design a selfpaced training strategy to progressively select unlabeled
examples and update the “trust” set of confident examples;
(b) we explore a fine-grained calibration of the functions
for unconfident examples in a meta-learning fashion; and
(c) we construct a collaborative self-supervision between
teacher and student models, and enforce their consistency
as a new regularization, against the weak supervision in PU
learning. Our main contributions are outlined as follows:
• A novel self-paced learning pipeline is first introduced
to adaptively mine confident examples from unlabeled
data, that will be labeled into trusted positive/negative
classes. A hybrid loss is applied to both the augmented

