Inverse Active Sensing :
Modeling and Understanding Timely Decision-Making

Daniel Jarrett 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1 2

Abstract
Evidence-based decision-making entails collecting (costly) observations about an underlying phenomenon of interest, and subsequently committing to an (informed) decision on the basis of accumulated evidence. In this setting, active sensing is
the goal-oriented problem of efficiently selecting
which acquisitions to make, and when and what
decision to settle on. As its complement, inverse
active sensing seeks to uncover an agent’s preferences and strategy given their observable decisionmaking behavior. In this paper, we develop an expressive, unified framework for the general setting
of evidence-based decision-making under endogenous, context-dependent time pressure—which requires negotiating (subjective) tradeoffs between
accuracy, speediness, and cost of information. Using this language, we demonstrate how it enables
modeling intuitive notions of surprise, suspense,
and optimality in decision strategies (the forward
problem). Finally, we illustrate how this formulation enables understanding decision-making behavior by quantifying preferences implicit in observed decision strategies (the inverse problem).

1. Introduction
Modeling decision-making processes is a central concern in
computational and behavioral science, with important applications to medicine (Li et al., 2015), economics (Clithero,
2018), and cognition (Drugowitsch et al., 2014). In evidence-based decision-making, the agent first collects a series
of observations about an underlying phenomenon of interest,
then subsequently commits to an informed decision based on
the accumulated evidence. As popular examples, consider
the problems of hypothesis testing, medical diagnostics,
and employee hiring: In each case, the decision-maker first
1

Department of Mathematics, University of Cambridge, UK.
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, UCLA, USA. Correspondence to: Daniel Jarrett <daniel.jarrett@maths.cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

conducts acquisitions for information (i.e. hypothesis tests,
diagnostic procedures, and candidate interviews), the results
on which the final decision is then based (i.e. the selected
hypothesis, the declared disease, and the hiring decision).
In this context, active sensing is the goal-directed task of
selecting which acquisitions to make, when to stop gathering information, and what decision to ultimately settle on.
Active sensing strategies have been studied for such applications as multi-hypothesis testing (Naghshvar et al., 2013),
sensory inference (Ahmad & Yu, 2013), and visual search
(Butko & Movellan, 2010). These are typically formulated
simply as sequential identification problems with an infinite
horizon—that is, of minimizing inaccuracies against a unit
sampling cost. However, for the general task of evidencebased decision-making, two critical shortcomings bear emphasis—a lack of expressivity, and a need for specification.
First, any sufficiently realistic decision model must account
for the presence, endogeneity, and context-dependence of
time pressure. While deadlines are studied in Frazier et al.
(2008) and Dayanik & Yu (2013), they are external variables, and their settings are passive (i.e. sampling from a
single exogenous supply of information). This is unrealistic:
While lengthy aptitude tests may be more discriminative for
recruiting purposes, their grueling nature may also cause
more candidates drop out of the pipeline entirely. Similarly, the probability of an adverse medical event that aborts
the diagnostic process depends on both the nature of the
test chosen (i.e. endogenous) and the underlying disease
itself (i.e. context-dependent). What we desire is a more
expressive framework capable of modeling such tradeoffs.
Second, even the simplest decision models suffer from a
need for specification. At a minimum, they require explicit
knowledge of the relative penalties of decision inaccuracies
and costs of acquisition. The need for complete specification
Problem Setting

Decisions

Hypothesis Testing Hypotheses
Medical Diagnosis
Diseases
Cognitive Science
Responses
Sensory Inference
Targets
Marketing & Sales Demographic
Recruiting & Hiring Hire or Fire

Acquisitions

Outcomes

Hyp. Tests Observations
Diag. Tests
Results
Perceptions
Evidence
Fixations
Sensations
Outreaches Engagements
Interviews Assessments

Table 1. Applications and terminology in timely decision-making.

