Being Bayesian about Categorical Probability

Taejong Joo 1 Uijung Chung 1 Min-Gwan Seo 1

Abstract
Neural networks utilize the softmax as a building
block in classification tasks, which contains an
overconfidence problem and lacks an uncertainty
representation ability. As a Bayesian alternative
to the softmax, we consider a random variable
of a categorical probability over class labels. In
this framework, the prior distribution explicitly
models the presumed noise inherent in the observed label, which provides consistent gains in
generalization performance in multiple challenging tasks. The proposed method inherits advantages of Bayesian approaches that achieve better uncertainty estimation and model calibration.
Our method can be implemented as a plug-andplay loss function with negligible computational
overhead compared to the softmax with the crossentropy loss function.

1. Introduction
Softmax (Bridle, 1990) is the de facto standard for post processing of logits of neural networks (NNs) for classification.
When combined with the maximum likelihood objective, it
enables efficient gradient computation with respect to logits and has achieved state-of-the-art performances on many
benchmark datasets. However, softmax lacks the ability
to represent the uncertainty of predictions (Blundell et al.,
2015; Gal & Ghahramani, 2016) and has poorly calibrated
behavior (Guo et al., 2017). For instance, the NN with
softmax can easily be fooled to confidently produce wrong
outputs; when rotating digit 3, it will predict it as the digit
8 or 4 with high confidence (Louizos & Welling, 2017).
Another concern of the softmax is its confident predictive
behavior makes NNs to be subject to overfitting (Xie et al.,
2016; Pereyra et al., 2017). This issue raises the need for
effective regularization techniques for improving generalization performance.
1
ESTsoft, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Taejong Joo
<tjoo@estsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Bayesian NNs (BNNs; MacKay, 1992) can address the
aforementioned issues of softmax. BNNs provide quantifiable measures of uncertainty such as predictive entropy
and mutual information (Gal, 2016) and enable automatic
embodiment of Occam’s razor (MacKay, 1995). However,
some practical obstacles have impeded the wide adoption of
BNNs. First, the intractable posterior inference in BNNs demands approximate methods such as variation inference (VI;
Graves, 2011; Blundell et al., 2015) and Monte Carlo (MC)
dropout (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016). Even with such novel
approximation methods, concerns arise regarding both the
degree of approximation and the computational expensive
posterior inference (Wu et al., 2019a; Osawa et al., 2019). In
addition, under extreme non-linearity between parameters
and outputs in the NNs, determining a meaningful weight
prior distribution is challenging (Sun et al., 2019). Last but
not least, BNNs often require considerable modifications to
existing baselines, or they result in performance degradation
(Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017).
In this paper, we apply the Bayesian principle to construct
the target distribution for learning classifiers. Specifically,
we regard a categorical probability as a random variable,
and construct the target distribution over the categorical
probability by means of the Bayesian inference, which is
approximated by NNs. The resulting target distribution can
be thought of as being regularized via the prior belief whose
impact is controlled by the number of observations. By
considering only the random variable of categorical probability, the Bayesian principle can be efficiently adopted to
existing deep learning building blocks without huge modifications. Our extensive experiments show effectiveness of
being Bayesian about the categorical probability in improving generalization performances, uncertainty estimation,
and calibration property.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows: 1) we
show the importance of considering categorical probability as a random variable instead of being determined by
the label; 2) we provide experimental results showing the
usefulness of the Bayesian principle in improving generalization performance of large models on standard benchmark
datasets, e.g., ResNext-101 on ImageNet; 3) we enable NNs
to inherit the advantages of the Bayesian methods in better
uncertainty representation and well-calibrated behavior with
a negligible increase in computational complexity.

