Graph Homomorphism Convolution

Hoang NT 1 2 Takanori Maehara 1

Abstract
In this paper, we study the graph classification
problem from the graph homomorphism perspective. We consider the homomorphisms from F to
G, where G is a graph of interest (e.g. molecules
or social networks) and F belongs to some family
of graphs (e.g. paths or non-isomorphic trees).
We show that graph homomorphism numbers provide a natural invariant (isomorphism invariant
and F-invariant) embedding maps which can be
used for graph classification. Viewing the expressive power of a graph classifier by the Findistinguishable concept, we prove the universality property of graph homomorphism vectors in
approximating F-invariant functions. In practice,
by choosing F whose elements have bounded treewidth, we show that the homomorphism method
is efficient compared with other methods.

1. Introduction
1.1. Background
In many fields of science, objects of interest often exhibit
irregular structures. For example, in biology or chemistry,
molecules and protein interactions are often modeled as
graphs (Milo et al., 2002; Benson et al., 2016). In multiphysics numerical analyses, methods such as the finite element methods discretize the sample under study by 2D/3Dmeshes (Mezentsev, 2004; Fey et al., 2018). In social studies, interactions between people are presented as a social
network (Barabási et al., 2016). Understanding these irregular non-Euclidean structures have yielded valuable scientific
and engineering insights. With recent successful developments of machine learning on regular Euclidean data such
as images, a natural extension challenge arises: How do we
learn from non-Euclidean data such as networks or meshes
modeled as graphs?
1

RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Tokyo,
Japan 2 Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Hoang NT <me@gearons.org>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Geometric (deep) learning (Bronstein et al., 2017) is an
important extension of machine learning as it generalizes
learning methods from Euclidean data to non-Euclidean
data. This branch of machine learning not only deals with
learning irregular data but also provides a proper means to
combine meta-data with their underlying structure. Therefore, geometric learning methods have enabled the application of machine learning to real-world problems: From
categorizing complex social interactions to generating new
chemical molecules. Among these methods, graph-learning
models for the classification task have been the most important subject of study.
Let X be the space of features (e.g., X = Rd for some
positive integer d), Y be the space of outcomes (e.g., Y =
{0, 1}), and G = (V (G), E(G)) be a graph with a vertex
set V (G) and edge set E(G) ⊆ V (G) × V (G). The graph
classification problem is stated follow1 .
Problem 1 (Graph Classification Problem). We are given
a set of tuples {(Gi , xi , yi ) : i = 1, . . . , N } of graphs
Gi = (V (Gi ), E(Gi )), vertex features xi : V (Gi ) → X ,
and outcomes yi ∈ Y. The task is to learn a hypothesis h
such that h((Gi , xi )) ≈ yi . 2
Problem 1 has been studied both theoretically and empirically. Theoretical graph classification models often discuss
the universality properties of some targeted function class.
While we can identify the function classes which these theoretical models can approximate, practical implementations
pose many challenges. For instance, the tensorized model
proposed by (Keriven & Peyré, 2019) is universal in the
space of continuous functions on bounded size graphs, but
it is impractical to implement such a model. On the other
hand, little is known about the class of functions which can
be estimated by some practical state-of-the-art models. To
address these disadvantages of both theoretical models and
practical models, we need a practical graph classification
model whose approximation capability can be parameterized. Such a model is not only effective in practice, as
we can introduce inductive bias to the design by the aforementioned parameterization, but also useful in theory as a
framework to study the graph classification problem.
1
2

This setting also includes the regression problem.
h can be a machine learning model with a given training set.

