Predicting Choice with Set-Dependent Aggregation

Nir Rosenfeld 1 Kojin Oshiba 1 Yaron Singer 1

Abstract
Providing users with alternatives to choose from
is an essential component of many online platforms, making the accurate prediction of choice
vital to their success. A renewed interest in learning choice models has led to improved modeling
power, but most current methods are either limited in the type of choice behavior they capture,
cannot be applied to large-scale data, or both.
Here we propose a learning framework for predicting choice that is accurate, versatile, and theoretically grounded. Our key modeling point is that to
account for how humans choose, predictive models must be expressive enough to accommodate
complex choice patterns but structured enough
to retain statistical efficiency. Building on recent
results in economics, we derive a class of models
that achieves this balance, and propose a neural
implementation that allows for scalable end-toend training. Experiments on three large choice
datasets demonstrate the utility of our approach.

1. Introduction
One of the most prevalent activities of online users is choosing. In almost any online platform, users constantly face
choices: what to purchase, who to follow, where to dine,
what to watch, and even simply where to click. As the
prominence of online services becomes ever more reliant on
such choices, the accurate prediction of choice is quickly becoming vital to their success. The availability of large-scale
choice data has spurred hopes of feasible individual-level
prediction, and many recent works have been devoted to the
modeling and prediction of choice (Benson et al., 2016; Ragain & Ugander, 2016; Kleinberg et al., 2017b;a; Mottini &
Acuna-Agost, 2017; Shah & Wainwright, 2017; Negahban
et al., 2018; Chierichetti et al., 2018; Overgoor et al., 2018).
In a typical choice scenario, a user is presented with a set
1
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University. Correspondence to: Nir Rosenfeld <nirr@seas.harvard.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

of items s = {x(1) , . . . , x(n) }, x(i) ∈ X = Rd , called the
choice set, with s ∈ S ⊆ 2X . From the alternatives in s, the
user chooses an item y ∈ s; in economics this is known as
the problem of discrete choice (Luce, 1959). We follow the
standard machine learning setup and assume choice sets s
and choices y are drawn i.i.d. from an unknown joint distribution D. Given a set of m examples T = {(si , yi )}m
i=1 ,
our goal is to learn a choice predictor h(s) that generalizes
well to unseen sets, i.e., has low expected error w.r.t. D.
A natural way to predict choice is to learn an item score
function f (x) from a class of score functions F and use it
to model the predicted
probability of choosing x from s as
P
0
Ps (x) = ef (x) / x0 ∈s ef (x ) . If the learned f ∈ F scores
chosen items higher than their alternatives, then Ps (x) will
provide useful predictions. While this approach seems appealing, it is in fact constrained by an undesired artifact
known as the Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives (IIA):
Definition 1. (Luce, 1959) P is said to satisfy IIA if for all
s ∈ S and for any a, b ∈ s, it holds that
P{a,b} (a)/P{a,b} (b) = Ps (a)/Ps (b)
IIA states that the likelihood of choosing a over b should
not depend on what other alternatives are available. This
means that the prediction rule hf (s) = argmaxx∈s Ps (x)
considers items with no regard of context, i.e., the alternatives available in s. IIA therefore imposes a rigid constraint
on the types of choice behavior that can be expressed by
the model—a fundamental limitation of this approach that
cannot be mitigated simply by increasing the complexity of
functions in F (e.g., adding layers or clever non-linearities).
From a practical point of view, this is discouraging, as there
is ample empirical evidence that real choice data exhibits
regular and consistent violations of IIA (see Rieskamp et al.
(2006) for an extensive survey). This has led to a surge
of interest in machine learning models that go beyond IIA
(Oh & Shah, 2014; Osogami & Otsuka, 2014; Benson et al.,
2016; Ragain & Ugander, 2016; Otsuka & Osogami, 2016;
Ragain & Ugander, 2018; Chierichetti et al., 2018; Seshadri
et al., 2019; Pfannschmidt et al., 2019).
The naı̈ve way to avoid IIA is to directly model all possible subsets, but this is likely to make learning intractable
(McFadden et al., 1977; Seshadri et al., 2019). A common
approach for resolving this difficulty is to impose structure,

