Lorentz Group Equivariant Neural Network for Particle Physics

Alexander Bogatskiy 1 Brandon Anderson 2 3 Jan T. Offermann 1 Marwah Roussi 1 David W. Miller 1 4
Risi Kondor 2 5 6

Abstract
We present a neural network architecture that
is fully equivariant with respect to transformations under the Lorentz group, a fundamental
symmetry of space and time in physics. The
architecture is based on the theory of the finitedimensional representations of the Lorentz group
and the equivariant nonlinearity involves the tensor product. For classification tasks in particle
physics, we demonstrate that such an equivariant
architecture leads to drastically simpler models
that have relatively few learnable parameters and
are much more physically interpretable than leading approaches that use CNNs and point cloud
approaches. The competitive performance of the
network is demonstrated on a public classification dataset (Kasieczka et al., 2019) for tagging
top quark decays given energy-momenta of jet
constituents produced in proton-proton collisions.

1. Introduction
The success of CNNs as a method of computer vision
has made clear the benefits of explicitly translationally
equivariant neural network architectures: there are far fewer
learnable parameters and these parameters are organized
into much more interpretable structures. The ability to
interpret convolutional kernels as images boosted our
understanding of why and how such networks operate
(Zeiler & Fergus, 2014).
However, there are many relevant problems that exhibit
much more complex symmetries than flat images. Such
1 Department of Physics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL,

U.S.A. 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL, U.S.A. 3 Atomwise, San Francisco, CA, U.S.A.
4 Enrico Fermi Institute, Chicago, IL, U.S.A. 5 Department of Statistics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, U.S.A. 6 Flatiron Institute,
Simons Foundation, New York, NY, U.S.A.. Correspondence to:
Alexander Bogatskiy <bogatsky@uchicago.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

problems may require or benefit from latent space representations that are intimately connected with the theory of
the specific underlying symmetry group. Indeed, these symmetries are manifest in the data itself, as each data point
is generated by a symmetric process or model. Following
this approach, elegant architectures can be advised based on
fundamental principles, and the “building blocks” of such architectures are greatly restricted by the imposed symmetries.
This is a highly sought-after property in neural network design since it may improve generality, interpretability, and
uncertainty quantification, while simplifying the model.
These general ideas have already led to the development
of multiple equivariant architectures for sets (permutation
invariance) (Zaheer et al., 2017), graphs (graph isomorphisms), 3D data (spatial rotations) (Monti et al., 2017),
and homogeneous spaces of Lie groups such as the twodimensional sphere (Cohen et al., 2018). For more discussion and references see Section 2.
Symmetries play a central role in any area of physics
(Frankel, 2004), and as such physics provides the widest
variety of symmetry groups relevant in computational problems. In particular, high energy and particle physics involve
symmetry groups ranging from U(1), SU(2) and SU(3) to
the Lorentz group SO(1, 3), and even more exotic ones like
E8 . Architectures that respect these symmetries can provide more sensible and tractable models, whose parameters
may be directly interpreted in the context of known physical
models, as in the case of CNNs.
Harmonic analysis provides two parallel but theoretically
equivalent implementations of group equivariance in neural
networks. The first is a natural generalization of CNNs to arbitrary Lie groups and their homogeneous spaces (Cohen &
Welling, 2016), where activations are functions on the group,
the nonlinearity is applied point-wise, and the convolution
is an integral over the group. The second approach works
entirely in the Fourier space (Thomas et al., 2018; Anderson
et al., 2019), that is, on the set of irreducible representations
of the group. It is the latter approach that we adopt in this
work due to its direct applicability to vector inputs.
These approaches are general, but here we present the first
specific application of a group equivariant architecture in
physics. We focus on a particle physics application where

