Reinforcement Learning for Molecular Design
Guided by Quantum Mechanics

Gregor N. C. Simm * 1 Robert Pinsler * 1 José Miguel Hernández-Lobato 1

Abstract
Automating molecular design using deep reinforcement learning (RL) holds the promise of
accelerating the discovery of new chemical compounds. Existing approaches work with molecular graphs and thus ignore the location of atoms
in space, which restricts them to 1) generating
single organic molecules and 2) heuristic reward
functions. To address this, we present a novel
RL formulation for molecular design in Cartesian coordinates, thereby extending the class of
molecules that can be built. Our reward function
is directly based on fundamental physical properties such as the energy, which we approximate
via fast quantum-chemical methods. To enable
progress towards de-novo molecular design, we
introduce M OL G YM, an RL environment comprising several challenging molecular design tasks
along with baselines. In our experiments, we
show that our agent can efficiently learn to solve
these tasks from scratch by working in a translation and rotation invariant state-action space.

1. Introduction
Finding new chemical compounds with desired properties
is a challenging task with important applications such as de
novo drug design and materials discovery (Schneider et al.,
2019). The diversity of synthetically feasible chemicals
that can be considered as potential drug-like molecules was
estimated to be between 1030 and 1060 (Polishchuk et al.,
2013), making exhaustive search hopeless.
Recent applications of machine learning have accelerated
the search for new molecules with specific desired properties. Generative models such as variational autoencoders
(VAEs) (Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018), recurrent neural
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Engineering, University
of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to: Gregor N. C.
Simm <gncs2@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Visualization of the molecular design process presented
in this work. The RL agent (depicted by a robot arm) sequentially
places atoms onto a canvas. By working directly in Cartesian
coordinates, the agent learns to build structures from a very general
class of molecules. Learning is guided by a reward that encodes
fundamental physical properties. Bonds are only for illustration.

networks (RNNs) (Segler et al., 2018), and generative adversarial networks (GANs) (De Cao & Kipf, 2018) have
been successfully applied to propose potential drug candidates. Despite recent advances in generating valid structures,
proposing truly novel molecules beyond the training data
distribution remains a challenging task. This issue is exacerbated for many classes of molecules (e.g. transition metals),
where such a representative dataset is not even available.
An alternative strategy is to employ RL, in which an agent
builds new molecules in a step-wise fashion (e.g., Olivecrona et al. (2017), Guimaraes et al. (2018), Zhou et al.
(2019), Zhavoronkov et al. (2019)). Training an RL agent
only requires samples from a reward function, alleviating
the need for an existing dataset of molecules. However,
the choice of state representation in current models still
severely limits the class of molecules that can be generated.
In particular, molecules are commonly described by graphs,
where atoms and bonds are represented by nodes and edges,
respectively. Since a graph is a simplified model of the physical representation of molecules in the real world, one is
limited to the generation of single organic molecules. Other
types of molecules cannot be appropriately described as
this representation lacks important three-dimensional (3D)
information, i.e. the relative position of atoms in space. For
example, systems consisting of multiple molecules cannot
be generated for this reason. Furthermore, it prohibits the

