Structured Policy Iteration for Linear Quadratic Regulator

Youngsuk Park 1 Ryan A. Rossi 2 Zheng Wen 3 Gang Wu 2 Handong Zhao 2

Abstract
Linear quadratic regulator (LQR) is one of the
most popular frameworks to tackle continuous
Markov decision process tasks. With its fundamental theory and tractable optimal policy, LQR
has been revisited and analyzed in recent years,
in terms of reinforcement learning scenarios such
as the model-free or model-based setting. In this
paper, we introduce the Structured Policy Iteration (S-PI) for LQR, a method capable of deriving
a structured linear policy. Such a structured policy with (block) sparsity or low-rank can have
significant advantages over the standard LQR policy: more interpretable, memory-efficient, and
well-suited for the distributed setting. In order to
derive such a policy, we first cast a regularized
LQR problem when the model is known. Then,
our Structured Policy Iteration (S-PI) algorithm,
which takes a policy evaluation step and a policy improvement step in an iterative manner, can
solve this regularized LQR efficiently. We further
extend the S-PI algorithm to the model-free setting where a smoothing procedure is adopted to
estimate the gradient. In both the known-model
and model-free setting, we prove convergence
analysis under the proper choice of parameters.
Finally, the experiments demonstrate the advantages of S-PI in terms of balancing the LQR performance and level of structure by varying the
weight parameter.

1. Introduction
Stochastic control for the class of linear quadratic regulator (LQR) has been applied in a wide variety of fields
including supply-chain optimization, advertising, dynamic
resource allocation, and optimal control (Sarimveis et al.,
2008; Nerlove & Arrow, 1962; Elmaghraby, 1993; Ander1
Stanford University 2 Adobe Research 3 Google DeepMind.
Correspondence to: Youngsuk Park <youngsuk@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

son & Moore, 2007) spanning several decades.
This stochastic control has led to a wide class of fundamental machinery along the way, across theoretical analysis
as well as tractable algorithms, where the model of transition dynamic and cost function are known. On the other
hand, under the uncertain model of transition dynamics, reinforcement learning (RL) and data-driven approaches have
achieved a great empirical success in recent years, from simulated game scenarios (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016)
to robot manipulation (Tassa et al., 2012; Al Borno et al.,
2012; Kumar et al., 2016). In recent years, LQR in discrete
time domain in particular, has been revisited and analyzed
under model uncertainty, not only in theoretical perspective like regret bound or sample complexity (Ibrahimi et al.,
2012; Fazel et al., 2018; Recht, 2019; Mania et al., 2019),
but also toward new real-world applications (Lewis et al.,
2012; Lazic et al., 2018; Park et al., 2019).
Despite the importance and success of the standard LQR,
discrete time LQR with a structured policy has been less
explored in theoretical and practical perspective under both
the known and unknown model settings, while such a policy may have a number of significant advantages over the
standard LQR policy: interpretability, memory-efficiency,
and is more suitable for the distributed setting. In this work,
we describe a methodology for learning a structured policy
for LQR along with theoretical analysis of it.
Summary of contributions.
• We formulate the regularized LQR problem for discrete
time system that is able to capture a structured linear
policy (in Section 2.1).
• To solve the regularized LQR problem when the model
is known, we develop the Structured Policy Iteration
(S-PI) algorithm that consists of a policy evaluation
and policy improvement step (in Section 2.2).
• We further extend S-PI to the model-free setting, utilizing a gradient estimate from a smoothing procedure
(in Section 3.1).
• We prove the linear convergence of S-PI to its stationary point under a proper choice of parameters in
both the known-model (in Section 2.3) and model-free
settings (in Section 3.2).
• We examine the properties of the S-PI algorithm and

