Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning with Neural Network
Parameterization: Global Optimality and Convergence Rate
Yufeng Zhang 1 Qi Cai 1 Zhuoran Yang 2 Zhaoran Wang 1

Abstract
Generative adversarial imitation learning (GAIL)
demonstrates tremendous success in practice, especially when combined with neural networks.
Different from reinforcement learning, GAIL
learns both policy and reward function from expert (human) demonstration. Despite its empirical
success, it remains unclear whether GAIL with
neural networks converges to the globally optimal solution. The major difficulty comes from
the nonconvex-nonconcave minimax optimization
structure. To bridge the gap between practice and
theory, we analyze a gradient-based algorithm
with alternating updates and establish its sublinear convergence to the globally optimal solution.
To the best of our knowledge, our analysis establishes the global optimality and convergence rate
of GAIL with neural networks for the first time.

1. Introduction
The goal of imitation learning (IL) is to learn to perform a
task based on expert demonstration (Ho & Ermon, 2016).
In contrast to reinforcement learning (RL), the agent only
has access to the expert trajectories but not the rewards. The
most straightforward approach of IL is behavioral cloning
(BC) (Pomerleau, 1991). BC treats IL as the supervised
learning problem of predicting the actions based on the
states. Despite its simplicity, BC suffers from the compounding errors caused by covariate shift (Ross et al., 2011; Ross
& Bagnell, 2010). Another approach of IL is inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) (Russell, 1998; Ng & Russell,
2000; Levine & Koltun, 2012; Finn et al., 2016), which
jointly learns the reward function and the corresponding
1

Department of Industrial Engineering and Management
Sciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA
2
Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering,
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA. Correspondence
to: Zhaoran Wang <zhaoranwang@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

optimal policy. IRL formulates IL as a bilevel optimization
problem. Specifically, IRL solves an RL subproblem given
a reward function at the inner level and searches for the reward function which makes the expert policy optimal at the
outer level. However, IRL is computationally inefficient as
it requires fully solving an RL subproblem at each iteration
of the outer level. Moreover, the desired reward function
may be nonunique. To address such issues of IRL, (Ho &
Ermon, 2016) propose generative adversarial imitation learning (GAIL), which searches for the optimal policy without
fully solving an RL subproblem given a reward function
at each iteration. GAIL solves IL via minimax optimization with alternating updates. In particular, GAIL alternates
between (i) minimizing the discrepancy in expected cumulative reward between the expert policy and the learned policy
and (ii) maximizing such a discrepancy over the reward function class. Such an alternating update scheme mirrors the
training of generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Arjovsky et al., 2017), where the learned
policy acts as the generator while the reward function acts
as the discriminator.
Incorporated with neural networks, which parameterize the
learned policy and the reward function, GAIL achieves significant empirical success in challenging applications, such
as natural language processing (Yu et al., 2016), autonomous
driving (Kuefler et al., 2017), human behavior modeling
(Merel et al., 2017), and robotics (Tai et al., 2018). Despite
its empirical success, GAIL with neural networks remains
less understood in theory. The major difficulty arises from
the following aspects: (i) GAIL involves minimax optimization, while the existing analysis of policy optimization with
neural networks (Anthony & Bartlett, 2009; Liu et al., 2019;
Bhandari & Russo, 2019; Wang et al., 2019) only focuses
on a minimization or maximization problem. (ii) GAIL with
neural networks is nonconvex-nonconcave, and therefore,
the existing analysis of convex-concave optimization with
alternating updates is not applicable (Nesterov, 2013). There
is an emerging body of literature (Rafique et al., 2018; Zhang
et al., 2019b) that casts nonconvex-nonconcave optimization
as bilevel optimization, where the inner level is solved to
a high precision as in IRL. However, such analysis is not
applicable to GAIL as it involves alternating updates.

