Sets Clustering

Ibrahim Jubran * 1 Murad Tukan * 1 Alaa Maalouf * 1 Dan Feldman 1

Abstract
The input to the sets-k-means problem is an integer k ≥ 1 and a set P = {P1 , · · · , Pn } of
fixed sized sets in Rd . The goal is to compute a
set C of P
k centers (points) in Rd that minimizes
2
the sum P ∈P minp∈P,c∈C kp − ck of squared
distances to these sets. An ε-core-set for this problem is a weighted subset of P that approximates
this sum up to 1 ± ε factor, for every set C of
k centers in Rd . We prove that such a core-set
of O(log2 n) sets always exists, and can be computed in O(n log n) time, for every input P and
every fixed d, k ≥ 1 and ε ∈ (0, 1). The result
easily generalized for any metric space, distances
to the power of z > 0, and M-estimators that handle outliers. Applying an inefficient but optimal
algorithm on this coreset allows us to obtain the
first PTAS (1 + ε approximation) for the sets-kmeans problem that takes time near linear in n.
This is the first result even for sets-mean on the
plane (k = 1, d = 2). Open source code and
experimental results for document classification
and facility locations are also provided.

(a) k = 1

(b) k = 2

Figure 1. sets-k-means for pairs on the plane. The input is a set
of n = 5 pairs of points that correspond to home/work addresses.
(left) The distance from a gas station (in red) to a person is the
smaller between its distance to its home and work address (line
segments). (right) For k = 2 gas stations, each person will choose
its closest gas station; see real word database at section 6.
2

Here, D̃(p, c) := kp − ck is the squared distance between
a point p ∈ P to the center c ∈ Rd . More generally, in unsupervised learning, for a given integer (number of clusters)
k ≥ 1, the k-means of the set P is a set C = {c1 , · · · , ck }
of k centers (points in Rd ) that minimizes the sum of squared
distances
X
X
2
D̃(p, C) =
min kp − ck ,
p∈P

p∈P

c∈C

1. Introduction
In machine learning it is common to represent the input as
a set of n points (database records) P = {p1 , · · · , pn } in
the Euclidean d-dimensional space Rd . That is, an n × d
real matrix whose rows correspond to the input points. Every point corresponds to e.g. the GPS address of a person (Liao et al., 2006; Nguyen et al., 2011), a pixel/feature
in an image (Tuytelaars et al., 2008), “bag of words” of a
document (Mladenic, 1999), or a sensor’s sample (Dunia
et al., 1996). Arguably, the most common statistics of
such a set is its mean (center of mass) which is the cend
ter
its sum of squared distances
P c ∈ R that minimizes
P
2
D̃(p,
c)
=
kp
−
ck to the input points in P .
p∈P
p∈P
*

Equal contribution 1 Robotics & Big Data Lab, Department of
Computer Science, University of Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to:
Ibrahim Jubran <ibrahim.jub@gmail.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

where D̃(p, C) := minc∈C D̃(p, c) denotes the squared
distance from each point p ∈ P to its nearest center in
C. The k-means clustering is probably the most common
clustering objective function, both in academy and industry
as claimed in (Hartigan, 1975; Arthur & Vassilvitskii, 2006;
Berkhin, 2002; Wu et al., 2008).
However, in the real-world, every database’s record actually
links to another database table, a GPS location may correspond to multiple GPS locations (e.g. home/work), every
image consists of a set of pixels/features, every document
contains a set of paragraphs, and a sensor’s sample may actually be a distribution over some possible values (Li et al.,
2010; 2008; Dunia et al., 1996; Xiao et al., 2007). This
motivates the following title and subject of this paper.
Sets Clustering. Along this paper, the input is not a set
of points, but rather a set P = {P1 , · · · , Pn } of sets in Rd
(or any other metric space; see Section 2), each of size m,
denoted as m-sets. A natural generalization of the mean of

