Certified Robustness to Label-Flipping Attacks via Randomized Smoothing

Elan Rosenfeld 1 Ezra Winston 1 Pradeep Ravikumar 1 J. Zico Kolter 1 2

Abstract
Machine learning algorithms are known to be susceptible to data poisoning attacks, where an adversary manipulates the training data to degrade
performance of the resulting classifier. In this
work, we present a unifying view of randomized
smoothing over arbitrary functions, and we leverage this novel characterization to propose a new
strategy for building classifiers that are pointwisecertifiably robust to general data poisoning attacks. As a specific instantiation, we utilize our
framework to build linear classifiers that are robust to a strong variant of label flipping, where
each test example is targeted independently. In
other words, for each test point, our classifier
includes a certification that its prediction would
be the same had some number of training labels
been changed adversarially. Randomized smoothing has previously been used to guarantee—with
high probability—test-time robustness to adversarial manipulation of the input to a classifier;
we derive a variant which provides a deterministic, analytical bound, sidestepping the probabilistic certificates that traditionally result from the
sampling subprocedure. Further, we obtain these
certified bounds with minimal additional runtime
complexity over standard classification and no assumptions on the train or test distributions. We
generalize our results to the multi-class case, providing the first multi-class classification algorithm
that is certifiably robust to label-flipping attacks.

1. Introduction
Modern classifiers, despite their widespread empirical success, are known to be susceptible to adversarial attacks.
In this paper, we are specifically concerned with so-called
“data poisoning” attacks (formally, causative attacks [Bar1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Bosch Center for AI. Correspondence to: Elan Rosenfeld <elan@cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

reno et al. 2006; Papernot et al. 2018]), where the attacker
manipulates some aspects of the training data in order to
cause the learning algorithm to output a faulty classifier.
Automated machine-learning systems which rely on large,
user-generated datasets—e.g. email spam filters, product
recommendation engines, and fake review detectors—are
particularly susceptible to such attacks. For example, by
maliciously flagging legitimate emails as spam and mislabeling spam as innocuous, an adversary can trick a spam
filter into mistakenly letting through a particular email.
Data poisoning attacks in the literature include label-flipping
attacks (Xiao et al., 2012), where the labels of a training set
can be adversarially manipulated to decrease performance
of the trained classifier; general data poisoning, where both
the training inputs and labels can be manipulated (Steinhardt et al., 2017); and backdoor attacks (Chen et al., 2017;
Tran et al., 2018), where the training set is corrupted so
as to cause the classifier to deviate from its expected behavior only when triggered by a specific pattern. However,
unlike the alternative test-time adversarial setting, where
reasonably effective provable defenses exist, comparatively
little work has been done on building classifiers that are
certifiably robust to targeted data poisoning attacks.
In this work we propose a framework for building classifiers
that are certifiably robust to a given class of data poisoning
attacks, such as label-flipping or backdoor attacks. In particular, we propose what we refer to as a pointwise certified
defense—this means that with each prediction, the classifier includes a certificate guaranteeing that its prediction
would not be different had it been trained on adversarially
manipulated data up to some “radius of perturbation” (a
formal definition is presented in Section 3). We then demonstrate a specific instantiation of this protocol, constructing linear classifiers that are pointwise-certifiably robust to
label-flipping attacks; i.e., each prediction is certified robust
against a certain number of training label flips.
Prior works on certified defenses make statistical guarantees
over the entire test distribution, but they make no guarantees as to the robustness of a prediction on any particular
test point; thus, a determined adversary could still cause a
specific test point to be misclassified. We therefore consider
the threat of a worst-case adversary that can make a training
set perturbation to target each test point individually. This

