Choice Set Optimization Under Discrete Choice Models of Group Decisions

Kiran Tomlinson 1 Austin R. Benson 1

Abstract
The way that people make choices or exhibit preferences can be strongly affected by the set of available alternatives, often called the choice set. Furthermore, there are usually heterogeneous preferences, either at an individual level within small
groups or within sub-populations of large groups.
Given the availability of choice data, there are
now many models that capture this behavior in order to make effective predictions—however, there
is little work in understanding how directly changing the choice set can be used to inﬂuence the
preferences of a collection of decision-makers.
Here, we use discrete choice modeling to develop
an optimization framework of such interventions
for several problems of group inﬂuence, namely
maximizing agreement or disagreement and promoting a particular choice. We show that these
problems are NP-hard in general, but imposing
restrictions reveals a fundamental boundary: promoting a choice can be easier than encouraging
consensus or sowing discord. We design approximation algorithms for the hard problems and show
that they work well on real-world choice data.

1. Context effects and optimizing choice sets
Choosing from a set of alternatives is one of the most important actions people take, and choices determine the composition of governments, the success of corporations, and the
formation of social connections. For these reasons, choice
models have received signiﬁcant attention in the ﬁelds of
economics (Train, 2009), psychology (Tversky & Kahneman, 1981), and, as human-generated data has become increasingly available online, computer science (Overgoor
et al., 2019; Seshadri et al., 2019; Rosenfeld et al., 2020). In
many cases, it is important that people have heterogeneous
preferences; for example, people living in different parts of
1

Department of Computer Science, Cornell University,
Ithaca, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Kiran Tomlinson
<kt@cs.cornell.edu>, Austin R. Benson <arb@cs.cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

a town might prefer different government policies.
Much of the computational work on choice has been devoted
to ﬁtting models for predicting future choices. In addition to
prediction, another area of interest is determining effective
interventions to inﬂuence choice—advertising and political
campaigning are prime examples. In heterogeneous groups,
the goal might be to encourage consensus (Amir et al., 2015),
or, for an ill-intentioned adversary, to sow discord, e.g.,
amongst political parties (Rosenberg et al., 2020).
One particular method of inﬂuence is introducing new alternatives or options. While early economic models assume
that alternatives are irrelevant to the relative ranking of options (Luce, 1959; McFadden, 1974), experimental work has
consistently found that new alternatives have strong effects
on our choices (Huber et al., 1982; Simonson & Tversky,
1992; Shaﬁr et al., 1993; Trueblood et al., 2013). These
effects are often called context effects or choice set effects.
A well-known example is the compromise effect (Simonson,
1989), which describes how people often prefer a middle
ground (e.g., the middle-priced wine). Direct measurements
on choice data have also revealed choice set effects in several domains (Benson et al., 2016; Seshadri et al., 2019).
Here, we pose adding new alternatives as a discrete optimization problem for inﬂuencing a collection of decision
makers, such as the inhabitants of a city or the visitors to a
website. To this end, we consider various models for how
someone makes a choice from a given set of alternatives,
where the model parameters can be readily estimated from
data. In our setup, everyone has a base set of alternatives
from which they make a choice, and the goal is to ﬁnd a set
of additional alternatives to optimize some function of the
group’s joint preferences on the base set. We speciﬁcally analyze three objectives: (i) agreement in preferences amongst
the group; (ii) disagreement in preferences amongst the
group; and (iii) promotion of a particular item (decision).
We use the framework of discrete choice (Train, 2009) to
probabilistically model a person’s choice from a given set of
items, called the choice set. These models are parameterized
for individual preferences, and when ﬁtting parameters from
data, preferences are commonly aggregated at the level of a
sub-population of individuals. Discrete choice models such
as the multinomial logit and elimination-by-aspects have
played a central role in behavioral economics for several

