Provable Self-Play Algorithms for Competitive Reinforcement Learning

Yu Bai * 1 Chi Jin * 2

Abstract
Self-play, where the algorithm learns by playing
against itself without requiring any direct supervision, has become the new weapon in modern
Reinforcement Learning (RL) for achieving superhuman performance in practice. However, the majority of exisiting theory in reinforcement learning
only applies to the setting where the agent plays
against a fixed environment; it remains largely
open whether self-play algorithms can be provably effective, especially when it is necessary to
manage the exploration/exploitation tradeoff. We
study self-play in competitive reinforcement learning under the setting of Markov games, a generalization of Markov decision processes to the twoplayer case. We introduce a self-play algorithm—
Value Iteration with Upper/Lower Confidence
Bound (VI-ULCB)—and
show that it achieves
√
regret Õ( T ) after playing T steps of the game,
where the regret is measured by the agent’s performance against a fully adversarial opponent who
can exploit the agent’s strategy at any step. We
also introduce an explore-then-exploit style algorithm, which achieves a slightly worse regret
of Õ(T 2/3 ), but is guaranteed to run in polynomial time even in the worst case. To the best of
our knowledge, our work presents the first line of
provably sample-efficient self-play algorithms for
competitive reinforcement learning.

1. Introduction
This paper studies competitive reinforcement learning (competitive RL), that is, reinforcement learning with two or
more agents taking actions simultaneously, but each maximizing their own reward. Competitive RL is a major branch
of the more general setting of multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL), with the specification that the agents have
*

Equal contribution 1 Salesforce Research 2 Princeton University.
Correspondence to: Yu Bai <yu.bai@salesforce.com>, Chi Jin
<chij@princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

conflicting rewards (so that they essentially compete with
each other) yet can be trained in a centralized fashion (i.e.
each agent has access to the other agents’ policies) (Crandall & Goodrich, 2005).
There are substantial recent progresses in competitive RL,
in particular in solving hard multi-player games such as
GO (Silver et al., 2017), Starcraft (Vinyals et al., 2019),
and Dota 2 (OpenAI, 2018). A key highlight in their approaches is the successful use of self-play for achieving
super-human performance in absence of human knowledge
or expert opponents. These self-play algorithms are able
to learn a good policy for all players from scratch through
repeatedly playing the current policies against each other
and performing policy updates using these self-played game
trajectories. The empirical success of self-play has challenged the conventional wisdom that expert opponents are
necessary for achieving good performance, and calls for a
better theoretical understanding.
In this paper, we take initial steps towards understanding
the effectiveness of self-play algorithms in competitive RL
from a theoretical perspective. We focus on the special
case of two-player zero-sum Markov games (Shapley, 1953;
Littman, 1994), a generalization of Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) to the two-player setting. In a Markov game,
the two players share states, play actions simultaneously,
and observe the same reward. However, one player aims
to maximize the return while the other aims to minimize
it. This setting covers the majority of two-player games
including GO (there is a single reward of {+1, −1} at the
end of the game indicating which player has won), and also
generalizes zero-sum matrix games (von Neumann, 1928)—
an important game-theoretic problem—into the multi-step
(RL) case.
More concretely, the goal of this paper is to design lowregret algorithms for solving episodic two-player Markov
games in the general setting (Kearns & Singh, 2002), that is,
the algorithm is allowed to play the game for a fixed amount
of episodes using arbitrary policies, and its performance
is measured in terms of the regret. We consider a strong
notion of regret for two-player zero-sum games, where the
performance of the deployed policies in each episode is
measured against the best response for that policy, which
can be different in different episodes. Such a regret bound

