Progressive Identification of True Labels for Partial-Label Learning

Jiaqi Lv † 1 Miao Xu 2 3 Lei Feng 4 Gang Niu 2 Xin Geng 1 Masashi Sugiyama 2 5

Abstract
Partial-label learning (PLL) is a typical weakly
supervised learning problem, where each training instance is equipped with a set of candidate
labels among which only one is the true label.
Most existing methods elaborately designed learning objectives as constrained optimizations that
must be solved in specific manners, making their
computational complexity a bottleneck for scaling up to big data. The goal of this paper is
to propose a novel framework of PLL with flexibility on the model and optimization algorithm.
More specifically, we propose a novel estimator
of the classification risk, theoretically analyze
the classifier-consistency, and establish an estimation error bound. Then we propose a progressive identification algorithm for approximately
minimizing the proposed risk estimator, where
the update of the model and identification of true
labels are conducted in a seamless manner. The resulting algorithm is model-independent and lossindependent, and compatible with stochastic optimization. Thorough experiments demonstrate it
sets the new state of the art.

1. Introduction
The increasing demand for massive data used in training
modern machine learning models, such as deep neural networks (DNNs), makes it inevitable that not all examples
are equipped with strong supervision information. Weak
supervision may result in a detrimental effect on model
training and has been widely studied (Zhou, 2017; Patrini
et al., 2017; Kamnitsas et al., 2018; Lu et al., 2019; Gong
†

Preliminary work was done during an internship at RIKEN AIP.
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China 2 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence
Project, Tokyo, Japan 3 The University of Queensland, Australia
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 5 University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
Correspondence to: Xin Geng <xgeng@seu.edu.cn>.

1

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

et al., 2019). We focus on an important weakly supervised
learning problem called partial-label learning (PLL) (Cour
et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2019; Lyu et al., 2019), where each
training instance is associated with a set of candidate labels
among which exactly one is true, reducing the overhead
of finding exact label from ambiguous candidates. This
problem arises in many real-world tasks such as automatic
image annotation (Chen et al., 2018), web mining (Luo &
Orabona, 2010), etc.
Related research on PLL was pioneered by a multiple-label
learning (MLL) method (Jin & Ghahramani, 2003). Despite
the same form of supervision information, i.e., a set of
candidate labels, that each training instance is assigned
with, a vital difference between MLL and PLL is that the
goal of PLL is identifying the only one true label among
candidate labels whereas for MLL identifying an arbitrary
label in the candidate label set is acceptable, i.e., treating
all candidate labels equally. In practice, Jin & Ghahramani
(2003) formulated an unconstrained learning objective to
minimize the KL divergence between the class prior and
the model-based conditional distribution, and solved it by
EM algorithm, resulting in a procedure iterating between
estimating the prior distribution and training the model.
Jin & Ghahramani (2003) used the class prior as the fitting
target of the model, in which the label with maximum prior
probability can be naturally regarded as the “true label”.
Coincidentally, the true label of training instance in PLL is
obscured by candidate labels that hinder the learning. The
key to success is also identifying the true label. Therefore,
the foundational work enlightened the successors to identify
the true label reasonably. Along this line, great efforts have
been made in designing learning objectives with some elaborate constraints for making assumptions on the model (Chen
et al., 2013; 2014) or better leveraging the prior knowledge
(Nguyen & Caruana, 2008; Zhang & Yu, 2015; Yu & Zhang,
2017; Gong et al., 2017; Feng & An, 2019a) so as to recover
the true labeling information.
However, the constrained learning objectives of the existing
methods are coupled to some specific optimization algorithms. A non-linear time complexity in the total volume
of data becomes a major limiting factor when these methods envision large amounts of training data. Furthermore,
Bottou & Bousquet (2007) proved stochastic optimization,

