The Implicit Regularization of Stochastic Gradient Flow for Least Squares

Alnur Ali 1 Edgar Dobriban 2 Ryan J. Tibshirani 3

Abstract
We study the implicit regularization of mini-batch
stochastic gradient descent, when applied to the
fundamental problem of least squares regression.
We leverage a continuous-time stochastic differential equation having the same moments as stochastic gradient descent, which we call stochastic gradient flow. We give a bound on the excess risk
of stochastic gradient flow at time t, over ridge
regression with tuning parameter λ = 1/t. The
bound may be computed from explicit constants
(e.g., the mini-batch size, step size, number of iterations), revealing precisely how these quantities
drive the excess risk. Numerical examples show
the bound can be small, indicating a tight relationship between the two estimators. We give a
similar result relating the coefficients of stochastic
gradient flow and ridge. These results hold under
no conditions on the data matrix X, and across the
entire optimization path (not just at convergence).

1. Introduction
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is one of the most widely
used optimization algorithms—given the sizes of modern
data sets, its scalability and ease-of-implementation means
that it is usually preferred to other methods, including gradient descent (Bottou, 1998; 2003; Zhang, 2004; Bousquet &
Bottou, 2008; Bottou, 2010; Bottou et al., 2016).
A recent line of work (Nacson et al., 2018; Gunasekar et al.,
2018a; Soudry et al., 2018; Suggala et al., 2018; Ali et al.,
2018; Poggio et al., 2019; Ji & Telgarsky, 2019) has shown
that the iterates generated by gradient descent, when applied
to a loss without any explicit regularizer, possess a kind
of implicit `2 regularity. Implicit regularization is useful
because it suggests a computational shortcut: the iterates
*
Equal contribution 1 Stanford University 2 University of
Pennsylvania 3 Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence
to: Alnur Ali <alnurali@stanford.edu>, Edgar Dobriban <dobriban@wharton.upenn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

generated by sequential optimization algorithms may serve
as cheap approximations to the more expensive solution
paths associated with explictly regularized problems. While
a lot of the interest in implicit regularization is new, its
origins can be traced back at least a couple of decades,
with several authors noting the apparent connection between
early-stopped gradient descent and `2 regularization (Strand,
1974; Morgan & Bourlard, 1989; Friedman & Popescu,
2004; Ramsay, 2005; Yao et al., 2007).
Thinking of SGD as a computationally cheap but noisy version of gradient descent, it is natural to ask: do the iterates
generated by SGD also possess a kind of `2 regularity? Of
course, the connection here may not be as clear as with
gradient descent, since there should be a price to pay for the
computational savings.
In this paper, we study the implicit regularization performed
by mini-batch stochastic gradient descent with a constant
step size, when applied to the fundamental problem of least
squares regression. We defer a proper review of related work
until later on, but for now mention that constant step sizes
are frequently analyzed (Bach & Moulines, 2013; Défossez
& Bach, 2014; Dieuleveut et al., 2017a; Jain et al., 2017;
Babichev & Bach, 2018), and popular in practice, because of
their simplicity. We adopt a continuous-time point-of-view,
following Ali et al. (2018), and study a stochastic differential
equation that we call stochastic gradient flow. A strength
of the continuous-time perspective is that it facilitates a
direct and precise comparison to `2 regularization, across
the entire optimization path—not just at convergence, as is
done in much of the current work on implicit regularization.
Summary of Contributions. A summary of our contributions in this paper is as follows.
• We give a bound on the excess risk of stochastic gradient flow at time t, over ridge regression with tuning
parameter λ = 1/t, for all t ≥ 0. The bound decomposes into three terms. The first term is the (scaled)
variance of ridge. The second and third terms both
stem from the variance due to mini-batching, and may
be made smaller by, e.g., increasing the mini-batch size
and/or decreasing the step size. The second term may
be interpreted as the “price of stochasticity”: it is nonnegative, but vanishes as time grows. The third term

