Good Subnetworks Provably Exist: Pruning via Greedy Forward Selection
Mao Ye 1 Chengyue Gong * 1 Lizhen Nie * 2 Denny Zhou 3 Adam Klivans 1 Qiang Liu 1

Abstract
Recent empirical works show that large deep
neural networks are often highly redundant and
one can find much smaller subnetworks without a significant drop of accuracy. However,
most existing methods of network pruning are
empirical and heuristic, leaving it open whether
good subnetworks provably exist, how to find
them efficiently, and if network pruning can be
provably better than direct training using gradient descent. We answer these problems positively by proposing a simple greedy selection
approach for finding good subnetworks, which
starts from an empty network and greedily adds
important neurons from the large network. This
differs from the existing methods based on backward elimination, which remove redundant neurons from the large network. Theoretically, applying the greedy selection strategy on sufficiently large pre-trained networks guarantees to
find small subnetworks with lower loss than networks directly trained with gradient descent. Our
results also apply to pruning randomly weighted
networks. Practically, we improve prior arts of
network pruning on learning compact neural architectures on ImageNet, including ResNet, MobilenetV2/V3, and ProxylessNet. Our theory and
empirical results on MobileNet suggest that we
should fine-tune the pruned subnetworks to leverage the information from the large model, instead
of re-training from new random initialization as
suggested in Liu et al. (2019b).

1. Introduction
The last few years have witnessed the remarkable success of large-scale deep neural networks (DNNs) in achiev*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, the
University of Texas, Austin 2 Department of Statistics, the University of Chicago 3 Google Research. Correspondence to: Mao
Ye <my21@cs.utexas.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

ing human-level accuracy on complex cognitive tasks, including image classification (e.g., He et al., 2016), speech
recognition (e.g., Amodei et al., 2016) and machine translation (e.g., Wu et al., 2016). However, modern largescale DNNs tend to suffer from slow inference speed and
high energy cost, which form critical bottlenecks on edge
devices such as mobile phones and Internet of Things
(IoT) (Cai et al., 2019). It is of increasing importance to
obtain DNNs with small sizes and low energy costs.
Network pruning has been shown to be a successful approach for learning small and energy-efficient neural networks (e.g., Han et al., 2016b). These methods start with
a pre-trained large neural network and remove the redundant units (neurons or filters/channels) to obtain a much
smaller subnetwork without significant drop of accuracy.
See e.g., Zhuang et al. (2018); Luo et al. (2017); Liu et al.
(2017; 2019b); He et al. (2019; 2018b) for examples of recent works.
However, despite the recent empirical successes, thorough
theoretical understandings on why and how network pruning works are still largely missing. Our work is motivated
by the following basic questions:
The Subnetwork Problems: Given a pre-trained large
(over-parameterized) neural network, does there exist a
small subnetwork inside the large network that performs
almost as well as the large network? How to find such
a good subnetwork computationally efficiently? Does the
small network pruned from the large network provably outperform the networks of same size but directly trained with
gradient descent starting from scratch?
We approach this problem by considering a simple greedy
selection strategy, which starts from an empty network and
constructs a good subnetwork by sequentially adding neurons from the pre-trained large network to yield the largest
immediate decrease of the loss (see Figure 1(left)). This
simple algorithm provides both strong theoretical guarantees and state-of-the-art empirical results, as summarized
below.
Greedy Pruning Learns Good Subnetworks For twolayer neural networks, our analysis shows that our method
yields a network of size n with a loss of O(1/n) + L⇤N ,
where L⇤N is the optimal loss we can achieve with all

