A Chance-Constrained Generative Framework for Sequence Optimization

Xianggen Liu 1 2 Qiang Liu 3 Sen Song 1 Jian Peng 2

Abstract
Deep generative modeling has achieved many successes for continuous data generation, such as
producing realistic images and controlling their
properties (e.g., styles). However, the development of generative modeling techniques for optimizing discrete data, such as sequences or strings,
still lags behind largely due to the challenges in
modeling complex and long-range constraints, including both syntax and semantics, in discrete
structures. In this paper, we formulate the sequence optimization task as a chance-constrained
optimization problem. The key idea is to enforce
a high probability of generating valid sequences
and also optimize the property of interest. We
propose a novel minimax algorithm to simultaneously tighten a bound of the valid chance and
optimize the expected property. Extensive experimental results in three domains demonstrate the
superiority of our approach over the existing sequence optimization methods.

1. Introduction
The sequence optimization task aims to generate valid sequences with desirable properties, which is a fundamental
problem in a variety of applications such as drug discovery (Zhou et al., 2019), code generation (Yin & Neubig,
2017), and gene analysis (Gupta & Zou, 2019). However,
this problem is very challenging. On the one hand, the
space is discrete by nature. The non-differentiability hinders back-propagate gradients to guide the learning of generators, which is effective in the continuous representation
modeling (Arjovsky et al., 2017); On the other hand, the
generated sequences should be subject to some complex and
1

Laboratory for Brain and Intelligence and Department of
Biomedical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana
Champaign, IL, USA. 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at Austin, TX, USA. Correspondence to: Xianggen
Liu <liuxg16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

long-range constraints (e.g., valency conditions in molecular
generation), pushing the discrete searching more difficult.
For example, to generate a string representing a molecule
or a mathematical expression with a desired quantitative
property, we need to both ensure the validity of the generated string subject to a grammar and model the string
representation so that it is predictive of the property.
Conventional approaches learn a sequence generator using the schemes of variational autoencoders (VAE) or generative adversarial networks (GAN). Gómez-Bombarelli
et al. (2018) map the molecular SMILES strings (Weininger,
1988) to a latent space via VAE and employs Bayesian optimization (Jones et al., 1998) to search the sequences with
desirable properties. Objective-reinforced generative adversarial networks (ORGAN, Guimaraes et al. 2017) optimizes
the property of the sequence directly by making it as part
of the reward function on the basis of SeqGAN (Yu et al.,
2017). But the lack of syntactic restriction for the structured
data makes them tend to generate invalid sequences.
To improve the validity of the generated sequences, Kusner
et al. (2017) and Dai et al. (2018) impose sophisticated and
task-specific grammars into the decoder of VAE. However,
when coming to another type of sequences (e.g., SMART,
InChI, and python code), these works require users to design new hand-crafted grammatical rules for the decoder.
Furthermore, these syntax-direct generative mechanisms
restrict the output space of the decoder, leading to limited
learning capacity.
As a result, the current sequence optimization methods in the
molecule domain achieve considerably lower performance
than the methods that work on graphs (Kajino, 2019). Therefore, sequence optimization task would be largely benefited
from a method that can effectively combine the objective of
optimizing a property and the requirement of validity.
To this end, we present a novel Chance-Constrained Generative Framework (CCGF) for sequence optimization, that
not only optimizes a desirable property but could also flexibly control the validity level of the generated sequences.
In particular, we first formulate sequence optimization as a
chance-constrained optimization problem (CCO, Charnes
et al. 1958), which involves optimizing an objective (e.g.,
a desirable property) on the condition of meeting certain
probabilistic constraints (e.g., validity requirement). Next,

