Latent Bernoulli Autoencoder
Jiri Fajtl 1 Vasileios Argyriou 1 Dorothy Monekosso 2 Paolo Remagnino 1

Abstract
In this work, we pose the question whether it is
possible to design and train an autoencoder model
in an end-to-end fashion to learn representations
in the multivariate Bernoulli latent space, and
achieve performance comparable with the state-ofthe-art variational methods. Moreover, we investigate how to generate novel samples and perform
smooth interpolation and attributes modification
in the binary latent space. To meet our objective,
we propose a simplified, deterministic model with
a straight-through gradient estimator to learn the
binary latents and show its competitiveness with
the latest VAE methods. Furthermore, we propose
a novel method based on a random hyperplane
rounding for sampling and smooth interpolation
in the latent space. Our method performs on a
par or better than the current state-of-the-art methods on common CelebA, CIFAR-10 and MNIST
datasets.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised representation learning is a very exciting direction in machine learning, particularly given the plethora
of easily available unlabeled data. There are many machine
learning algorithms that would greatly benefit from low dimensional, highly expressive features, whether for object
detection, classification, reinforcement learning or as generative models for compression, super resolution or novel
samples generation. This direction has been successfully
pursued with autoencoder models and particularly the variational autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2014) and
its derivatives. Recently, fully deterministic, regularized
(Ghosh et al., 2020) and discrete, vector-quantized (VQVAE) (van den Oord et al., 2017) autoencoders have been
proposed, demonstrating performance comparable to theirs
stochastic counterparts.
1
Kingston University, London, UK 2 Leeds Beckett University,
Leeds, UK. Correspondence to: Jiri Fajtl <j.fajtl@kingston.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

In this work we focus on a deterministic class of autoencoders learning a discrete representation, specifically the
multivariate Bernoulli distribution without enforcing any
prior on the latent space and trained with a gradient based
method in an end-to-end fashion.
Binary representations appear to be attractive for a number
of applications, for example the realization of an encoder
for sparse distributed representations for methods such as
the Hierarchical Temporal Memory (HTM) (Hawkins & Ahmad, 2016), modelling neurobiological processes (Bethge &
Berens, 2008), data compression, memory addressing (Rae
et al., 2016), for gating (hard attention)(Xu et al., 2015)
or for general representation learning (Bengio et al., 2012;
2013a). The authors believe that good, as defined by Bengio
et al. 2013a, binary features have also great potential in application to energy based memory models such as Hopfield
networks operating on a single, capsule (Sabour et al., 2017)
like neuron level.
Current neural network learning algorithms are almost exclusively based on very successful gradient based learning
methods. However, the need for differentiability of each
layer represents a challenge if one desires to train stochastic neurons or other non-differentiable functions such as
quantization. Number of techniques have been proposed
allowing gradient propagation through such neurons such
as re-parametrization, (Kingma & Welling, 2014), surrogate gradient functions (Bengio et al., 2013b) or continuous
relaxation of non-differentiable nodes (Jang et al., 2017).
In our method we follow the approach behind the straightthrough estimator (Hinton, 2012; Bengio et al., 2013b) due
its conceptually simple setup.
Sampling from and interpolating in the discrete latent
space is equally challenging. Unlike multimodal, Gaussian and many other real-valued distributions, the multivariate Bernoulli distribution concentrates most of the
information on the second and higher moments, since
the marginals are strictly unimodal and entirely described
by the mean p = E[bi ], directly giving rise to variance
V ar[bi ] = p(1 − p) for Bernoulli variable bi at dimension
i. This also seems to play a key role in biological neurons,
where the binary, pairwise correlations provide strikingly
accurate encoding for neuronal firing patterns in primate
retina (Nirenberg & Victor, 2007; Schneidman et al., 2006;
Shlens et al., 2006).

