Teaching with Limited Information on the Learner’s Behaviour

Ferdinando Cicalese 1 Sergio Filho 2 Eduardo Laber 2 Marco Molinaro 2

Abstract
Machine Teaching studies how efficiently a
Teacher can guide a Learner to a target hypothesis. We focus on the model of Machine Teaching with a black box learner introduced in [Dasgupta et al., ICML 2019], where the teaching is
done interactively without having any knowledge
of the Learner’s algorithm and class of hypotheses, apart from the fact that it contains the target hypothesis h∗ . We first refine some existing
results for this model and, then, we study new
variants of it. Motivated by the realistic possibility that h∗ is not available to the learner, we
consider the case where the teacher can only aim
at having the learner converge to a best available
approximation of h∗ . We also consider weaker
black box learners, where, in each round, the
choice of the consistent hypothesis returned to
the Teacher is not adversarial, and in particular,
we show that better provable bounds can be obtained for a type of Learner that moves to the
next hypothesis smoothly, preferring hypotheses
that are close to the current one; and for another
type of Learner that can provide to the Teacher
hypotheses chosen at random among those consistent with the examples received so far. Finally,
we present an empirical evaluation of our basic
interactive teacher on real datasets.

1. Introduction
Machine Teaching studies how efficiently a Teacher can
teach a target hypothesis to a Learner. The classic works
(Shinohara, 1991; Goldman & Kearns, 1995) consider the
setting where the Teacher sends in one shot a set of labeled
examples to the Learner, which then has to output the correct target hypothesis. In more recent works, the focus has
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Verona, Italy 2 Department of Computer Science,
PUC-Rio, Brazil. Correspondence to: Eduardo Laber <eduardo.laber1@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

been on the interactive setting (Liu et al., 2017; Chen et al.,
2018; Liu et al., 2018; Dasgupta et al., 2019) — where the
Teacher and Leaner interact over multiple rounds. In each
round, the Teacher sends examples to the Learner, which
returns 1 some feedback; this process continues until the
Learner reaches the target hypothesis (or a good approximation of it).
Machine teaching models have proved useful in several
contexts, e.g., crowd sourcing (Johns et al., 2015; Zhou
et al., 2018), intelligent tutoring systems (Rafferty et al.,
2016; Zhu et al., 2018), analysis of training set attacks (Mei
& Zhu, 2015). Moreover, commercial tools are under development by the Microsoft Machine Teaching Group, as
detailed on their web page, which are based on, or employ,
the paradigm of machine teaching, e.g., PICL, which leverages the selection of examples that maximize the training
value of the interaction with the teacher; LUIS for natural language understanding; and other projects on building
models for autonomous systems.
Most of the above works assume that the Teacher has significant knowledge about the Learner, e.g., its hypothesis
class and the specific procedure employed for learning a
hypothesis from labeled examples. However, this assumption excludes many important situations as human teaching and automatic learners with black box behaviour (e.g.
Deep Nets). Thus, recent work in the field has focused
on analysing scenarios in which the Teacher’s knowledge
about the Learner is limited (Liu et al., 2018; Dasgupta
et al., 2019).
In particular, (Dasgupta et al., 2019) addressed machine
teaching with a black box learner, where the only knowledge of the Teacher about the Learner is that its hypothesis class contains the target. They considered a model of
interaction where at each round the Teacher sends labelled
examples to the Learner and it provides a hypothesis that
is consistent with all the examples received so far. The authors provide bounds on the number of examples required
to teach the target hypothesis to worst-case learners.
Here, we refine some existing results for the model of
machine teaching with a black box learners considered in
1

Unless specified, we will tacitly assume that Learner and
Teacher are machines, hence we use neutral pronouns.

