Acceleration for Compressed Gradient Descent in Distributed and
Federated Optimization

Zhize Li 1 Dmitry Kovalev 1 Xun Qian 1 Peter Richtárik 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
Due to the high communication cost in distributed
and federated learning problems, methods relying
on compression of communicated messages are
becoming increasingly popular. While in other
contexts the best performing gradient-type methods invariably rely on some form of acceleration/momentum to reduce the number of iterations, there are no methods which combine the
benefits of both gradient compression and acceleration. In this paper, we remedy this situation
and propose the first accelerated compressed gradient descent (ACGD) methods. In the single
machine
we prove 
that ACGD enjoys the
 regime, q
L
1
rate O (1 + ω) µ log  for µ-strongly conq 

vex problems and O (1 + ω) L for convex
problems, respectively, where ω is the compression parameter. Our results improve
upon the ex

1
isting non-accelerated rates O (1 + ω) L
µ log 


and O (1 + ω) L , respectively, and recover the
optimal rates of accelerated gradient descent as
a special case when no compression (ω = 0) is
applied. We further propose a distributed variant
of ACGD (called
and prove the con ADIANA)
q
q
p ω  ωL 
ω
e ω+ L +
vergence rate O
µ
n +
n µ ,
e
where n is the number of devices/workers and O
1
hides the logarithmic factor log . This improves

e ω + L + ωL
upon the previous best result O
µ

nµ

achieved by the DIANA method of Mishchenko
et al. (2019). Finally, we conduct several experiments on real-world datasets which corroborate
our theoretical results and confirm the practical
superiority of our accelerated methods.
1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal,
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Correspondence to: Zhize Li
<zhize.li@kaust.edu.sa>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

With the proliferation of edge devices such as mobile
phones, wearables and smart home devices comes an increase in the amount of data rich in potential information
which can be mined for the benefit of the users. One of the
approaches of turning the raw data into information is via
federated learning (Konečný et al., 2016; McMahan et al.,
2017), where typically a single global supervised model is
trained in a massively distributed manner over a network of
heterogeneous devices.
Training supervised federated learning models is typically
performed by solving an optimization problem of the form
n
n
o
1X
min P (x) :=
fi (x) + ψ(x) ,
(1)
n i=1
x∈Rd
where fi : Rd → R is smooth loss associated with data
stored on device i and ψ : Rd → R ∪ {+∞} is a relatively
simple but possibly nonsmooth regularizer.
In distributed learning in general, and federated learning
in particular, communication of messages across a network
forms the bottleneck of the training system. It is thus very
important to devise novel strategies for reducing the number of communication rounds. Two of the most common
strategies are i) local computations (Ma et al., 2017; Stich,
2019; Khaled et al., 2020) and ii) communication compression (Seide et al., 2014; Alistarh et al., 2017; Wangni et al.,
2018; Horváth et al., 2019a). The former is used to perform
more local computations on each device before communication and subsequent model averaging, hoping that this
will reduce the total number of communications. The latter is used to reduce the size of communicated messages,
saving precious time spent in each communication round,
and hoping that this will not increase the total number of
communications.
1.1. Theoretical inefficiency of local methods
Despite their practical success, local methods are poorly
understood and there is much to be discovered. For instance,
there exist no theoretical results which would suggest that
any local method (e.g., local gradient descent (GD) or local
SGD) can achieve better communication complexity than

