PDO-eConvs: Partial Differential Operator Based Equivariant Convolutions

Zhengyang Shen 1 Lingshen He 2 Zhouchen Lin 2 Jinwen Ma 1

Abstract
Recent research has shown that incorporating
equivariance into neural network architectures is
very helpful, and there have been some works
investigating the equivariance of networks under
group actions. However, as digital images and
feature maps are on the discrete meshgrid, corresponding equivariance-preserving transformation
groups are very limited.
In this work, we deal with this issue from the connection between convolutions and partial differential operators (PDOs). In theory, assuming inputs
to be smooth, we transform PDOs and propose a
system which is equivariant to a much more general continuous group, the n-dimension Euclidean
group. In implementation, we discretize the system using the numerical schemes of PDOs, deriving approximately equivariant convolutions (PDOeConvs). Theoretically, the approximation error
of PDO-eConvs is of the quadratic order. It is the
first time that the error analysis is provided when
the equivariance is approximate. Extensive experiments on rotated MNIST and natural image classification show that PDO-eConvs perform competitively yet use parameters much more efficiently.
Particularly, compared with Wide ResNets, our
methods result in better results using only 12.6%
parameters.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, convolutional neural network (CNN)
models have become the dominant machine learning methods in the field of computer vision for various tasks, such
as image recognition, objective detection and semantic segmentation. Compared with fully-connected neural networks,
1

School of Mathematical Sciences and LMAM, Peking University, Beijing 100871 2 Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MoE),
School of EECS, Peking University, Beijing 100871. Correspondence to: Zhouchen Lin <zlin@pku.edu.cn>, Jinwen Ma
<jwma@math.pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

a significant advantage of CNNs is that they are shift equivariant: shifting an image and then feeding it through a number of layers is the same as feeding the original image and
then shifting the resulted feature maps. In other words, the
translation symmetry is preserved by each layer. Also, the
equivariance property brings in weight sharing, with which
we can use parameters more efficiently.
Motivated by this, Cohen and Welling (2016) proposed
group equivariant CNNs (G-CNNs), showing how convolutional networks can be generalized to exploit larger groups
of symmetries, including rotations and reflections. G-CNNs
are equivariant to the group p4m or p41 , and work on square
lattices. In addition, Hoogeboom et al. (2018) proposed
HexaConv and showed how one can implement planar convolutions and group convolutions over hexagonal lattices,
instead of square ones. As a result, the equivariance is expanded to p6m. However, it seems impossible to design
CNNs that are equivariant to the rotation angles other than
π/2 (p4m) and π/3 (p6m) as there does not seem to exist other rotational symmetric discrete lattices on the 2D
plane, if one considers equivariance in the ways as (Cohen
& Welling, 2016) and (Hoogeboom et al., 2018).
In order to exploit more symmetries, Weiler et al. (2018)
employed harmonics as steerable filters to achieve exact
equivariance to larger transformation groups in the continuous domain. However, they are difficult to preserve strong
equivariance when operating on discrete pixel grids, for two
main reasons: (i) When a harmonic is sampled on grids with
a low rate, it could appear as a lower harmonic, which introduces aliasing artifacts. (ii) With Gaussian radial profiles
as radial functions, harmonics ranged out of the sampled
kernel support, leading to a high equivariance error on implementation.
From another point of view, a conventional convolutional
filter can also be viewed as a linear combination of PDOs,
which was proposed by (Ruthotto & Haber, 2018). With this
new understanding, we assume inputs are smooth functions,
and then show how to transform the PDOs and get a system
which is exactly equivariant to a much more general continu1
Generally, the group pnm, which we will use in Section 4,
denotes the group generated by translations, reflections and rotations by 2π/n. The group pn denotes the group only generated by
translations and rotations by 2π/n.

