Feature-map-level Online Adversarial Knowledge Distillation

Inseop Chung 1 SeongUk Park 1 Jangho Kim 1 Nojun Kwak 1

Abstract
Feature maps contain rich information about image intensity and spatial correlation. However,
previous online knowledge distillation methods
only utilize the class probabilities. Thus in this
paper, we propose an online knowledge distillation method that transfers not only the knowledge
of the class probabilities but also that of the feature map using the adversarial training framework.
We train multiple networks simultaneously by employing discriminators to distinguish the feature
map distributions of different networks. Each network has its corresponding discriminator which
discriminates the feature map from its own as fake
while classifying that of the other network as real.
By training a network to fool the corresponding
discriminator, it can learn the other network’s feature map distribution. We show that our method
performs better than the conventional direct alignment method such as L1 and is more suitable
for online distillation. Also, we propose a novel
cyclic learning scheme for training more than two
networks together. We have applied our method to
various network architectures on the classification
task and discovered a significant improvement of
performance especially in the case of training a
pair of a small network and a large one.

1. Introduction
With the advent of Alexnet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), deep
convolution neural networks have achieved remarkable success in a variety of tasks. However, high-performance of
deep neural network is often gained by increasing the depth
or the width of a network. Deep and wide networks cost
a large number of computation as well as memory storage
which is not suitable for a resource-limited environment
1
Graduate School of Convergence Science and Technology,
Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence
to: Inseop Chung <jis3613@snu.ac.kr>, Nojun Kwak <nojunk@snu.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

such as mobile or embedded systems. To overcome this
issue, many researches have been conducted to develop
smaller but more accurate neural networks. Some of the
well-known methods in this line of research are parameter
quantization or binarization (Rastegari et al., 2016), pruning (Li et al., 2016) and knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton
et al., 2015).
KD has been an active area of research as a solution to
improve the performance of a light-weight network by transferring the knowledge of a large pre-trained network (or
an ensemble of small networks) as a teacher network. KD
sets the teacher network’s class probabilities as a target
which a small student network tries to mimic. By aligning
the student’s predictions to those of the teacher, the student
can improve its performance. Recently, some studies have
shown that rather than using a pre-trained teacher, simultaneously training networks to learn from each other in a peerteaching manner is also possible. This approach is called
online distillation. Deep mutual learning (DML) (Zhang
et al., 2018) and on-the-fly native ensemble (ONE) (Lan
et al., 2018) are the representative online distillation methods that show appealing results in the image classification
tasks. Conventional distillation method requires pre-training
a powerful teacher network and performs an one-way transfer to a relatively small and untrained student network. On
the other hand, in online mutual distillation, there is no
specific teacher-student role. All the networks learn simultaneously by teaching each other from the start of training.
It trains with the conventional cross-entropy loss from the
ground truth label along with the mimicry loss to learn from
its peers. Networks trained in such an online distillation way
achieve results superior not only to the networks trained
with the cross-entropy loss alone but also to those trained in
a conventional offline distillation manner from a pre-trained
teacher network.
However, aforementioned online distillation methods make
use of only the logit information. While the logit contains the probabilistic information over classes, the feature map, the output of convolution layer, has more meaningful and abundant feature information on image intensity and spatial correlation. In offline distillation which
utilizes a pre-trained model as a teacher network, many
methods such as FitNet (Romero et al., 2014), attention
transfer (AT) (Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016a) and factor

