Q-value Path Decomposition for Deep Multiagent Reinforcement Learning

Yaodong Yang 1 Jianye Hao 1 2 Guangyong Chen 3 4 Hongyao Tang 1 Yingfeng Chen 5 Yujing Hu 5
Changjie Fan 5 Zhongyu Wei 6

Abstract
Recently, deep multiagent reinforcement learning
(MARL) has become a highly active research area
as many real-world problems can be inherently
viewed as multiagent systems. A particularly interesting and widely applicable class of problems
is the partially observable cooperative multiagent
setting, in which a team of agents learns to coordinate their behaviors conditioning on their private observations and commonly shared global
reward signals. One natural solution is to resort to
the centralized training and decentralized execution paradigm and during centralized training, one
key challenge is the multiagent credit assignment:
how to allocate the global rewards for individual agent policies for better coordination towards
maximizing system-level’s benefits. In this paper,
we propose a new method called Q-value Path
Decomposition (QPD) to decompose the system’s
global Q-values into individual agents’ Q-values.
Unlike previous works which restrict the representation relation of the individual Q-values and the
global one, we leverage the integrated gradient
attribution technique into deep MARL to directly
decompose global Q-values along trajectory paths
to assign credits for agents. We evaluate QPD
on the challenging StarCraft II micromanagement
tasks and show that QPD achieves the state-ofthe-art performance in both homogeneous and heterogeneous multiagent scenarios compared with
existing cooperative MARL algorithms.
1 College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University 2 Huawei Noah‘s Ark Lab 3 Guangdong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Computer Vision and Virtual Reality Technology, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China 4 Tencent Quantum Lab
5 NetEase Fuxi AI Lab 6 Fudan University. Correspondence
to: Jianye Hao <jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn>, Guangyong Chen
<gy.chen@siat.ac.cn>.

Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
The cooperative multiagent reinforcement learning problem
has attracted increasing research attention in the last decade
(Busoniu et al., 2008; Gupta et al., 2017; Palmer et al., 2018),
where a system of agents learn towards coordinated policies
to optimize the accumulated global rewards. Cooperative
multiagent systems (MAS) have been demonstrated beneficial in numerous applications, e.g., the coordination of
autonomous vehicles (Cao et al., 2012) and optimizing the
productivity of a factory in distributed logistics (Ying &
Sang, 2005). One natural way to address the cooperative
MARL problem is the centralized approach, which views
the overall MAS as a whole and solves it as a single-agent
learning task. In such settings, existing reinforcement learning (RL) techniques can be leveraged to learn joint optimal
policies based on agents’ joint observations and common
rewards (Tan, 1993). However, the centralized approach
usually does not scale well, since the joint action space of
agents grows exponentially as the agent number increases.
Furthermore, centralized approaches may not be applicable
in practical settings where only distributed policies can be
deployed due to private observations and communication
constraints (Foerster et al., 2018), i.e., each agent can only
decide how to behave based on its local observations.
To address these above limitations, researchers resort to
decentralized approaches, in which each agent learns its
optimal policy independently based on its local observations
and individual rewards. However, in cooperative multiagent
environments, all agents receive the same global reward
signal. Letting individual agents learn concurrently based
on the global reward (aka. independent learners) has been
well studied (Tan, 1993), but sometimes even shown to be
difficult in even simple two-agent, single-state stochastic
coordination problems. One main reason is that the global
reward signal brings the nonstationarity that agents cannot
distinguish between the stochasticity of the environment and
the explorative behaviors of other co-learners (Lowe et al.,
2017), thus may mistakenly update their policies. Therefore,
the key of coordinating agents is to correctly allocate the
reward signal for each agent, which is also known as the
multiagent credit assignment problem (Chang et al., 2004).
For simple problems, it might be possible to manually de-

