Compressive sensing with un-trained neural networks:
Gradient descent finds the smoothest approximation

Reinhard Heckel 1 Mahdi Soltanolkotabi 2

Abstract
Un-trained convolutional neural networks have
emerged as highly successful tools for image recovery and restoration. They are capable of solving standard inverse problems such as denoising
and compressive sensing with excellent results by
simply fitting a neural network model to measurements from a single image or signal without the
need for any additional training data. For some
applications, this critically requires additional regularization in the form of early stopping the optimization. For signal recovery from a few measurements, however, un-trained convolutional networks have an intriguing self-regularizing property: Even though the network can perfectly fit
any image, the network recovers a natural image from few measurements when trained with
gradient descent until convergence. In this paper, we provide numerical evidence for this property and study it theoretically. We show that—
without any further regularization—an un-trained
convolutional neural network can approximately
reconstruct signals and images that are sufficiently
structured, from a near minimal number of random measurements.

1. Introduction
Un-trained convolutional neural networks have emerged as
highly successful tools for image recovery and restoration,
for a variety of problems including denoising, compressive
sensing, and inpainting (Ulyanov et al., 2018; Jin et al.,
2019; Veen et al., 2018; Jagatap & Hegde, 2019; Heckel,
2019; Heckel & Hand, 2019; Bostan et al., 2020; Wang
et al., 2020; Hyder & Asif, 2020; Arora et al., 2020). As
1
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technical University of Munich 2 Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Southern California. Correspondence to: Reinhard
Heckel <reinhard.heckel@tum.de>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

opposed to trained convolutional neural networks, that learn
an image prior from training data, un-trained convolutional
networks act as an image prior without any training and
solely based on the architecture of the network and the
optimization procedure used to fit them.
The benefit of untrained networks was first observed in
the Deep Image Prior (DIP) paper (Ulyanov et al., 2018).
The key observation of Ulyanov et al. (2018) is that fitting
a standard over-parameterized convolutional autoencoder
(specifically, the U-net (Ronneberger et al., 2015) or variations thereoff) to a single noisy/corrupted image, when
combined with early stopping, yields excellent denoising,
inpainting, and super-resolution performance. Subsequent
literature has demonstrated that many elements of the architecture of a convolutional autoencoder—such as the encoder
part—are irrelevant for this behavior to emerge. In particular
the papers (Heckel & Hand, 2019; Heckel & Soltanolkotabi,
2020) highlight the critical role of convolutions with fixed
convolutional kernels.
Un-trained convolutional networks are empirically most effective when the network is over-parametrized, meaning that
is has more parameters than image pixels. This holds even
though in this regime the neural network can in principle
fit any image perfectly, including random noise. Therefore,
further regularization is critical to performance in many applications. For instance denoising (Ulyanov et al., 2018;
Heckel & Soltanolkotabi, 2020) critically requires early
stopping, as without early stopping the noisy image is fitted perfectly and no noise is removed. However, perhaps
surprisingly, for some inverse problems including inpainting (Ulyanov et al., 2018) and compressive sensing, no
further regularization is necessary! That is, a convolutional
neural network, when fitted to compressive measurements
from a single image (no other training data) can estimate
the original image well, as illustrated in Figure 1. This
phenomenon demonstrates an intriguing self-regularization
capability in the context of compressive sensing.
The overarching goal of this paper is to study compressive
sensing with un-trained convolutional generators theoretically in order to explain the above phenomenon. In particular, our goal is to understand (i) why for compressive
sensing problems gradient descent can reconstruct a good

