Implicit differentiation of Lasso-type models for hyperparameter optimization

Quentin Bertrand * 1 Quentin Klopfenstein * 2 Mathieu Blondel 3 Samuel Vaiter 4 Alexandre Gramfort 1
Joseph Salmon 5

Abstract
Setting regularization parameters for Lasso-type
estimators is notoriously difficult, though crucial for obtaining the best accuracy. The most
popular hyperparameter optimization approach is
grid-search on a held-out dataset. However, gridsearch requires to choose a predefined grid of
parameters and scales exponentially in the number of parameters. Another class of approaches
casts hyperparameter optimization as a bi-level
optimization problem, typically solved by gradient descent. The key challenge for these approaches is the estimation of the gradient w.r.t.
the hyperparameters. Computing that gradient
via forward or backward automatic differentiation usually suffers from high memory consumption, while implicit differentiation typically involves solving a linear system which can be prohibitive and numerically unstable. In addition,
implicit differentiation usually assumes smooth
loss functions, which is not the case of Lassotype problems. This work introduces an efficient
implicit differentiation algorithm, without matrix inversion, tailored for Lasso-type problems.
Our proposal scales to high-dimensional data by
leveraging the sparsity of the solutions. Empirically, we demonstrate that the proposed method
outperforms a large number of standard methods
for hyperparameter optimization.

*
Equal contribution 1 Université Paris-Saclay, Inria, CEA,
Palaiseau, France 2 Institut Mathématique de Bourgogne, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France 3 Google Research, Brain team,
Paris, France 4 CNRS and Institut Mathématique de Bourgogne,
Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France 5 IMAG, Université de
Montpellier, CNRS, Montpellier, France. Correspondence to:
Quentin Bertrand <quentin.bertrand@inria.fr>, Quentin Klopfenstein <quentin.klopfenstein@u-bourgogne.fr>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
In many statistical applications, the number of parameters p is much larger than the number of observations n.
In such scenarios, a popular approach to tackle linear regression problems is to consider convex `1 -type penalties,
used in Lasso (Tibshirani, 1996), Group-Lasso (Yuan and
Lin, 2006), Elastic-Net (Zou and Hastie, 2005) or adaptive Lasso (Zou, 2006). These Lasso-type estimators rely
on regularization hyperparameters, trading data fidelity
against sparsity. Unfortunately, setting these hyperparameters is hard in practice: estimators based on `1 -type penalties are indeed more sensitive to the choice of hyperparameters than `2 regularized estimators.
To control for overfitting, it is customary to use different
datasets for model training (i.e., computing the regression
coefficients) and hyperparameter selection (i.e., choosing
the best regularization parameters). A metric, e.g., holdout loss, is optimized on a validation dataset (Stone and
Ramer, 1965). Alternatively one can rely on a statistical
criteria that penalizes complex models such as AIC/BIC
(Liu et al., 2011) or SURE (Stein Unbiased Risk Estimator, Stein 1981). In all cases, hyperparameters are tuned to
optimize a chosen metric.
The canonical hyperparameter optimization method is
grid-search. It consists in fitting and selecting the best
model over a predefined grid of parameter values. The
complexity of grid-search is exponential with the number
of hyperparameters, making it only competitive when the
number of hyperparameters is small. Other hyperparameter
selection strategies include random search (Bergstra and
Bengio, 2012) and Bayesian optimization (Brochu et al.,
2010; Snoek et al., 2012) that aims to learn an approximation of the metric over the parameter space and rely on an
exploration policy to find the optimum.
Another line of work for hyperparameter optimization
(HO) relies on gradient descent in the hyperparameter
space. This strategy has been widely explored for smooth
objective functions (Larsen et al., 1996; Bengio, 2000;
Larsen et al., 2012). The main challenge for this class of
methods is estimating the gradient w.r.t. the hyperparameters. Gradient estimation techniques are mostly divided in
two categories. Implicit differentiation requires the exact

