Uncertainty quantification for nonconvex tensor completion:
Confidence intervals, heteroscedasticity and optimality

Changxiao Cai 1 H. Vincent Poor 1 Yuxin Chen 1

Abstract
We study the distribution and uncertainty of nonconvex optimization for noisy tensor completion
— the problem of estimating a low-rank tensor
given incomplete and corrupted observations of
its entries. Focusing on a two-stage nonconvex estimation algorithm proposed by (Cai et al., 2019),
we characterize the distribution of this estimator
down to fine scales. This distributional theory
in turn allows one to construct valid and short
confidence intervals for both the unseen tensor
entries and its underlying tensor factors. The
proposed inferential procedure enjoys several important features: (1) it is fully adaptive to noise
heteroscedasticity, and (2) it is data-driven and
adapts automatically to unknown noise distributions. Furthermore, our findings unveil the statistical optimality of nonconvex tensor completion:
it attains un-improvable estimation accuracy —
including both the rates and the pre-constants —
under i.i.d. Gaussian noise.

1. Introduction
1.1. Noisy low-rank tensor completion
Tensor data are routinely employed in data and information
sciences to model (structured) multi-dimensional objects
(Kolda & Bader, 2009; Anandkumar et al., 2014; Sidiropoulos et al., 2017; Zhang, 2019). In many practical scenarios
of interest, however, we do not have full access to a largedimensional tensor of interest, as only a sampling of its
entries are revealed to us; yet we would still wish to reliably
infer all missing data. This task, commonly referred to as
tensor completion, finds applications in numerous domains
including medical imaging (Semerci et al., 2014), visual
data analysis (Liu et al., 2013), seismic data reconstruction
(Kreimer et al., 2013), to name just a few. In order to make

meaningful inference about the unseen entries, additional
information about the unknown tensor plays a pivotal role
(otherwise one is in the position with fewer equations than
unknowns). A common type of such prior information is
low-rank structure, which hypothesizes that the unknown
tensor is decomposable into the superposition of a small
number of rank-one tensors. Substantial attempts have been
made in the past few years to tackle this low-rank tensor
completion problem.
To set the stage for a formal discussion, suppose we are
interested in reconstructing a third-order tensor T ? =
[Ti,j,k ]1≤i,j,k≤d ∈ Rd×d×d , which is a priori known to
have low canonical polyadic (CP) rank. This means that T ?
admits the following CP decomposition1
T? =

Xr
l=1

u?l ⊗ u?l ⊗ u?l =:

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

l=1

(u?l )⊗3 ,

(1)

where u?l ∈ Rd (1 ≤ l ≤ r) represents the unknown tensor factor, and the rank r is considerably smaller than the
ambient dimension d. What we have obtained is a highly incomplete collection of noisy observations about the entries
of T ? ∈ Rd×d×d ; more precisely, suppose we observe
obs
?
Ti,j,k
= Ti,j,k
+ Ei,j,k ,

(i, j, k) ∈ Ω,

(2)

where Ω ⊆ [d]3 with [d] := {1, · · · , d} is a subset of entries,
obs
Ti,j,k
denotes the observed entry in the (i, j, k)-th position,
and we use Ei,j,k to represent the noise, in an attempt to
model more realistic scenarios. The presence of missing
data and noise, as well as the “notorious” tensor structure
(which is not as computationally friendly as its matrix analog (Hillar & Lim, 2013)), poses severe computational and
statistical challenges for reliable tensor reconstruction.
1.2. Review: a nonconvex optimization approach
A natural reconstruction strategy based on the partial data
at hand is to resort to the following least-squares problem:
"
X

 r
X

(i,j,k)∈Ω

l=1

1

Electrical Engineering, Princeton University. Correspondence
to: Yuxin Chen <yuxin.chen@princeton.edu>.

Xr

minimize f (U ) =
U ∈Rd×r

u⊗3
l

#2


i,j,k

obs
−Ti,j,k

. (3)

1
For any u, v, w ∈ Rd , we denote by u ⊗ v ⊗ w ∈ Rd×d×d
such that (u ⊗ v ⊗ w)i,j,k = ui vj wk for all 1 ≤ i, j, k ≤ d.

