Train Large, Then Compress:
Rethinking Model Size for Efficient Training and Inference of Transformers

Zhuohan Li * 1 Eric Wallace * 1 Sheng Shen * 1 Kevin Lin * 1
Kurt Keutzer 1 Dan Klein 1 Joseph E. Gonzalez 1

Abstract
Since hardware resources are limited, the objective of training deep learning models is typically to maximize accuracy subject to the time
and memory constraints of training and inference.
We study the impact of model size in this setting, focusing on Transformer models for NLP
tasks that are limited by compute: self-supervised
pretraining and high-resource machine translation. We first show that even though smaller
Transformer models execute faster per iteration,
wider and deeper models converge in significantly
fewer steps. Moreover, this acceleration in convergence typically outpaces the additional computational overhead of using larger models. Therefore,
the most compute-efficient training strategy is to
counterintuitively train extremely large models
but stop after a small number of iterations. This
leads to an apparent trade-off between the training
efficiency of large Transformer models and the
inference efficiency of small Transformer models. However, we show that large models are
more robust to compression techniques such as
quantization and pruning than small models. Consequently, one can get the best of both worlds:
heavily compressed, large models achieve higher
accuracy than lightly compressed, small models.

1. Introduction
In the current deep learning paradigm, using more compute
(e.g., increasing model size, dataset size, or training steps)
typically leads to higher model accuracy (Brock et al., 2019;
Raffel et al., 2019). This phenomenon is exacerbated by
the recent success of self-supervised pretraining (Devlin
et al., 2019; Hénaff et al., 2019), which allows training
*
Equal contribution 1 UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Zhuohan Li <zhuohan@cs.berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Common
Practice

Train Small
Model

Stop Training
When Converged

Lightly
Compress

Optimal

Train Large
Model

Stop Training
Early

Heavily
Compress

Figure 1. Under the usual presumption that models are trained to
convergence, only small models that are fast-to-execute are feasible
in resource-constrained settings. Our work shows that the most
compute-efficient training scheme is instead to train very large
models, stop them well short of convergence, and then heavily
compress them to meet test-time constraints.

to scale to massive amounts of unlabeled data and very
large neural models. Consequently, computational resources
are increasingly the critical constraint on improving model
accuracy. This constraint causes the (often implicit) goal of
model training to be maximizing compute efficiency: how
to achieve the highest model accuracy given a fixed amount
of hardware and training time.
Maximizing compute efficiency requires rethinking common assumptions about model training. In particular, there
is typically an implicit assumption that models must be
trained until convergence, which makes larger models appear less viable for limited compute budgets. We challenge
this assumption by demonstrating the opportunity to increase model size at the cost of convergence. Concretely,
we show that the fastest way to train Transformer models (Vaswani et al., 2017) is to substantially increase model
size but stop training very early.
In our experiments, we vary the width and depth of Transformer models and evaluate their training time and accuracy on self-supervised pretraining (RO BERTA (Liu et al.,
2019b) trained on Wikipedia and BookCorpus) and machine
translation (WMT14 English→French). For these tasks, we
first show that larger models converge to lower validation
error in fewer gradient updates than smaller models (Section 3). Moreover, this increase in convergence outpaces the
additional computational overhead of using larger models—
the most compute-efficient models are extremely large and
stopped well short of convergence (e.g., Figure 2, left). We
also show that this acceleration in wall-clock convergence

