ConQUR: Mitigating Delusional Bias in Deep Q-learning

DiJia (Andy) Su 1 2 Jayden Ooi 1 Tyler Lu 1 Dale Schuurmans 1 3 Craig Boutilier 1

Abstract
Delusional bias is a fundamental source of error in approximate Q-learning. To date, the only
techniques that explicitly address delusion require
comprehensive search using tabular value estimates. In this paper, we develop efficient methods to mitigate delusional bias by training Qapproximators with labels that are “consistent”
with the underlying greedy policy class. We introduce a simple penalization scheme that encourages Q-labels used across training batches to remain (jointly) consistent with the expressible policy class. We also propose a search framework
that allows multiple Q-approximators to be generated and tracked, thus mitigating the effect of
premature (implicit) policy commitments. Experimental results demonstrate that these methods
can improve the performance of Q-learning in a
variety of Atari games, sometimes dramatically.

1. Introduction
Q-learning (Watkins & Dayan, 1992; Sutton & Barto, 2018)
lies at the heart of many of the recent successes of deep reinforcement learning (RL) (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al.,
2016), with recent advances (e.g., van Hasselt (2010); Bellemare et al. (2017); Wang et al. (2016); Hessel et al. (2017))
helping to make it among the most widely used methods
in applied RL. Despite these successes, many properties
of Q-learning are poorly understood, and it is challenging
to successfully apply deep Q-learning in practice. Various
modifications have been proposed to improve convergence
or approximation error (Gordon, 1995; 1999; Szepesvári
1

Google Research, Mountain View, California, USA
Department of Electrical Engineering, Princeton University,
New Jersey, USA 3 Department of Computing Science, University
of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. Correspondence to:
DiJia (Andy) Su <andy.2008.su@gmail.com>, Jayden Ooi
<jayden@google.com>, Tyler Lu <tylerlu@google.com>,
Dale Schuurmans <daes@ualberta.ca>, Craig Boutilier
<cboutilier@google.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

& Smart, 2004; Melo & Ribeiro, 2007; Maei et al., 2010;
Munos et al., 2016); but it remains difficult to reliably attain
both robustness and scalability.
Recently, Lu et al. (2018) identified a source of error in Qlearning with function approximation known as delusional
bias. This bias arises because Q-learning updates the value
of state-action pairs using estimates of (sampled) successorstate values that can be mutually inconsistent given the policy class induced by the approximator. This can result in
unbounded approximation error, divergence, policy cycling,
and other undesirable behavior. To handle delusion, the
authors propose a policy-consistent backup operator that
maintains multiple Q-value estimates organized into information sets. Each information set has its own backed-up
Q-values and corresponding “policy commitments” responsible for inducing these values. Systematic management
of these sets ensures that only consistent choices of maximizing actions are used to update Q-values. All potential
solutions are tracked to prevent premature convergence on
specific policy commitments. Unfortunately, the proposed
algorithms use tabular representations of Q-functions, so
while this establishes foundations for delusional bias, the
function approximator is used neither for generalization nor
to manage the size of the state/action space. Consequently,
this approach is not scalable to practical RL problems.
In this work, we develop C ON QUR (CONsistent Q-Update
Regression), a general framework for integrating policyconsistent backups with regression-based function approximation for Q-learning, and for managing the search through
the space of possible regressors (i.e., information sets). With
suitable search heuristics, the proposed framework provides
a computationally effective means for minimizing the effects
of delusional bias, while scaling to practical problems.
Our main contributions are as follows. First, we define
novel augmentations of Q-regression to increase the degree
of policy consistency across training batches. Since testing
exact consistency is expensive, we introduce an efficient softconsistency penalty that promotes consistency of labels with
earlier policy commitments. Second, using information-set
structure (Lu et al., 2018), we define a search space over Qregressors to explore multiple sets of policy commitments.
Third, we propose heuristics to guide the search, critical
given the combinatorial nature of information sets. Finally,

