Oracle Efficient Private Non-Convex Optimization

Seth Neel * 1 Aaron Roth * 2 Giuseppe Vietri * 3 Zhiwei Steven Wu * 3

Abstract
One of the most effective algorithms for differentially private learning and optimization is objective perturbation. This technique augments a
given optimization problem (e.g. deriving from
an ERM problem) with a random linear term, and
then exactly solves it. However prior analyses of
this approach crucially rely on the convexity and
smoothness of the objective function. We give two
algorithms that extend this approach substantially.
The first algorithm requires nothing except boundedness of the loss function, and operates over a
discrete domain. We achieve this by introducing a
novel “normalization“ step into the objective perturbation algorithm, which provides enough stability to satisfy differential privacy even without
convexity. The second algorithm operates over
a continuous domain and its privacy analysis requires only that the loss function be bounded and
Lipschitz in its continuous parameter. We complement our theoretical results with an empirical
evaluation of the non-convex case, in which we
use an integer program solver as our optimization
oracle. We find that for the problem of learning
linear classifiers, directly optimizing for 0/1 loss
using our approach can out-perform the more standard approach of privately optimizing a convexsurrogate loss function on the Adult dataset.

1. Introduction
Consider the general problem of optimizing a function
L : Ln × W 7→ R defined with respect to a dataset D ∈ Ln
*

Equal contribution 1 Wharton Statistics Department, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA 2 Department
of Computer and Information Sciences, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA 3 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA. Correspondence to: Seth Neel <sethneel93@gmail.com >, Aaron Roth <aaroth@cis.upenn.edu>,
Giuseppe Vietri <vietr002@umn.edu>, Zhiwei Steven Wu
<zstevenwu@cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

and a parameter w ∈ W: arg minw L(D, w). This general
class of problems includes classical empirical risk minimization, amongst others, and is a basic problem in learning and
optimization. We say that such a function L is 1-sensitive in
the dataset D if changing one datapoint in D can change the
value of L(D, w) by at most 1, for any parameter value w.
Suppose that we want to solve an optimization problem like
this subject to the constraint of differential privacy. The exponential mechanism provides a powerful, general-purpose,
and often error-optimal method to solve this problem (McSherry & Talwar, 2007). It requires no assumptions on the
function other than that it is 1-sensitive (this is a minimal
assumption for privacy: more generally, its guarantees are
parameterized by the sensitivity of the function). Unfortunately, the exponential mechanism is generally infeasible to
run: its implementation (and the implementation of related
mechanisms, like “Report-Noisy-Max” (Dwork & Roth,
2014)) requires the ability to enumerate the parameter range
W, making it infeasible in most learning settings, despite
its use in proving general information theoretic bounds in
private PAC learning (Kasiviswanathan et al., 2011). When
L(D, w) is continuous, convex, and satisfies second order
conditions like strong convexity or smoothness, the situation
is better: there are a number of algorithms available, including simple output perturbation (Chaudhuri et al., 2011) and
objective perturbation (Chaudhuri et al., 2011; Kifer et al.,
2012; Iyengar et al., 2019). This partly mirrors the situation
in non-private data analysis, in which convex optimization
problems can be solved quickly and efficiently, and most
non-convex problems are NP-hard in the worst case.
In the non-private case, however, the worst-case complexity
of optimization problems does not tell the whole story. For
many non-convex optimization problems, such as integer
programming, there are fast heuristics that not only reliably
succeed in optimizing functions deriving from real inputs,
but can also certify their own success. In such settings, can
we leverage these heuristics to obtain practical private optimization algorithms? In this paper, we give two novel analyses of objective perturbation algorithms that extend their
applicability to 1-sensitive non-convex problems (and more
generally, bounded sensitivity functions). We also get new
results for convex problems, without the need for second
order conditions like smoothness or strong convexity. Our
first algorithm operates over a discrete parameter space W,

