Near-linear time Gaussian process optimization
with adaptive batching and resparsification

Daniele Calandriello * 1 Luigi Carratino * 2 Alessandro Lazaric 3 Michal Valko 4 Lorenzo Rosasco 2 5 6

Abstract
Gaussian processes (GP) are one of the most successful frameworks to model uncertainty. However, GP optimization (e.g., GP-UCB) suffers
from major scalability issues. Experimental time
grows linearly with the number of evaluations,
unless candidates are selected in batches (e.g.,
using GP-BUCB) and evaluated in parallel. Furthermore, computational cost is often prohibitive
since algorithms such as GP-BUCB require a time
at least quadratic in the number of dimensions and
iterations to select each batch. In this paper, we introduce BBKB (Batch Budgeted Kernel Bandits),
the first no-regret GP optimization algorithm that
provably runs in near-linear time and selects candidates in batches. This is obtained with a new
guarantee for the tracking of the posterior variances that allows BBKB to choose increasingly
larger batches, improving over GP-BUCB. Moreover, we show that the same bound can be used
to adaptively delay costly updates to the sparse
GP approximation used by BBKB, achieving a
near-constant per-step amortized cost. These findings are then confirmed in several experiments,
where BBKB is much faster than state-of-the-art
methods.

1. Introduction
Gaussian process (GP) optimization is a principled way
to optimize a black-box function from noisy evaluations
(i.e., sometimes referred to as bandit feedback). Due to the
presence of noise, the optimization process is modeled as a
*

Equal contribution 1 Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genova,
Italy (now at Deepmind, Paris, France) 2 MaLGa - Dibris - Università degli Studi di Genova, Italy 3 Facebook AI Research, Paris,
France 4 DeepMind, Paris, France 5 MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA
6
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genova, Italy. Correspondence
to: Daniele Calandriello <daniele.calandriello@iit.it>, Luigi Carratino <luigi.carratino@dibris.unige.it>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

sequential learning problem, where at each step t:
1) the learner chooses candidate xt out of a decision set A;
2) the environment evaluates f (xt ) and returns a noisy feedback yt to the learner;
3) the learner uses yt to guide its subsequent choices.
The goal of the learner is to converge over time to a global
optimal candidate. This goal is often formalized as a regret minimization problem, where the performance of the
learner is evaluated by the cumulative
value of the candiP
dates chosen over time (i.e., t f (xt )) compared to the
optimum of the function f ? = maxx f (x). While many
GP optimization algorithms come with strong theoretical
guarantees and are empirically effective, most of them suffer
from experimental and/or computational scalability issues.
Experimental scalability. GP optimization algorithms usually follow a sequential interaction protocol, where at each
step t, they wait for the feedback yt before proposing a
new candidate xt+1 . As such, the experimentation time
grows linearly with t, which may be impractical in applications where each evaluation may take long time to complete
(e.g., in lab experiments). This problem can be mitigated by
switching to batched algorithms, which at step t propose a
batch of candidates that are evaluated in parallel. After the
batch is evaluated, the algorithm integrates the feedbacks
and move on to select the next batch. This strategy reduces
the experimentation time, but it may degrade the optimization performance: the candidates in the batch are picked
by a strategy based on less feedback than the one used by
a sequentially strategy that selects candidates based on the
feedback of each previous choice. Many approaches have
been proposed for batched GP optimization. Among those
with theoretical guarantees, some are based on sequential
greedy selection (Desautels et al., 2014), entropy search
(Hennig & Schuler, 2012), determinantal point process sampling (Kathuria et al., 2016), or multi-agent cooperation
(Daxberger & Low, 2017), as well as many heuristics for
which no regret guarantees (Chevalier & Ginsbourger, 2013;
Shah & Ghahramani, 2015). However, they all suffer from
the same computational limitations of classical GP methods.
Computational scalability. The computational complexity of choosing a single candidate in classical GP methods
grows quadratically with the number of evaluations. This

