Learning Portable Representations for High-Level Planning

Steven James 1 Benjamin Rosman 1 George Konidaris 2

Abstract
We present a framework for autonomously learning a portable representation that describes a collection of low-level continuous environments. We
show that these abstract representations can be
learned in a task-independent egocentric space
specific to the agent that, when grounded with
problem-specific information, are provably sufficient for planning. We demonstrate transfer in
two different domains, where an agent learns a
portable, task-independent symbolic vocabulary,
as well as operators expressed in that vocabulary,
and then learns to instantiate those operators on a
per-task basis. This reduces the number of samples required to learn a representation of a new
task.

1. Introduction
A major goal of artificial intelligence is creating agents
capable of acting effectively in a variety of complex environments. Robots, in particular, face the difficult task
of generating behaviour while sensing and acting in highdimensional and continuous spaces. Decision-making at this
level is typically infeasible—the robot’s innate action space
involves directly actuating motors at a high frequency, but it
would take thousands of such actuations to accomplish most
useful goals. Similarly, sensors provide high-dimensional
signals that are often continuous and noisy. Hierarchical
reinforcement learning (Barto & Mahadevan, 2003) tackles
this problem by abstracting away the low-level action space
using higher-level skills, which can accelerate learning and
planning. Skills alleviate the problem of reasoning over
low-level actions, but the state space remains unchanged;
efficient planning may therefore also require state space
abstraction.

One approach is to build a state abstraction of the environment that supports planning. Such representations can then
be used as input to task-level planners, which plan using
far more compact abstract state descriptors. This mitigates
the issue of reward sparsity and admits solutions to longhorizon tasks, but raises the question of how to build the
appropriate abstract representation of a problem. This is
often resolved manually, requiring substantial effort and
expertise on the part of the human designer.
Fortunately, recent work demonstrates how to learn a provably sound symbolic representation autonomously, given
only the data obtained by executing the high-level actions
available to the agent (Konidaris et al., 2018). A major shortcoming of that framework is the lack of generalisability—
the learned symbols are grounded in the current task, so an
agent must relearn the appropriate representation for each
new task it encounters (see Figure 1). This is a data- and
computation-intensive procedure involving clustering, probabilistic multi-class classification, and density estimation in
high-dimensional spaces, and requires repeated execution
of actions within the environment.

(a) The distribution over positions from where the agent is
able to interact with the door.

(b) In the new task, the
learned distribution is no
longer useful since the door’s
location has changed.

Figure 1: An illustration of the shortcomings of learning
task-specific state abstractions (Konidaris et al., 2018). (a)
An agent (represented by a red circle) learns a distribution
over states (x, y, θ tuples, describing its position in a room)
in which it can interact with a door. (b) However, this
distribution cannot be reused in a new room with a different
layout.

1

School of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics,
University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa
2
Department of Computer Science, Brown University, Providence RI 02912, USA. Correspondence to: Steven James
<steven.james@wits.ac.za>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

The contribution of this work is twofold. First, we introduce
a framework for deriving a symbolic abstraction over an egocentric state space (Agre & Chapman, 1987; Guazzelli et al.,
1998; Finney et al., 2002; Konidaris et al., 2012).1 Because
such state spaces are relative to the agent, they provide a
1

Egocentric state spaces have also been adopted by recent

