A Geometric Approach to Archetypal Analysis via Sparse Projections

V. Abrol 1 P. Sharma 2

Abstract

where k.kF is the Frobenius norm (Tosic & Frossard, 2011;
Elhamifar et al., 2012). Different decomposition approaches
employ different constraints (such as non-negativity, sparsity, independence etc.) on factors D and A and hence lead
to different type of representations of the data, suitable for
various pattern recognition tasks. For instance, clustering
approaches give easy interpretable representation, while approaches such as PCA/ICA/NMF/SC are more efficient in
capturing inherent structures and patterns of data (Mørup &
Hansen, 2012).

Archetypal analysis (AA) aims to extract patterns
using self-expressive decomposition of data as
convex combinations of extremal points (on the
convex hull) of the data. This work presents a
computationally efficient greedy AA (GAA) algorithm. GAA leverages the underlying geometry
of AA, is scalable to larger datasets, and has significantly faster convergence rate. To achieve this,
archetypes are learned via sparse projection of
data. In the transformed space, GAA employs
an iterative subset selection approach to identify
archetypes based on the sparsity of convex representations. The work further presents the use of
GAA algorithm for extended AA models such as
robust and kernel AA. Experimental results show
that GAA is considerably faster while performing
comparable to existing methods for tasks such as
classification, data visualization/categorization.

1. Introduction
In recent years, various matrix decompositions techniques
have helped researchers in summarizing and visualizing
large datasets of natural scenes, objects, faces, videos, and
text (Elhamifar et al., 2012; Mørup & Hansen, 2012; Thurau
& Bauckhage, 2009). The popular approaches are clustering
methods, principal component analysis (PCA), independent
component analysis (ICA), dictionary learning (DL)/sparse
coding (SC), non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) etc
(Bernstein, 2009; Mørup & Hansen, 2012; Tosic & Frossard,
2011). Specifically, we seek factors D ∈ Rn×d and A ∈
Rd×l for a collection of signals as columns of matrix X ∈
Rn×l by minimizing the objective function
kX − DAk2F =

l
X

kxi − Dai k22 ,

(1)

i=1
1

Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford. 2 Department of
Engineering Science, University of Oxford. Correspondence to:
<abrol@maths.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

This paper is focused on an unsupervised learning technique
called archetypal analysis (AA), which is intuitive and easy
to interpret like clustering, and has flexibility as that of matrix factorization (Chen et al., 2014; Mørup & Hansen, 2012;
Fotiadou et al., 2017). In contrast to centroids, archetypes
characterize extremal rather than average properties of the
given data, and therefore leads to a more compact representation (Seth & Eugster, 2016a; Yale Song et al., 2015). AA is
decomposition of data as convex combinations of extremal
points that lie on the convex hull of the data and are themselves restricted to being a convex combinations of individual observations (Mørup & Hansen, 2012; Mei et al., 2018).
AA has found application in variety of problems ranging
from style transfer (Wynen et al., 2018), hyperspectral image unmixing (Zhao et al., 2016; Zhao et al., 2016), fMRI
analysis (Hinrich et al., 2016), video summarization (Yale
Song et al., 2015), clustering (Mørup & Hansen, 2012; Seth
& Eugster, 2016a), acoustic modelling (Thakur et al., 2018)
to action and texture segmentation (Cabero & Epifanio,
2019; Fotiadou et al., 2017). However, compared to other
factorization models, it is believed that the lack of efficient
algorithms has limited the deployment of AA to prevail as a
tool for data visualization and analysis (Chen et al., 2014);
our goal in this paper is to address this issue.
This paper presents an approach which exploits the underlying geometry and sparsity pattern of the convex representations to identify archetypes or points on convex hull of
the data. It is based on the observation that extremal points
have a sparser convex representation compared to interior
points of the data distribution. This motivates identifying
archetypes efficiently in the transformed space involving
sparse matrices. First, we develop an efficient algorithm
based on greedy column subset selection strategy (Jafari &
Plumbley, 2011). Then, we demonstrate that our approach

