Learning the Stein Discrepancy
for Training and Evaluating Energy-Based Models without Sampling

Will Grathwohl 1 Kuan-Chieh Wang 1 Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen 1 David Duvenaud 1 Richard Zemel 1

Abstract
We present a new method for evaluating and training unnormalized density models. Our approach
only requires access to the gradient of the unnormalized model’s log-density. We estimate the
Stein discrepancy between the data density p(x)
and the model density q(x) defined by a vector
function of the data. We parameterize this function with a neural network and fit its parameters
to maximize the discrepancy. This yields a novel
goodness-of-fit test which outperforms existing
methods on high dimensional data. Furthermore,
optimizing q(x) to minimize this discrepancy produces a novel method for training unnormalized
models which scales more gracefully than existing methods. The ability to both learn and compare models is a unique feature of the proposed
method.

Figure 1. Density models trained with approximate MCMC samplers can fail to match the data density while still generating highquality samples. Samples from approximate MCMC samplers
follow a different distribution than the density they are applied to.
It is this induced distribution which is trained to match the data. In
contrast, our approach LSD directly matches the model density
to the data density without reliance on a sampler.

1. Introduction
Energy-Based Models (EBMs), also known as unnormalized density models, are perhaps the most flexible way to
parameterize a density. They hinge on the observation that
any density p(x) can be expressed as
p(x) =

exp(−E(x))
,
Z

(1)

where E : RD → R, known as the Renergy function, maps
each point to a scalar, and Z = x exp(−E(x)) is the
normalizing constant.
A major benefit of EBMs is that they allow maximal freedom in designing the energy function E. This makes
it straightforward to incorporate prior knowledge about
the problem, such as symmetries or domain-specific design choices, into the structure of the model. This has
1

University of Toronto and Vector Institute, Toronto,
Canada.
Correspondence to: Will Grathwohl <wgrathwohl@cs.toronto.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

made EBMs an appealing candidate for applications in
physics (Noé et al., 2019), biology (Ingraham et al., 2019),
neuroscience (Scellier & Bengio, 2017), and computer vision (LeCun et al., 2007; Osadchy et al., 2007; Xie et al.,
2016; 2019; 2018), to name a few.
Despite their many benefits, EBMs present a central challenge which complicates their use: because we cannot efficiently compute the normalizing constant, we cannot compute likelihoods under our model, making training and evaluation difficult. Much prior work on EBMs has relied on
MCMC sampling techniques to estimate the likelihood (for
evaluation) and its gradient (for training). Other approaches
train EBMs by finding easier-to-compute surrogate objectives which have similar optima to the maximum likelihood
objective. These include Score Matching (Hyvärinen, 2005)
and Noise-Contrastive Estimation (Gutmann & Hyvärinen,
2010).
These original sampling- and score-based approaches were
not able to scale to large, high-dimensional datasets as well
as subsequently developed alternative models, such as Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2013)
and Normalizing Flows (NFs) (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015).
These approaches offer more easily scalable training, evaluation, and sampling, but do so at the cost of a more restrictive
model parameterization which can lead to well-known prob-

