Angular Visual Hardness
Beidi Chen 1 Weiyang Liu 2 Zhiding Yu 3 Jan Kautz 3 Anshumali Shrivastava 1
Animesh Garg 3 4 5 Anima Anandkumar 3 6

Abstract
Recent convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have led to impressive performance but often suffer from poor calibration. They tend to be overconfident, with the model confidence not always
reflecting the underlying true ambiguity and hardness. In this paper, we propose angular visual
hardness (AVH), a score given by the normalized
angular distance between the sample feature embedding and the target classifier to measure sample hardness. We validate this score with an indepth and extensive scientific study, and observe
that CNN models with the highest accuracy also
have the best AVH scores. This agrees with an
earlier finding that state-of-art models improve on
the classification of harder examples. We observe
that the training dynamics of AVH is vastly different compared to the training loss. Specifically,
AVH quickly reaches a plateau for all samples
even though the training loss keeps improving.
This suggests the need for designing better loss
functions that can target harder examples more effectively. We also find that AVH has a statistically
significant correlation with human visual hardness. Finally, we demonstrate the benefit of AVH
to a variety of applications such as self-training
for domain adaptation and domain generalization.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved great
progress on many computer vision tasks such as image classification (He et al., 2016; Krizhevsky et al., 2012), face
recognition (Sun et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2017b; 2018a), and
scene understanding (Zhou et al., 2014; Long et al., 2015a).
On certain large-scale benchmarks such as ImageNet, CNNs
1
Rice University 2 Georgia Institute of Technology 3 NVIDIA
University of Toronto 5 Vector Institute, Toronto 6 Caltech. Correspondence to: Beidi Chen <beidi.chen@rice.edu>, Weiyang Liu
<wyliu@gatech.edu>, Zhiding Yu <zhidingy@nvidia.com>.

4

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Plate Rack

Sharpness

Contrast

Blur

Dishwasher

Saltshaker

Nail

Oil Filter

Figure 1. Example images that confuse humans. Top row: images
with degradation. Bottom row: images with semantic ambiguity.

have even surpassed human-level performance (Deng et al.,
2009). Despite the notable progress, CNNs are still far
from matching human-level visual recognition in terms of
robustness (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2018c),
adaptability (Finn et al., 2017) and few-shot generalizability (Hariharan & Girshick, 2017; Liu et al., 2019), and could
suffer from various biases. For example, ImageNet-trained
CNNs are reported to be biased towards textures, and these
biases may result in CNNs being overconfident, or prone to
domain gaps and adversarial attacks (Geirhos et al., 2019).
Softmax score has been widely used as a confidence measure
for CNNs but it tends to give over-confident output (Guo
et al., 2017; Li & Hoiem, 2018). To fix this issue, one line
of work considers confidence calibration from a Bayesian
point of view (Springenberg et al., 2016; Lakshminarayanan
et al., 2017). Most of these methods tend to focus on the
calibration and rescaling of model confidence by matching
expected error or ensemble. But how much they are correlated with human confidence is yet to be thoroughly studied.
On the other hand, several recent works (Liu et al., 2016;
2017c; 2018b) conjecture that softmax feature embeddings
tend to naturally decouple into norms and angular distances
that are related to intra-class confidence and inter-class semantic difference. Though inspiring, the conjecture lacks
thorough investigation and we make surprising observations
partially contradicting to the conjecture on intra-class confidence. This motivates us to conduct rigorous studies for
reliable and semantics-related confidence measure.
Human vision is considered much more robust than current
CNNs, but this does not mean humans cannot be confused.

