PackIt: A Virtual Environment for Geometric Planning

Akit Goyal 1 Jia Deng 1

Abstract
The ability to jointly understand the geometry of
objects and plan actions for manipulating them
is crucial for intelligent agents. We refer to this
ability as geometric planning. Recently, many
interactive environments have been proposed to
evaluate intelligent agents on various skills, however, none of them cater to the needs of geometric
planning. We present PackIt, a virtual environment to evaluate and potentially learn the ability
to do geometric planning, where an agent needs
to take a sequence of actions to pack a set of
objects into a box with limited space. We also
construct a set of challenging packing tasks using
an evolutionary algorithm. Further, we study various baselines for the task that include model-free
learning-based and heuristic-based methods, as
well as search-based optimization methods that
assume access to the model of the environment.2

1. Introduction
A crucial component of human intelligence is the ability to
simultaneously reason about the geometry of objects and
plan actions for manipulating them. This ability comes in
handy in many everyday scenarios, like organizing utensils
on a stand, putting stuff in boxes while moving out or rearranging objects in a room to bring in a new couch. In
all these cases, we need to understand the geometry of objects and plan actions while taking care of various spatial
constraints. We use the term geometric planning to refer
to this ability. As opposed to classical symbolic planning,
which involves manipulating and reasoning about symbols,
geometric planning involves manipulating and reasoning
about geometric entities. It is desirable for artificial agents
1
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University,
Princeton,
NJ, USA. Correspondence to:
Ankit Goyal <agoyal@princeton.edu>, Jia Deng <jiadeng@cs.princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
2
Code and data are available at https://github.com/
princeton-vl/PackIt.

like robots to possess the ability of geometric planning so
that they can operate in unconstrained human environments
and assist us in day-to-day activities.
The first step for building artificial agents that possess a certain ability is to have a benchmark for evaluating that ability.
Following this principle, several environments have been
proposed in the AI literature which test agents on various
abilities. For example 3D interactive environments like AI2THOR (Kolve et al., 2017), HoME (Brodeur et al., 2017)
and CHALET (Yan et al., 2018) test agents on navigation
and object interaction. Similarly, simulated environments in
robotics (Plappert et al., 2018) evaluate agents on low-level
continuous control problems. However, none of the prior
environments directly cater to geometric planning. In 3D
interactive environments like AI2-THOR and HoME, the geometrical variability of the objects does not play a large role,
and hence, an agent need not reason about the geometry of
objects while interacting with them. Likewise, simulated
environments in robotics do not require reasoning about the
geometry of multiple real-world objects simultaneously as
their focus is on low-level control problems like grasping.
To address the need for an environment that caters to geometric planning, we propose PackIt. PackIt is a 3D virtual
environment that explicitly tests an agent for geometric planning. Our hope is that the availability of such a benchmark
would help the community to build and test components
that would enable artificial agents to do geometric planning. Also, PackIt is OpenAI gym (Brockman et al., 2016)
compatible, which makes it easily adoptable.

?
Figure 1. An example to demonstrate the packing task. Given a set
of objects and a box, the task is to figure out a way of placing the
objects completely inside the box.

