ControlVAE: Controllable Variational Autoencoder
Huajie Shao 1 Shuochao Yao 1 Dachun Sun 1 Aston Zhang 2
Shengzhong Liu 1 Dongxin Liu 1 Jun Wang 3 Tarek Abdelzaher 1

Abstract

Variational Autoencoders (VAE) and their variants have been widely used in a variety of applications, such as dialog generation, image generation
and disentangled representation learning. However, the existing VAE models may suffer from
KL vanishing in language modeling and low reconstruction quality for disentangling. To address
these issues, we propose a novel controllable variational autoencoder framework, ControlVAE, that
combines a controller, inspired by automatic control theory, with the basic VAE to improve the performance of resulting generative models. Specifically, we design a new non-linear PI controller,
a variant of the proportional-integral-derivative
(PID) control, to automatically tune the hyperparameter (weight) added in the VAE objective using the output KL-divergence as feedback during
model training. The framework is evaluated using
three applications; namely, language modeling,
disentangled representation learning, and image
generation. The results show that ControlVAE
can achieve much better reconstruction quality
than the competitive methods for the comparable
disentanglement performance. For language modeling, it not only averts the KL-vanishing, but also
improves the diversity of generated text. Finally,
we also demonstrate that ControlVAE improves
the reconstruction quality for image generation
compared to the original VAE.

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, USA. 2 AWS Deep Learning,
CA, USA. 3 Alibaba Group, Seattle, WA. Correspondence
to: Tarek Abdelzaher <zaher@illinois.edu>, Huajie Shao
<hshao5@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
This paper proposes a novel controllable variational autoencoder, ControlVAE 1 , that leverages automatic control to
precisely control the trade-off between data reconstruction
accuracy bounds (from a learned latent representation) and
application-specific constraints, such as output diversity or
disentangled latent factor representation. Specifically, a controller is designed that stabilizes the value of KL-divergence
(between the learned approximate distribution of the latent
variables and their true distribution) in the VAE’s objective
function to achieve the desired trade-off, thereby improving
application-specific performance metrics of several existing
VAE models.
The work is motivated by the increasing popularity of VAEs
as an unsupervised generative modeling framework that
learns an approximate mapping between Gaussian latent
variables and data samples when the true latent variables
have an intractable posterior distribution (Sohn et al., 2015;
Kingma & Welling, 2013). Since VAEs can directly work
with both continuous and discrete input data (Kingma &
Welling, 2013), they have been widely adopted in various
applications, such as image generation (Yan et al., 2016; Liu
et al., 2017), dialog generation (Wang et al., 2019; Hu et al.,
2017), and disentangled representation learning (Higgins
et al., 2017; Kim & Mnih, 2018).
Popular VAE applications often involve a trade-off between reconstruction accuracy bounds and some other
application-specific goal, effectively manipulated through
KL-divergence. For example, in (synthetic) text or image
generation, a goal is to produce new original text or images,
as opposed to reproducing one of the samples in training
data. In text generation, if KL-divergence is too low, output diversity is reduced (Bowman et al., 2015), which is
known as the KL-vanishing problem. To increase output
diversity, it becomes advantageous to artificially increase
KL-divergence. The resulting approximation was shown to
produce more diverse, yet still authentic-looking outputs.
Conversely, disentangled representation learning (Denton
et al., 2017) leverages the observation that KL-divergence in
the VAE constitutes an upper bound on information transfer
1

Source code is publicly available at https://github.
com/shj1987/ControlVAE-ICML2020.git

