An Explicitly Relational Neural Network Architecture

Murray Shanahan 1 2 Kyriacos Nikiforou 1 Antonia Creswell 1 Christos Kaplanis 1 David Barrett 1
Marta Garnelo 1

Abstract
With a view to bridging the gap between deep
learning and symbolic AI, we present a novel endto-end neural network architecture that learns to
form propositional representations with an explicitly relational structure from raw pixel data. In
order to evaluate and analyse the architecture, we
introduce a family of simple visual relational reasoning tasks of varying complexity. We show
that the proposed architecture, when pre-trained
on a curriculum of such tasks, learns to generate reusable representations that better facilitate
subsequent learning on previously unseen tasks
when compared to a number of baseline architectures. The workings of a successfully trained
model are visualised to shed some light on how
the architecture functions.

1. Introduction
When humans face novel problems, they are able to draw
effectively on past experience with other problems that are
superficially very different, but that have similarities on a
more abstract, structural level. This ability is essential for
lifelong, continual learning, and confers on humans a degree of data efficiency, powers of transfer learning, and a
capacity for out-of-distribution generalisation that contemporary machine learning has yet to match (Garnelo et al.,
2016; Lake et al., 2017; Marcus, 2018; Smith, 2019). A
case may be made that all these issues are different facets
of the same underlying challenge, namely the challenge of
devising systems that learn to construct general-purpose,
reusable representations (McCarthy, 1987; Bengio et al.,
2013). A representation is general-purpose and reusable to
the extent that it contains information whose domain of application exceeds the context within which it was acquired.
1

DeepMind, London, UK 2 Imperial College London, London, UK. Correspondence to: Murray Shanahan <mshanahan@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Representations that are general-purpose and reusable improve data efficiency because a system that already knows
how to build representations relevant to a novel task (despite its novelty) doesn’t have to learn that task from scratch.
Ideally, a system that efficiently exploits general-purpose,
reusable representations in this way should be the very same
system that learned how to construct them in the first place.
Moreover, in learning to solve a novel task using such representations, we should expect the system to learn further
representations that are themselves general-purpose and
reusable. So, with the exception of the very first representations the system learns, all learning in such a system would
in effect be transfer learning, and the process of learning
would be inherently cumulative, continual, and lifelong.
One approach to building such a system is to take inspiration from the paradigm of classical, symbolic AI (Garnelo
& Shanahan, 2019). Building on the mathematical foundations of first-order predicate calculus, a typical symbolic AI
system works by applying logic-like rules of inference to
language-like propositional representations whose elements
are objects and relations. Thanks to their declarative character and compositional structure, these representations lend
themselves naturally to generality and reusability. However,
in contrast to contemporary deep learning systems, the representations deployed in classical AI are not usually learned
from data but hand-crafted (Harnad, 1990). The aim of the
present work is to get the best of both worlds with an endto-end differentiable neural network architecture that builds
in propositional, relational priors in much the same way that
a convolutional network builds in spatial and locality priors.
The architecture introduced here builds on recent work with
non-local network architectures that learn to discover and
exploit relational information (Wang et al., 2018), notably
relation nets (Santoro et al., 2017; Palm et al., 2018) and
architectures based on multi-head attention (Vaswani et al.,
2017; Santoro et al., 2018; Zambaldi et al., 2019). However,
these architectures generate representations that lack explicit
structure. There is, in general, no straightforward mapping
from the parts of a representation to the usual elements of a
symbolic medium such as predicate calculus: propositions,
relations, and objects. To the extent that these elements
are present, they are smeared across the embedding vector,
which makes representations hard to interpret and makes it

