Boosting for Control of Dynamical Systems

Naman Agarwal 1 Nataly Brukhim 2 1 Elad Hazan 2 1 Zhou Lu 2

Abstract
We study the question of how to aggregate controllers for dynamical systems in order to improve
their performance. To this end, we propose a
framework of boosting for online control. Our
main result is an efficient boosting algorithm that
combines weak controllers into a provably more
accurate one. Empirical evaluation on a host of
control settings supports our theoretical findings.

1. Introduction
In many learning scenarios it is significantly easier to come
up with a mildly accurate rule of thumb than state of the art
performance. This motivation led to the development of ensemble methods and boosting (Schapire & Freund, 2012), a
theoretically sound methodology to combine rules of thumb
(often referred to as weak learners) into a substantially more
accurate learner.
The application of boosting has transformed machine learning across a variety of applications, including supervised
learning: classification (Freund & Schapire, 1997), regression (Mason et al., 2000), online learning (Beygelzimer
et al., 2015b;a), agnostic learning (Kanade & Kalai, 2009),
recommendation systems (Freund et al., 2003) and many
more.
While the same motivation for boosting exists for dynamical
systems, i.e. it is often easy to come up with a reasonable
predictor or a controller for a dynamical system, the theory
and practice of boosting faces significant challenges in these
settings due to the existence of a state. Formally, a dynamical system is specified by a rule xt+1 = f (xt , ut ) + wt .
The problem of optimal control in dynamical systems requires the design of a sequence of controls {ut } so as to
minimize a certain objective (for example making the states
follow a certain trajectory). As can be seen readily, the
decisions made by a controller affects the future trajectory
1

Google AI Princeton 2 Department of Computer Science,
Princeton University. Correspondence to:
<namanagarwal@google.com, {nbrukhim,ehazan,zhoul}@princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

of the system, and hence it is often not a-priori clear how to
obtain a meaningful guarantee when switching between or
aggregating different controllers.
In this paper we propose a framework for formalizing boosting in the context of optimal control of dynamical systems.
The first crucial insight comes from the newly emerging
literature on non-stochastic control, which allows a noncounterfactual description of the dynamics. Then leveraging techniques from online learning with memory (Anava
et al., 2015) and online gradient boosting (Beygelzimer
et al., 2015b), we provide a boosting algorithm for controlling systems with state and prove appropriate theoretical
guarantees on its performance.
The notion of boosting in online learning. Notice that
unlike supervised learning, in the case of dynamical systems
it is not immediately clear what metric should be used to
measure the improvement provided by boosting algorithms.
The theory of online gradient boosting (Beygelzimer et al.,
2015b) suggests to boost online learning by improving the
expressivity of the predictors. Given a set of weak online
learners, online boosting guarantees prediction (as measured
by mistake bounds or regret) that is as good as a predictor
in a larger class.
Furthermore, a robust way to study the optimal control
problem is to study it in the online non-stochastic setting
(Agarwal et al., 2019), where both the objective to be minimized and the perturbations to the system get revealed in an
online fashion1 .
Motivated by this, we take an online boosting approach to
optimal control. Our boosting algorithm when given access
to (weak) controllers from a certain class, provides a boosted
controller than can provably perform (in terms of regret) as
well as a controller from the larger class of a committee (or
convex combination) of the weak controllers. Furthermore,
we provide an alternate boosting algorithm, which is more
efficient in terms of the number of weak controllers required,
and allows for the utilization of weak controllers designed
for handling only quadratic losses into strong controllers
that can compete against the more general class of smooth
and strongly-convex losses.
1
We formally define the notion of non-stochastic control in
Section 2.1.

