Variational Inference for Sequential Data with Future Likelihood Estimates

Geon-Hyeong Kim 1 Youngsoo Jang 1 Hongseok Yang 1 Kee-Eung Kim 1 2

Abstract
The recent development of ﬂexible and scalable
variational inference algorithms has popularized
the use of deep probabilistic models in a wide
range of applications. However, learning and rea­
soning about high-dimensional models with nondifferentiable densities are still a challenge. For
such a model, inference algorithms struggle to
estimate the gradients of variational objectives ac­
curately, due to high variance in their estimates.
To tackle this challenge, we present a novel vari­
ational inference algorithm for sequential data,
which performs well even when the density from
the model is not differentiable, for instance, due
to the use of discrete random variables. The key
feature of our algorithm is that it estimates future
likelihoods at all time steps. The estimated future
likelihoods form the core of our new low-variance
gradient estimator. We formally analyze our gra­
dient estimator from the perspective of variational
objective, and show the effectiveness of our algo­
rithm with synthetic and real datasets.

1. Introduction
Learning a deep probabilistic model for complex data with
latent variables is one of the most important tasks in ma­
chine learning. Such models are typically built using neural
networks, and applied to analyze a wide variety of data,
including high-dimensional ones such as images (Kingma
& Welling, 2014; Rezende & Mohamed, 2015; Chen et al.,
2016; Gulrajani et al., 2016), speech and music (Chung et al.,
2015; Fraccaro et al., 2016), and videos (Babaeizadeh et al.,
2017; Denton & Fergus, 2018). However, when these mod­
els do not have differentiable densities (for instance, due to
1
School of Computing, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
Graduate School of AI, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
Correspondence to: Geon-Hyeong Kim <ghkim@ai.kaist.ac.kr>,
Youngsoo Jang <ysjang@ai.kaist.ac.kr>, Hongseok Yang
<hongseok.yang@kaist.ac.kr>,
Kee-Eung Kim <keee­
ung.kim@kaist.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the au­
thor(s).

discrete latent variables), learning and analyzing the models
for high-dimensional data is still a challenge despite impres­
sive progress in the past few years, including, but not limited
to, tighter variational bounds (Burda et al., 2016; Maddison
et al., 2017a; Naesseth et al., 2018; Le et al., 2018; Lawson
et al., 2018; Masrani et al., 2019), low-variance gradient
estimators (Mnih & Gregor, 2014; Mnih & Rezende, 2016;
Tucker et al., 2017; Grathwohl et al., 2018), and techniques
for preventing the diminishing gradient due to the multiple
samples (Rainforth et al., 2018; Tucker et al., 2019).
In this paper, we tackle the challenge for models for se­
quential data in the context of black-box variational infer­
ence (Ranganath et al., 2014). For these models, the noise
from the data or the algorithm accumulates over time, and
the variance of the algorithm’s estimates typically grows
exponentially with the number of time steps. As a result,
parameter learning and posterior inference via black-box
variational inference are particularly difﬁcult for these mod­
els. While there have been a large amount of prior work
on these models, such as tighter variational bound derived
from sequential Monte Carlo (Maddison et al., 2017a; Naes­
seth et al., 2018; Le et al., 2018; Lawson et al., 2018), the
current variational inference algorithms struggle to approxi­
mate the gradients of variational bounds accurately, due to
high variance in their estimates, especially when the models
use discrete latent variables and thus do not have smooth
densities; in such a case, the techniques that leverage the
smoothness of the model, such as reparameterization trick,
are no longer straightforwardly applicable.
We propose a novel gradient estimator for a sequential vari­
ant of the importance-weighted-autoencoder (IWAE) objec­
tive (Burda et al., 2016), which is a provably tighter lower
bound to the log marginal likelihood than the more tradi­
tional evidence-lower-bound (ELBO) objective. In order
to approximate the gradient accurately, our estimator com­
putes the estimates of future likelihoods at each time step, by
exploiting the recursive nature of sequential models. The es­
timated future likelihoods are then used to improve the stan­
dard score-function-based gradient estimator of the IWAE
objective. Speciﬁcally, they serve as baselines (i.e. control
variates), and also enable to replace a high-variance part of
this standard estimator with a low-variance counterpart. Our
estimator does not require the differentiability of a model’s
density, and can be applied to sequential models with both

