Beyond Signal Propagation:
Is Feature Diversity Necessary in Deep Neural Network Initialization?

Yaniv Blumenfeld 1 Dar Gilboa 2 Daniel Soudry 1

Abstract
Deep neural networks are typically initialized
with random weights, with variances chosen to facilitate signal propagation and stable gradients. It
is also believed that diversity of features is an important property of these initializations. We construct a deep convolutional network with identical
features by initializing almost all the weights to 0.
The architecture also enables perfect signal propagation and stable gradients, and achieves high
accuracy on standard benchmarks. This indicates
that random, diverse initializations are not necessary for training neural networks. An essential
element in training this network is a mechanism
of symmetry breaking; we study this phenomenon
and find that standard GPU operations, which are
non-deterministic, can serve as a sufficient source
of symmetry breaking to enable training.

1. Introduction
Random, independent initialization of weights in deep neural networks is a common practice across numerous architectures and machine learning tasks (He et al., 2016; Vaswani
et al., 2017; Szegedy et al., 2015). When backpropagation
was first proposed (Rumelhart et al., 1986), neural networks
were initialized randomly with the goal of breaking symmetry between the learned features. Empirically, it had been
established that the method used to initialize the weights of
each layer can have a significant effect on the accuracy of
the trained model, and common initialization schemes (Glorot & Bengio, 2010; He et al., 2015) are generally motivated
by ensuring that the variance of the neurons does not grow
rapidly with depth at initialization.
Neural networks with random features (Rahimi & Recht,
2008) have been thoroughly studied, and such models admit
1 Technion, Israel 2 Columbia University. Correspondence to:
Yaniv Blumenfeld <yanivblm6@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 t h International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

a detailed analysis of their dynamics and generalization
properties. Unlike the features in a neural network, the
randomly initialized features in these models are not trained.
While random features models are known to be limited
compared to ones with learned or hand-designed features
(Yehudai & Shamir, 2019), numerous studies have shown
that classifiers can be trained to good accuracy relying solely
on random, untrained features (Louart et al., 2018; Mei &
Montanari, 2019).
A possible explanation for the role of random initialization
was implied by the recently proposed "lottery ticket hypothesis" (Frankle & Carbin, 2018). After showing that sparse
networks could be trained as effectively as dense networks
if certain subsets of the weights were initialized with the
same values, the authors suggest that neural networks contain trainable sub-networks, characterized by their unique
architecture and initialization. These sparse sub-network
can be extracted by first training dense neural networks and
selecting weights with large magnitudes. Additionally, (Ramanujan et al., 2019) has shown that randomly initialized
neural network contain sub-networks that achieve relatively
high accuracy without any training. However, more recent
studies of this topic (Frankle et al., 2019b;a) has put the significance of the initial sub-networks back into question. It
was suggested that in the case of deeper models, the Lottery
Ticket method is more effective when relying on the values of the weights in a dense network at advanced training
epochs, and not the randomly initialization values.
While this may indicate that feature diversity is an important
property of the network initialization, there is evidence to
the contrary as well. Calculations of signal propagation in
random neural networks (Poole et al., 2016; Schoenholz
et al., 2016), applied in (Xiao et al., 2018) to convolutional
networks, led the authors to suggest the Delta Orthogonal
initialization, which they have used to successfully train a
10,000 layer convolutional network without skip connections on the CIFAR-10 dataset. The resulting initialization
is relatively sparse, with only a single non-zero entry per
convolution filter. When studying residual neural networks
with a similar approach, as was done in (Yang & Schoenholz, 2017), it is apparent that signal propagation is optimized when the entire signal passes through the residual

