Reliable Fidelity and Diversity Metrics for Generative Models

Muhammad Ferjad Naeem * 1 2 Seong Joon Oh * 1 Youngjung Uh 1 Yunjey Choi 1 Jaejun Yoo 1 3

Abstract
Devising indicative evaluation metrics for the image generation task remains an open problem. The
most widely used metric for measuring the similarity between real and generated images has been
the Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) score. Because it does not differentiate the fidelity and diversity aspects of the generated images, recent
papers have introduced variants of precision and
recall metrics to diagnose those properties separately. In this paper, we show that even the latest version of the precision and recall metrics
are not reliable yet; for example, they fail to
detect the match between two identical distributions, they are not robust against outliers, and the
evaluation hyperparameters are selected arbitrarily. We propose density and coverage metrics
that solve the above issues. We analytically and
experimentally show that density and coverage
provide more interpretable and reliable signals
for practitioners than the existing metrics. Code:
github.com/clovaai/generative-evaluation-prdc .

1. Introduction
Assessing a generative model is difficult. Unlike the evaluation of discriminative models P (T |X) that is often easily
done by measuring the prediction performances on a few
labelled samples (Xi , Ti ), generative models P (X) are assessed by measuring the discrepancy between the real {Xi }
and generated (fake) {Yj } sets of high-dimensional data
points. Adding to the complexity, there are more than one
way of measuring distances between two distributions each
with its own pros and cons. In fact, even human judgement
based measures like Mean Opinion Scores (MOS) are not
ideal, as practitioners have diverse opinions on what the
“ideal” generative model is (Borji, 2019).
*
Equal contribution 1 Clova AI Research, Naver Corp.
Technische Universität München, Germany 3 École polytechnique
fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland. Correspondence to:
Jaejun Yoo <jaejun.yoo88@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Nonetheless, there must be some measurement of the quality
of generative models for the progress of science. Several
quantitative metrics have been proposed, albeit with their
own set of trade-offs. For example, Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) score (Heusel et al., 2017), the most popular
metric in image generation tasks, has empirically exhibited
good agreements with human perceptual scores. However,
FID summarises the comparison of two distributions into
a single number, failing to separate two important aspects
of the quality of generative models: fidelity and diversity (Sajjadi et al., 2018). Fidelity refers to the degree to
which the generated samples resemble the real ones. Diversity, on the other hand, measures whether the generated
samples cover the full variability of the real samples.
Recent papers (Sajjadi et al., 2018; Simon et al., 2019;
Kynkäänniemi et al., 2019) have introduced precision and
recall metrics as measures of fidelity and diversity, respectively. Though precision and recall metrics have introduced
the important perspectives in generative model evaluation,
we show that they are not ready yet for practical use. We
argue that necessary conditions for useful evaluation metrics
are: (1) ability to detect identical real and fake distributions,
(2) robustness to outlier samples, (3) responsiveness to mode
dropping, and (4) the ease of hyperparameter selection in the
evaluation algorithms. Unfortunately, even the most recent
version of the precision and recall metrics (Kynkäänniemi
et al., 2019) fail to meet the requirements.
To address the practical concerns, we propose the density
and coverage metrics. By introducing a simple yet carefully
designed manifold estimation procedure, we not only make
the fidelity-diversity metrics empirically reliable but also
theoretically analysable. We test our metric on generative
adversarial networks, one of the most successful generative
models in recent years.
We then study the embedding algorithms for evaluating
image generation algorithms. Embedding is an inevitable
ingredient due to the high-dimensionality of images and
the lack of semantics in the RGB space. Despite the importance, the embedding pipeline has been relatively less
studied in the existing literature; evaluations of generated
images mostly rely on the features from an ImageNet pretrained model (Salimans et al., 2016; Heusel et al., 2017;
Sajjadi et al., 2018; Simon et al., 2019; Kynkäänniemi et al.,

