Composable Sketches for Functions of Frequencies: Beyond the Worst Case

Edith Cohen 1 2 Ofir Geri 3 4 Rasmus Pagh 1 5 6

Abstract
Recently there has been increased interest in using machine learning techniques to improve classical algorithms. In this paper we study when
it is possible to construct compact, composable
sketches for weighted sampling and statistics estimation according to functions of data frequencies.
Such structures are now central components of
large-scale data analytics and machine learning
pipelines. However, many common functions,
such as thresholds and pth frequency moments
with p > 2, are known to require polynomial
size sketches in the worst case. We explore performance beyond the worst case under two different types of assumptions. The first is having
access to noisy advice on item frequencies. This
continues the line of work of Hsu et al. (ICLR
2019), who assume predictions are provided by
a machine learning model. The second is providing guaranteed performance on a restricted class
of input frequency distributions that are better
aligned with what is observed in practice. This
extends the work on heavy hitters under Zipfian
distributions in a seminal paper of Charikar et
al. (ICALP 2002). Surprisingly, we show analytically and empirically that “in practice” small
polylogarithmic-size sketches provide accuracy
for “hard” functions.

data with small computational resources (time, communication, and space). Such sketches support processing additional data elements and merging sketches of multiple
datasets to obtain a sketch of the union of the datasets. This
design is suitable for working with streaming data (by processing elements as they arrive) and distributed datasets, and
allows us to parallelize computations over massive datasets.
Sketches are now a central part of managing large-scale
data, with application areas as varied as federated learning (McMahan et al., 2017) and statistics collection at network switches (Liu et al., 2016; 2019).
The datasets we consider consist of elements that are keyvalue pairs (x, v) where v ≥ 0. The frequency wx of a key
x is defined as the sum of the values of elements with that
key. When the value of all elements is 1, the frequency is
simply the number of occurrences of a key in the dataset.
Examples of such datasets include search queries, network
traffic, user interactions, or training data from many devices.
These datasets are typically distributed or streamed.
Given a dataset of this form, one is often interested in computing statistics that depend on the frequencies of keys. For
example, the statistics of interest can be the number of keys
with frequency greater than some constant P
(threshold functions), or the second frequency moment ( x wx2 ), which
can be used to estimate the skew of the data. Generally, we
are interested in statistics of the form
X
Lx f (wx )
(1)
x

1. Introduction
Composable sketches, also known as mergeable summaries (Agarwal et al., 2013), are data structures that support summarizing large amounts of distributed or streamed
1

Google Research, Mountain View, CA 2 Department of
Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, Israel 3 Stanford University, CA, USA 4 Most of this work was done while interning at Google Research. 5 BARC, Denmark 6 IT University of Copenhagen, Denmark.
Correspondence to:
Edith Cohen <edith@cohenwang.com>, Ofir Geri <ofirgeri@cs.stanford.edu>, Rasmus Pagh <pagh@itu.dk>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

where f is some function applied to the frequencies of the
keys and the coefficients Lx are provided (for example as
a function of the features of the key x). An important
special case, popularized in the seminal work of (Alon
et al., 1999),
Pis computing the f -statistics of the data:
kf (w)k1 = x f (wx ).
One way to compute statistics of the form (1) is to compute a
random sample of keys, and then use the sample to compute
estimates for the statistics. In order to compute low-error
estimates, the sampling has to be weighted in a way that
depends on the target function f : each key x is weighted by
f (wx ). Since the problem of computing a weighted sample
is more general than computing f -statistics, our focus in this
work will be on composable sketches for weighted sampling
according to different functions of frequencies.

