Improved Communication Cost in Distributed PageRank Computation
– A Theoretical Study

Siqiang Luo 1

Abstract
PageRank is a widely used approach for measuring the importance of a node in a graph. Due
to the rapid growth of the graph size in the real
world, the importance of computing PageRanks
in a distributed environment has been increasingly recognized. However, only a few previous works can provide a provable complexity and
accuracy for distributed PageRank computation.
Given a constant d ≥ 1 and a graph of n nodes,
the state-of-the-art approach, Radar-Push, uses
O(log log n + log d) communication rounds to
approximate the PageRanks within a relative error
Θ( log1d n ) under a generalized congested clique
distributed computation model. However, RadarPush entails as large as O(log2d+3 n) bits of bandwidth (e.g., the communication cost between a
pair of nodes per round). In this paper, we provide a new algorithm that uses asymptotically the
same communication round complexity while using only O(d log3 n) bits of bandwidth.

1. Introduction
A graph is used to model a set of instances (represented
as “nodes”) with the mutual relationship (represented as
“edges”) between some pairs of instances. For example, a
social network can be modeled as a graph where a node is a
user, and an edge indicates friendship (Fang et al., 2016); a
road network is also a graph with a node as a road junction
and an edge as a road segment (Luo et al., 2018; 2019a). In
these graphs, PageRank (Page et al., 1999) is an effective
approach in estimating the importance of the nodes, and
has been applied in numerous applications including data
mining, machine learning, distributed networks as well as
Web algorithms (Luo et al., 2019b;c; Das Sarma et al., 2015;
Florescu & Caragea, 2017; Fujiwara et al., 2013; Ahmadi
1
Harvard University. Correspondence to: Siqiang Luo <siqiangluo@seas.harvard.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

et al., 2011; Neumann et al., 2011; Ponzetto & Strube, 2007).
Given a graph G of n nodes and a probability α ∈ (0, 1),
the PageRank vector of G is the stationary distribution π of
the following specific random walk with restart: a walker
initially starts at a node chosen uniformly at random; at
each step, with probability 1 − α the walker jumps to a
neighboring node chosen randomly, and with the remaining
α probability it restarts at a random node.
Computing PageRanks in a distributed environment has
been extensively studied (Luo, 2019; Guo et al., 2017;
Das Sarma et al., 2015; Zhu et al., 2005). Among them,
IPRA 1 (Das Sarma et al., 2015) and Radar-Push (Luo,
2019) provide provable complexity and accuracy in a vertexcentric distributed computation model. Particularly, IPRA
is discussed under a communication-restricted variant congested clique that initially each node only knows its neighbors, whereas Radar-Push employs a bandwidth-generalized
congested clique model, which considers each graph node as
individuals and that the nodes communicate with each other
over a complete network (i.e., the clique on the n nodes of
the graph) in order to compute some function of their inputs.
The computation is performed in synchronous communication rounds and each pair of nodes can communicate at most
b bits per round, where b is known as the bandwidth of the
model. Radar-Push assumes that b can be Ω(log n), where
n is the number of nodes in the graph. Under the model,
Radar-Push is the state-of-the-art algorithm that gives the
best round complexity. For an undirected and connected
graph G of n nodes, Radar-Push approximates PageRank
vector with a relative error of Θ( log1d n ) in O(d log log n)
communication rounds with a bandwidth of O(log2d+3 n)
bits.
The congested clique model is a fundamental distributed
computation model, and it has received tremendous interest
in recent years. Under this model many important problems have been studied. Examples include computing graph
connectivity (Hegeman et al., 2015), computing Minimum
Spanning Tree (Ghaffari & Parter, 2016; Jurdziński & Nowicki, 2018), as well as addressing the routing and sorting
problem (Lenzen, 2013). The congested clique model is
1

per.

Named “Improved-PageRank-Algorithm” in the original pa-

