Stronger and Faster Wasserstein Adversarial Attacks

Kaiwen Wu 1 2 Allen Houze Wang 1 2 Yaoliang Yu 1 2

Abstract
Deep models, while being extremely flexible and
accurate, are surprisingly vulnerable to “small,
imperceptible” perturbations known as adversarial attacks. While the majority of existing attacks
focus on measuring perturbations under the `p
metric, Wasserstein distance, which takes geometry in pixel space into account, has long been
known to be a suitable metric for measuring image quality and has recently risen as a compelling
alternative to the `p metric in adversarial attacks.
However, constructing an effective attack under
the Wasserstein metric is computationally much
more challenging and calls for better optimization algorithms. We address this gap in two ways:
(a) we develop an exact yet efficient projection
operator to enable a stronger projected gradient
attack; (b) we show that the Frank-Wolfe method
equipped with a suitable linear minimization oracle works extremely fast under Wasserstein constraints. Our algorithms not only converge faster
but also generate much stronger attacks. For instance, we decrease the accuracy of a residual
network on CIFAR-10 to 3.4% within a Wasserstein perturbation ball of radius 0.005, in contrast
to 65.6% using the previous Wasserstein attack
based on an approximate projection operator. Furthermore, employing our stronger attacks in adversarial training significantly improves the robustness of adversarially trained models.

1. Introduction
Deep models are surprisingly vulnerable to adversarial attacks, namely small or even imperceptible perturbations that
completely change the prediction (Szegedy et al., 2014).
The existence of adversarial examples has raised a lot of
security concerns on deep models, and a substantial amount
1

David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University
of Waterloo 2 Vector Institute. Correspondence to: Kaiwen Wu
<kaiwen.wu@uwaterloo.ca>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

`∞

`2

Wasserstein
PGD + Dual Proj.
predict: 4

predict: 9

Figure 1: `∞ , `2 and Wasserstein adversarial examples
generated by projected gradient descent (PGD) with dual
projection. While l∞ and l2 norm adversarial examples tend
to perturb the background, Wasserstein adversarial examples
redistribute the pixel mass.

of work has devoted to this emerging field (Goodfellow
et al., 2018), including various attacks as well as defences
(e.g. Goodfellow et al., 2015; Papernot et al., 2016; Carlini
& Wagner, 2017; Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016; Kurakin
et al., 2017; Madry et al., 2018). Some empirical defences
are shown ineffective later under stronger attacks (Athalye
et al., 2018), which has motivated a line of research on certified defences with provable guarantees (e.g. Wong & Kolter,
2018; Tjeng et al., 2019; Gowal et al., 2019; Raghunathan
et al., 2018; Cohen et al., 2019).
The majority of existing work on adversarial robustness
focused on the `p threat model where the perturbation is
measured using the `p norm. However, the `p norm, despite being computationally convenient, is long known to
be a poor proxy for measuring image similarity: two semantically similar images for human perception are not
necessarily close under `p norm, see (e.g. Wang & Bovik,
2009) for some astonishing examples. To this end, threat
models beyond `p norms have been proposed, e.g. Engstrom
et al. (2019) explore geometric transformation to fool deep
networks; Laidlaw & Feizi (2019) use point-wise functions
on pixel values to flip predictions; Tramer & Boneh (2019)
study robustness against multiple (`p ) perturbations.

