Online Learning with Imperfect Hints

Aditya Bhaskara 1 Ashok Cutkosky 2 3 Ravi Kumar 2 Manish Purohit 2

Abstract
We consider a variant of the classical online linear optimization problem in which at every step,
the online player receives a “hint” vector before
choosing the action for that round. Rather surprisingly, it was shown that if the hint vector is
guaranteed to have a positive correlation with the
cost vector, then the online player can achieve
a regret of O(log
√ T ), thus significantly improving over the O( T ) regret in the general setting.
However, the result and analysis require the correlation property at all time steps, thus raising the
natural question: can we design online learning
algorithms that are resilient to bad hints?
In this paper we develop algorithms and nearly
matching lower bounds for online learning with
imperfect directional hints. Our algorithms are
oblivious to the quality of the hints, and the regret
bounds interpolate between the always-correlated
hints case and the no-hints case. Our results also
generalize, simplify, and improve upon previous
results on optimistic regret bounds, which can be
viewed as an additive version of hints.

1. Introduction
In the standard online convex optimization model (Zinkevich, 2003), at each time step t, an algorithm first plays a
point xt in a convex set, and then the system responds with
a convex loss function. The loss incurred by the algorithm is
the function evaluated at the point xt . The performance of
an algorithm is measured using the concept of regret. The
regret of an algorithm is the difference between the total
loss it incurs and the loss of the best fixed point it could have
played (in hindsight); algorithms with sub-linear regret are
1
University of Utah, Salt Lake City Utah, USA 2 Google
Research, Mountain View California, USA 3 Boston University, Boston Massachusetts, USA. Correspondence to: Aditya
Bhaskara <bhaskaraaditya@gmail.com>, Ashok Cutkosky
<ashok@cutkosky.com>, Ravi Kumar <ravi.k53@gmail.com>,
Manish Purohit <mpurohit@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

hence desirable. The framework of online convex optimization is quite powerful, general, and has been extensively
studied. Many important problems such as portfolio selection, learning from mixture of experts, matrix completion,
recommendation systems, and certain online combinatorial optimization problems can be cast in this framework.
For a detailed exposition, see the books by Hazan (2016)
and Shalev-Shwartz (2011).
An important special case of online convex optimization
is when the loss function is actually linear, i.e., the loss
function is given
√ by a cost vector. In this case, algorithms
with regret O( T ), where T is the number of steps, are
known (Zinkevich, 2003; Kalai & Vempala, 2005); furthermore, this bound is also optimal (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi,
2006). In fact, from a regret point of view, the linear case is
the hardest since if the loss function is strongly convex, then
there are algorithms achieving only O(log T ) regret (Hazan
et al., 2007). There has been some effort to better understand the regret landscape of linear loss functions,
especially
√
on how to circumvent the pessimistic Ω( T ) barrier.
A particularly intriguing line of work was initiated by Hazan
& Megiddo (2007), who modeled a notion of predictability
in online learning settings. In their model, the algorithm
knows the first coordinate of the cost vector at all time
steps. Under this assumption, they showed a regret bound
of O(d2 /α · log T ) when the convex set is the Euclidean
ball, where α is the magnitude of the first coordinate that
is known to the algorithm and d is the dimension of the
space. Their work was subsequently generalized and extended by Dekel et al. (2017), who considered a scenario
when the online algorithm is provided with a directional
hint at each step; this hint is assumed to be always weakly
but positively correlated with the cost vector. They showed
a regret bound of O(d/α · log T ), where α is the amount of
correlation present in the hint.
The biggest drawback in these previous works is that they
require the hints to be helpful at every time step. Clearly,
this is a stringent requirement that may easily fail to hold.
This is especially so if the hints are provided by, say, a
learning algorithm! In such a scenario, one can only expect
the hints to be good on average or have other probabilistic
guarantees of goodness. This means in particular that some
of the hints could potentially be very misleading. Since the

