It’s Not What Machines Can Learn, It’s What We Cannot Teach

Gal Yehuda 1 Moshe Gabel 2 Assaf Schuster 1

Abstract
Can deep neural networks learn to solve any task,
and in particular problems of high complexity?
This question attracts a lot of interest, with recent
works tackling computationally hard tasks such as
the traveling salesman problem and satisfiability.
In this work we offer a different perspective on
this question. Given the common assumption that
NP 6= coNP we prove that any polynomial-time
sample generator for an NP-hard problem samples, in fact, from an easier sub-problem. We empirically explore a case study, Conjunctive Query
Containment, and show how common data generation techniques generate biased datasets that
lead practitioners to over-estimate model accuracy. Our results suggest that machine learning
approaches that require training on a dense uniform sampling from the target distribution cannot
be used to solve computationally hard problems,
the reason being the difficulty of generating sufficiently large and unbiased training sets.

1. Introduction
Applying deep learning methods to solve or approximately
solve1 computationally hard problems has gained popularity
in recent years. Examples include attempts to solve the
satisfiability problem (Selsam et al., 2018; Cameron et al.,
2020), the traveling salesman problem (TSP) (Prates et al.,
2019; Milan et al., 2017) and symbolic integration (Lample & Charton, 2020). There has also been recent interest
in developing dedicated architectures for learning how to
perform algorithmic tasks from solved instances, such as
the Neural Turing Machine (Graves et al., 2014), the Differentiable Neural Computer (Graves et al., 2016), and the
1

Department of Computer Science, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Israel 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to:
Gal Yehuda <ygal@cs.technion.ac.il>, Moshe Gabel <mgabel@cs.toronto.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

dataset generation process

complexity of resulting task
harder

non-polynomial
sampler

NP-hard

NP-hard
NP-complete

finite set

polynomial NP ∩ coNP
augmentation
NP

polynomial
sampler

NP ∩ coNP

P

coNP

easier

Figure 1. Assuming NP 6= coNP, any polynomial-time data generator for a NP-hard classification task will output data from an
easier NP ∩ coNP task, even when starting with a sample generated
by a non-polynomial deterministic process and augmenting it.

Neural GPU (Kaiser & Sutskever, 2015).
The expressive power of deep neural networks, which represents the breadth of functions deep models are able to
compute, has been an active area of research since the rise
of deep learning (Siegelmann & Sontag, 1991; Raghu et al.,
2017; Lu et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2020). We know that recurrent neural networks and many modern architectures
are Turing complete (Pérez et al., 2019) when allowed unbounded precision, meaning they are in theory capable of
performing any computation that a Turing machine can do.
This raises the intriguing possibility of discovering efficient
approximate solvers by using machine learning to train a
model on solved instances of a given problem. However,
even if a model is expressive enough in theory, we must also
be able to train it to arrive at the correct solution.
The difficulty emerges in acquiring a suitable dataset. Large,
diverse and densely sampled datasets are essential for the
learning ability of deep learning models (Chollet, 2017). Existing datasets for computational tasks tend to be application
specific; such datasets may also be biased towards a subset
of the problem space, which may be easy and unrepresentative. For example, training a model to answer the 3-SAT
problem using a dataset where all examples follow a simple
1
Throughout the paper, by “solve” we mean solve or solve
approximately, e.g., by allowing some level of error.

