Problems with Shapley-value-based explanations as feature importance
measures
I. Elizabeth Kumar 1 Suresh Venkatasubramanian 1 Carlos Scheidegger 2 Sorelle A. Friedler 3

Abstract
Game-theoretic formulations of feature importance have become popular as a way to “explain”
machine learning models. These methods define a
cooperative game between the features of a model
and distribute influence among these input elements using some form of the game’s unique
Shapley values. Justification for these methods
rests on two pillars: their desirable mathematical properties, and their applicability to specific
motivations for explanations. We show that mathematical problems arise when Shapley values are
used for feature importance, and that the solutions
to mitigate these necessarily induce further complexity, such as the need for causal reasoning. We
also draw on additional literature to argue that
Shapley values are not a natural solution to the
human-centric goals of explainability.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models are increasingly being used to
replace human decision-making for tasks involving some
kind of prediction. As state-of-the-art predictive machine
learning models become increasingly inscrutable, there has
been an increase in concern that the black-box nature of
these systems can obscure undesirable properties of the decision algorithm, such as illegal bias or signals accidentally
learned from artifacts irrelevant to the task at hand. More
recently, attempts have been made to “explain” the output
of a complicated function in terms of its inputs to address
these and other concerns. One of the more prominent tools
in this literature has been the Shapley value, a method for
additively attributing value among players of a cooperative
game. In this setting, the “players” are the features used
1

School of Computing, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT,
USA 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Arizona,
Tucson, AZ, USA 3 Department of Computer Science, Haverford
College, Haverford, PA, USA. Correspondence to: I. Elizabeth
Kumar <kumari@cs.utah.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

by the model, and the game is the prediction of the model.
A variety of methods to assign feature influence using the
Shapley value have recently been developed (Lipovetsky &
Conklin, 2001; Štrumbelj & Kononenko, 2014; Lundberg
et al., 2018; Datta et al., 2016b; Merrick & Taly, 2019; Frye
et al., 2019; Aas et al., 2019).
In this paper, we demonstrate that Shapley-value-based explanations for feature importance fail to serve their desired
purpose in general. We make this argument in two parts.
Firstly, we show that applying the Shapley value to the problem of feature importance introduces mathematically formalizable properties which may not align with what we would
expect from an explanation. Secondly, taking a humancentric perspective, we evaluate Shapley-value-based explanations through established frameworks of what people
expect from explanations, and find them wanting. We find
that the game theoretic problem formulation of Shapleyvalue-based explanations do not match the proposed use
cases for its solution, and thus caution against their usage
except in narrowly constrained settings where they admit a
clear interpretation.
We describe the different Shapley-value-based explanation
frameworks in Section 2, and present our two-part critique
in Sections 3 and 4. We discuss these results and provide
some suggestions in Section 5.

2. Background
In this section, we define the Shapley value and articulate the
different ways in which it has been applied to the problem
of feature importance.
2.1. Classical Shapley values
In cooperative game theory, a coalitional game consists of a
set of N players and a characteristic function v which maps
subsets S ⊆ {1, 2, ..., N } to a real value v(S), satisfying
v(∅) = 0. The value function represents how much collective payoff a set of players can gain by “cooperating” as a
set. The Shapley value is one way to allocate the total value
of the grand coalition, v({1, 2, ..., N }), between the individual players. It is based on trying to answer the question:
how much does player i contribute to the coalition?

