Sub-linear Memory Sketches for Near Neighbor Search on Streaming Data

Benjamin Coleman 1 Richard G Baraniuk 1 2 Anshumali Shrivastava 1 2

Abstract

have high similarity to any dynamically generated query q.

We present the first sublinear memory sketch that
can be queried to find the nearest neighbors in
a dataset. Our online sketching algorithm compresses an N element dataset to a sketch of size
O(N b log3 N ) in O(N (b+1) log3 N ) time, where
b < 1. This sketch can correctly report the nearest neighbors of any query that satisfies a stability condition parameterized by b. We achieve
sublinear memory performance on stable queries
by combining recent advances in locality sensitive hash (LSH)-based estimators, online kernel
density estimation, and compressed sensing. Our
theoretical results shed new light on the memoryaccuracy tradeoff for nearest neighbor search,
and our sketch, which consists entirely of short
integer arrays, has a variety of attractive features
in practice. We evaluate the memory-recall tradeoff of our method on a friend recommendation
task in the Google Plus social media network.
We obtain orders of magnitude better compression than the random projection based alternative
while retaining the ability to report the nearest
neighbors of practical queries.

In this paper, we focus on low-memory ANNS in settings
where it is prohibitive to store the complete data in any
form. Such restrictions naturally arise in extremely large
databases, computer networks, and internet-of-things systems (Johnson et al., 2019). We want to compress the
dataset D into a sketch S that is as small as possible while
still retaining the ability to find near-neighbors for any
query. Furthermore, the algorithm should be one pass as
the second pass is prohibitive when we cannot store the full
data in any form. It is common wisdom that the size of S
must scale linearly (≥ Ω(N )), even if we allow algorithms
that only identify the locations of the nearest neighbors.
In this work, we challenge that wisdom by constructing a
sketch of size O(N b log3 N ) bits in O(N b+1 log3 N ) time.
Our sketch can identify near-neighbors for stable queries
with high probability in O(N b+1 log3 N ) time. The value
of b depends on the dataset, but b can be significantly less
than 1 for many applications of practical importance. It
should be noted that our sketch does not return the near
neighbors themselves, since we do not store the vectors
in any form. Instead, we output the identity or the index
of the nearest neighbor, which is sufficient for most applications and does not fundamentally change the problem.
Our sketch also does not attempt to correctly answer every possible near-neighbor query in sublinear memory, as
this would violate information theoretic lower bounds. Instead, we provide a graceful tradeoff between the stability
of a near neighbor search query and the memory required
to obtain a correct answer.

1. Introduction
Approximate near-neighbor search (ANNS) is a fundamental problem with widespread applications in databases,
learning, computer vision, and much more (Gionis et al.,
1999). Furthermore, ANNS is the first stage of several data
processing and machine learning pipelines and is a popular
baseline data analysis method. Informally, the problem is
as follows. Given a dataset D = x1 , x2 , ..., xN , observed
in a one pass sequence, build a data structure S that can efficiently identify a small number of data points xi ∈ D that
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice
University, Houston, Texas, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, Rice University, Houston, Texas, USA. Correspondence to:
Benjamin Coleman <ben.coleman@rice.edu>, Anshumali Shrivastava <anshumali@rice.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1.1. Our Contribution
Our main contribution is a one-pass algorithm that produces a sketch S that solves the exact v-nearest neighbor
problem in sub-linear memory with high probability. A formal problem statement is available in Section 2.3 and our
theoretical results are formally stated in Section 4. Our algorithm requires O(N b+1 log3 N ) time to construct S and
the same time to return the v nearest neighbors for a query.
Here, b is a query-dependent value that describes the stability or difficulty of the query. Our guarantees are general and
work for any query, but the sketch is only sub-linear when
b < 1. In practice, one commits to a given b value and
obtains the guarantees for all queries satisfying our condi-

