Fast Learning of Graph Neural Networks with Guaranteed Generalizability:
One-hidden-layer Case

Shuai Zhang 1 Meng Wang 1 Sijia Liu 2 Pin-Yu Chen 3 Jinjun Xiong 3

Abstract
Although graph neural networks (GNNs) have
made great progress recently on learning from
graph-structured data in practice, their theoretical guarantee on generalizability remains elusive in the literature. In this paper, we provide
a theoretically-grounded generalizability analysis of GNNs with one hidden layer for both regression and binary classification problems. Under the assumption that there exists a groundtruth GNN model (with zero generalization error), the objective of GNN learning is to estimate
the ground-truth GNN parameters from the training data. To achieve this objective, we propose
a learning algorithm that is built on tensor initialization and accelerated gradient descent. We
then show that the proposed learning algorithm
converges to the ground-truth GNN model for the
regression problem, and to a model sufficiently
close to the ground-truth for the binary classification problem. Moreover, for both cases, the
convergence rate of the proposed learning algorithm is proven to be linear and faster than the
vanilla gradient descent algorithm. We further
explore the relationship between the sample complexity of GNNs and their underlying graph properties. Lastly, we provide numerical experiments
to demonstrate the validity of our analysis and the
effectiveness of the proposed learning algorithm
for GNNs.

1
Dept. of Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, NY, USA 2 MIT-IBM
Waston AI Lab, Cambridge, MA, USA 3 IBM Thomas J.
Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Shuai Zhang <zhangs21@rpi.edu>, Meng
Wang <wangm7@rpi.edu>, Sijia Liu <Sijia.Liu@ibm.com>,
Pin-Yu Chen <Pin-Yu.Chen@ibm.com>, Jinjun Xiong <jinjun@us.ibm.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) (Gilbert et al., 2005;
Scarselli et al., 2008) have demonstrated great practical performance in learning with graph-structured data. Compared
with traditional (feed-forward) neural networks, GNNs introduce an additional neighborhood aggregation layer, where
the features of each node are aggregated with the features of
the neighboring nodes (Gilmer et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2018).
GNNs have a better learning performance in applications
including physical reasoning (Battaglia et al., 2016), recommendation systems (Ying et al., 2018), biological analysis
(Duvenaud et al., 2015), and compute vision (Monfardini
et al., 2006). Many variations of GNNs, such as Gated
Graph Neural Networks (GG-NNs) (Li et al., 2016), Graph
Convolutional Networks (GCNs) (Kipf & Welling, 2017)
and others (Hamilton et al., 2017; Veličković et al., 2018)
have recently been developed to enhance the learning performance on graph-structured data.
Despite the numerical success, the theoretical understanding of the generalizability of the learned GNN models to
the testing data is very limited. Some works (Xu et al.,
2018; 2019; Wu et al., 2019; Morris et al., 2019) analyze
the expressive power of GNNs but do not provide learning
algorithms that are guaranteed to return the desired GNN
model with proper parameters. Only few works (Du et al.,
2019; Verma & Zhang, 2019) explore the generalizabilty
of GNNs, under the one-hidden-layer setting, as even with
one hidden layer the models are already complex to analyze,
not to mention the multi-layer setting. Both works show
that for regression problems, the generalization gap of the
training error and the testing error decays with respect to the
number of training samples at a sub-linear rate. The analysis in Ref. (Du et al., 2019) analyzes GNNs through Graph
Neural Tangent Kernels (GNTK) which is an extension of
Neural Tangent kernel (NTK) model (Jacot et al., 2018;
Chizat & Bach, 2018; Nitanda & Suzuki, 2019; Cao & Gu,
2020). When over-parameterized, this line of works shows
sub-linear convergence to the global optima of the learning
problem with assuming enough filters in the hidden layer
(Jacot et al., 2018; Chizat & Bach, 2018). Ref. (Verma &
Zhang, 2019) only applies to the case of one single filter
in the hidden layer, and the activation function needs to be

