Towards Non-Parametric Drift Detection via Dynamic Adapting Window
Independence Drift Detection (DAWIDD)

Fabian Hinder 1 André Artelt 1 Barbara Hammer 1

Abstract
The notion of concept drift refers to the phenomenon that the distribution, which is underlying the observed data, changes over time; as a
consequence machine learning models may become inaccurate and need adjustment. Many online learning schemes include drift detection to
actively detect and react to observed changes. Yet,
reliable drift detection constitutes a challenging
problem in particular in the context of high dimensional data, varying drift characteristics, and
the absence of a parametric model such as a classification scheme which reflects the drift. In this
paper we present a novel concept drift detection
method, Dynamic Adapting Window Independence Drift Detection (DAWIDD), which aims
for non-parametric drift detection of diverse drift
characteristics. For this purpose, we establish a
mathematical equivalence of the presence of drift
to the dependency of specific random variables in
an according drift process. This allows us to rely
on independence tests rather than parametric models or the classification loss, resulting in a fairly
robust scheme to universally detect different types
of drift, as it is also confirmed in experiments.

1. Introduction
One fundamental assumption in classical machine learning
is the fact that observed data are i.i.d. according to some
unknown underlying probability measure PX , i.e. the data
generating process is stationary. Yet, this assumption is
often violated as soon as machine learning faces real world
problems: models are subject to seasonal changes, changed
demands of individual costumers, ageing of sensors, etc. In
*

Equal contribution 1 Cognitive Interaction Technology
(CITEC), Bielefeld University, Bielefeld, Germany. Correspondence to: Fabian Hinder <fhinder@techfak.uni-bielefeld.de>,
André Artelt <aartelt@techfak.uni-bielefeld.de>, Barbara Hammer <bhammer@techfak.uni-bielefeld.de>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

such settings, life-long model adaptation rather than classical batch learning is required for optimal performance.
Since drift, i.e. the fact that data is no longer identically
distributed, is a major issue in many real-world applications
of machine learning, many attempts were made to deal with
this setting (Ditzler et al., 2015).
Depending on the domain of data and application, the presence of drift is modelled in different ways. As an example,
covariate shift refers to the situation of training and test
set having different marginal distributions (Gretton et al.,
2009). Learning for data streams extends this setting to an
unlimited (but usually countable) stream of observed data,
mostly in supervised learning scenarios (Gama et al., 2014).
Here, one distinguishes between virtual and real drift, i.e.
non-stationarity of the marginal distribution only or also the
posterior. Learning technologies for such situations often
rely on windowing techniques, and adapt the model based
on the characteristics of the data in an observed time window. Active methods explicitly detect drift, usually referring
to drift of the classification error, and trigger model adaptation this way, while passive methods continuously adjust
the model (Ditzler et al., 2015).
Interestingly, a majority of approaches deal with supervised
scenarios, aiming for a small interleaved train-test error; this
is accompanied by first approaches to identify particularly
relevant features where drift occurs (Webb et al., 2017), and
a large number of methods, which aim for a detection of
drift and an identification of change points in given data sets
(Aminikhanghahi and Cook, 2017). These techniques often
rely on strong assumptions regarding the process, e.g. they
detect a substantial decrease of the classification accuracy
of a specific classification scheme on the given data, or they
judge important characteristics of the distribution which are
estimated on time windows of fixed size – as a consequence,
these methods face problems if the underlying drift characteristics do not align with these assumptions. The purpose
of our contribution is threefold:
(I) We formalize two different notions of drift which are
used in the literature, namely drift as change of probabilities, and drift as change of a loss function, which is used for
popular drift detection methods, and we show the equivalence of these notions; (II) we provide a novel mathematical

