Decision Trees for Decision-Making under the
Predict-then-Optimize Framework

Adam N. Elmachtoub 1 Jason Cheuk Nam Liang 2 Ryan McNellis 1 3

Abstract
We consider the use of decision trees for
decision-making problems under the predictthen-optimize framework. That is, we would like
to first use a decision tree to predict unknown input parameters of an optimization problem, and
then make decisions by solving the optimization
problem using the predicted parameters. A natural loss function in this framework is to measure the suboptimality of the decisions induced
by the predicted input parameters, as opposed
to measuring loss using input parameter prediction error. This natural loss function is known in
the literature as the Smart Predict-then-Optimize
(SPO) loss, and we propose a tractable methodology called SPO Trees (SPOTs) for training decision trees under this loss. SPOTs benefit from
the interpretability of decision trees, providing
an interpretable segmentation of contextual features into groups with distinct optimal solutions
to the optimization problem of interest. We conduct several numerical experiments on synthetic
and real data including the prediction of travel
times for shortest path problems and predicting
click probabilities for news article recommendation. We demonstrate on these datasets that
SPOTs simultaneously provide higher quality decisions and significantly lower model complexity than other machine learning approaches (e.g.,
CART) trained to minimize prediction error.
1
Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research and Data Science Institute, Columbia University, NY, USA
2
Operations Research Center, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MA, USA 3 Amazon, NY, USA. Publication written prior to
Amazon employment. Correspondence to: Adam N. Elmachtoub
<adam@ieor.columbia.edu>, Jason Cheuk Nam Liang <jcnliang@mit.edu>, Ryan McNellis <rtm2130@columbia.edu, rmcnell@amazon.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Many decision-making problems of interest to practitioners can be framed as optimization problems containing uncertain input parameters to be estimated from data. For
example, personalized advertising requires estimation of
click/conversion probabilities as a function of user features,
portfolio optimization problems necessitate accurate predictions of asset returns, and delivery routing problems require forecasts of travel times. A convenient and widelyutilized framework for addressing these problems is the
predict-then-optimize framework. Predict-then-optimize is
a two step approach which (i) first predicts any uncertain
input parameters using a machine learning (ML) model
trained on historical data, and (ii) then generates decisions
by solving the corresponding optimization problem using
the predicted parameters. Typically, the ML models in this
framework are trained using loss functions measuring prediction error (e.g., mean squared error) without considering
the impact of the predictions on the downstream optimization problem. However, for many practitioners, the primary
interest is in obtaining near-optimal decisions from the input parameter estimates rather than minimizing prediction
error. In this work, we provide a methodology for training
decision trees, under the predict-then-optimize framework,
to minimize decision error rather than prediction error.
A natural idea is to integrate the prediction task with the optimization task, training the ML models using a loss function which directly measures the suboptimality of the decisions induced by the predicted input parameters. Elmachtoub & Grigas (2017) propose such a loss function for a
broad class of decision-making problems, which they refer to as the Smart Predict-then-Optimize loss (SPO loss).
However, the authors note that training ML models using
SPO loss is likely infeasible due to the SPO loss function
being nonconvex and discontinuous (and therefore not differentiable). The authors therefore propose a convex surrogate loss function they refer to as SPO+ loss, which they
show is Fisher consistent with respect to SPO loss under
some assumptions. Wilder et al. (2019a) also note the nondifferentiability of SPO loss and modify the objective function of the nominal optimization problem to derive a differentiable, surrogate loss function. Both works demonstrate

