Sequence Generation with Mixed Representations

Lijun Wu* 1 2 Shufang Xie* 1 Yingce Xia 1 Yang Fan 3 Tao Qin 1 Jianhuang Lai 2 Tie-Yan Liu 1

Abstract
Tokenization is the first step of many natural language processing (NLP) tasks and plays an important role for neural NLP models. Tokenization
methods such as byte-pair encoding and SentencePiece, which can greatly reduce the large vocabulary size and deal with out-of-vocabulary words,
have shown to be effective and are widely adopted
for sequence generation tasks. While various tokenization methods exist, there is no common
acknowledgement which one is the best. In this
work, we propose to leverage the mixed representations from different tokenizers for sequence
generation tasks, which can take the advantages of
each individual tokenization method. Specifically,
we introduce a new model architecture to incorporate mixed representations and a co-teaching
algorithm to better utilize the diversity of different tokenization methods. Our approach achieves
significant improvements on neural machine translation tasks with six language pairs, as well as an
abstractive summarization task.

1. Introduction
Natural language processing (NLP) has achieved great success with deep neural networks in recent years (Deng & Liu,
2018; Zhang et al., 2015; Deng et al., 2013; Wu et al., 2016;
Hassan et al., 2018). For neural based NLP models, tokenization, which chops raw sequence up into pieces, is the
first step and plays the most important role in the text preprocessing. Previously, tokenization is always performed on
word level (Arppe et al., 2005; Bahdanau et al., 2014), which
splits a raw sentence by spaces and applies language-specific
rules to punctuation marks, or character level (Kim et al.,
2016; Lee et al., 2017), which directly segments words into
*

Equal contribution 1 Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China 3 University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China. Correspondence to: Lijun Wu <Lijun.Wu@microsoft.com>, Yingce Xia
<Yingce.Xia@microsoft.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

Table 1. A German sentence example (Ori stands for original) of
tokenization results by BPE, WordPiece (WP), SentencePiece (SP)
tokenizers. Different subwords are highlighted in bold font. @@
and represent the boundaries of subwords.
Results
Ori

und diese einfachen themen sind eigentlich keine
komplexen wissenschaftlichen zusammenhänge

BPE

und diese einfachen themen sind eigentlich keine
komplex@@ en wissenschaftlichen zusammen@@
hän@@ ge

WP

SP

und diese einfachen themen sind eigentlich keine
komplexe n wissenschaftlichen zusammen hä nge
und diese einfachen them en sind eigentlich keine
komplexen wissenschaft lichen zusammenhänge

individual characters. However, previous works revealed
that such tokenization methods have their own drawbacks
(Ling et al., 2015; Cherry et al., 2018; Luong & Manning,
2016) and often lead to inaccurate results.
Recently, there are several types of tokenization methods
shown to be very effective, which split sentences into subword units according to the statistics of consequent characters. Byte-pair encoding (BPE) (Sennrich et al., 2015) constructs the vocabulary based on the subword frequency, and
word level tokenization should be applied first before using
BPE. SentencePiece (SP)1 (Kudo, 2018; Kudo & Richardson, 2018) and WordPiece (WP) (Schuster & Nakajima,
2012) tokenizers leverage language models to build the vocabulary, which can be applied to the raw text data without
word tokenization. Table 1 shows the results of three tokenizers for one example of German sentence and they differ
a lot with each other. For example, BPE segments the word
“komplexen” into “komplex” and “en”, while WP segments
it into “komplexe” and “n” but SP keeps it as is. Despite
the effectiveness of various tokenizers, there is no common
acknowledgement about which approach is the best across
different tasks. Taking machine translation as an example,
preliminary experiments (see Table 2) show that no specific tokenizer can universally perform best across different
datasets. Considering each tokenization method has its own
strengths and unique characteristics, instead of inventing an1
To be concrete, we refer the unigram language model in (Kudo,
2018) as SentencePiece.

