Causal Inference using Gaussian Processes
with Structured Latent Confounders
Sam Witty 1 Kenta Takatsu 1 David Jensen 1 Vikash Mansinghka 2

Abstract
Latent confounders—unobserved variables that
influence both treatment and outcome—can bias
estimates of causal effects. In some cases, these
confounders are shared across observations, e.g.
all students taking a course are influenced by the
course’s difficulty in addition to any educational
interventions they receive individually. This paper shows how to semiparametrically model latent
confounders that have this structure and thereby
improve estimates of causal effects. The key innovations are a hierarchical Bayesian model, Gaussian processes with structured latent confounders
(GP-SLC), and a Monte Carlo inference algorithm
for this model based on elliptical slice sampling.
GP-SLC provides principled Bayesian uncertainty
estimates of individual treatment effect with minimal assumptions about the functional forms relating confounders, covariates, treatment, and outcome. Finally, this paper shows GP-SLC is competitive with or more accurate than widely used
causal inference techniques on three benchmark
datasets, including the Infant Health and Development Program and a dataset showing the effect
of changing temperatures on state-wide energy
consumption across New England.

1. Introduction
Multiple causal models can be observationally equivalent,
i.e., they induce the same likelihoods for observed data,
while producing different estimates of the effects of an intervention. This observational equivalance between causal
models is the basis for the colloquial expression “correlation
does not imply causation.” Distinguishing between causal
1
College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst, United States 2 Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, United States. Correspondence to: Sam
Witty <switty@cs.umass.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

models, and estimating the effects of interventions, requires
untestable assumptions about causal structure.
One such common assumption is unconfoundedness (Imbens & Rubin, 2015), i.e., that there exist no latent variables that influence both treatment and outcome. This
assumption enables the unique identification of interventional distributions from the joint distribution over observed
variables (Pearl, 2009) and reduces causal inference to
probabilistic estimation. Unfortunately, assuming unconfoundedness is often unreasonable in real observational settings (Shadish et al., 2008). However, it may be more reasonable to assume uncounfoundedness for a subset of data
instances that are known to share a common structure.
For example, suppose an educator proposes a new policy of
holding back poor performing kindergarten students (Hong
& Raudenbush, 2006; Hong & Yu, 2008) with the intention
of increasing their future academic performance. To estimate the effect of this policy change, they gather data on
student retention and education outcomes from a national
database. Here, the unconfoundedness assumption is not
justified, as the schools’ retention policies are likely to be
influenced by local economic conditions, which may also influence student outcomes through other causal mechanisms,
such as the availability of educational resources. However,
the assumption may be justified when considering only students within a particular school, as this subset of students
are similarly influenced by local economic conditions. In
other words, statistical relationships within a school are less
likely to be biased by latent confounders than are statistical
relationships across the entire population.
In this paper, we present Gaussian processes with structured
latent confounders (GP-SLC), a novel Bayesian nonparametric approach to causal inference with hierarchical data.
The key innovation behind GP-SLC is to place Gaussian process priors over functions in a hierarchical structural causal
model, bringing the flexibility of Gaussian process models
to a wide variety of practical causal inference techniques.
GP-SLC naturally handles binary and continuous treatments
and requires minimal assumptions about functional relationships between latent confounders, observed covariates,
treatment, and outcomes. See Figure 1 for an overview on
how GP-SLC estimates counterfactual outcomes from data.

