Dissecting Non-Vacuous Generalization Bounds
based on the Mean-Field Approximation

Konstantinos Pitas 1

Abstract
Explaining how overparametrized neural networks simultaneously achieve low risk and zero
empirical risk on benchmark datasets is an open
problem. PAC-Bayes bounds optimized using
variational inference (VI) have been recently proposed as a promising direction in obtaining nonvacuous bounds. We show empirically that this approach gives negligible gains when modeling the
posterior as a Gaussian with diagonal covariance—
known as the mean-field approximation. We investigate common explanations, such as the failure of VI due to problems in optimization or
choosing a suboptimal prior. Our results suggest that investigating richer posteriors is the most
promising direction forward.

(a)

1. Introduction
Two recent works (Dziugaite & Roy, 2017; Zhou et al.,
2018) based on the PAC-Bayes framework (McAllester,
1999) have made remarkable progress towards explaining why overparametrized neural networks simultaneously
achieve low risk and zero empirical risk on benchmark
datasets. PAC-Bayes bounds deal with randomized classifiers with posterior and prior distributions ρ̂ and π respectively. Given that typically one wants to bound the risk of a
deterministic classifier f the posterior ρ̂ is chosen to be in
some sense close to f (i.e. it is usually centered at f ). Then,
PAC-Bayes theorems make statements that are roughly of
the form
EL(ρ̂) ≤ EL̂(ρ̂) + βKL(ρ̂||π),

(1)

where L(ρ̂) is the risk, L̂(ρ̂) is the empirical risk and the
expectation is over the posterior. The βKL(ρ̂||π) term be1

École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Konstantinos Pitas <konstantinos.pitas@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Risk-Complexity plot for MNIST 10: The area below
the dashed line corresponds to non-vacuous pairs of (complexity,
empirical risk). The purple star corresponds to the optimal bound
implied by the testing set. We parametrize the PAC-Bayes bound
with different combinations of diagonal Gaussian priors and posteriors. “Isotropic@” corresponds to isotropic priors and posteriors
with the prior centered at 0 and at the deep neural network random initialization. Similarly for “Mean-Field VI@” the posterior
is diagonal but non-isotropic and we optimize it with variational
inference. Choosing the prior mean to be the random initialization
improves the bounds greatly in both cases. On the contrary when
optimizing with mean-field variational inference there is negligible
improvement over the isotropic case.

tween the prior and posterior acts as a measure of complexity
for the classifier.
The RHS of (1) corresponds to a variational encoding
scheme of the deep neural network weights, where the variance of the noise in the posterior measures the level of precision used in the encoding (Blier & Ollivier, 2018). In Dziugaite & Roy (2017), the authors minimize this variational
code directly using a differentiable surrogate, by parameterizing the prior and posterior as Gaussians, and optimizing
using stochastic variational inference (Hoffman et al., 2013;
Kingma & Welling, 2013). They obtain non-vacuous generalization bounds on a simplified MNIST(LeCun & Cortes,
2010) dataset, but are unable to scale their result to larger

