Adversarial Mutual Information for Text Generation
Boyuan Pan 1 * Yazheng Yang 2 * Kaizhao Liang 3 Bhavya Kailkhura 4 Zhongming Jin 5 Xian-Sheng Hua 5
Deng Cai 1 Bo Li 3

Abstract
Recent advances in maximizing mutual information (MI) between the source and target have
demonstrated its effectiveness in text generation.
However, previous works paid little attention to
modeling the backward network of MI (i.e. dependency from the target to the source), which is
crucial to the tightness of the variational information maximization lower bound. In this paper, we
propose Adversarial Mutual Information (AMI):
a text generation framework which is formed as a
novel saddle point (min-max) optimization aiming
to identify joint interactions between the source
and target. Within this framework, the forward
and backward networks are able to iteratively promote or demote each other’s generated instances
by comparing the real and synthetic data distributions. We also develop a latent noise sampling
strategy that leverages random variations at the
high-level semantic space to enhance the long
term dependency in the generation process. Extensive experiments based on different text generation tasks demonstrate that the proposed AMI
framework can significantly outperform several
strong baselines, and we also show that AMI has
potential to lead to a tighter lower bound of maximum mutual information for the variational information maximization problem.

1. Introduction
Generating diverse and meaningful text is one of the coveted goals in machine learning research. Most sequence
transductive models for text generation can be efficiently
trained by maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) and have
*

Equal contribution 1 State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang
University 2 College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University
3
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 4 Lawrence Livermore
National Laboratory 5 Alibaba Group. Correspondence to: Boyuan
Pan <panby@zju.edu.cn>, Bo Li <lbo@illinois.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

demonstrated dominant performance in various tasks, such
as dialog generation (Serban et al., 2016; Park et al., 2018),
machine translation (Bahdanau et al., 2014; Vaswani et al.,
2017) and document summarization (See et al., 2017). However, the MLE-based training schemes have been shown to
produce safe but dull texts which are ascribed to the relative
frequency of generic phrases in the dataset such as “I don’t
know” or “what do you do” (Serban et al., 2016).
Recently, Li et al. (2016a) proposed to use maximum mutual
information (MMI) in the dialog generation as the objective
function. They showed that modeling mutual information
between the source and target will significantly decrease
the chance of generating bland sentences and improve the
informativeness of the generated responses, which has inspired many important works on MI-prompting text generation (Li et al., 2016b; Zhang et al., 2018b; Ye et al.,
2019). In practice, directly maximizing the mutual information is intractable, so it is often converted to a lower bound
called the variational information maximization (VIM) problem by defining an auxiliary backward network to approximate the posterior of the dependency from the target to the
source (Chen et al., 2016). Specifically, the likelihood of
generating the real source text by the backward network,
whose input is the synthetic target text produced by the
forward network, will be used as a reward to optimize the
forward network, tailoring it to generate sentences with
higher rewards.
However, most of them optimize the backward network by
maximizing the likelihood stated above. Without the guarantee of the quality of the synthetic target text produced by the
forward network, this procedure encourages the backward
model to generate the real source text from many uninformative sentences and is not likely to make the backward
network approach the true posterior, thus affects the tightness of the variational lower bound. On the other hand,
since the likelihood of the backward network is a reward for
optimizing the forward network, a biased backward network
may provide unreliable reward scores, which will mislead
the forward network to still generate bland text.
In this paper, we present a simple yet effective framework
based on the maximum mutual information objective that
encourages it to train the forward network and the backward network adversarially. We propose Adversarial Mu-

