Multigrid Neural Memory

Tri Huynh 1 Michael Maire 1 Matthew R. Walter 2

Abstract
We introduce a novel approach to endowing neural networks with emergent, long-term, largescale memory. Distinct from strategies that
connect neural networks to external memory
banks via intricately crafted controllers and handdesigned attentional mechanisms, our memory is
internal, distributed, co-located alongside computation, and implicitly addressed, while being
drastically simpler than prior efforts. Architecting networks with multigrid structure and connectivity, while distributing memory cells alongside computation throughout this topology, we
observe the emergence of coherent memory subsystems. Our hierarchical spatial organization,
parameterized convolutionally, permits efficient
instantiation of large-capacity memories, while
multigrid topology provides short internal routing pathways, allowing convolutional networks
to efficiently approximate the behavior of fully
connected networks. Such networks have an implicit capacity for internal attention; augmented
with memory, they learn to read and write specific
memory locations in a dynamic data-dependent
manner. We demonstrate these capabilities on exploration and mapping tasks, where our network
is able to self-organize and retain long-term memory for trajectories of thousands of time steps. On
tasks decoupled from any notion of spatial geometry: sorting, associative recall, and question
answering, our design functions as a truly generic
memory and yields excellent results.

1. Introduction
Memory, in the form of generic, high-capacity, long-term
storage, is likely to play a critical role in expanding neural
networks to new application domains. A neural memory
1

University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA 2 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. Correspondence to:
Tri Huynh <trihuynh@uchicago.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

subsystem with such properties could be transformative—
pushing neural networks within grasp of tasks traditionally
associated with general intelligence and an extended sequence of reasoning steps. Development of architectures
for integrating memory units with neural networks spans a
good portion of the history of neural networks themselves
(e.g., from LSTMs (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) to
the recent Neural Turing Machines (NTMs) (Graves et al.,
2014)). Yet, while useful, none has elevated neural networks
to be capable of learning from and processing data on size
and time scales commensurate with traditional computing
systems. Recent successes of deep neural networks, though
dramatic, are focused on tasks, such as visual perception or
natural language translation, with relatively short latency—
e.g., hundreds of steps, often the depth of the network itself.
We present a network architecture that allows memory subsystems to emerge as a byproduct of training simple components. Though our networks appear structurally uniform,
they learn to behave like coherent large-scale memories,
internally coordinating a strategy for directing reads and
writes to specific layers and spatial locations therein. As
an analogy, a convolutional neural network (CNN), tasked
with classifying images, may coordinate and specialize its
internal layers for extracting useful visual representations.
Our networks, trained for a task requiring long-term memory, do the same with respect to memory: they self-organize
their internal layers into a large-scale memory store. We accomplish this using only generic components; our networks
are comprised of LSTM cells and convolutional operations.
Yet, our networks learn to master tasks that are beyond the
abilities of traditional CNNs or LSTMs.
Multigrid organization, imposed on both spatial layout
and connectivity, is the design principle that endows networks with this qualitatively new capacity for forming selforganized memory subsystems. Compared to almost all
existing networks, a multigrid wiring pattern provides an
exponentially more efficient routing topology among local
components embedded within it. Ke et al. (2017) implement
a multigrid variant of CNNs, demonstrating that efficient
routing capacity enables the network to learn tasks that
require attentional behavior. We distribute memory cells
throughout such a network, and observe that this implicit
capacity for attention translates into an implicit capacity for
attention over memory read and write locations. Learned pa-

