PENNI: Pruned Kernel Sharing for Efficient CNN Inference

Shiyu Li 1 Edward Hanson 1 Hai Li 1 Yiran Chen 1

Abstract
Although state-of-the-art (SOTA) CNNs achieve
outstanding performance on various tasks, their
high computation demand and massive number
of parameters make it difficult to deploy these
SOTA CNNs onto resource-constrained devices.
Previous works on CNN acceleration utilize lowrank approximation of the original convolution
layers to reduce computation cost. However, these
methods are very difficult to conduct upon sparse
models, which limits execution speedup since redundancies within the CNN model are not fully
exploited. We argue that kernel granularity decomposition can be conducted with low-rank assumption while exploiting the redundancy within
the remaining compact coefficients. Based on this
observation, we propose PENNI, a CNN model
compression framework that is able to achieve
model compactness and hardware efficiency simultaneously by (1) implementing kernel sharing
in convolution layers via a small number of basis
kernels and (2) alternately adjusting bases and
coefficients with sparse constraints. Experiments
show that we can prune 97% parameters and 92%
FLOPs on ResNet18 CIFAR10 with no accuracy
loss, and achieve 44% reduction in run-time memory consumption and a 53% reduction in inference
latency.

1. Introduction
One of the greatest strengths of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), specifically Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs), is their large design space, which innately heightens flexibility and potential for accuracy. Improving model
accuracy conventionally involves increasing its size, given
sufficient training data. This increase in size can come in
the form of more layers (He et al., 2016), more channels per
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke
University, Durham NC, United States. Correspondence to: Shiyu
Li <shiyu.li@duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

layer (Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016), or more branches
(Szegedy et al., 2015). A major drawback of naı̈vely increasing model size is the substantial computational power
and memory bandwidth required to train and run inference
tasks. To address this issue, multiple methods have been
introduced to compress CNN models and increase sparsity
(Han et al., 2015; Wen et al., 2016). Model compression
can come in the form of weight quantization (Ullrich et al.,
2017) or Low Rank Approximation (LRA) (Denton et al.,
2014).
LRA utilizes matrix factorization to decompose weight matrices into the product of two low rank matrices, thus reducing computation cost. Some works (Lebedev et al., 2014;
Tai et al., 2016) use tensor decomposition to represent the
original weight with the outer product of one-dimensional
tensors (i.e., vectors) . The speedup and parameter reduction
of these methods are notable; however, current approaches
are limited because they do not consider redundancies in
CNN parameters.
Model sparsity can be induced via various pruning techniques, most of which are categorized under structured or
unstructured. On one hand, unstructured pruning aims to
remove unimportant weights of a network, irrespective of
its location. By targeting the least important weights in a
model, unstructured pruning has minimal impact on overall
accuracy while achieving a high sparsity level. However,
the undefined distribution of pruned weights makes it challenging to compress the model’s representation in memory.
On the other hand, structured pruning achieves sparsity by
removing entire DNN structures (e.g. filter-channels, filters,
layers, etc.) that are deemed unimportant, which may impact
a model’s performance by inadvertently removing sensitive
parameters. Such predictable pruning patterns open the
avenue for efficient model storage and computation. It is
important to note that merely applying structured pruning
is not enough to fully reap hardware efficiency benefits.
Without additional changes to the underlying representation in memory or the model’s training or inference stage
algorithms, conventional DNN platforms still fall victim to
inefficient memory transfers and computations.
In this paper, we propose Pruned kernel sharing for Efficient CNN Inference (PENNI), a CNN model compression
framework that overcomes these challenges by decompos-

