Multilinear Latent Conditioning for Generating Unseen Attribute
Combinations
Markos Georgopoulos 1 Grigorios G Chrysos 1 Maja Pantic 1 Yannis Panagakis 2

Abstract
Deep generative models rely on their inductive
bias to facilitate generalization, especially for
problems with high dimensional data, like images. However, empirical studies have shown that
variational autoencoders (VAE) and generative
adversarial networks (GAN) lack the generalization ability that occurs naturally in human perception. For example, humans can visualize a woman
smiling after only seeing a smiling man. On the
contrary, the standard conditional VAE (cVAE)
is unable to generate unseen attribute combinations. To this end, we extend cVAE by introducing
a multilinear latent conditioning framework that
captures the multiplicative interactions between
the attributes. We implement two variants of our
model and demonstrate their efficacy on MNIST,
Fashion-MNIST and CelebA. Altogether, we design a novel conditioning framework that can be
used with any architecture to synthesize unseen
attribute combinations.

1. Introduction
Deep generative models have been widely utilized to push
the boundaries of the state-of-the-art in various tasks including image (Miyato et al., 2018), audio (Andreux & Mallat,
2018), as well as text synthesis (Radford et al., 2018). Their
success would not be possible without the development of
complex and expressive models (Miyato et al., 2018; Karras
et al., 2019; Du & Mordatch, 2019) as well as the collection
of rich and thoroughly annotated datasets (Liu et al., 2015;
Deng et al., 2009). However, due to the high data complexity of these tasks (Arora & Zhang, 2017), generative models
have to rely on a set of assumptions, i.e., their inductive
1
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, United
Kingdom 2 Department of Informatics and Telecommunications,
University of Athens, Greece. Correspondence to: Markos Georgopoulos <m.georgopoulos@imperial.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Schematic of the conditional VAE (top) and the proposed
framework (bottom). The baseline (conditional VAE) lacks the
structure in the latent space and cannot generate images of attribute
combinations that are absent from the training set (e.g., orange 2).
On the contrary, the proposed method capitalizes on the multilinear latent conditioning to synthesize images of unseen attribute
combinations.

bias. These assumptions are based on the distribution of the
training set, as well as the model itself, and are crucial for
generalization. However, the training set is not always an
accurate description of the real world. Hence, the generated
distribution is constrained by the distribution of the training
data.
The empirical study conducted in (Zhao et al., 2018) is
the first to investigate the inductive bias of deep generative models. The study focuses on the unsupervised setting
and demonstrates the inability of variational autoencoders
(VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014)
and generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al., 2014) to generate images of unseen attribute combinations. For example, consider the task of generating an image
of a smiling woman without seeing one in the training set.
We posit that in order to further advance the state-of-the-art,
generative models should be able to generalize to unseen
attribute combinations. In this work, we focus on the supervised setting and investigate the conditional generation of
attribute combinations that are absent from the training set.

