Rate-Distortion Optimization Guided Autoencoder for Isometric Embedding in
Euclidean Latent Space

Keizo Kato 1 Jing Zhou 2 Tomotake Sasaki 1 Akira Nakagawa 1

Abstract
To analyze high-dimensional and complex data
in the real world, deep generative models, such
as variational autoencoder (VAE) embed data in a
low-dimensional space (latent space) and learn a
probabilistic model in the latent space. However,
they struggle to accurately reproduce the probability distribution function (PDF) in the input
space from that in the latent space. If the embedding were isometric, this issue can be solved,
because the relation of PDFs can become tractable.
To achieve isometric property, we propose RateDistortion Optimization guided autoencoder inspired by orthonormal transform coding. We show
our method has the following properties: (i) the
Jacobian matrix between the input space and a Euclidean latent space forms a constantly-scaled orthonormal system and enables isometric data embedding; (ii) the relation of PDFs in both spaces
can become tractable one such as proportional
relation. Furthermore, our method outperforms
state-of-the-art methods in unsupervised anomaly
detection with four public datasets.

1. Introduction
Capturing the inherent features of a dataset from highdimensional and complex data is an essential issue in machine learning. Generative model approach learns the probability distribution of data, aiming at data generation, unsupervised learning, disentanglement, etc. (Tschannen et al.,
2018). It is generally difficult to directly estimate a probability density function (PDF) Px (x) of high-dimensional
data x ∈ RM . Instead, one promising approach is to map
x to a low-dimensional latent variable z ∈ RN (N < M ),
and capture PDF Pz (z). Variational autoencoder (VAE) is a
widely used generative model to capture z as a probabilistic
1
FUJITSU LABORATORIES LTD. 2 Fujitsu R&D Center Co.,
Ltd.. Correspondence to: kato.keizo, anaka <@fujitsu.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

model with univariate Gaussian priors (Kingma & Welling,
2014). For a more flexible estimation of Pz (z), successor
models have been proposed, such as using Gaussian mixture
model (GMM) (Zong et al., 2018), combining univariate
Gaussian model and GMM (Liao et al., 2018), etc.
In tasks where the quantitative analysis is vital, Px (x)
should be reproduced from Pz (z). For instance, in anomaly
detection, the anomaly likelihood is calculated based on
PDF value of data sample (Chalapathy & Chawla, 2019).
However, the embedding of VAEs is not isometric; that is,
the distance between data points x(1) and x(2) is inconsistent to the distance of corresponding latent variables z (1)
and z (2) (Chen et al., 2018; Shao et al., 2018; Geng et al.,
2020). Obviously mere estimation of Pz (z) cannot be the
substitution of the estimation for Px (x) under such situation. As McQueen et al. (2016) mentioned, for a reliable
data analysis, the isometric embedding in low-dimensional
space is necessary. In addition, to utilize the standard PDF
estimation techniques, the latent space is preferred to be a
Euclidean space. Despite of its importance, this point is not
considered even in methods developed for the quantitative
analysis of PDF (Johnson et al., 2016; Zong et al., 2018;
Liao et al., 2018; Zenati et al., 2018; Song & Ou, 2018).
According to the Nash embedding theorem, an arbitrary
smooth and compact Riemannian manifold M can be embedded in a Euclidean space RN (N ≥ dim M + 1, sufficiently large) isometrically (Han & Hong, 2006). On
the other hand, the manifold hypothesis argues that realworld data presented in a high-dimensional space concentrate in the vicinity of a much lower dimensional manifold
Mx ⊂ RM (Bengio et al., 2013). Based on these theories,
it is expected that the input data x can be embedded isometrically in a low-dimensional Euclidean space RN when
dim Mx < N  M . Although the existence of the isometric embedding was proven, the method to achieve it has
been challenging. Some previous works have proposed algorithms to do that (McQueen et al., 2016; Bernstein et al.,
2000). Yet, they do not deal with high-dimensional input
data, such as images. Another thing to consider is the distance on Mx may be defined by the data tendency with an
appropriate metric function. For instance, we can choose the
binary cross entropy (BCE) for binary data and structured

