Optimal Robust Learning of Discrete Distributions from Batches

Ayush Jain 1 Alon Orlitsky 1

Abstract
Many applications, including natural language
processing, sensor networks, collaborative filtering, and federated learning, call for estimating discrete distributions from data collected in batches,
some of which may be untrustworthy, erroneous,
faulty, or even adversarial. Previous estimators
for this setting ran in exponential time, and for
some regimes required a suboptimal number of
batches. We provide the first polynomial-time estimator that is optimal in the number of batches
and achieves essentially the best possible estimation accuracy.

1. Introduction
1.1. Motivation
Estimating discrete distributions from their samples is a
fundamental modern-science tenet. (Kamath et al., 2015)
showed that as the number of sample s grows, a k-symbol
distribution
can be learned to expected L1 distance ∼
p
2(k−1)/(πs) that we call the information-theoretic limit.
In many applications, some samples are inadvertently or maliciously corrupted. A simple and intuitive example shows
that this erroneous data limits the extent to which a distribution can be learned, even with infinitely many samples.
Consider the extremely simple case of just two possible
binary distributions: (1, 0) and (1 − β, β). An adversary
who observes a 1 − β fraction of the samples and can determine the rest, could use the observed samples to learn
the underlying distribution, and set the remaining samples
to make the distribution appear to be (1 − β, β). By the
triangle inequality, even with arbitrarily many samples, any
estimator for p incurs an L1 loss ≥ β for at least one of the
two distributions. We call this the adversarial lower bound.
The example may seem to suggest a pessimistic conclusion.
1
University of California, San Diego. Correspondence to:
Ayush Jain <ayjain@eng.ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

If an adversary can corrupt a β fraction of the data, a loss
≥ β is unavoidable. Fortunately, that is not necessarily so.
In many applications data is collected in batches, most of
which are genuine, but some possibly corrupted. Here are
a few examples. Data may be gathered by sensors, each
providing a large amount of data, and some sensors may be
faulty. The word frequency of an author may be estimated
from several large texts, some of which are mis-attributed.
Or user preferences may be learned by querying several
users, but some users may intentionally bias their feedback.
Interestingly, even when a β-fraction of the batches are corrupted, the underlying distribution can be estimated to L1
distance much lower than β. Consider for example just three
n-sample batches, of which one is chosen adversarially. The
underlying distribution can be learned
p from each genuine
batch to expected L1 distance ∼ 2(k − 1)/(πn). It is
easy to see that the average of the two estimates pairwiseclosest in L1 distance achieves a comparable expected distance that for large batch size n is much lower than β.
This raises the natural question of whether estimates from
even more batches can be combined effectively to estimate
distributions to within a distance that is not only much
smaller than the β achieved when no batch information
p was
utilized, but also significantly smaller than the O( k/n)
distance derived above when two batches were used. For example can the underlying distribution be learned to a small
L1 distance when, as in many practical examples, n ≤ k?
To formalize the problem, (Qiao & Valiant, 2017) considered learning a k-symbol distribution p whose samples are
provided in batches of size ≥ n. A total of m batches are
provided, of which a fraction ≤ β may be arbitrarily and
adversarially corrupted, while in every other batch b the
samples are drawn according a distribution pb satisfying
||pb − p||1 ≤ η, allowing for the possibility that slightly
different distributions generate samples in each batch.
For this adversarial batch setting, they showed that for any
alphabet size k ≥ 2, and any number m of batches, the
lowest achievable L1 distance is ≥ η + √β2n . We refer to
this as the adversarial batch lower bound.
For β < 1/900, they also derived an estimation algorithm
√
that approximates p to L1 distance O(max{η + β/ n,
p
(n + k)/(nm)}), achieving the adversarial batch lower

