Learning to Score Behaviors for Guided Policy Optimization
Aldo Pacchiano * 1 Jack Parker-Holder * 2 Yunhao Tang * 3 Anna Choromanska 4 Krzysztof Choromanski 5
Michael I. Jordan 1

Abstract
We introduce a new approach for comparing reinforcement learning policies, using Wasserstein
distances (WDs) in a newly defined latent behavioral space. We show that by utilizing the dual formulation of the WD, we can learn score functions
over policy behaviors that can in turn be used to
lead policy optimization towards (or away from)
(un)desired behaviors. Combined with smoothed
WDs, the dual formulation allows us to devise
efficient algorithms that take stochastic gradient
descent steps through WD regularizers. We incorporate these regularizers into two novel on-policy
algorithms, Behavior-Guided Policy Gradient and
Behavior-Guided Evolution Strategies, which we
demonstrate can outperform existing methods in
a variety of challenging environments. We also
provide an open source demo1 .

1. Introduction
One of the key challenges in reinforcement learning (RL)
is to efficiently incorporate the behaviors of learned policies into optimization algorithms (Lee & Popovic, 2010;
Meyerson et al., 2016; Conti et al., 2018). The fundamental
question we aim to shed light on in this paper is:
What is the right measure of similarity between two policies
acting on the same underlying MDP and how can we devise
algorithms to leverage this information for RL?
In simple terms, the main thesis motivating the methods we
*

Equal contribution 1 University of California Berkeley
University of Oxford 3 Columbia University 4 New York University 5 Google Brain Robotics. Correspondence to: Aldo
Pacchiano <pacchiano@berkeley.edu>, Jack Parker-Holder
<jackph@robots.ox.ac.uk>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
1
Available
at
https://github.com/
behaviorguidedRL/BGRL.
We emphasize this is the
exact code from our experiments, but a demo to build intuition
and clarify our methods.

propose is that:
Two policies may perform similar actions at a local level
but result in very different global behaviors.
We propose to define behaviors via so-called Behavioral
Policy Embeddings (henceforth referred to as Policy Embeddings), which can be both on policy and off policy.
On policy embeddings are achieved via what we call Behavioral Embeddings Maps (BEMs) - functions mapping
trajectories of a policy into a latent behavioral space representing trajectories in a compact way. We define the policy
embedding as the pushforward distributions over trajectory
embeddings as a result of applying a BEM to the policy’s
trajectories. Importantly, two policies with distinct distributions over trajectories may result in the same probabilistic
embedding. Off policy embeddings in contrast correspond
to state and policy evaluation pairs resulting of evaluating
the policy on states sampled from a probing state distribution that can be chosen independently from the policy.
Both embedding mechanisms result in probabilistic Policy
Embeddings, which allow us to identify a policy with a
distribution with support on an embedding space. Policy
Embeddings provide us a way to rigorously define dissimilarity between policies. We do this by equipping them with
metrics defined on the manifold of probability measures,
namely a class of Wasserstein distances (WDs, (Villani,
2008)). There are several reasons for choosing WDs:
• Flexibility. We can use any cost function between embeddings of trajectories, allowing the distance between policy
embeddings to arise organically from an interpretable
distance between embedding points.
• Non-injective BEMs. Different trajectories may be
mapped to the same embedding point (for example in
the case of the last-state embedding). This precludes the
use of likelihood-based distances such as the KL divergence (Kullback & Leibler, 1951), which we discuss in
Section 6.
• Behavioral Test Functions. Solving the dual formulation of the WD objective yields a pair of test functions
over the space of embeddings, used to score trajectories
or state policy pairs (see: Sec. 5.2).

