Handling the Positive-Definite Constraint in the Bayesian Learning Rule

Wu Lin 1 Mark Schmidt 1 2 Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan 3

Abstract
The Bayesian learning rule is a natural-gradient
variational inference method, which not only contains many existing learning algorithms as special
cases but also enables the design of new algorithms. Unfortunately, when variational parameters lie in an open constraint set, the rule may not
satisfy the constraint and requires line-searches
which could slow down the algorithm. In this
work, we address this issue for positive-definite
constraints by proposing an improved rule that
naturally handles the constraints. Our modification is obtained by using Riemannian gradient
methods, and is valid when the approximation attains a block-coordinate natural parameterization
(e.g., Gaussian distributions and their mixtures).
Our method outperforms existing methods without any significant increase in computation. Our
work makes it easier to apply the rule in the presence of positive-definite constraints in parameter
spaces.

1. Introduction
The Bayesian learning rule, a recently proposed method,
enables derivation of learning algorithms from Bayesian
principles (Khan & Rue, 2020). It is a natural-gradient
variational inference method (Khan & Lin, 2017) where, by
carefully choosing a posterior approximation, we can derive
many algorithms in fields such as probabilistic graphical
models, continuous optimization, and deep learning. Khan
& Lin (2017) derive approximate inference methods, such
as stochastic variational inference and variational message
passing; Khan et al. (2018) derive connections to deeplearning algorithms; and Khan & Rue (2020) derive many
classical algorithms such as least-squares, gradient descent,
Newton’s method, and the forward-backward algorithm.
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. 2 CIFAR
AI Chair, Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute, Canada. 3 RIKEN
Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Wu Lin <wlin2018@cs.ubc.ca>.

We can also design new algorithms using this rule such as
uncertainty estimation in deep learning (Osawa et al., 2019)
and the ensemble of Newton methods (Lin et al., 2019a).
An issue with the rule is that when parameters of an posterior approximation lie in an open constraint set, the update
may not always satisfy the constraints. For Gaussian approximations, the posterior covariance needs to be positive
definite but the rule may violate this; see Appendix D.1 in
Khan et al. (2018) for detail. A straightforward solution is
to use a backtracking line-search to keep the updates within
the constraint set (Khan & Lin, 2017), but this can lead to
slow convergence. In some cases, we can find an approximate update which always satisfies the constraints, e.g., for
Gaussian approximations (Khan et al., 2018). However, in
general, it is difficult to come up with such approximations
that are both fast and reasonably accurate. Our goal in this
paper is to modify the Bayesian learning rule so that it can
naturally handle such constraints.
We propose an improved Bayesian learning rule to handle the positive-definite constraints. This is obtained by
using a generalization of natural-gradient methods called
Riemannian-gradient methods. We show that, for many
useful approximations with a specific block-diagonal structure on the Fisher information matrix, the constraints are
satisfied after an additional term is added to the rule. Such
a structure is possible when the parameters of the approximation are partitioned in what we call the block-coordinate
natural (BCN) parameterizations. Fortunately, for many
approximations with such parameterizations, the improved
rule requires almost the same computation as the original
rule. An example is shown in Figure 1 where our improved
rule fixes an implementation issue with an algorithm proposed by Osawa et al. (2019) for deep learning. We present
examples where the improved rule converges faster than the
original rule and many existing baseline methods.

2. Bayesian Learning Rule

1

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Given a dataset D, it is common to estimate unknown
`(z) ≡
variables z of a statistical model by minimizing1 ¯
`(D, z) + R(z) where `(D, z) is a loss function and R(z)
We assume ∇z ¯
`(z) and ∇2z ¯
`(z) exist almost surely whenever
they are needed. ∇ denotes the standard derivative in this paper.
1

