Differentiable Product Quantization for End-to-End Embedding Compression

Ting Chen 1 Lala Li 1 Yizhou Sun 2

Abstract
Embedding layers are commonly used to map
discrete symbols into continuous embedding vectors that reflect their semantic meanings. Despite
their effectiveness, the number of parameters in an
embedding layer increases linearly with the number of symbols and poses a critical challenge on
memory and storage constraints. In this work, we
propose a generic and end-to-end learnable compression framework termed differentiable product quantization (DPQ). We present two instantiations of DPQ that leverage different approximation techniques to enable differentiability in endto-end learning. Our method can readily serve
as a drop-in alternative for any existing embedding layer. Empirically, DPQ offers significant
compression ratios (14-238×) at negligible or no
performance cost on 10 datasets across three different language tasks. 1

1. Introduction
The embedding layer is a basic neural network module
which maps a discrete symbol/word into a continuous hidden vector. It is widely used in NLP related applications,
including language modeling, machine translation and text
classification. With large vocabulary sizes, embedding layers consume large amounts of storage and memory. For
example, in the medium-sized LSTM-based model on the
PTB dataset (Zaremba et al., 2014), the embedding table accounts for more than 95% of the total number of parameters.
Even with sub-words encoding (Sennrich et al., 2015; Kudo
& Richardson, 2018), the size of the embedding layer is still
very significant. In addition to words/sub-words models in
the text domain (Mikolov et al., 2013; Devlin et al., 2018),
embedding layers are also used in a wide range of applications such as knowledge graphs (Bordes et al., 2013; Socher
1

Google Research 2 University of California, Los Angeles. Correspondence to: Ting Chen <iamtingchen@google.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).
1
Code at: github.com/chentingpc/dpq_embedding_compression.

et al., 2013) and recommender systems (Koren et al., 2009),
where the vocabulary sizes are even larger.
Recent efforts to reduce the size of embedding layers have
been made (Shu & Nakayama, 2017; Chen et al., 2018b),
where the authors propose to first learn to encode symbols/words with K-way D-dimensional discrete codes (KD
codes, such as 5-1-2-4 for “cat” and 5-1-2-3 for “dog”), and
then compose the codes to form the output symbol embedding using an embedding composition function. However,
in (Shu & Nakayama, 2017), the discrete codes are fixed before training and are therefore non-adaptive for downstream
tasks. (Chen et al., 2018b) proposes to learn discrete codes
in an end-to-end fashion which leads to better task performance, but their method has two major drawbacks. Firstly,
they utilize complicated embedding composition functions
(e.g. recurrent networks, MLPs) to convert discrete codes
into embedding vectors, which are both computationally
expensive and hard to learn. Secondly, as a result, an additional distillation procedure is required in order to avoid
performance drop.
In this work, we propose a simple differentiable product
quantization (DPQ) framework, which is an efficient module to insert discrete codes into a neural network while
maintaining differentiability. The proposal is based on the
observation that the discrete codes are naturally derived
through the process of quantization (product quantization
by Jegou et al. (2010) in particular), and by making the
quantization process differentiable, we are able to learn the
discrete codes in an end-to-end fashion. Under our framework, we present two concrete approximation techniques
that allow differentiable learning. Compared to the existing
methods (Shu & Nakayama, 2017; Chen et al., 2018b), our
framework 1) establishes a simple and general framework
to generate discrete codes in neural nets in a differentiable
manner, 2) enables more efficient computation and better
approximations, 3) achieves better task performance and
better compression ratios, and 4) avoids the two-stage training (pre-training and distillation) as needed in (Chen et al.,
2018b).
We conduct experiments on ten different datasets across
three language tasks, with additional experiments on
BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) pre-training, by simply replacing the original embedding layer with DPQ. The results

