Self-Attentive Hawkes Process
Qiang Zhang 1 Aldo Lipani 1 Omer Kirnap 1 Emine Yilmaz 1 2

Abstract
Capturing the occurrence dynamics is crucial
to predicting which type of events will happen
next and when. A common method to do this
is through Hawkes processes. To enhance their
capacity, recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have
been incorporated due to RNNs’ successes in processing sequential data such as languages. Recent evidence suggests that self-attention is more
competent than RNNs in dealing with languages.
However, we are unaware of the effectiveness of
self-attention in the context of Hawkes processes.
This study aims to fill the gap by designing a
self-attentive Hawkes process (SAHP). SAHP employs self-attention to summarise the influence of
history events and compute the probability of the
next event. One deficit of the conventional selfattention, when applied to event sequences, is that
its positional encoding only considers the order
of a sequence ignoring the time intervals between
events. To overcome this deficit, we modify its
encoding by translating time intervals into phase
shifts of sinusoidal functions. Experiments on
goodness-of-fit and prediction tasks show the improved capability of SAHP. Furthermore, SAHP
is more interpretable than RNN-based counterparts because the learnt attention weights reveal
contributions of one event type to the happening
of another type. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first work that studies the effectiveness
of self-attention in Hawkes processes.

1. Introduction
Humans and natural phenomena often generate a large
amount of irregular and asynchronous event sequences.
These sequences can be, for example, user activities on
social media platforms (Farajtabar et al., 2015), high1

University College London, London, United Kingdom
Amazon, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Qiang
Zhang <qiang.zhang.16@ucl.ac.uk>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

frequency financial transactions (Bacry & Muzy, 2014),
healthcare records (Wang et al., 2016), gene positions in
bioinformatics (Reynaud-Bouret et al., 2010), or earthquakes and aftershocks in geophysics (Ogata, 1998). Three
characteristics make these event sequences unique, their:
asynchronicity, multi-modality, and cross-correlation. A
sequence is asynchronous when multiple events happening
in the continuous time domain are sampled with unequal intervals, in contrast to discrete sequences where events have
equal sampling intervals (Zhang et al., 2018b). A sequence
is multi-modal when sequences contain multiple type of
events. A sequence is cross-correlated when the occurrence
of one type of event at a certain time can excite or inhibit
the happening of future events of the same or another type.
Figure 1 shows four types of events and their mutual influence. A classic modelling problem with these sequences is
to predict which type and when future events will happen.
The occurrence of asynchronous event sequences are often
modelled by temporal point processes (TPPs) (Cox & Isham,
1980; Brillinger et al., 2002). They are stochastic processes
with (marked) events on the continuous time domain. One
special but significant type of TPPs is the Hawkes process.
A considerable amount of studies have used Hawkes process
as a de facto standard tool to model event streams, including:
topic modelling and clustering of textual documents (He
et al., 2015; Du et al., 2015a), construction and inference
on network structure (Yang & Zha, 2013; Choi et al., 2015;
Etesami et al., 2016), personalised recommendations based
on users’ temporal behaviour (Du et al., 2015b), discovering of patterns in social interactions (Guo et al., 2015;
Lukasik et al., 2016), stance detection (Lukasik et al., 2016;
Zhang et al., 2018c; 2019a) and learning causality (Xu et al.,
2016). Hawkes processes usually model the occurrence
probability of an event with a so called intensity function.
For those events whose occurrence are influenced by history,
the intensity function is specified as history-dependent.
The vanilla Hawkes processes specify a fixed and static intensity function, which limits the capability of capturing
complicated dynamics. To improve its capability, RNNs
have been incorporated as result of their success in dealing
with sequential data such as speech and language. RNNbased Hawkes processes use a recurrent structure to summarise history events, either in the fashion of discretetime (Du et al., 2016; Xiao et al., 2017b) or continuous-

