Bandits for BMO Functions
Tianyu Wang 1 Cynthia Rudin 1

Abstract
We study the bandit problem where the underlying expected reward is a Bounded Mean Oscillation (BMO) function. BMO functions are allowed
to be discontinuous and unbounded, and are useful in modeling signals with infinities in the domain. We develop a toolset for BMO bandits, and
provide an algorithm that can achieve poly-log
δ-regret – a regret measured against an arm that
is optimal after removing a δ-sized portion of the
arm space.

1. Introduction
Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) problems model sequential
decision making under uncertainty. Algorithms for this
problem have important real-world applications including
medical trials (Robbins, 1952) and web recommender systems (Li et al., 2010). While bandit methods have been
developed for various settings, one problem setting that has
not been studied, to the best of our knowledge, is when the
expected reward function is a Bounded Mean Oscillation
(BMO) function in a metric measure space. Intuitively, a
BMO function does not deviate too much from its mean
over any ball, and can be discontinuous or unbounded.
Such unbounded functions can model many real-world quantities. Consider the situation in which we are optimizing
the parameters of a process (e.g., a physical or biological
system) whose behavior can be simulated. The simulator is
computationally expensive to run, which is why we could
not exhaustively search the (continuous) parameter space
for the optimal parameters. The “reward” of the system is
sensitive to parameter values and can increase very quickly
as the parameters change. In this case, by failing to model
the infinities, even state-of-the-art continuum-armed bandit
methods fail to compute valid confidence bounds, potentially leading to underexploration of the important part of
1

Department of Computer Science, Duke University,
Durham, NC, USA. Correspondence to: Tianyu Wang
<tianyu@cs.duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

the parameter space, and they may completely miss the
optima.
As another example, when we try to determine failure modes
of a system or simulation, we might try to locate singularities in the variance of its outputs. These are cases where
the variance of outputs becomes extremely large. In this
case, we can use a bandit algorithm for BMO functions to
efficiently find where the system is most unstable.
There are several difficulties in handling BMO rewards.
First and foremost, due to unboundedness in the expected reward functions, traditional regret metrics are doomed to fail.
To handle this, we define a new performance measure, called
δ-regret. The δ-regret measures regret against an arm that is
optimal after removing a δ-sized portion of the arm space.
Under this performance measure, and because the reward is
a BMO function, our attention is restricted to a subspace on
which the expected reward is finite. Subsequently, strategies
that conform to the δ-regret are needed.
To develop a strategy that handles δ-regret, we leverage
the John-Nirenberg inequality, which plays a crucial role in
harmonic analysis. We construct our arm index using the
John-Nirenberg inequality, in addition to a traditional UCB
index. In each round, we play an arm with highest index.
As we play more and more arms, we focus our attention on
regions that contain good arms. To do this, we discretize the
arm space adaptively, and carefully control how the index
evolves with the discretization. We provide two algorithms
– Bandit-BMO-P and Bandit-BMO-Z. They discretize the
arm space in different ways. In Bandit-BMO-P, we keep a
strict partitioning of the arm space. In Bandit-BMO-Z, we
keep a collection of cubes where a subset of cubes form a
discretization. Bandit-BMO-Z achieves poly-log δ-regret
with high probability.

2. Related Works
Bandit problems in different settings have been actively
studied since as far back as Thompson (1933). Upper
confidence bound (UCB) algorithms remain popular (Robbins, 1952; Lai and Robbins, 1985; Auer, 2002) among the
many approaches for (stochastic) bandit problems (e.g., see
Srinivas et al., 2010; Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011; Agrawal
and Goyal, 2012; Bubeck and Slivkins, 2012; Seldin and
Slivkins, 2014). Various extensions of upper confidence

