Generalization and Representational Limits of Graph Neural Networks

Vikas K. Garg 1 Stefanie Jegelka 1 Tommi Jaakkola 1

Abstract
We address two fundamental questions about
graph neural networks (GNNs). First, we prove
that several important graph properties, e.g.,
shortest/longest cycle, diameter, or certain motifs, cannot be computed by GNNs that rely entirely on local information. Such GNNs include
the standard message passing models, and more
powerful variants that exploit local graph structure (e.g., via relative orientation of messages, or
local port ordering) to distinguish neighbors of
each node. Our treatment includes a novel graphtheoretic formalism.
Second, we provide the first data dependent generalization bounds for message passing GNNs.
This analysis explicitly accounts for the local
permutation invariance of GNNs. Our bounds
are much tighter than existing VC-dimension
based guarantees for GNNs, and are comparable
to Rademacher bounds for recurrent neural networks.

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (Scarselli et al., 2009; Gori et al.,
2005), in their various incarnations, have emerged as models of choice for embedding graph-structured data from
a diverse set of domains, including molecular structures,
knowledge graphs, biological networks, social networks,
and n-body problems (Duvenaud et al., 2015; Defferrard
et al., 2016; Battaglia et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2018b; Santoro et al., 2018; Yun et al., 2019; Jin et al., 2019).
The working of a graph neural network (GNN) on an input graph, with a feature vector associated with each node,
can be outlined as follows. Layer ` of the GNN updates
the embedding of each node v by aggregating the feature
vectors, or node and/or edge embeddings, of v’s neighbors
1

CSAIL, MIT. Correspondence to:
Vikas Garg
<vgarg@csail.mit.edu>, Stefanie Jegelka <stefje@mit.edu>,
Tommi Jaakkola <tommi@csail.mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

from layer ` − 1 via a non-linear transformation, possibly combining this with v’s embedding. The exact form
of the aggregate and combine steps varies across architectures, and empirical success has been demonstrated for
several variants. These include Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN) (Kipf and Welling, 2017), Graph Attention
Networks (GAT) (Veličković et al., 2018), Graph Isomorphism Network (GIN) (Xu et al., 2019), and GraphSAGE
(Hamilton et al., 2017). GNNs are known to have fundamental connections to message passing (Dai et al., 2016;
Gilmer et al., 2017), the Weisfeiler-Leman (WL) graph isomorphism test (Xu et al., 2019; Morris et al., 2019), and
local algorithms (Sato et al., 2019; Loukas, 2020).
In this work, we investigate the representational limitations
and generalization properties of GNNs. That is, we examine the performance of GNNs from a learning perspective:
(a) how well they can discriminate graphs that differ in a
specific graph property (represented by assigning different
labels to such graphs), and (b) how well they can predict
labels, e.g., a graph property, for unseen graphs. Specifically, we focus on classification: (1) a GNN with learnable
parameters embeds the nodes of each input graph, (2) the
node embeddings are combined into a single graph vector
via a readout function such as sum, average, or elementwise maximum, and (3) a parameterized classifier either
makes a binary prediction on the resulting graph vector
(our setting for representation limits), or local binary predictions, one per node, the majority of which determines
the graph label (our setting for generalization bounds).
Our contributions. (1) We show that GNNs that generate
node embeddings solely based on local information cannot distinguish some simple non-isomorphic graphs. As a
result, these GNNs cannot compute important graph properties such as longest or shortest cycle, diameter, etc. This
limitation holds for popular models such as GraphSAGE,
GCN, GIN, and GAT. Our impossibility results also extend to more powerful variants that provide to each node
information about the layout of its neighbors, e.g., via port
numbering, like CPNGNN (Sato et al., 2019), or geometric
information, like DimeNet (Klicpera et al., 2020).
We introduce a novel graph-theoretic formalism for analyzing CPNGNNs, and our constructions provide insights that
may facilitate the design of more effective GNNs.

