Understanding and Mitigating the Tradeoff Between Robustness and Accuracy

Aditi Raghunathan * 1 Sang Michael Xie * 1 Fanny Yang 2 John C. Duchi 1 Percy Liang 1

Adversarial training augments the training set
with perturbations to improve the robust error
(over worst-case perturbations), but it often leads
to an increase in the standard error (on unperturbed test inputs). Previous explanations for this
tradeoff rely on the assumption that no predictor in the hypothesis class has low standard and
robust error. In this work, we precisely characterize the effect of augmentation on the standard
error in linear regression when the optimal linear
predictor has zero standard and robust error. In
particular, we show that the standard error could
increase even when the augmented perturbations
have noiseless observations from the optimal linear predictor. We then prove that the recently
proposed robust self-training (RST) estimator improves robust error without sacrificing standard
error for noiseless linear regression. Empirically,
for neural networks, we find that RST with different adversarial training methods improves both
standard and robust error for random and adversarial rotations and adversarial `∞ perturbations
in CIFAR-10.

1. Introduction
Adversarial training methods (Goodfellow et al., 2015;
Madry et al., 2017) attempt to improve the robustness of neural networks against adversarial examples (Szegedy et al.,
2014) by augmenting the training set (on-the-fly) with perturbed examples that preserve the label but that fool the
current model. While such methods decrease the robust error, the error on worst-case perturbed inputs, they have been
observed to cause an undesirable increase in the standard
error, the error on unperturbed inputs (Madry et al., 2018;
Zhang et al., 2019; Tsipras et al., 2019).
*

Equal contribution 1 Stanford University 2 ETH Zurich. Correspondence to: Aditi Raghunathan <aditir@stanford.edu>, Sang
Michael Xie <xie@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Std Err(AT) - Std Err(Std) (%)

Abstract
8
6

ε = 1/255
ε = 2/255
ε = 3/255
ε = 4/255

4
2
0
104
Number of labeled samples

Figure 1. Gap between the standard error of adversarial trainning (Madry et al., 2018) with `∞
perturbations, and standard training.
The gap decreases with increase in
training set size, suggesting that the
tradeoff between standard and robust error should disappear with infinite data.

Previous works attempt to explain the tradeoff between standard error and robust error in two settings: when no accurate
classifier is consistent with the perturbed data (Tsipras et al.,
2019; Zhang et al., 2019; Fawzi et al., 2018), and when
the hypothesis class is not expressive enough to contain the
true classifier (Nakkiran, 2019). In both cases, the tradeoff
persists even with infinite data. However, adversarial perturbations in practice are typically defined to be imperceptible
to humans (e.g. small `∞ perturbations in vision). Hence
by definition, there exists a classifier (the human) that is
both robust and accurate with no tradeoff in the infinite data
limit. Furthermore, since deep neural networks are expressive enough to fit not only adversarial but also randomly
labeled data perfectly (Zhang et al., 2017), the explanation
of a restricted hypothesis class does not perfectly capture
empirical observations either. Empirically on C IFAR -10, we
find that the gap between the standard error of adversarial
training and standard training decreases as we increase the
labeled data size, thereby also suggesting the tradeoff could
disappear with infinite data (See Figure 1).
In this work, we provide a different explanation for the
tradeoff between standard and robust error that takes generalization from finite data into account. We first consider
a linear model where the true linear function has zero standard and robust error. Adversarial training augments the
original training set with extra data, consisting of samples (xext , y) where the perturbations xext are consistent,
meaning that the conditional distribution stays constant
Py (· | xext ) = Py (· | x). We show that even in this simple
setting, the augmented estimator, i.e. the minimum norm
interpolant of the augmented data (standard + extra data),
could have a larger standard error than that of the standard
estimator, which is the minimum norm interpolant of the
standard data alone. We found this surprising given that
adding consistent perturbations enforces the predictor to

