Peer Loss Functions:
Learning from Noisy Labels without Knowing Noise Rates

Yang Liu 1 Hongyi Guo 2

Abstract
Learning with noisy labels is a common challenge in supervised learning.
Existing approaches often require practitioners to specify
noise rates, i.e., a set of parameters controlling
the severity of label noises in the problem, and
the specifications are either assumed to be given
or estimated using additional steps. In this work,
we introduce a new family of loss functions that
we name as peer loss functions, which enables
learning from noisy labels and does not require
a priori specification of the noise rates. Peer loss
functions work within the standard empirical risk
minimization (ERM) framework. We show that,
under mild conditions, performing ERM with
peer loss functions on the noisy data leads to the
optimal or a near-optimal classifier as if performing ERM over the clean training data, which we
do not have access to. We pair our results with an
extensive set of experiments. Peer loss provides
a way to simplify model development when facing potentially noisy training labels, and can be
promoted as a robust candidate loss function in
such situations.

1. Introduction
The quality of supervised learning models depends on the
quality of the training dataset {(xn , yn )}N
n=1 . In practice,
label noise can arise due to a host of reasons. For instance,
the observed labels ỹn s may represent human observations
of a ground truth label. In this case, human annotators may
observe the label imperfectly due to differing degrees of
expertise or measurement error, see e.g., medical examples
such as labeling MRI images from patients. There exist ex1
Computer Science and Engineering, UC Santa Cruz, Santa
Cruz, CA, USA 2 Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, China. Correspondence to: Yang Liu <yangliu@ucsc.edu>, Hongyi Guo <guohongyi@sjtu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

tensive prior works in the literature that aim to develop algorithms to learn models that are robust to label noise (Bylander, 1994; Cesa-Bianchi et al., 1999; 2011; Ben-David
et al.; Scott et al., 2013; Natarajan et al., 2013; Scott, 2015).
Typical solutions that have theoretical guarantees often require a priori knowledge of noise rates, i.e., a set of parameters that control the severity of label noise. Working with
unknown noise rates is difficult in practice: Usually, one
must estimate the noise rates from data, which may require
additional data collection or requirement (Natarajan et al.,
2013; Scott, 2015; Van Rooyen et al., 2015a) (e.g., a set of
ground truth labels for tuning these parameters) and may
introduce estimation error that can affect the final model in
less predictable ways. Our main goal is to provide an alternative that does not require the specification of the noise
rates, nor an additional estimation step for the noise. This
target solution benefits the practitioner when he or she does
not have access to reliable estimates of the noise rates (e.g.,
when the training data has a limited size for the estimation
tasks, or when the training data is already collected in a
form that makes the estimation hard to perform).
In this paper, we introduce a new family of loss functions,
peer loss functions, to empirical risk minimization (ERM),
for a broad class of learning with noisy labels problems.
Peer loss functions operate under different noise rates without requiring either a priori knowledge of the embedded
noise rates, or an estimation procedure. This family of loss
functions builds on approaches developed in the peer prediction literature (Miller et al., 2005; Dasgupta & Ghosh,
2013; Shnayder et al., 2016), which studies how to elicit
information from self-interested agents without verification. Results in the peer prediction literature focused on designing scoring functions to score each reported data using
another noisy reference answer, without accessing ground
truth information. We borrow this idea and the associated
scoring functions via making a connection through treating
each classifier’s predictions as an agent’s private information to be elicited and evaluated, and the noisy labels as
imperfect reference answers reported from a “noisy label
agent”. The specific form of peer loss evaluates classifiers’
prediction using noisy labels on both the samples to-beevaluated and carefully constructed “peer” samples. The
evaluation on the constructed peer sample encodes implic-

