Convex Representation Learning for Generalized Invariance in
Semi-Inner-Product Space

Yingyi Ma 1 Vignesh Ganapathiraman 1 Yaoliang Yu 2 Xinhua Zhang 1

Abstract
Invariance (defined in a general sense) has been
one of the most effective priors for representation learning. Direct factorization of parametric models is feasible only for a small range of
invariances, while regularization approaches, despite improved generality, lead to nonconvex optimization. In this work, we develop a convex
representation learning algorithm for a variety
of generalized invariances that can be modeled
as semi-norms. Novel Euclidean embeddings
are introduced for kernel representers in a semiinner-product space, and approximation bounds
are established. This allows invariant representations to be learned efficiently and effectively as
confirmed in our experiments, along with accurate predictions.

1. Introduction
Effective modeling of structural priors has been the
workhorse of a variety of machine learning algorithms.
Such priors are available in a rich supply, including invariance (Simard et al., 1996; Ferraro and Caelli, 1994),
equivariance (Cohen and Welling, 2016; Graham and Ravanbakhsh, 2019), disentanglement (Bengio et al., 2013;
Higgins et al., 2017), homophily/heterophily (Eliassi-Rad
and Faloutsos, 2012), fairness (Creager et al., 2019), correlations in multiple views and modalities (Wang et al., 2015;
Kumar et al., 2018), etc.
In this paper we focus on “generalized invariance”, where
certain relationship holds irrespective of certain changes
in data. This extends traditional settings that are limited
to, e.g., transformation and permutation. For instance, in
multilabel classification there are semantic or logical rela1

University of Illinois at Chicago 2 University of Waterloo and Vector Institute. Correspondence to: Xinhua Zhang
<zhangx@uic.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

tionships between classes which hold for any input. Common examples include mutual exclusion and implication
(Mirzazadeh et al., 2015a; Deng et al., 2012). In mixup
(Zhang et al., 2018), a convex interpolation of a pair of
examples is postulated to yield the same interpolation of
output labels.
While conventional wisdom learns models whose prediction accords with these structures, recent developments
show that it can be more effective to learn structureencoding representations. Towards this goal, the most
straightforward approach is to directly parameterize the
model. For example, deep sets model permutation invariance via an additive decomposition (Zaheer et al., 2017),
convolutional networks use sparse connection and parameter sharing to model translational invariance, and a similar approach has been developed for equivariance (Ravanbakhsh et al., 2017). Although they simplify the model and
can enforce invariance over the entire space, their applicability is very restricted, because most useful structures do
not admit a readily decomposable parameterization. As a
result, most invariance/equivariance models are restricted
to permutations and group based diffeomorphism.
In order to achieve significantly improved generality and
flexibility, the regularization approach can be leveraged,
which penalizes the violation of pre-specified structures.
For example, Rifai et al. (2011) penalizes the norm of the
Jacobian matrix to enforce contractivity, conceivably a generalized type of invariance. Smola (2019) proposed using a
max-margin loss over all transformations (Teo et al., 2007).
However, for most structures, regularization leads to a nonconvex problem. Despite the recent progress in optimization for deep learning, the process still requires a lot of trial
and error. Therefore a convex learning procedure will be
desirable, because besides the convenience in optimization,
it also offers the profound advantage of decoupling parameter optimization from problem specification: poor learning
performance can only be ascribed to a poor model architecture, not to poor local minima.
Indeed convex invariant representation learning has been
studied, but in limited settings. Tangent distance kernels
(Haasdonk and Keysers, 2002) and Haar integration ker-

