Structural Language Models of Code

Uri Alon 1 Roy Sadaka 1 Omer Levy 2 3 Eran Yahav 1

Abstract
We address the problem of any-code completion – generating a missing piece of source
code in a given program without any restriction on the vocabulary or structure. We introduce a new approach to any-code completion
that leverages the strict syntax of programming
languages to model a code snippet as a tree –
structural language modeling (SLM). SLM estimates the probability of the program’s abstract
syntax tree (AST) by decomposing it into a product of conditional probabilities over its nodes.
We present a neural model that computes these
conditional probabilities by considering all AST
paths leading to a target node. Unlike previous techniques that have severely restricted the
kinds of expressions that can be generated in this
task, our approach can generate arbitrary code in
any programming language. Our model significantly outperforms both seq2seq and a variety
of structured approaches in generating Java and
C# code. Our code, data, and trained models are
available at http://github.com/tech-srl/
slm-code-generation/. An online demo is
available at http://AnyCodeGen.org.

1. Introduction
Code completion is the problem of generating code given
its surrounding code as context. In its most general form,
this problem is extremely challenging as it requires reasoning over an unbounded number of syntactic structures and
user-defined symbols. Previous approaches have avoided
this issue by limiting the generation problem: program
synthesis approaches are often tailored to domain-specific
languages (Gulwani, 2011; Polozov & Gulwani, 2015; De1

2
Technion,
Israel
Tel
Aviv
University
Facebook AI Research.
Correspondence to:
Uri
Alon
<urialon@cs.technion.ac.il>,
Roy
Sadaka
<roysadaka@gmail.com>,
Omer
Levy
<omerlevy@gmail.com>, Eran Yahav <yahave@cs.technion.ac.il>.

vlin et al., 2017; Ellis et al., 2019), while other recent approaches generate code in general languages like Java and
C#, but severely restrict the syntax, vocabulary, domain,
or nature of the generated programs (Murali et al., 2018;
Brockschmidt et al., 2019; Young et al., 2019).
We introduce the task of any-code completion – generating
code in a general-purpose programming language without
any restriction on its vocabulary or structure. Specifically,
we focus on generating code in context: given a program
P and some part of the program p, the task is to predict
p from the rest of the program P − =P\p. Any-code completion thus generalizes the restricted completion task of
Brockschmidt et al. (2019), in which the target code contained only primitive types (e.g., int and string) and excluded user-defined functions. Figure 1 shows two anycode completion examples.
In related tasks such as semantic parsing (Dong & Lapata,
2018; Yu et al., 2018; Iyer et al., 2019), natural-languageto-code (Allamanis et al., 2015; Iyer et al., 2018), and editto-code (Yin et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2019), models must
use separate encoders and decoders because of the different
modalities of the input (e.g. natural language text) and the
output (code). In contrast, we leverage the fact that our input and output are of the same modality (code), and pursue
better generalization by modeling them jointly.
We present a new approach that explicitly models the
source and the target code as the same tree – structural
language modeling (SLM). SLM estimates the probability
of the program’s abstract syntax tree (AST) by decomposing it into a product of conditional probabilities over its
nodes. We present a neural model that computes these conditional probabilities by considering all AST paths leading to a target node, generalizing over traditional language
models that consider sequences of words. While prior work
uses AST paths to read programs (Alon et al., 2019b), we
generate code by predicting the next node along the set of
paths, generating the target AST node-by-node.

3

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

We evaluate SLMs on Java any-code completion, achieving
a new state of the art: exact-match accuracy@1 of 18.04%
and accuracy@5 of 24.83% (previous SOTA: 16.93% and
23.17%). SLMs also outperform existing models in the restricted completion task of Brockschmidt et al. (2019) in
C# by a wide margin, 37.61% accuracy@1 compared to

