Meta Variance Transfer: Learning to Augment from The Others

Seong-Jin Park 1 Seungju Han 1 Jiwon Baek 1 Insoo Kim 1 Juhwan Song 1 Hae Beom Lee 2
Jae-Joon Han 1 Sung Ju Hwang 2

Abstract
Humans have the ability to robustly recognize objects with various factors of variations such as
nonrigid transformations, background noises, and
changes in lighting conditions. However, training deep learning models generally require huge
amount of data instances under diverse variations,
to ensure its robustness. To alleviate the need of
collecting large amount of data and better learn
to generalize with scarce data instances, we propose a novel meta-learning method which learns
to transfer factors of variations from one class to
another, such that it can improve the classification
performance on unseen examples. Transferred
variations generate virtual samples that augment
the feature space of the target class during training,
simulating upcoming query samples with similar
variations. By sharing the factors of variations
across different classes, the model becomes more
robust to variations in the unseen examples and
tasks using small number of examples per class.
We validate our model on multiple benchmark
datasets for few-shot classification and face recognition, on which our model significantly improves
the performance of the base model, outperforming
relevant baselines.

1. Introduction
Humans can robustly recognize and understand a concept
under various circumstances. For instance, we can learn a
new visual concept only by observing a few images. Humans can also accurately recognize the same concept with
large variations in shapes, lighting conditions, or with background changes. On the contrary, current deep learning
frameworks generally require huge amount of data under
diverse variations to robustly learn and recognize new con1
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology 2 KAIST. Correspondence to: Sung Ju Hwang <sjhwang82@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

cepts. However, collecting a complete dataset with all possible variations described for each instance is not feasible
for real-world problems. This is particularly the case when
dealing with large number of classes. In real-world settings,
it is more common to collect an imbalanced dataset with
a large discrepancy in the number of examples, or the coverage of the observable variations for each class. A deep
neural network trained on such a dataset may not generalize
well to unseen variations at test time.
A popular solution to this problem is perturbing existing
samples during training, such that the perturbed examples
could account for unseen variations. It is well known that
conventional data augmentation methods such as random
cropping, flipping, and color jittering of images are helpful
for almost all computer vision applications. However, less
studies have focused on applying semantic perturbations to
training samples to simulate unseen variations in test data,
particularly variations which cannot be described by conventional data augmentation and pre-defined transformations.
Some existing works (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Zhu et al.,
2017; Karras et al., 2019) have addressed this problem by
training generative models on a dataset with pre-defined
modes of variations. Such methods generate images of a
class with predefined variations. While this approach could
generate realistic and diverse samples, there are still limitations. First, training such models requires an additional
dataset with annotations for the required pre-defined variations. Since obtaining human annotations on the variations
is costly, we can only obtain pre-defined types of variations,
which may not cover all possible variations of a single class.
Moreover, the images generated by the model do not guarantee improvements of the test accuracy, since it is trained
separately from the classification model.
However, such a way of generating data with annotation
to facilitate learning differs from the way of which humans learn. In fact, we presume that humans have a metaknowledge that can transfer variations from one visual class
to another, thus can imagine an unseen variation of a class.
For example, even when we see an animal that we have
never seen before, we can imagine how it will look with
different poses in different surroundings. This is presumably due to the fact that there are certain types of variations

