From Sets to Multisets: Provable Variational Inference
for Probabilistic Integer Submodular Models
Aytunc Sahin 1 Yatao Bian 2 Joachim M. Buhmann 1 Andreas Krause 1

Abstract
Submodular functions have been studied extensively in machine learning and data mining. In
particular, the optimization of submodular functions over the integer lattice (integer submodular
functions) has recently attracted much interest, because this domain relates naturally to many practical problem settings, such as multilabel graph cut,
budget allocation and revenue maximization with
discrete assignments. In contrast, the use of these
functions for probabilistic modeling has received
surprisingly little attention so far. In this work, we
firstly propose the Generalized Multilinear Extension, a continuous DR-submodular extension for
integer submodular functions. We study central
properties of this extension and formulate a new
probabilistic model which is defined through integer submodular functions. Then, we introduce a
block-coordinate ascent algorithm to perform approximate inference for this class of models and finally, we demonstrate its effectiveness and viability on several real-world social connection graph
datasets with integer submodular objectives.

1. Introduction
Submodular functions have many applications in machine
learning, which include data summarization (Tschiatschek
et al., 2014; Lin & Bilmes, 2012), sensor placement (Krause
et al., 2006) and computer vision (Boykov et al., 1999).
They are defined on the subsets of the ground set V which
contains n elements. Alternatively, they can be described as
a pseudo-Boolean function which is defined on vertices of
the unit hypercube {0, 1}n . A crucial benefit of submodular
functions is their attractive properties from the optimiza1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland 2 Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China 518057. Correspondence to: Aytunc Sahin <aytunc.sahin@inf.ethz.ch>, Yatao
Bian <yatao.bian@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

tion perspective. Using the celebrated greedy algorithm
of Nemhauser et al. (1978), one can get a constant factor
approximation guarantee for maximizing a submodular function subject to cardinality constraints. However, for more
complex constraints, such as matroid constraints, the best
guarantees can be obtained via a continuous relaxation of the
problem. The multilinear extension (Calinescu et al., 2007)
is a continuous extension of a submodular function to the
full hypercube [0, 1]n and one can get the best approximation guarantee for matroid constraints by optimizing it using
the continuous greedy algorithm (Calinescu et al., 2011).
Recently, Probabilistic Submodular Models (PSMs) (Djolonga & Krause, 2014; Tschiatschek et al., 2016; Gotovos
et al., 2015) were introduced as Gibbs distributions over
subsets parameterized via a submodular energy function.
These distributions can represent expressive probabilistic
models by capturing complex interactions among elements.
Since the partition function of these models requires a sum
over all subsets, it is intractable for large ground sets. One
way to approximate this probability distribution is to use
variational inference. When a fully factorized Bernoulli
distribution is chosen as a variational distribution, the lower
bound for the log-partition function – the Evidence Lower
Bound (ELBO) – can be decomposed into two parts: The
multilinear extension and the entropy of the variational
distribution (Bian et al., 2019).
Though originally associated with set functions, submodularity can be generalized to integer (Soma et al., 2014;
Soma & Yoshida, 2018) and continuous domains (Bach,
2019; Staib & Jegelka, 2017; Bian et al., 2017b; Hassani
et al., 2017). Submodular functions over the integer lattice
have applications in optimal budget allocation (Soma et al.,
2014), sensor placement with discrete energy levels (Soma
& Yoshida, 2015) and influence maximization with partial
incentives (Demaine et al., 2014). Submodular optimization
over continuous domains captures a rich class of tractable
non-convex optimization problems, and arises in various
applications, such as revenue maximization with continuous
assignments (Bian et al., 2017b; 2020), robust budget
allocation (Staib & Jegelka, 2017) and provable mean-field
inference for PSMs (Bian et al., 2019). However, the
family of probabilistic submodular models defined through

