Deep Streaming Label Learning

Zhen Wang 1 Liu Liu 1 Dacheng Tao 1

Abstract
In multi-label learning, each instance can be associated with multiple and non-exclusive labels.
Previous studies assume that all the labels in the
learning process are fixed and static; however,
they ignore the fact that the labels will emerge
continuously in changing environments. In order to fill in these research gaps, we propose a
novel deep neural network (DNN)-based framework, Deep Streaming Label Learning (DSLL),
to classify instances with newly emerged labels
effectively. DSLL can explore and incorporate the
knowledge from past labels and historical models
to understand and develop emerging new labels.
DSLL consists of three components: 1) a streaming label mapping to extract deep relationships
between new labels and past labels with a novel label correlation-aware loss; 2) a streaming feature
distillation propagating feature-level knowledge
from the historical model to a new model; 3) a
senior student network to model new labels with
the help of knowledge learned from the past. Theoretically, we prove that DSLL admits tight generalization error bounds for new labels in the DNN
framework. Experimentally, extensive empirical
results show that the proposed method performs
significantly better than the existing state-of-theart multi-label learning methods to handle the
continually emerging new labels.

1. Introduction
In traditional supervised learning, a single instance only
possesses a single label; whereas, in many real-world tasks,
one instance can be naturally associated with multiple and
non-exclusive labels. For example, a document may be1

UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer
Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia.
Correspondence
to: Zhen Wang <zwan4121@uni.sydney.edu.au>, Liu Liu
<liu.liu1@sydney.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

long to various topics (Zhang & Zhou, 2006; Nam et al.,
2014); an image can contain several individuals’ faces (Xiao
et al., 2010); a gene may be related to multiple functions (Barutcuoglu et al., 2006; Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2012).
Multi-label learning has been proposed and studied to handle such kind of tasks, with the goal of predicting a label
vector y ∈ {0, 1}m for a given instance x ∈ Rd , where m
is the number of labels, and d is the dimensionality of the
input instance.
A straightforward solution to multi-label learning is binary relevance (BR) (Tsoumakas et al., 2010) and one-vsall (Menon et al., 2019), which treat each label as an independent binary classification problem. However, in addition
to a lack of correlations between label information, such approaches suffer from high computational and storage costs
for large datasets, which would limit the prediction performance. As a result, there are two prevalent techniques to
deal with multi-label learning: (1) exploring and exploiting
the correlations across labels (Zhang & Zhou, 2006; Read
et al., 2011; Nam et al., 2019), and (2) reducing the label
space by embedding original high-dimensional label vectors
into the low-dimensional representation (Tsoumakas et al.,
2011; Bhatia et al., 2015; Liu & Shen, 2019). In particular,
deep neural networks (DNNs) (LeCun et al., 2015; Schmidhuber, 2015) offer a good way to learn the label correlation
and embedding simultaneously, significantly outperforming
classical methods (Nam et al., 2014; Yeh et al., 2017; Chen
et al., 2018).
Overall, existing multi-label learning studies focus on a
fixed set of labels. That is, they assume that all the labels
in the learning process are given at once. However, this
assumption is frequently violated in real-world changing environments. In practice, with more in-depth data exploration
and understanding, the number of labels gradually increases.
For example, when a photograph is posted on Facebook
or Twitter, the photo will be labeled continuously and differently by users who are browsing, and the classification
system needs to be updated accurately according to the new
labels. In the multi-label learning setting, independently
learning only for new labels ignores the correlated information from past labels; integrating past labels with emerging
new labels to retrain a new multi-label model would be
prohibitively computationally expensive. Hence, streaming
label learning (SLL) (You et al., 2016) has been proposed

