Extrapolation for Large-batch Training in Deep Learning

Tao Lin * 1 Lingjing Kong * 1 Sebastian U. Stich 1 Martin Jaggi 1

Abstract
Deep learning networks are typically trained by
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) methods that
iteratively improve the model parameters by estimating a gradient on a very small fraction of
the training data. A major roadblock faced when
increasing the batch size to a substantial fraction
of the training data for reducing training time is
the persistent degradation in performance (generalization gap). To address this issue, recent
work propose to add small perturbations to the
model parameters when computing the stochastic
gradients and report improved generalization performance due to smoothing effects. However, this
approach is poorly understood; it requires often
model-specific noise and fine-tuning.
To alleviate these drawbacks, we propose to use
instead computationally efficient extrapolation
(extragradient) to stabilize the optimization trajectory while still benefiting from smoothing to
avoid sharp minima. This principled approach
is well grounded from an optimization perspective and we show that a host of variations can be
covered in a unified framework that we propose.
We prove the convergence of this novel scheme
and rigorously evaluate its empirical performance
on ResNet, LSTM, and Transformer. We demonstrate that in a variety of experiments the scheme
allows scaling to much larger batch sizes than
before whilst reaching or surpassing SOTA accuracy.

1. Introduction
The workhorse training algorithm for most machine learning applications—including deep learning—is Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD). Recently, data parallelism has
emerged in deep learning, where large-batch (Goyal et al.,
*
Equal contribution 1 EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Tao Lin <tao.lin@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

2017) is used to reduce the gradient computation rounds
so as to accelerate the training. However, in practice, these
large-batch variants suffer from severe issues of test quality
loss (Shallue et al., 2018; McCandlish et al., 2018; Golmant
et al., 2018), which voids gained computational advantage.
While still not completely understood, recent research has
linked part of this loss of efficiency to the existence of sharp
minima. In contrast, landscapes with flat minima have in empirical studies shown generalization benefits (Keskar et al.,
2016; Yao et al., 2018; Lin et al., 2020), though this topic is
still actively debated (Dinh et al., 2017).
Another line of research tries to understand general deep
learning training from an optimization perspective, in terms
of the optimization trajectory in the loss surface (Neyshabur,
2017; Jastrzebski et al., 2020). Golatkar et al. (2019) empirically show that regularization techniques only affect early
learning dynamics (initial optimization phase) but matter
little in the final phase of training (converging to a local
minimum), similar to the critical initial learning phase described in (Achille et al., 2019) and the break-even point
analysis on the entire optimization trajectory of Jastrzebski
et al. (2020).
These new insights are consistent with empirically developed techniques for the SOTA large-batch training. For
example, gradual learning rate warmup for the first few
epochs (Goyal et al., 2017; You et al., 2019) is often used;
and in local SGD (Lin et al., 2020) for better generalization,
stochastic noise injection is only applied after the first phase
of training (post-local SGD).
These discussions on optimization and generalization motivate us to answer the following questions when using or
developing large-batch techniques for better training: Does
the proposed technique improve (initial) optimization, or
help to converge to a better local minimum, or both? How
and when should we apply the technique?
In this paper, we first revisit the classical smoothing idea
(which was recently attributed to avoiding sharp minima in
deep learning (Wen et al., 2018; Haruki et al., 2019)) from
optimization perspective. We then propose a computational
efficient local extragradient method as a way of smoothing
for distributed large-batch training, referred to as EXTRAP SGD; we further extend it to a general framework (extrapolated SGD) for distributed training. We thoroughly evaluate

