Detecting Out-of-Distribution Examples with Gram Matrices

Chandramouli S. Sastry 1 Sageev Oore 1

Abstract
When presented with Out-of-Distribution (OOD)
examples, deep neural networks yield confident,
incorrect predictions; detecting OOD examples is
challenging, and the potential risks are high. In
this paper, we propose to detect OOD examples by
identifying inconsistencies between activity patterns and predicted class. We find that characterizing activity patterns by Gram matrices and identifying anomalies in Gram matrix values can yield
high OOD detection rates. We identify anomalies
in the Gram matrices by simply comparing each
value with its respective range observed over the
training data. Unlike many approaches, this can
be used with any pre-trained softmax classifier
and neither requires access to OOD data for finetuning hyperparameters, nor does it require OOD
access for inferring parameters. We empirically
demonstrate applicability across a variety of architectures and vision datasets and, for the important
and surprisingly hard task of detecting far out-ofdistribution examples, it generally performs better
than or equal to state-of-the-art OOD detection
methods (including those that do assume access
to OOD examples).

tion. Such examples are often referred to as being out-ofdistribution (OOD), and while their existence has been wellknown for some time, the challenges of identifying them
and a baseline method to do so in a variety of tasks such as
image classification, text classification, and speech recognition were presented by Hendrycks and Gimpel (2017). Recently, Nalisnick et al. (2019a) identified a similar problem
with generative models: they demonstrate that flow-based
models, VAEs, and PixelCNNs cannot distinguish images
of common objects such as dogs, trucks, and horses (i.e.
CIFAR-10) from those of house numbers (i.e. SVHN), assigning a higher likelihood to the latter when the model is
trained on the former. They report similar findings across
several other pairs of popular image datasets.
While we might expect neural networks to respond differently to OOD examples than to in-distribution (ID) examples, exactly where and how to find these differences in activity patterns is not at all clear. Hendrycks and Gimpel (2017)
and others (Nguyen et al., 2015; Yu et al., 2011) showed
that looking at the maximal softmax value is insufficient. In
Section 2 we describe some other recent approaches to this
problem. In this work, we find that characterizing activity
patterns with Gram matrices—and their extensions that we
introduce—lets us quantify anomalies to allow state-of-theart (SOTA) detection rates on OOD examples.

1
Dalhousie University/ Vector Institute. Correspondence to:
Chandramouli Shama Sastry <chandramouli.sastry@gmail.com>.

Intuition. We identify out-of-distribution examples by
jointly considering the class assigned at the output layer
and the activity patterns in the intermediate layers. For
example, if an image is predicted to be a dog, yet the intermediate activity patterns are somehow atypical of those
seen by the network for other dog images during training,
then that is a strong indicator of an OOD example. This
effectively allows us to detect incongruence between the
prediction made by the network and the path by which it
arrived at that prediction. To describe the activation path
we need to describe the intermediate feature representations,
and as a proxy for describing those representations, we use
Gram Matrices as they not only describe the activations at
the individual channels but also summarize the pairwise
interactions between the channels.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Strengths. Unlike those previous works that assume access to OOD examples and train an auxiliary classifier for

1. Introduction
Even when deep neural networks (DNNs) achieve impressive accuracy on challenging tasks, they do not always visibly falter on misclassified examples: in those cases they
can often make predictions that are both very confident and
completely incorrect. Yet, predictive uncertainty is essential
in real-world contexts tolerating minimal error margins such
as autonomous vehicle control and medical, financial and
legal fields.
In this work, we focus on flagging test examples that do
not contain any of the classes modeled in the train distribu-

