Differentiating through the Fréchet Mean

Aaron Lou * 1 Isay Katsman * 1 Qingxuan Jiang * 1 Serge Belongie 1 Ser-Nam Lim 2 Christopher De Sa 1

Abstract
Recent advances in deep representation learning
on Riemannian manifolds extend classical deep
learning operations to better capture the geometry of the manifold. One possible extension is
the Fréchet mean, the generalization of the Euclidean mean; however, it has been difficult to
apply because it lacks a closed form with an easily computable derivative. In this paper, we show
how to differentiate through the Fréchet mean
for arbitrary Riemannian manifolds. Then, focusing on hyperbolic space, we derive explicit
gradient expressions and a fast, accurate, and
hyperparameter-free Fréchet mean solver. This
fully integrates the Fréchet mean into the hyperbolic neural network pipeline. To demonstrate
this integration, we present two case studies. First,
we apply our Fréchet mean to the existing Hyperbolic Graph Convolutional Network, replacing its
projected aggregation to obtain state-of-the-art results on datasets with high hyperbolicity. Second,
to demonstrate the Fréchet mean’s capacity to generalize Euclidean neural network operations, we
develop a hyperbolic batch normalization method
that gives an improvement parallel to the one observed in the Euclidean setting1 .

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in geometric representation learning
have utilized hyperbolic space for tree embedding tasks
(Nickel & Kiela, 2017; 2018; Yu & De Sa, 2019). This is
due to the natural non-Euclidean structure of hyperbolic
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Cornell
University, NY, Ithaca, USA 2 Facebook AI, NY, New York, USA.
Correspondence to:
Aaron Lou <al968@cornell.edu>,
Isay Katsman <isk22@cornell.edu>, Qingxuan Jiang
<qj46@cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).
1
Our PyTorch implementation of the differentiable Fréchet
mean can be found at https://github.com/CUVL/DifferentiableFrechet-Mean.

Figure 1. Depicted above is the Fréchet mean, µ, of three points,
x1 , x2 , x3 in the Lorentz model of hyperbolic space. As one
can see, the Fréchet mean conforms with the geometry of the
hyperboloid and is vastly different from the standard Euclidean
mean.

space, in which distances grow exponentially as one moves
away from the origin. Such a geometry is naturally equipped
to embed trees, since if we embed the root of the tree near
the origin and layers at successive radii, the geometry of hyperbolic space admits a natural hierarchical structure. More
recent work has focused specifically on developing neural networks that exploit the structure of hyperbolic space
(Ganea et al., 2018; Tifrea et al., 2019; Chami et al., 2019;
Liu et al., 2019).
A useful structure that has thus far not been generalized
to non-Euclidean neural networks is that of the Euclidean
mean. The (trivially differentiable) Euclidean mean is necessary to perform aggregation operations such as attention
(Vaswani et al., 2017), and stability-enhancing operations
such as batch normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015), in the
context of Euclidean neural networks. The Euclidean mean
extends naturally to the Fréchet mean in non-Euclidean geometries (Fréchet, 1948). However, unlike the Euclidean
mean, the Fréchet mean does not have a closed-form solution, and its computation involves an argmin operation that
cannot be easily differentiated. This makes the important
operations we are able to perform in Euclidean space hard to

