Learning Fair Policies in Multiobjective (Deep) Reinforcement Learning
with Average and Discounted Rewards

Umer Siddique 1 Paul Weng 1 2 Matthieu Zimmer 1

Abstract
As the operations of autonomous systems generally affect simultaneously several users, it is
crucial that their designs account for fairness considerations. In contrast to standard (deep) reinforcement learning (RL), we investigate the problem of learning a policy that treats its users equitably. In this paper, we formulate this novel RL
problem, in which an objective function, which
encodes a notion of fairness that we formally define, is optimized. For this problem, we provide
a theoretical discussion where we examine the
case of discounted rewards and that of average
rewards. During this analysis, we notably derive
a new result in the standard RL setting, which is
of independent interest: it states a novel bound
on the approximation error with respect to the optimal average reward of that of a policy optimal
for the discounted reward. Since learning with
discounted rewards is generally easier, this discussion further justifies finding a fair policy for the
average reward by learning a fair policy for the
discounted reward. Thus, we describe how several classic deep RL algorithms can be adapted
to our fair optimization problem, and we validate
our approach with extensive experiments in three
different domains.

current AI methods do not handle well situations where they
impact many users.
The usual approach in those AI systems consists in maximizing a single overall utility (measuring for instance efficiency,
accuracy, or task fulfillment). When an AI system affects
many users, a utilitarian objective is generally adopted,
where the individual utilities of all users are summed (or
equivalently averaged). Yet, such approach does not guarantee that users are treated equitably. Indeed, in order to obtain
an efficient global solution for the utilitarian objective, the
utility of some users may be sacrificed. Thus, fairness considerations during the design of autonomous systems are
critical if we want users to accept and trust them.
One typical solution to the previous issue is to resort to
an egalitarian approach where the objective becomes to
maximize the utility of the worse-off user. However, a direct
application of this maxmin approach may not yield strictly
efficient solution for all users because of the focus on only
one user. In this paper, we adopt a more refined definition
of fairness (Moulin, 2004) that relies on three properties:
efficiency, impartiality, and equity (Section 2.3). In order
to encode them, we use the generalized Gini evaluation
function (Weymark, 1981) as the social welfare function
(i.e., the function that defines the overall utility from all the
user utilities).
In this work, we study the optimization of this fair welfare
function in the context of (deep) reinforcement learning
considering both discounted rewards and average rewards.

1. Introduction

Our contributions can be summarized as follows:

The progress in artificial intelligence (AI) and its use in
autonomous systems have created a lot of opportunities as
well as challenges for human society. Indeed, a well-trained
AI system can automate or solve some tasks better than
humans (Pilarski et al., 2011; Silver et al., 2017). However,

1. We introduce this novel problem that we call “fair optimization in RL” (Section 3).
2. We investigate its theoretical properties (Section 3.1).
Notably, (1) we establish the sufficiency of stationary
Markov policies for finding fair solutions, (2) we discuss
the possible state-dependency of fair optimality, and (3)
we provide an approximation error bound for using a policy optimal for discounted rewards instead of one optimal
for average rewards. Interestingly, this last result applied
to single-objective RL leads to a novel, simple, and interpretable bound, which is of independent interest.
3. We adapt three deep RL algorithms for solving our fair

1
UM-SJTU Joint Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China 2 Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Paul Weng
<paul.weng@sjtu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

