Online Bayesian Moment Matching based SAT Solver Heuristics

Haonan Duan * 1 2 Saeed Nejati * 1 George Trimponias 3 Pascal Poupart 1 2 Vijay Ganesh 1

Abstract
In this paper, we present a Bayesian Moment
Matching (BMM) based method aimed at solving the initialization problem in Boolean SAT
solvers. The initialization problem can be stated
as follows: given a SAT formula φ, compute
an initial order over the variables of φ and values/polarity for these variables such that the runtime of SAT solvers on input φ is minimized.
At the start of a solver run, our BMM-based
methods compute a posterior probability distribution for an assignment to the variables of the
input formula after analyzing its clauses, which
will then be used by the solver to initialize its
search. We perform extensive experiments to
evaluate the efficacy of our BMM-based heuristic
against 4 other initialization methods (random,
survey propagation, Jeroslow-Wang, and default)
in state-of-the-art solvers, MapleCOMSPS and
MapleLCMDistChronotBT over the SAT competition 2018 application benchmark, as well as the
best-known solvers in the cryptographic category,
namely, CryptoMiniSAT, Glucose, and MapleSAT. On the cryptographic benchmark, BMMbased solvers out-perform all other initialization
methods. Further, the BMM-based MapleCOMSPS significantly out-perform the same solver
using all other initialization methods by 12 additional instances solved and better average runtime,
over the SAT 2018 competition benchmark.

1. Introduction
Over the last two decades, modern conflict-driven
clause-learning (CDCL) Boolean satisfiability (SAT)
solvers (Marques-Silva & Sakallah, 1999; Moskewicz et al.,
2001) have had a transformative impact on many disciplines
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Waterloo 2 Vector Institute 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab. Correspondence to: Pascal Poupart <ppoupart@uwaterloo.ca>, Vijay Ganesh <vijay.ganesh@uwaterloo.ca>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

such as verification (Bradley, 2011), testing (Cadar et al.,
2008), security (Avgerinos et al., 2011), and AI (Rintanen,
2009). The reason for this phenomenon is the dramatic
improvement in the ability of SAT solvers in solving large
real-world Boolean formulas with tens of millions of variables and clauses. While this performance is impressive, the
demand for ever-more efficient solvers continues to grow
unabated. CDCL solvers search the space of variable assignments exhaustively by starting with an empty assignment
and repeatedly branching on variables to which truth values
are assigned. When a conflict is found, the search backtracks
by undoing one or several variable assignments. Additionally, a conflict analysis procedure finds a clause that is added
to the formula to help the solver avoid the same conflict in
the future. The search ends when a satisfying assignment is
found or the space is proven to be unsatisfiable.
In the last 5 years, it has been shown that machine learning (ML) based heuristics for branching and restarts can
dramatically improve SAT solver performance, ushering a
new approach to solver design (Liang et al., 2016; 2017b;
2018). This impact can best be explained via the view that
solvers are fundamentally proof systems, and machine learning methods are powerful ways of initializing, sequencing
and selecting proof rules to optimally and adaptively solve
formulas. Inspired by this success, we propose a Bayesian
Moment Matching (BMM) based method to solve the initialization problem in SAT solvers.
The Initialization Problem in SAT Solvers. We define
the initialization problem as follows: given a SAT formula
φ, compute an initial order over the variables of φ and
values/polarity for them such that the runtime of CDCL
solvers on input φ is minimized. By initial order, we mean a
total order over variables chosen by the CDCL solver S (and
similarly, by initial value assignment we mean a mapping
from variables to truth values) at the beginning of its search,
i.e., before any variables have been branched upon by the
solver S. Solver developers have known for a long time
that the initial order and value assignment to the variables
of an input formula can have a significant impact on the
performance of CDCL SAT solvers.
BMM-based Method to Solve the Initialization Problem
in SAT Solvers. The BMM method proposed in this paper
is used as a pre-processor to a CDCL SAT solver. Our

