Individual Fairness for k-Clustering

Sepideh Mahabadi * 1 Ali Vakilian * 2

Abstract
We give a local search based algorithm for kmedian and k-means (and more generally for any
k-clustering with `p norm cost function) from the
perspective of individual fairness. More precisely,
for a point x in a point set P of size n, let r(x) be
the minimum radius such that the ball of radius
r(x) centered at x has at least n/k points from P .
Intuitively, if a set of k random points are chosen
from P as centers, every point x ∈ P expects to
have a center within radius r(x). An individually
fair clustering provides such a guarantee for every
point x ∈ P . In this work, we show how to get a
bicriteria approximation for fair k-clustering: The
k-median (k-means) cost of our solution is within
a constant factor of the cost of an optimal fair
k-clustering, and our solution approximately satisfies the fairness condition (also within a constant
factor).

1. Introduction
Due to the increasingly use of machine learning in decisionmaking tasks such as awarding loans, estimating the likelihood of recidivism (Galindo & Tamayo, 2000; Chouldechova, 2017; Dressel & Farid, 2018; Kleinberg et al., 2018),
it is crucial to design fair algorithms from the perspective
of each individual input entity. In general, the rich area of
algorithmic fairness over the pas few years has had two
main aspects, (1) understanding different notions of fairness and formalizing them in the context of learning and
optimization tasks (e.g. (Feldman et al., 2015; Kleinberg
et al., 2017; Chouldechova & Roth, 2018; Mehrabi et al.,
2019; Pessach & Shmueli, 2020)) and (2) designing efficient
algorithms with respect to the additional properties caused
by the fairness requirement (e.g. (Joseph et al., 2016; Hardt
et al., 2016)). Our work in this paper is focused on the latter
*
Equal contribution 1 TTIC, Chicago, Illinois, USA 2 University
of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, USA. Correspondence to:
Sepideh Mahabadi <mahabadi@ttic.edu>, Ali Vakilian <vakilian@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

direction and in particular the design of fair algorithms for
a basic task in unsupervised learning, namely clustering.
Recently, there has been a large body of work on design
of fair algorithms for unsupervised learning tasks and in
particular clustering, e.g., (Chierichetti et al., 2017; Bera
et al., 2019; Abraham et al., 2019; Har-Peled & Mahabadi,
2019; Elzayn et al., 2019; Baharlouei et al., 2019).
Clustering is a fundamental task with huge number of applications such as feature engineering, recommendation
systems and urban planning. Due to its importance, the
clustering problem has been studied extensively from the
fairness point view over the past few years (Chierichetti
et al., 2017; Rösner & Schmidt, 2018; Kleindessner et al.,
2019a;b; Backurs et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2019; Schmidt
et al., 2019; Bercea et al., 2019; Bera et al., 2019; Huang
et al., 2019; Ahmadian et al., 2019; Davidson & Ravi, 2019;
Abraham et al., 2019). However, most previous results on
this topic consider the clustering problem with respect to
the notion of group fairness. As introduced by (Chierichetti
et al., 2017), in the clustering problem with respect to the
group fairness requirement, the high-level goal is to come
up with a minimum cost clustering of a given set of points
with an extra constraint that requires all clusters to be balanced with respect to a set of specified protected attributes
such as gender, race or religious.
In this paper, following the work of (Jung et al., 2019), we
study the clustering problem from the individual fairness
point of view: The goal is to design a clustering of the input point set so that all points are treated (approximately)
equally. As an example, this is important when the clustering is used in certain infrastructural decisions such as
where to open new facilities to serve residents in different
neighborhoods. Formally, given a point set P of size n, the
fair radius is defined for each point p ∈ P as the minimum
radius such that the ball B(p, r(p)) contains at least dn/ke
points from P . Intuitively, this is the radius which the point
p expects to have a center within, if the centers were to be
chosen uniformly at random. Therefore, it is natural to ask
for a clustering solution to approximately respects this expectation and provides a clustering that has a center within
distance O(r(p)) for every point p ∈ P , thus providing an
individually fair clustering solution.
As mentioned above, this notion of fair clustering was in-

