Fair Generative Modeling via Weak Supervision
Kristy Choi 1 * Aditya Grover 1 * Trisha Singh 2 Rui Shu 1 Stefano Ermon 1

Abstract
Real-world datasets are often biased with respect
to key demographic factors such as race and gender. Due to the latent nature of the underlying
factors, detecting and mitigating bias is especially
challenging for unsupervised machine learning.
We present a weakly supervised algorithm for
overcoming dataset bias for deep generative models. Our approach requires access to an additional
small, unlabeled reference dataset as the supervision signal, thus sidestepping the need for explicit
labels on the underlying bias factors. Using this
supplementary dataset, we detect the bias in existing datasets via a density ratio technique and
learn generative models which efficiently achieve
the twin goals of: 1) data efficiency by using
training examples from both biased and reference
datasets for learning; and 2) data generation close
in distribution to the reference dataset at test time.
Empirically, we demonstrate the efficacy of our
approach which reduces bias w.r.t. latent factors
by an average of up to 34.6% over baselines for
comparable image generation using generative
adversarial networks.

1. Introduction
Increasingly, many applications of machine learning (ML)
involve data generation. Examples of such production level
systems include Transformer-based models such as BERT
and GPT-3 for natural language generation (Vaswani et al.,
2017; Devlin et al., 2018; Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al.,
2020), Wavenet for text-to-speech synthesis (Oord et al.,
2017), and a large number of creative applications such
Coconet used for designing the “first AI-powered Google
Doodle” (Huang et al., 2017). As these generative applications become more prevalent, it becomes increasingly
important to consider questions with regards to the potential
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University 2 Department of Statistics, Stanford University.
Correspondence to: Kristy Choi <kechoi@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

discriminatory nature of such systems and ways to mitigate
it (Podesta et al., 2014). For example, some natural language
generation systems trained on internet-scale datasets have
been shown to produce generations that are biased towards
certain demographics (Sheng et al., 2019).
A variety of socio-technical factors contribute to the discriminatory nature of ML systems (Barocas et al., 2018). A
major factor is the existence of biases in the training data
itself (Torralba et al., 2011; Tommasi et al., 2017). Since
data is the fuel of ML, any existing bias in the dataset can be
propagated to the learned model (Barocas & Selbst, 2016).
This is a particularly pressing concern for generative models
which can easily amplify the bias by generating more of
the biased data at test time. Further, learning a generative
model is fundamentally an unsupervised learning problem
and hence, the bias factors of interest are typically latent.
For example, while learning a generative model of human
faces, we often do not have access to attributes such as gender, race, and age. Any existing bias in the dataset with
respect to these attributes are easily picked by deep generative models. See Figure 1 for an illustration.
In this work, we present a weakly-supervised approach to
learning fair generative models in the presence of dataset
bias. Our source of weak supervision is motivated by
the observation that obtaining multiple unlabelled (biased)
datasets is relatively cheap for many domains in the big data
era. Among these data sources, we may wish to generate
samples that are close in distribution to a particular target
(reference) dataset.1 As a concrete example of such a reference, organizations such as the World Bank and biotech
firms (23&me, 2016; Hong, 2016) typically follow several
good practices to ensure representativeness in the datasets
that they collect, though such methods are unscalable to
large sizes. We note that neither of our datasets need to
be labeled w.r.t. the latent bias attributes and the size of
the reference dataset can be much smaller than the biased
dataset. Hence, the level of supervision we require is weak.
Using a reference dataset to augment a biased dataset, our
goal is to learn a generative model that best approximates the
1
We note that while there may not be concept of a dataset devoid of bias, carefully designed representative data collection practices may be more accurately reflected in some data sources (Gebru
et al., 2018) and can be considered as reference datasets.

