Improving Transformer Optimization Through Better Initialization

Xiao Shi Huang * 1 2 Felipe Pérez * 1 Jimmy Ba 3 2 Maksims Volkovs 1

Abstract
The Transformer architecture has achieved considerable success recently; the key component
of the Transformer is the attention layer that enables the model to focus on important regions
within an input sequence. Gradient optimization
with attention layers can be notoriously difficult
requiring tricks such as learning rate warmup to
prevent divergence. As Transformer models are
becoming larger and more expensive to train, recent research has focused on understanding and
improving optimization in these architectures. In
this work our contributions are two-fold: we first
investigate and empirically validate the source
of optimization problems in the encoder-decoder
Transformer architecture; we then propose a new
weight initialization scheme with theoretical justification, that enables training without warmup or
layer normalization. Empirical results on public
machine translation benchmarks show that our
approach achieves leading accuracy, allowing to
train deep Transformer models with 200 layers
in both encoder and decoder (over 1000 attention/MLP blocks) without difficulty. Code for
this work is available here: https://github.
com/layer6ai-labs/T-Fixup.

1. Introduction
The Transformer model proposed by Vaswani et al. (2017),
has proven to be a versatile and effective architecture with
broad applications in various fields of deep learning, including neural machine translation (Vaswani et al., 2017; Edunov
et al., 2018), language modeling (Devlin et al., 2019; Yang
et al., 2019; Lan et al., 2020; Beltagy et al., 2020), video captioning and summarization (Bilkhu et al., 2019; Fan et al.,
2018; Chen et al., 2018a) and recommender systems (Chen
*
Equal contribution 1 Layer 6 AI, Toronto, ON, Canada
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada 3 Vector Institute,
Toronto, ON, Canada. Correspondence to: Xiao Shi Huang
<gary@layer6.ai>, Felipe Pérez <felipe@layer6.ai>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

et al., 2019; Sun et al., 2019). Despite the broad applications,
optimization in the Transformer models can be notoriously
difficult (Popel & Bojar, 2018). Most successful implementations require learning rate warmup, layer normalization,
residual connections and large batch size for learning to
work. Removing any of these components hampers optimization, and the model often fails to learn (Popel & Bojar,
2018). Learning rate warmup is particularly puzzling. Unlike most deep learning architectures, where learning rate
is initialized to a reasonably high value and then annealed
as training progresses, Transformers instead require gradual
learning rate warmup at the beginning of training. Starting
with a high learning rate without warmup breaks optimization, while training with a small learning rate is prohibitively
slow.
As many leading Transformer architectures are large and
require many GPU hours to train (Yang et al., 2019; Lan
et al., 2020), recent research has focused on understanding
and improving optimization in these models (Ahmed et al.,
2017; Chen et al., 2018b; Nguyen & Salazar, 2019; Aji
& Heafield, 2019; Liu et al., 2020). Chen et al. (2018b)
found that layer normalization could be the source of the
problem, and moving it off the main branch improves optimization. This finding was further supported by follow
up work (Nguyen & Salazar, 2019; Wang et al., 2019). In
parallel, Zhang et al. (2019b) showed that layer normalization can be fully removed in related ResNet models if
appropriate weight initialization is used. Lastly, Liu et al.
(2020) focused on the Adam optimizer, demonstrating that
during early stages of optimization the inverse of the second
moment is proportional to a divergent integral and can lead
to unstable updates. Despite significant progress, there have
been conflicting conclusions on learning rate warmup from
previous work (Ma & Yarats, 2019; Liu et al., 2020).
In this work, we aim to answer the question of why
Transformer training can break down without learning rate
warmup, and propose a solution. We first show that instability in the Adam optimizer, in part caused by gradient
vanishing from layer normalization, causes optimization to
break when warmup is not used. We then build on the work
of Zhang et al. (2019b), and propose a weight initialization scheme for the Transformer that fully eliminates the
need for layer normalization and warmup. By applying this
weight initialization, we achieve highly competitive perfor-

