Fairwashing Explanations with Off-Manifold Detergent

Christopher J. Anders 1 Plamen Pasliev 1 Ann-Kathrin Dombrowski 1 Klaus-Robert Müller 1 2 3 Pan Kessel 1

Abstract
Explanation methods promise to make black-box
classifiers more transparent. As a result, it is
hoped that they can act as proof for a sensible,
fair and trustworthy decision-making process of
the algorithm and thereby increase its acceptance
by the end-users. In this paper, we show both theoretically and experimentally that these hopes are
presently unfounded. Specifically, we show that,
for any classifier g, one can always construct another classifier g̃ which has the same behavior on
the data (same train, validation, and test error) but
has arbitrarily manipulated explanation maps. We
derive this statement theoretically using differential geometry and demonstrate it experimentally
for various explanation methods, architectures,
and datasets. Motivated by our theoretical insights, we then propose a modification of existing
explanation methods which makes them significantly more robust.

1. Introduction
Explanation methods4 are increasingly adopted by machine
learning practitioners and incorporated into standard deep
learning libraries (Kokhlikyan et al., 2019; Alber et al.,
2019; Ancona et al., 2018). The interest in explainability is partly driven by the hope that explanations can act as
proof for a sensible, fair, and trustworthy decision-making
process(Aı̈vodji et al., 2019; Lapuschkin et al., 2019). As an
example, a bank could provide explanations for its rejection
of a loan application. By doing so, the bank can demonstrate that the decision was not based on illegal or ethically
1
Machine Learning Group, Technische Universität Berlin,
Germany 2 Max-Planck-Institut für Informatik, Saarbrücken,
Germany 3 Department of Brain and Cognitive Engineering,
Korea University, Seoul, Korea. Correspondence to: Pan
Kessel <pan.kessel@tu-berlin.de>, Klaus-Robert Müller <klausrobert.mueller@tu-berlin.de>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
4
See (Samek et al., 2019) and references therein for a detailed
overview.

questionable features. It can furthermore provide feedback
to the customer. In some situations, an explanation of an
algorithmic decision may even be required by law.
However, this hope is based on the assumption that explanations faithfully reflect the underlying mechanisms of the
algorithmic decision. In this work, we demonstrate unequivocally that this assumption should not be made carelessly
because explanations can be easily manipulated.
In more detail, we show theoretically that for any classifier
g, one can always find another classifier g̃ which agrees
with the original g on the entire data manifold but has (almost) completely controlled explanations. This surprising
result is established using techniques of differential geometry. We then demonstrate experimentally that one can easily
construct such manipulated classifiers g̃.
In the example above, a bank could use a manipulated classifier g̃ that uses mainly unethical features, such as the gender
of the applicant, but has explanations which suggest that the
decision was only based on financial features.
Briefly put, the manipulability of explanations arises from
the fact that the data manifold is typically low-dimensional
compared to its high-dimensional embedding space. The
training process only determines the classifier in directions
along the manifold. However, many explanation methods
are mainly sensitive to directions orthogonal to the data manifold. Since these directions are undetermined by training,
they can be changed at will.
This theoretical insight allows us to propose a modification
to explanation methods which make them significantly more
robust with respect to such manipulations. Namely, the explanation is projected along tangential directions of the data
manifold. We show, both theoretically and experimentally,
that these tangent-space-projected (tsp) explanations are indeed significantly more robust. We thereby establish a novel
and exciting connection between the fields of explainability
and manifold learning.
In summary, our main contributions are as follows:

• Using differential geometry, we establish theoretically
that popular explanation methods can be easily manipulated.

