FormulaZero: Distributionally Robust Online Adaptation via
Offline Population Synthesis
Aman Sinha * 1 Matthew O’Kelly * 2 Hongrui Zheng * 2 Rahul Mangharam 2 John Duchi 1 Russ Tedrake 3

Abstract
Balancing performance and safety is crucial to
deploying autonomous vehicles in multi-agent environments. In particular, autonomous racing is a
domain that penalizes safe but conservative policies, highlighting the need for robust, adaptive
strategies. Current approaches either make simplifying assumptions about other agents or lack
robust mechanisms for online adaptation. This
work makes algorithmic contributions to both
challenges. First, to generate a realistic, diverse
set of opponents, we develop a novel method
for self-play based on replica-exchange Markov
chain Monte Carlo. Second, we propose a distributionally robust bandit optimization procedure
that adaptively adjusts risk aversion relative to
uncertainty in beliefs about opponents’ behaviors.
We rigorously quantify the tradeoffs in performance and robustness when approximating these
computations in real-time motion-planning, and
we demonstrate our methods experimentally on
autonomous vehicles that achieve scaled speeds
comparable to Formula One racecars.

1. Introduction
Current autonomous vehicle (AV) technology still struggles
in competitive multi-agent scenarios, such as merging onto
a highway, where both maximizing performance (negotiating the merge without delay or hesitation) and maintaining
safety (avoiding a crash) are important. The strategic implications of this tradeoff are magnified in racing. During
the 2019 Formula One season, the race-winner achieved the
fastest lap in only 33% of events (Federation Internationale
*

1
Equal contribution
Stanford University,
Stan2
ford, CA, USA University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA 3 Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. Correspondence to:
Aman Sinha <amans@stanford.edu>, Matthew O’Kelly
<mokelly@seas.upenn.edu>,
Hongrui
Zheng
<hongruiz@seas.upenn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

de l’Automobile, 2019). Empirically, the weak correlation
between achieving the fastest lap-time and winning suggests
that consistent and robust performance is critical to success.
In this paper, we investigate this intuition in the setting of
autonomous racing (AR). In AR, an AV must lap a racetrack in the presence of other agents deploying unknown
policies. The agent wins if it completes the race faster than
its opponents; a crash automatically results in a loss.
AR is a competitive multi-agent game, a general setting
challenging for a number of reasons, especially in robotics
applications. First, failures are expensive and dangerous,
so learning-based approaches must avoid such behavior or
rely on simulation while training. Second, the agents only
partially observe their opponent’s state, and these observations do not uniquely determine the opponent’s behavior.
Finally, the agents must make decisions online; the opponent’s strategy is a tightly-held secret and cannot be obtained
by collecting data before the competition.
Problem: We frame the AR challenge in the context of
robust reinforcement learning. We analyze the system as
a partially-observed Markov decision process (POMDP)
(S, A, Psa , O, r, ), with state space S, action space A,
state-action transition probabilities Psa , observation space
O, rewards r : O ! R, and discount factor . Furthermore,
we capture uncertainty in behaviors of other agents through
an ambiguity1 set P for the state-action transitions. Then
the AV’s objective is
X
t
maximize inf
E[r(o(t))].
(1)
Psa 2P

t

The obvious price of robustness (Bertsimas & Sim, 2004)
is that a larger ambiguity set ensures a greater degree of
safety while sacrificing performance against a particular
opponent. If we knew the opponent’s behavior, we would
need no ambiguity set; equivalently, the ambiguity set would
shrink to the nominal state-action transition distribution.
Our goal is to automatically trade between performance
and robustness as we play against opponents, which breaks
down into two challenges: parametrizing the ambiguity set
to allow tractable inference and computing the robust cost
efficiently online.
1

Ambiguity is a synonym for uncertainty (Gilboa & Marinacci,
2016). Formal descriptions in this paper use the term ambiguity.

