Adaptive Gradient Descent without Descent

Yura Malitsky 1 Konstantin Mishchenko 2
where f : Rd → R is a differentiable function. Throughout
the paper we assume that (1) has a solution and we denote
its optimal value by f∗ .

Abstract
We present a strikingly simple proof that two
rules are sufficient to automate gradient descent:
1) don’t increase the stepsize too fast and 2) don’t
overstep the local curvature. No need for functional values, no line search, no information about
the function except for the gradients. By following these rules, you get a method adaptive to the
local geometry, with convergence guarantees depending only on the smoothness in a neighborhood of a solution. Given that the problem is
convex, our method converges even if the global
smoothness constant is infinity. As an illustration, it can minimize arbitrary continuously twicedifferentiable convex function. We examine its
performance on a range of convex and nonconvex
problems, including logistic regression and matrix
factorization.

The simplest and most known approach to this problem
is the gradient descent method (GD), whose origin can be
traced back to Cauchy (Cauchy, 1847; Lemaréchal, 2012).
Although it is probably the oldest optimization method, it
continues to play a central role in modern algorithmic theory
and applications. Its definition can be written in a mere one
line,
xk+1 = xk − λ∇f (xk ),
k ≥ 0,
(2)
where x0 ∈ Rd is arbitrary and λ > 0. Under assumptions
that f is convex and L–smooth1 , that is
k∇f (x) − ∇f (y)k ≤ Lkx − yk,

Since the early days of optimization it was evident that there
is a need for algorithms that are as independent from the
user as possible. First-order methods have proven to be
versatile and efficient in a wide range of applications, but
one drawback has been present all that time: the stepsize.
Despite certain success stories, line search procedures and
adaptive online methods have not removed the need to manually tune the optimization parameters. Even in smooth
convex optimization, which is often believed to be much
simpler than the nonconvex counterpart, robust rules for
stepsize selection have been elusive. The purpose of this
work is to remedy this deficiency.
The problem formulation that we consider is the basic unconstrained optimization problem
x∈Rd

(3)

one can show that GD with λ ∈ (0, L2 ) converges to an
optimal solution (Polyak, 1963). Moreover, with λ = L1 the
convergence rate (Drori & Teboulle, 2014) is

1. Introduction

min f (x),

∀x, y,

(1)

Equal contribution 1 EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland 2 KAUST,
Thuwal, Saudi Arabia.
Correspondence to: Yura Malitsky <y.malitsky@gmail.com>, Konstantin Mishchenko <konsta.mish@gmail.com>.

f (xk ) − f∗ ≤

Lkx0 − x∗ k2
,
2(2k + 1)

(4)

where x∗ is any solution of (1). Note that this bound is not
improvable (Drori & Teboulle, 2014).
We identify four important challenges that limit the applications of gradient descent even in the convex case:
1. GD is not general: many functions do not satisfy (3)
globally.
2. GD is not a free lunch: one needs to guess λ, potentially trying many values before a success.
3. GD is not robust: failing to provide λ < L2 may lead
to divergence.
4. GD is slow: even if L is finite, it might be arbitrarily
larger than local smoothness.

*

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1.1. Related work
Certain ways to address some of the issues above already
exist in the literature. They include line search, adaptive
Polyak’s stepsize, mirror descent, dual preconditioning, and
1

Alternatively, we will say that ∇f is L-Lipschitz.

