Confidence-Aware Learning for Deep Neural Networks

Jooyoung Moon * 1 Jihyo Kim * 1 Younghak Shin 2 Sangheum Hwang 1 3

Abstract
Despite the power of deep neural networks for
a wide range of tasks, an overconfident prediction issue has limited their practical use in many
safety-critical applications. Many recent works
have been proposed to mitigate this issue, but
most of them require either additional computational costs in training and/or inference phases
or customized architectures to output confidence
estimates separately. In this paper, we propose a
method of training deep neural networks with a
novel loss function, named Correctness Ranking
Loss, which regularizes class probabilities explicitly to be better confidence estimates in terms
of ordinal ranking according to confidence. The
proposed method is easy to implement and can
be applied to the existing architectures without
any modification. Also, it has almost the same
computational costs for training as conventional
deep classifiers and outputs reliable predictions
by a single inference. Extensive experimental
results on classification benchmark datasets indicate that the proposed method helps networks to
produce well-ranked confidence estimates. We
also demonstrate that it is effective for the tasks
closely related to confidence estimation, out-ofdistribution detection and active learning.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have shown remarkable performance
on a wide spectrum of machine learning tasks for a variety
of domains, e.g., image classification (Krizhevsky et al.,
2012), speech recognition (Hinton et al., 2012), and medical
diagnosis (Nam et al., 2019). They are, however, generally
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Data Science, Seoul National University of Science and Technology, Seoul, Republic of
Korea 2 LG CNS, Seoul, Republic of Korea 3 Department of Industrial & Information Systems Engineering, Seoul National University of Science and Technology, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Sangheum Hwang <shwang@seoultech.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

an overconfident estimator that produces predictive probabilities with high confidence even for incorrect predictions
(Nguyen et al., 2015; Szegedy et al., 2014).
The overconfident prediction issue makes deep neural network models unreliable, and therefore limits the deployment of the models in safety-critical applications such as
autonomous driving and computer-aided diagnosis. For the
successful integration of a deep neural network model into
real-world systems, the model must not only be accurate but
also indicate when it is likely to be wrong. In other words,
the model should know what it does not know. Hence, a
deep neural network model that provides high quality of
confidence estimates is required for practical applications.
The quality of confidence estimates associated with a
model’s prediction can be assessed in two separate perspectives: confidence calibration and ordinal ranking according
to confidence values. Confidence calibration is the problem of predicting probability estimates that reflects the true
correctness likelihood. Thus, a well-calibrated classifier outputs predictive probabilities that can be directly interpreted
as predictions’ confidence level. It is known that modern
neural networks generate miscalibrated outputs in spite of
their high accuracy (Guo et al., 2017). Guo et al. (2017)
examined which factors influence calibration performances
of deep neural networks and showed that temperature scaling, a simple post-processing technique to learn a single
corrective constant, is very effective at calibrating a model’s
predictions. Obviously, confidence calibration alone is insufficient to evaluate the quality of predictive confidence
since it is orthogonal to both classification accuracy and
ranking performance (Kumar et al., 2019). For instance,
we can have a perfectly calibrated classifier if it outputs the
probability of 0.5 on the two-class dataset consisting of 50%
positive and 50% negative samples. It means that a wellcalibrated model may show lower predictive performances
(Guo et al., 2017; Neumann et al., 2018).
Another view is ordinal ranking of predictions according
to their confidence. Intuitively, a prediction with higher
confidence value should be more likely to be correct than
one with lower confidence value. Thus, ordinal ranking
aims to estimate confidence values whose ranking among
samples are effective to distinguish correct from incorrect
predictions. In most previous studies, this problem has been

