Polynomial Tensor Sketch for Element-wise Function of Low-Rank Matrix

Insu Han 1 Haim Avron 2 Jinwoo Shin 3 1

Abstract
This paper studies how to sketch element-wise
functions of low-rank matrices. Formally, given
low-rank matrix A = [Aij ] and scalar non-linear
function f , we aim for finding an approximated
low-rank representation of the (possibly highrank) matrix [f (Aij )]. To this end, we propose an
efficient sketching-based algorithm whose complexity is significantly lower than the number of
entries of A, i.e., it runs without accessing all
entries of [f (Aij )] explicitly. The main idea underlying our method is to combine a polynomial
approximation of f with the existing tensor sketch
scheme for approximating monomials of entries
of A. To balance the errors of the two approximation components in an optimal manner, we
propose a novel regression formula to find polynomial coefficients given A and f . In particular, we utilize a coreset-based regression with a
rigorous approximation guarantee. Finally, we
demonstrate the applicability and superiority of
the proposed scheme under various machine learning tasks.

1. Introduction
Given a low-rank matrix A = [Aij ] ∈ Rn×n with A =
U V > for some matrices U, V ∈ Rn×d with d  n and a
scalar non-linear function f : R → R, we are interested in
the following element-wise matrix function:∗
f (A) ∈ Rn×n ,

where f (A)ij := [f (Aij )] .

Our goal is to design a fast algorithm for computing talland-thin matrices TU , TV in time o(n2 )such that f (A) ≈
TU TV> . In particular, our algorithm should run without
computing all entries of A or f (A) explicitly. As an
1
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea
School of Mathematical Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Israel
3
Graduate School of AI, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea. Correspondence
to: Jinwoo Shin <jinwoos@kaist.ac.kr>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

side, we obtain a o(n2 )-time approximation scheme of
f (A)x ≈ TU TV> x for an arbitrary vector x ∈ Rn due
to the associative property of matrix multiplication, where
the exact computation of f (A)x requires the complexity
of Θ(n2 ).
The matrix-vector multiplication f (A)x or the low-rank
decomposition f (A) ≈ TU TV> is useful in many machine
learning algorithms. For example, the Gram matrices of
certain kernel functions, e.g., polynomial and radial basis
function (RBF), are element-wise matrix functions where
the rank is the dimension of the underlying data. Such
matrices are the cornerstone of so-called kernel methods
and the ability to multiply the Gram matrix to a vector
suffices for most kernel learning. The Sinkhorn-Knopp
algorithm is a powerful, yet simple, tool for computing
optimal transport distances (Cuturi, 2013; Altschuler et al.,
2017) and also involves the matrix-vector multiplication
f (A)x with f (x) = exp(x). Finally, f (U V > ) can also
describe the non-linear computation of activation in a layer
of deep neural networks (Goodfellow et al., 2016), where U ,
V and f correspond to input, weight and activation function
(e.g., sigmoid or ReLU) of the previous layer, respectively.
Unlike the element-wise matrix function f (A), a traditional matrix function f (A) is defined on their eigenvalues (Higham, 2008) and possesses clean algebraic properties, i.e., it preserves eigenvectors. For example, given
a diagonalizable matrix A = P DP −1 , it is defined that
f (A) = P f (D)P −1 . A classical problem addressed
in the literature is of approximating the trace of f (A) (or
f (A)x) efficiently (Han et al., 2017; Ubaru et al., 2017).
However, these methods are not applicable to our problem because element-wise matrix functions are fundamentally different from the traditional function of matrices,
e.g., they do not guarantee the spectral property. We are
unaware of any approximation algorithm that targets general element-wise matrix functions. The special case of
element-wise kernel functions such as f (x) = exp(x) and
f (x) = xk , as been address in the literature, e.g., using random Fourier features (RFF) (Rahimi & Recht, 2008; Pennington et al., 2015), Nyström method (Williams & Seeger,
2001), sparse greedy approximation (Smola & Schökopf,
∗
In this paper, we primarily focus on the square matrix A for
simplicity, but it is straightforward to extend our results to the case
of non-square matrices.

