Accelerating the diffusion-based ensemble sampling by non-reversible dynamics

Futoshi Futami 1 2 * Issei Sato 1 2 Masashi Sugiyama 2 1

Abstract
Posterior distribution approximation is a central
task in Bayesian inference. Stochastic gradient
Langevin dynamics (SGLD) and its extensions
have been practically used and theoretically studied. While SGLD updates a single particle at
a time, ensemble methods that update multiple
particles simultaneously have been recently gathering attention. Compared with the naive parallelchain SGLD that updates multiple particles independently, ensemble methods update particles
with their interactions. Thus, these methods are
expected to be more particle-efficient than the
naive parallel-chain SGLD because particles can
be aware of other particles’ behavior through
their interactions. Although ensemble methods
numerically demonstrated their superior performance, no theoretical guarantee exists to assure
such particle-efficiency and it is unclear whether
those ensemble methods are really superior to the
naive parallel-chain SGLD in the non-asymptotic
settings. To cope with this problem, we propose a novel ensemble method that uses a nonreversible Markov chain for the interaction, and
we present a non-asymptotic theoretical analysis
for our method. Our analysis shows that, for the
first time, the interaction causes a faster convergence rate than the naive parallel-chain SGLD in
the non-asymptotic setting if the discretization error is appropriately controlled. Numerical experiments show that we can control the discretization
error by tuning the interaction appropriately.

1. Introduction
In Bayesian inference, a central task is to accurately and
efficiently evaluate the posterior distribution (Bishop, 2006;
*
The author is now with NTT. 1 The Univiersity of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan 2 RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Futoshi
Futami <futami@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp>, Issei Sato <sato@g.ecc.utokyo.ac.jp>, Masashi Sugiyama <sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Murphy, 2012). For many practical models, we cannot obtain an analytical expression of the normalizing constant;
thus, we need to approximate the posterior. One of the most
successfully used methods to approximate the posterior is
stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD)(Welling &
Teh, 2011) and its variants (Ma et al., 2015; Chen et al.,
2016; 2014). These are diffusion-based sampling methods and suitable for large-scale data by using not the full
gradient but a stochastic version obtained through a randomly chosen subset of data. Each sample in SGLD moves
toward the gradient direction with added Gaussian noise
(hereinafter, we refer to a sample as a particle). Extensions of SGLD have been extensively developed (Ma et al.,
2015; Chen et al., 2014) to focus on improving the sampling
scheme, which updates one particle at a time, by extending
its associated phase space.
On the other hand, ensemble methods that update multiple
particles simultaneously have recently been gathering attention (Nusken & Pavliotis, 2019). Compared with naive
parallel-chain SGLD, which also updates multiple particles independently at each step, recent ensemble methods
introduced some interaction between particles. The advantage of these methods is that the multiple particles interact
with each other while moving simultaneously; thus, they
have correlations with each other. Because of these correlations, these particles can be aware of each other’s behavior
and can be more particle-efficient than naive parallel-chain
SGLD, in which the particles are independent of each other
(Liu et al., 2019a). Also, recent development of parallelprocessing computation schemes has further encouraged
the ensemble methods (Nusken & Pavliotis, 2019). Representative examples of diffusion-based ensemble methods
include Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD) (Liu &
Wang, 2016) and stochastic particle-optimization sampling
(SPOS)(Zhang et al., 2018).
Although the ensemble methods showed superior performance numerically, no theoretical analysis has been conducted to clarify the theoretical advantage of introducing
such “interactions” into diffusion-based sampling in a nonasymptotic setting and no work has clarified such improved
“particle efficiency”. To be more precise, the theoretical
advantage of updating multiple particles simultaneously
through their interactions compared to naive parallel-chain
SGLD, which updates multiple particles independently at

