Symbolic Network: Generalized Neural Policies for Relational MDPs

Sankalp Garg 1 Aniket Bajpai 1 Mausam 1

Abstract
A Relational Markov Decision Process (RMDP)
is a first-order representation to express all instances of a single probabilistic planning domain with possibly unbounded number of objects. Early work in RMDPs outputs generalized (instance-independent) first-order policies or
value functions as a means to solve all instances
of a domain at once. Unfortunately, this line of
work met with limited success due to inherent limitations of the representation space used in such
policies or value functions. Can neural models
provide the missing link by easily representing
more complex generalized policies, thus making
them effective on all instances of a given domain?
We present S YM N ET, the first neural approach
for solving RMDPs that are expressed in the probabilistic planning language of RDDL. S YM N ET
trains a set of shared parameters for an RDDL
domain using training instances from that domain.
For each instance, S YM N ET first converts it to
an instance graph and then uses relational neural models to compute node embeddings. It then
scores each ground action as a function over the
first-order action symbols and node embeddings
related to the action. Given a new test instance
from the same domain, S YM N ET architecture
with pre-trained parameters scores each ground
action and chooses the best action. This can be
accomplished in a single forward pass without
any retraining on the test instance, thus implicitly
representing a neural generalized policy for the
whole domain. Our experiments on nine RDDL
domains from IPPC demonstrate that S YM N ET
policies are significantly better than random and
sometimes even more effective than training a
state-of-the-art deep reactive policy from scratch.
1
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi.
Correspondence to: Sankalp Garg <sankalp2621998@gmail.com>,
Aniket Bajapi <quantum.computing96@gmail.com>, Mausam
<mausam@cse.iitd.ac.in>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
A Relational Markov Decision Process (RMDP) (Boutilier
et al., 2001) is a first-order, predicate calculus-based representation for expressing instances of a probabilistic planning
domain with a possibly unbounded number of objects. An
RMDP domain has object types, relational state predicate
and action symbols that are applied over objects, first order
transition templates that specify probabilistic effects associated with action symbols, and a first-order reward structure.
A domain instance additionally specifies a set of objects and
a start state, thus defining a ground MDP with a known start
state (Kolobov et al., 2012)). Relational planners aim to
produce a single generalized policy that can yield a ground
policy for all instances of the domain, with little instancespecific computation. Domain-independent planners are
representation-specific, but domain-agnostic, making them
applicable to all domains expressible in the language. In this
paper, we design a domain-independent relational planner.
RMDP planners, in their vision, expect to scale to very large
problem sizes by exploiting the first-order structures of a
domain – thereby reducing the curse of dimensionality. Traditional RMDP planners attempted to find a generalized
first-order value function or policy using symbolic dynamic
programming (Boutilier et al., 2001), or by approximating
them via a function over first-order basis functions (e.g.,
(Guestrin et al., 2003; Sanner & Boutilier, 2009)). Unfortunately, these methods met with rather limited success, for
e.g., no relational planner participated in International Probabilistic Planning Competition (IPPC)1 after 2006, even
though all competition domains were relational. We believe
that this lack of success may be due to the inherent limitations in the representation power of a basis function-based
representation. Through this work, we wish to revive the
research thread on RMDPs and explore if neural models
could be effective in representing these first-order functions.
We present Symbolic NetWork (S YM N ET), the first domainindependent neural relational planner that computes generalized policies for RMDPs that are expressed in the symbolic
representation language of RDDL (Sanner, 2010). S YM N ET
outputs its generalized policy via a neural model whose all
parameters are specific to a domain, but tied among all in1
http://www.icaps-conference.org/index.
php/Main/Competitions

