Variational Bayesian Quantization

Yibo Yang * 1 Robert Bamler * 1 Stephan Mandt 1

Abstract
We propose a novel algorithm for quantizing continuous latent representations in trained models.
Our approach applies to deep probabilistic models, such as variational autoencoders (VAEs), and
enables both data and model compression. Unlike current end-to-end neural compression methods that cater the model to a fixed quantization
scheme, our algorithm separates model design
and training from quantization. Consequently,
our algorithm enables “plug-and-play” compression with variable rate-distortion trade-off, using
a single trained model. Our algorithm can be
seen as a novel extension of arithmetic coding to
the continuous domain, and uses adaptive quantization accuracy based on estimates of posterior
uncertainty. Our experimental results demonstrate
the importance of taking into account posterior
uncertainties, and show that image compression
with the proposed algorithm outperforms JPEG
over a wide range of bit rates using only a single
standard VAE. Further experiments on Bayesian
neural word embeddings demonstrate the versatility of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Latent-variable models have become a mainstay of modern
machine learning. Scalable approximate Bayesian inference methods, in particular Black Box Variational Inference
(Ranganath et al., 2014; Rezende et al., 2014), have spurred
the development of increasingly large and expressive probabilistic models, including deep generative probabilistic models such as variational autoencoders (Kingma & Welling,
2014b) and Bayesian neural networks (MacKay, 1992; Blundell et al., 2015). One natural application of deep latent
variable modeling is data compression, and recent work has
focused on end-to-end procedures that optimize a model
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of California, Irvine. Correspondence to: Yibo Yang
<yibo.yang@uci.edu>, Robert Bamler <rbamler@uci.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

for a particular compression objective. Here, we study a
related but different problem: given a trained model, what
is the best way to encode the information contained in its
continuous latent variables?
As we show, our proposed solution provides a new “plugand-play” approach to lossy compression of both data instances (represented by local latent variables, e.g., in a VAE)
as well as model parameters (represented by global latent
variables that serve as parameters of a Bayesian statistical model). Our approach separates the compression task
from model design and training, thus implementing variablebitrate compression as an independent post-processing step
in a wide class of existing latent variable models.
At the heart of our proposed method lies a novel quantization scheme that optimizes a rate-distortion trade-off by
exploiting posterior uncertainty estimates. Quantization is
central to lossy compression, as continuous-valued data like
natural images, videos, and distributed representations ultimately need to be discretized to a finite number of bits
for digital storage or transmission. Lossy compression algorithms therefore typically find a discrete approximation
of some semantic representation of the data, which is then
encoded with a lossless compression method.
In classical lossy compression methods such as JPEG or
MP3, the semantic representation is carefully designed to
support compression at variable bitrates. By contrast, stateof-the-art deep learning based approaches to lossy data compression (Ballé et al., 2017; 2018; Rippel & Bourdev, 2017;
Mentzer et al., 2018; Lombardo et al., 2019) are trained to
minimize a distortion metric at a fixed bitrate. To support
variable-bitrate compression in this approach, one has to
train several models for different bitrates. While training
several models may be viable in many cases, a bigger issue
is the increase in decoder size as the decoder has to store
the parameters of not one but several deep neural networks
for each bitrate setting. In applications like video streaming
under fluctuating connectivity, the decoder further has to
load a new deep learning model into memory every time a
change in bandwidth requires adjusting the bitrate.
By contrast, we propose a a quantization method for latent
variable models that decouples training from compression,
and that enables variable-bitrate compression with a single
model. We generalize a classical entropy coding algorithm,

