Concise Explanations of Neural Networks using Adversarial Training
Prasad Chalasani 1 Jiefeng Chen 2 Amrita Roy Chowdhury 2 Somesh Jha 1 2 Xi Wu 3

Abstract
We show new connections between adversarial
learning and explainability for deep neural networks (DNNs). One form of explanation of the
output of a neural network model in terms of its
input features, is a vector of feature-attributions.
Two desirable characteristics of an attributionbased explanation are: (1) sparseness: the attributions of irrelevant or weakly relevant features should be negligible, thus resulting in concise explanations in terms of the significant features, and (2) stability: it should not vary significantly within a small local neighborhood of
the input. Our first contribution is a theoretical
exploration of how these two properties (when
using attributions based on Integrated Gradients,
or IG) are related to adversarial training, for a
class of 1-layer networks (which includes logistic regression models for binary and multi-class
classification); for these networks we show that
(a) adversarial training using an `1 -bounded adversary produces models with sparse attribution
vectors, and (b) natural model-training while encouraging stable explanations (via an extra term
in the loss function), is equivalent to adversarial
training. Our second contribution is an empirical verification of phenomenon (a), which we
show, somewhat surprisingly, occurs not only
in 1-layer networks, but also DNNs trained on
standard image datasets, and extends beyond IGbased attributions, to those based on DeepSHAP:
adversarial training with `1 -bounded perturbations yields significantly sparser attribution vectors, with little degradation in performance on
natural test data, compared to natural training.
Moreover, the sparseness of the attribution vectors is significantly better than that achievable via
`1 -regularized natural training.
1
XaiPient 2 University of Wisconsin (Madison) 3 Google. Correspondence to: Prasad Chalasani <pchalasani@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Despite the recent dramatic success of deep learning models
in a variety of domains, two serious concerns have surfaced
about these models.
Vulnerability to Adversarial Attacks: We can abstractly
think of a neural network model as a function F (x ) of a
d-dimensional input vector x 2 Rd , and the range of F
is either a discrete set of class-labels, or a continuous set
of class probabilities. Many of these models can be foiled
by an adversary who imperceptibly (to humans) alters the
input x by adding a perturbation 2 Rd so that F (x + )
is very different from F (x ) (Szegedy et al., 2013; Goodfellow et al., 2014; Papernot et al., 2015; Biggio et al., 2013).
Adversarial training (or adversarial learning) has recently
been proposed as a method for training models that are robust to such attacks, by applying techniques from the area
of Robust Optimization (Madry et al., 2017; Sinha et al.,
2018). The core idea of adversarial training is simple: we
define a set S of allowed perturbations 2 Rd that we want
to “robustify” against (e.g. S could be the set of where
|| ||1  "), and perform model-training using Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) exactly as in natural training,
except that each training example x is perturbed adversarially, i.e. replaced by x + ⇤ where ⇤ 2 S maximizes the
example’s loss-contribution.
Explainability: One way to address the well-known lack
of explainability of deep learning models is feature attribution, which aims to explain the output of a model F (x ) as
an attribution vector AF (x ) of the contributions from the
features x . There are several feature-attribution techniques
in the literature, such as Integrated Gradients (IG) (Sundararajan et al., 2017), DeepSHAP (Lundberg & Lee, 2017),
and LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016). For such an explanation
to be human-friendly, it is highly desirable (Molnar, 2019)
that the attribution-vector is sparse, i.e., only the features
that are truly predictive of the output F (x ) should have
significant contributions, and irrelevant or weakly-relevant
features should have negligible contributions. A sparse attribution makes it possible to produce a concise explanation,
where only the input features with significant contributions
are included. For instance, if the model F is used for a loan
approval decision, then various stakeholders (like customers,

