Stochastic Differential Equations with Variational Wishart Diffusions

Martin Jørgensen 1 Marc Peter Deisenroth 2 Hugh Salimbeni 3

Abstract

Why model the process noise? Assume that in the example
above, the two states represent meteorological measurements: rainfall and wind speed. Both are influenced by
confounders, such as atmospheric pressure, which are not
measured directly. This effect can in the case of the model
in (1) only be modelled through the diffusion . Moreover,
wind and rain may not correlate identically for all states of
the confounders.

We present a Bayesian non-parametric way of inferring stochastic differential equations for both
regression tasks and continuous-time dynamical
modelling. The work has high emphasis on the
stochastic part of the differential equation, also
known as the diffusion, and modelling it by means
of Wishart processes. Further, we present a semiparametric approach that allows the framework
to scale to high dimensions. This successfully
lead us onto how to model both latent and autoregressive temporal systems with conditional heteroskedastic noise. We provide experimental evidence that modelling diffusion often improves
performance and that this randomness in the differential equation can be essential to avoid overfitting.

Dynamical modelling with focus in the noise-term is not
a new area of research. The most prominent one is the
Auto-Regressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity (ARCH)
model (Engle, 1982), which is central to scientific fields
like econometrics, climate science and meteorology. The
approach in these models is to estimate large process noise
when the system is exposed to a shock, i.e. an unforeseen
significant change in states. Thus, it does not depend on the
value of some state, but rather on a linear combination of
previous states.

1. Introduction
An endeared assumption to make when modelling multivariate phenomena with Gaussian processes (GPs) is that
of independence between processes, i.e. every dimension
of a multivariate phenomenon is modelled independently.
Consider the case of a two-dimensional temporal process
xt evolving as
xt := f (xt−1 ) + t ,

(1)

where f (xt−1 ) = (f1 (xt−1 ), f2 (xt−1 ))> , f1 and f2 independent, and t ∼ N (0, σ 2 I). This model is commonly
used in the machine learning community and is easy to use
and understand, but for many real-world cases the noise is
too simplistic. In this paper, we will investigate the noise
term t and also make it dependent on the state xt−1 . This
is also known as heteroskedastic noise. We will refer to the
sequence of t as the diffusion or process noise.
1
Department for Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical
University of Denmark 2 Department of Computer Science, University College London 3 G-Research. Correspondence to: Martin
Jørgensen <marjor@dtu.dk>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

In this paper, we address this shortcoming and introduce
a model to handle the process noise by the use of Wishart
processes. Through this, we can sample covariance matrices
dependent on the input state. This allows the system to
evolve as a homogeneous system rather than independent
sequences. By doing so, we can avoid propagating too
much noise—which can often be the case with diagonal
covariances—and potentially improve on modelling longerrange dependencies. Volatility modelling with GPs has
been considered by Wu et al. (2014); Wilson & Ghahramani
(2010); Heaukulani & van der Wilk (2019).
For regression tasks, our model is closely related to several
recent works exploring continuous-time deep neural networks (E, 2017; Haber & Ruthotto, 2017; Chen et al., 2018).
Here the notion of depth is no longer a discrete quantity (i.e.
the number of hidden layers), but an interval on which a
continuous flow is defined. In this view, continuous-time
learning takes residual networks (He et al., 2016) to their infinite limit, while remaining computationally feasible. The
flow, parameterized by a differential equation, allows for
time-series modelling, even with temporal observations that
are not equidistant.
This line of work has been extended with stochastic equivalents (Twomey et al., 2019; Tzen & Raginsky, 2019;
Liu et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020), and the work by

