Neural Topic Modeling with Continual Lifelong Learning

Pankaj Gupta 1 Yatin Chaudhary 1 2 Thomas Runkler 1 Hinrich Schütze 2

Abstract
Lifelong learning has recently attracted attention
in building machine learning systems that continually accumulate and transfer knowledge to help
future learning. Unsupervised topic modeling has
been popularly used to discover topics from document collections. However, the application of
topic modeling is challenging due to data sparsity,
e.g., in a small collection of (short) documents and
thus, generate incoherent topics and sub-optimal
document representations. To address the problem, we propose a lifelong learning framework
for neural topic modeling that can continuously
process streams of document collections, accumulate topics and guide future topic modeling tasks
by knowledge transfer from several sources to
better deal with the sparse data. In the lifelong
process, we particularly investigate jointly: (1)
sharing generative homologies (latent topics) over
lifetime to transfer prior knowledge, and (2) minimizing catastrophic forgetting to retain the past
learning via novel selective data augmentation,
co-training and topic regularization approaches.
Given a stream of document collections, we apply the proposed Lifelong Neural Topic Modeling
(LNTM) framework in modeling three sparse document collections as future tasks and demonstrate
improved performance quantified by perplexity,
topic coherence and information retrieval task.
Code:
https://github.com/pgcool/
Lifelong-Neural-Topic-Modeling

1. Introduction
Unsupervised topic models, such as LDA (Blei et al., 2003),
RSM (Salakhutdinov & Hinton, 2009), DocNADE (Lauly
et al., 2017), NVDM (Srivastava & Sutton, 2017), etc. have
been popularly used to discover topics from large document
1

Corporate Technology, Siemens AG Munich, Germany 2 CIS,
University of Munich (LMU) Munich, Germany. Correspondence
to: Pankaj Gupta <pankaj.gupta@drimco.net>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Knowledge Base
of Topics
(operating
(productline)
system)
(fruit)
android, mac,
ipad, apple,
seeds, nutrition,
apple,
ios,
iphone, app
apple, grapes,
smartphone, linux, windows,
healthy, sweet,
tablet, phone xp, microsoft ... edible, pears
t=1

t=2

t=T

past learning (Topic Modeling)

Knowledge
Accumulation Lifelong TM with
Knowledge Knowledge Base
Transfer
iphone, mac, talk, iphone, ios,
ios, apple, shares, ipad, apple,
android,
android, diseases,
profit, tablet, ipad tablet, mac
t=T+1

future learning

Figure 1. Motivation for Lifelong Topic Modeling

collections. However in sparse data settings, the application
of topic modeling is challenging due to limited context in a
small document collection or short documents (e.g., tweets,
headlines, etc.) and the topic models produce incoherent
topics. To deal with this problem, there have been several attempts (Petterson et al., 2010; Das et al., 2015; Nguyen et al.,
2015; Gupta et al., 2019) that introduce prior knowledge
such as pre-trained word embeddings (Pennington et al.,
2014) to guide meaningful learning.
Lifelong Machine Learning (LML) (Thrun & Mitchell,
1995; Mitchell et al., 2015; Hassabis et al., 2017; Parisi
et al., 2019) has recently attracted attention in building adaptive computational systems that can continually acquire,
retain and transfer knowledge over life time when exposed
to modeling continuous streams of information. In contrast, the traditional machine learning is based on isolated
learning i.e., a one-shot task learning (OTL) using a single
dataset and thus, lacks ability to continually learn from incrementally available heterogeneous data. The application
of LML framework has shown potential for supervised natural language processing (NLP) tasks (Chen & Liu, 2016)
such as in sentiment analysis (Chen et al., 2015), relation
extraction (Wang et al., 2019), text classification (de Masson d’Autume et al., 2019), etc. Existing works in topic
modeling are either based on the OTL approach or transfer learning (Chen & Liu, 2014) using stationary batches
of training data and prior knowledge without accounting
for streams of document collections. The unsupervised
document (neural) topic modeling still remains unexplored
regarding lifelong learning.
In this work, we explore unsupervised document (neural) topic modeling within a continual lifelong learning
paradigm to enable knowledge-augmented topic learning
over lifetime. We show that Lifelong Neural Topic Modeling
(LNTM) is capable of mining and retaining prior knowledge

