Converging to Team-Maxmin Equilibria in Zero-Sum Multiplayer Games

Youzhi Zhang 1 Bo An 1

Abstract
Efficiently computing equilibria for multiplayer
games is still an open challenge in computational
game theory. This paper focuses on computing
Team-Maxmin Equilibria (TMEs), which is an important solution concept for zero-sum multiplayer
games where players in a team having the same
utility function play against an adversary independently. Existing algorithms are inefficient to compute TMEs in large games, especially when the
strategy space is too large to be represented due to
limited memory. In two-player games, the Incremental Strategy Generation (ISG) algorithm is an
efficient approach to avoid enumerating all pure
strategies. However, the study of ISG for computing TMEs is completely unexplored. To fill
this gap, we first study the properties of ISG for
multiplayer games, showing that ISG converges
to a Nash Equilibrium (NE) but may not converge
to a TME. Second, we design an ISG variant for
TMEs (ISGT) by exploiting that a TME is an
NE maximizing the team’s utility and show that
ISGT converges to a TME and the impossibility of
relaxing conditions in ISGT. Third, to further improve the scalability, we design an ISGT variant
(CISGT) by using the strategy space for computing an equilibrium that is close to a TME but is
easier to be computed as the initial strategy space
of ISGT. Finally, extensive experimental results
show that CISGT is orders of magnitude faster
than ISGT and the state-of-the-art algorithm to
compute TMEs in large games.

1. Introduction
Game theory is an important tool to model the interaction
between agents. Now researchers have achieved many results for two-player games, e.g., computing Nash Equilibria
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. Correspondence to: Youzhi
Zhang <yzhang137@ntu.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

(NEs) for zero-sum games (Nash, 1951) via linear programs
(Von Neumann & Morgenstern, 1953; Von Stengel, 1996;
Shoham & Leyton-Brown, 2008) and many scalable algorithms, e.g., the double oracle algorithm (McMahan et al.,
2003) and the counterfactual regret minimization algorithm
(Zinkevich et al., 2008), and computing Stackelberg equilibria (Conitzer & Sandholm, 2006). Based on these results,
researchers have successfully applied game theory to many
domains, e.g., improving the security for people and wildlife
in security games (Sinha et al., 2018) and defeating top human professionals in poker games (Brown & Sandholm,
2018). However, researchers have achieved fewer results
for multiplayer games except for games having very special
structures, e.g., polymatrix games (Cai & Daskalakis, 2011)
and congestion games (Shoham & Leyton-Brown, 2008)
or algorithms having no theoretical guarantee (Brown &
Sandholm, 2019). In fact, the hardness to compute NEs (it
is PPAD-complete even for zero-sum three-player games
(Chen & Deng, 2005)) and the equilibrium selection problem (Brown & Sandholm, 2019) (it is hard for players independently choosing strategies and then forming an NE
because NEs are not exchangeable) make them remain open
challenges for computing and applying NEs in multiplayer
games.
This paper focuses on computing Team-Maxmin Equilibria
(TMEs) (von Stengel & Koller, 1997; Basilico et al., 2017b;
Celli & Gatti, 2018; Zhang & An, 2020), which is an important solution concept for zero-sum multiplayer games
where players in a team having the same utility function
play against an adversary independently. A TME is an NE
maximizing the team’s utility and always exists. More importantly, the TME is unique in general, and then it avoids
the equilibrium selection problem. Moreover, TMEs can
be used to model many real-world scenarios. For example,
to keep the safety of New York, the Patrol Services Bureau
in the New York City Police Department (NYPD) has 77
police precincts (NYPD, 2020b), and each precinct is divided into four or five fully-staffed sectors by Neighborhood
Policing recently (NYPD, 2020a). They maintain “sector
integrity”: officers in different sectors work independently
to keep the safety of their sectors, except in precinct-wide
emergencies (NYPD, 2020a).
However, it is still challenging to compute a TME, which is
FNP-hard (Hansen et al., 2008). Moreover, a TME is only

