On the Unreasonable Effectiveness of the Greedy Algorithm:
Greedy Adapts to Sharpness

Sebastian Pokutta 1 Mohit Singh 2 Alfredo Torrico 3

Abstract
It is well known that the standard greedy algorithm guarantees a worst-case approximation factor of 1 − 1/e when maximizing a monotone submodular function under a cardinality constraint.
However, empirical studies show that its performance is substantially better in practice. This
raises a natural question of explaining this improved performance of the greedy algorithm. In
this work, we define sharpness for submodular
functions as a candidate explanation for this phenomenon. We show that the greedy algorithm
provably performs better as the sharpness of the
submodular function increases. This improvement ties in closely with the faster convergence
rates of first order methods for sharp functions in
convex optimization.

1. Introduction
During the last decade, the interest in constrained submodular maximization has increased significantly, especially due
to its numerous applications in real-world problems. Common examples of these applications are influence modeling
in social networks (Kempe et al., 2003), sensor placement
(Krause et al., 2008a), document summarization (Lin &
Bilmes, 2009), or in general constrained feature selection
(Krause & Guestrin, 2005a; Das & Kempe, 2008; Krause
et al., 2008b; 2009; Powers et al., 2016). To illustrate the
submodular property, consider a simple example of selecting the most influential nodes S in a social network where
information is seeded at S and is passed around in the network based on a certain stochastic process. Submodularity
captures the natural property that the total number of nodes
influenced marginally decreases as more nodes are seeded
1
Zuse Institute Berlin (ZIB), TU Berlin 2 Georgia Institute of Technology 3 CERC Data Science, Polytechnique Montreal. Correspondence to: Alfredo Torrico <alfredo.torricopalacios@polymtl.ca>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

(Kempe et al., 2003). Given the importance of submodular
optimization, there has been significant progress in designing new algorithms with provable guarantees (Calinescu
et al., 2011; Ene & Nguyen, 2016; Buchbinder & Feldman,
2016; Sviridenko, 2004).
The most fundamental problem in submodular optimization is to maximize a monotonically increasing submodular function subject to a cardinality constraint. A classical result (Nemhauser et al., 1978; Nemhauser & Wolsey,
1978) shows that the greedy algorithm is a multiplicative
(1 − 1/e)-approximation algorithm. Moreover, no other efficient algorithm can obtain a better guarantee (Nemhauser
& Wolsey, 1978). However, empirical observations have
shown that standard algorithms such as the greedy algorithm
performs considerably better in practice. Explaining this
phenomenon has been a tantalizing challenge. Are there
specific properties in real world instances that the greedy
algorithm exploits? An attempt to explain this phenomenon
has been made with the concept of curvature (Conforti &
Cornuéjols, 1984). In simple words, this parameter measures how close to linear the objective function is. This line
of work establishes a (best possible) approximation ratio of
1 − γ/e using curvature γ ∈ [0, 1] as parameter (Sviridenko
et al., 2015).
In this work, we focus on giving an explanation for those
instances in which the optimal solution clearly stands out
over the rest of feasible solutions. For this, we consider
the concept of sharpness initially introduced in continuous optimization (Łojasiewicz, 1963) and we adapt it to
submodular optimization. Roughly speaking, this property
measures the behavior of the objective function around the
set of optimal solutions. Sharpness in continuous optimization translates in faster convergence rates. Equivalently, we
will show that the greedy algorithm for submodular maximization performs better as the sharpness of the objective
function increases, as a discrete analog of ascent algorithms
in continuous optimization.
Our main contributions in this work are: (1) to introduce
the sharpness criteria in submodular optimization as a novel
candidate explanation of the performance of the greedy algorithm; (2) to show that the standard greedy algorithm
automatically adapts to the sharpness of the objective func-

