Combinatorial Pure Exploration for Dueling Bandits

Wei Chen * 1 Yihan Du 2 Longbo Huang 2 Haoyu Zhao 2

Abstract
In this paper, we study combinatorial pure exploration for dueling bandits (CPE-DB): we have
multiple candidates for multiple positions as modeled by a bipartite graph, and in each round we
sample a duel of two candidates on one position
and observe who wins in the duel, with the goal of
finding the best candidate-position matching with
high probability after multiple rounds of samples.
CPE-DB is an adaptation of the original combinatorial pure exploration for multi-armed bandit
(CPE-MAB) problem to the dueling bandit setting. We consider both the Borda winner and the
Condorcet winner cases. For Borda winner, we
establish a reduction of the problem to the original CPE-MAB setting and design PAC and exact
algorithms that achieve both the sample complexity similar to that in the CPE-MAB setting (which
is nearly optimal for a subclass of problems) and
polynomial running time per round. For Condorcet winner, we first design a fully polynomial
time approximation scheme (FPTAS) for the offline problem of finding the Condorcet winner
with known winning probabilities, and then use
the FPTAS as an oracle to design a novel pure exploration algorithm CAR-Cond with sample complexity analysis. CAR-Cond is the first algorithm
with polynomial running time per round for identifying the Condorcet winner in CPE-DB.

1. Introduction
Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) (Lai & Robbins, 1985; Thompson, 1933; Auer et al., 2002; Agrawal & Goyal, 2012) is a
classic model that characterizes the exploration-exploitation
∗
Alphabetical order 1 Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
IIIS, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
Correspondence to:
Wei Chen <weic@microsoft.com>, Yihan
Du <duyh18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>,
Longbo Huang
<longbohuang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>,
Haoyu
Zhao
<zhaohy16@tsinghua.org.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

tradeoff in online learning. The pure exploration task (EvenDar et al., 2006; Chen & Li, 2016; Sabato, 2019) is an
important variant of the MAB problems, where the objective is to identify the best arm with high confidence, using
as few samples as possible. A rich class of pure exploration problems have been extensively studied, e.g., best
K-arm identification (Kalyanakrishnan et al., 2012) and
multi-bandit best arm identification (Bubeck et al., 2013).
Recently, Chen et al. (2014) proposes a general combinatorial pure exploration for multi-armed bandit (CPE-MAB)
framework, which encompasses previous pure exploration
problems. In the CPE-MAB problem, a learner is given a
set of arms and a collection of arm subsets with certain combinatorial structures. At each time step, the learner plays
an arm and observes the random reward, with the objective
of identifying the best combinatorial subset of arms. Gabillon et al. (2016); Chen et al. (2017) follow this setting and
further improve the sample complexity.
However, in many real-world applications involving implicit
(human) feedback including social surveys (Alwin & Krosnick, 1985), market research (Ben-Akiva et al., 1994) and
recommendation systems (Radlinski et al., 2008), the information observed by the learner is intrinsically relative. For
example, in voting and elections, it is more natural for the
electors to offer preference choices than numerical evaluations on candidates. For this scenario, the dueling bandit
formulation (Yue et al., 2012; Ramamohan et al., 2016; Sui
et al., 2018) provides a promising model for online decision
making with relative feedback.
In this paper, we contribute a model adapting the original
CPE-MAB problem to the dueling bandit setting. Specifically, we formulate the combinatorial pure exploration for
dueling bandit (CPE-DB) problem as follows. A CPE-DB
instance consists of a bipartite graph G modeling multiple
candidates that could fit into multiple positions, and an unknown preference probability matrix specifying when we
play a duel between two candidates for one position, the
probability that the first would win over the second. At each
time step, a learner samples a duel of two candidates on one
position and observes a random outcome of which candidate
wins in this duel sampled according to the preference probability matrix. The objective is to use as few duel samples
as possible to identify the best candidate-position matching
with high confidence, for two popular optimality metrics

