Too Relaxed to Be Fair
¨ Perrot 2 3 4 Ulrike von Luxburg 1 2
Michael Lohaus 1 2 Michael

Abstract
We address the problem of classification under
fairness constraints. Given a notion of fairness,
the goal is to learn a classifier that is not discriminatory against a group of individuals. In the literature, this problem is often formulated as a constrained optimization problem and solved using
relaxations of the fairness constraints. We show
that many existing relaxations are unsatisfactory:
even if a model satisfies the relaxed constraint, it
can be surprisingly unfair. We propose a principled framework to solve this problem. This new
approach uses a strongly convex formulation and
comes with theoretical guarantees on the fairness
of its solution. In practice, we show that this
method gives promising results on real data.

1. Introduction
Informally, a classifier is considered unfair when it unjustly
promotes a group of individuals while being detrimental
to others; it is considered fair when it is free of any unjust
behavior. However, the details of what is fair and unfair
can be vastly different from one application to another. For
example, a college might want to admit a diverse student
pool with respect to gender or race. This notion of fairness
is called demographic parity. On the other hand, consider a
bank giving out loans. If a group of individuals repays less
frequently than others, it is normal that they receive fewer
loans. However, it does not mean that all requests should be
declined. In particular, any individual that is likely to repay
a loan should be given the opportunity to get one, regardless
of group membership. This is called equality of opportunity.
1
University of ¨
Tubingen, Germany 2 Max Planck Institute for
Intelligent Systems, ¨
Tubingen, Germany 3 Univ Lyon, UJM-SaintEtienne, CNRS, IOGS, LabHC UMR 5516, F-42023, SAINTETIENNE, France 4 Most of the work was done when M.P. was
affiliated with the Max Planck Institute. Correspondence to:
¨
Michael Lohaus <michael.lohaus@uni-tuebingen.de>, Michael
Perrot <michael.perrot@univ-st-etienne.fr>, Ulrike von Luxburg
<luxburg@informatik.uni-tuebingen.de>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

The problem of learning fair classifiers has mainly been addressed in three ways. First, pre-processing approaches alter
the labels of the examples or their representation to increase
the intrinsic fairness of a dataset. A classifier learned on
this modified data is then more likely to be fair (Feldman
et al., 2015; Calmon et al., 2017; Kamiran & Calders, 2012;
Dwork et al., 2012; Zemel et al., 2013). Second, post-hoc
procedures transform existing accurate but unfair classifiers
into fair classifiers (Chzhen et al., 2019; Hardt et al., 2016;
Woodworth et al., 2017; Kamiran et al., 2010). Finally, direct methods learn a fair and accurate classifier in a single
step (Kamishima et al., 2012; Zafar et al., 2017b;a; Calders
& Verwer, 2010; Wu et al., 2019; Donini et al., 2018; Cotter
et al., 2019; Agarwal et al., 2018; Goh et al., 2016). In this
paper, we focus on the latter kind of approaches.
Motivation: relaxations sometimes fail to produce fair
solutions. Recently, several direct methods have been proposed that use relaxed versions of the considered fairness
constraint. These approaches work reasonably well for some
applications. However, their relaxations are quite coarse and
we demonstrate below that they can fail to find fair classifiers. In particular, there is typically no guarantee on the
relationship between the relaxed fairness and the true fairness of a solution: a classifier that is perfectly fair in terms
of relaxed fairness can be highly unfair in terms of true
fairness (see Figure 1 for an illustration). In this paper, we
study the limitations of a number of popular approaches
(Zafar et al., 2017b;a; Wu et al., 2019; Donini et al., 2018).
Algorithmic contributions. We propose a new principled
framework to tackle the problem of fair classification that is
particularly relevant for application scenarios where formal
fairness guarantees are required. Our approach is based on
convex relaxations and comes with theoretical guarantees
that ensure that the learned classifier is fair up to sampling
errors. Furthermore, we use a learning theory framework for
similarity-based classifiers to exhibit sufficient conditions
that guarantee the existence of a fair and accurate classifier.

2. Problem Setting
Let X be a feature space, Y = {−1, 1} a space of binary
class labels, and S = {−1, 1} a space of binary sensitive
attributes. Assume that there exists a distribution DZ over
Z = X × S × Y and that we can draw some examples

