Stochastic Regret Minimization in Extensive-Form Games

Gabriele Farina 1 Christian Kroer 2 Tuomas Sandholm 1 3 4 5

Abstract
Monte-Carlo counterfactual regret minimization
(MCCFR) is the state-of-the-art algorithm for
solving sequential games that are too large for
full tree traversals. It works by using gradient estimates that can be computed via sampling. However, stochastic methods for sequential games
have not been investigated extensively beyond
MCCFR. In this paper we develop a new framework for developing stochastic regret minimization methods. This framework allows us to use
any regret-minimization algorithm, coupled with
any gradient estimator. The MCCFR algorithm
can be analyzed as a special case of our framework, and this analysis leads to significantly
stronger theoretical guarantees on convergence,
while simultaneously yielding a simplified proof.
Our framework allows us to instantiate several
new stochastic methods for solving sequential
games. We show extensive experiments on five
games, where some variants of our methods outperform MCCFR.

1. Introduction
Extensive-form games (EFGs) are a broad class of games
that can model sequential and simultaneous moves, outcome uncertainty, and imperfect information. This includes
real-world settings such as negotiation, sequential auctions,
security games (Lisý et al., 2016; Munoz de Cote et al.,
2013), cybersecurity games (DeBruhl et al., 2014; Chen
et al., 2018), recreational games such as poker (Sandholm,
2010) and billiards (Archibald & Shoham, 2009), and medical treatment (Chen & Bowling, 2012; Sandholm, 2015).
1

Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA 15213 2 IEOR Department, Columbia
University, New York NY 10027 3 Strategic Machine, Inc.
4
Strategy Robot, Inc. 5 Optimized Markets, Inc.. Correspondence to: Gabriele Farina <gfarina@cs.cmu.edu>, Christian
Kroer <christian.kroer@columbia.edu>, Tuomas Sandholm <sandholm@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Typically, EFG models are operationalized by computing
either a Nash equilibrium of the game, or an approximate
Nash equilibrium if the game is large. Approximate Nash
equilibrium of zero-sum EFGs has been the underlying idea
of several recent AI milestones, where strong AIs for twoplayer poker were created (Moravčík et al., 2017; Brown
& Sandholm, 2017b). In principle, a zero-sum EFG can be
solved in polynomial time using a linear program whose
size is linear in the size of the game tree (von Stengel, 1996).
However, for most real-world games this linear program
is much too large to solve, either because it does not fit in
memory, or because iterations of the simplex algorithm or
interior-point methods become prohibitively expensive due
to matrix inversion. Instead, first-order methods (Hoda et al.,
2010; Kroer et al., 2020) or regret-based methods (Zinkevich et al., 2007; Tammelin et al., 2015; Brown & Sandholm,
2019a) are used in practice. These methods work by only
keeping one or two strategies around for each player (typically the size of a strategy is much smaller than the size
of the game tree). The game tree is then only accessed for
computing gradients, which can be done via a single tree
traversal (which can often be done without storing the tree),
and sometimes game-specific structure can be exploited to
speed this up further (Johanson et al., 2011). Finally, these
gradients are used to update the strategy iterates.
However, for large games, even these gradient-based methods that require traversing the entire game tree are prohibitively expensive (henceforth referred to as deterministic methods). This was seen in two recent superhuman
poker AIs: Libratus (Brown & Sandholm, 2017b) and
Pluribus (Brown & Sandholm, 2019b). Both AIs were generated in a two-stage manner: an offline blueprint strategy was
computed, and then refinements to the blueprint solution
were computed online while actually playing against human opponents. The online solutions were computed using
deterministic methods (since those subgames are significantly smaller than the entire game). However, the original
blueprint strategies had to be computed without traversing
the entire game tree, as this game tree is far too large for
even a moderate amount of traversals.
When full tree traversals are too expensive, stochastic methods can be used to compute approximate gradients instead.
The most common stochastic method for solving large EFGs
is the Monte-Carlo Counterfactual Regret Minimization

