Margin-aware Adversarial Domain Adaptation with Optimal Transport

Sofien Dhouib 1 Ievgen Redko 2 Carole Lartizien 1

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new theoretical analysis of unsupervised domain adaptation (DA) that
relates notions of large margin separation, adversarial learning and optimal transport. This
analysis generalizes previous work on the subject by providing a bound on the target margin
violation rate, thus reflecting a better control of
the quality of separation between classes in the
target domain than bounding the misclassification
rate. The bound also highlights the benefit of a
large margin separation on the source domain for
adaptation and introduces an optimal transport
(OT) based distance between domains that has
the virtue of being task-dependent, contrary to
other approaches. From the obtained theoretical
results, we derive a novel algorithmic solution for
domain adaptation that introduces a novel shallow
OT-based adversarial approach and outperforms
other OT-based DA baselines on several simulated
and real-world classification tasks.

1. Introduction
Learning to classify elements of a data set is one of the
most widespread tasks in machine learning. Classically, it
is done after assuming that data used for testing and those
used for training a classification model stem from the same
probability distribution (Sen et al., 2020). However, such
an assumption is usually violated in real-world applications:
product reviews classification where the difference of product types change the words distributions (Blitzer et al., 2007)
or image classification where the variation of acquisition
methods and conditions between training and test data introduce non-negligible distribution shifts (Hutchison et al.,
1
Univ Lyon, INSA-Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1,
UJM-Saint Etienne, CNRS, Inserm, CREATIS UMR 5220, U1206,
F-69100, LYON, France 2 Univ Lyon, UJM-Saint-Etienne, CNRS,
Institut d Optique Graduate School Laboratoire Hubert Curien
UMR 5516, F-42023, Saint-Etienne, France. Correspondence to:
Sofien Dhouib <sofiane.dhouib@creatis.insa-lyon.fr>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

2010), to name a few. While manual labeling may be considered as a tractable solution, such an approach is time
consuming, can necessitate an often costly intervention of
experts for labeling (e.g in medical imaging applications)
and totally discards the information available on a different,
yet related, labeled training set. Such a setting has motivated the emergence of domain adaptation (Pan & Yang,
2010; Weiss et al., 2016), a branch of statistical learning
that takes the distribution shift into account, and in which
the test data is assumed to be partially or totally unlabeled.
In the literature, the training set and test set distributions are
respectively termed source and target domains. In this paper,
we focus on the challenging setting of unsupervised domain
adaptation (Margolis, 2011), were no labels are available
for the target data.
Since the inception of the domain adaptation field, several
theoretical contributions were proposed to analyze this problem in the statistical learning framework (Ben-David et al.,
2007b; Mansour et al., 2009; Cortes & Mohri, 2014; Germain et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2019). The general idea
behind any such analysis usually consists in bounding the
target domain error rate by a source error rate plus an estimable term reflecting a certain distance between domains,
called the alignment or divergence term, plus a non estimable term that is assumed to be small for adaptation to
be possible. To this end, the seminal work of (Ben-David
et al., 2007b) considered the bounds for 0-1 loss in binary
classification setting by introducing a divergence term that
takes into account the complexity of the hypothesis space.
Their results were further generalized for any loss function
verifying the triangle inequality in (Mansour et al., 2009)
and to a case when the hypothesis space is a RKHS in
(Cortes & Mohri, 2014; Cortes et al., 2019). A somewhat
different result was recently proposed (Zhang et al., 2019)
where the authors provided generalization bounds for DA
in the case of multi-class classification with source domain
error defined by the margin violation rate. Finally, several
DA bounds where proposed in (Redko et al., 2016; Courty
et al., 2017; Shen et al., 2017) for the specific case when
the considered alignment term is given by the Wasserstein
distance (Santambrogio, 2016).
At the algorithmic level, there have been a plethora of algorithms that deal with the unsupervised domain adaptation
problem, and they can be roughly divided to shallow (Kouw

