Latent Variable Modelling with Hyperbolic Normalizing Flows

Avishek Joey Bose 1 2 Ariella Smofsky 1 2 Renjie Liao 3 4 Prakash Panangaden 1 2 William L. Hamilton 1 2

Abstract
The choice of approximate posterior distributions
plays a central role in stochastic variational inference (SVI). One effective solution is the use of
normalizing flows to construct flexible posterior
distributions. However, a key limitation of existing normalizing flows is that they are restricted
to Euclidean space and are ill-equipped to model
data with an underlying hierarchical structure. To
address this fundamental limitation, we present
the first extension of normalizing flows to hyperbolic spaces. We first elevate normalizing flows
to hyperbolic spaces using coupling transforms
defined on the tangent bundle, termed Tangent
Coupling (T C). We further introduce Wrapped
Hyperboloid Coupling (WHC), a fully invertible
and learnable transformation that explicitly utilizes the geometric structure of hyperbolic spaces,
allowing for expressive posteriors while being efficient to sample from. We demonstrate the efficacy
of our novel normalizing flow over hyperbolic
VAEs and Euclidean normalizing flows. Our approach achieves improved performance on density
estimation, as well as reconstruction of real-world
graph data, which exhibit a hierarchical structure.
Finally, we show that our approach can be used to
power a generative model over hierarchical data
using hyperbolic latent variables.

1. Introduction
Stochastic variational inference (SVI) methods provide an
appealing way of scaling probabilistic modeling to large
scale data. These methods transform the problem of computing an intractable posterior distribution to finding the
best approximation within a class of tractable probability
distributions (Hoffman et al., 2013). Using tractable classes
of approximate distributions, e.g., mean-field, and Bethe
1

McGill University 2 Mila 3 University of Toronto 4 Vector Institute. Correspondence to: Joey Bose <joey.bose@mail.mcgill.ca>,
Ariella Smofsky <ariella.smofsky@mail.mcgill.ca>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

ℝ2

ℍ2K

ℝ2

ℙ2K

Figure 1. The shortest path between a given pair of node embeddings in R2 and hyperbolic space as modelled by the Lorentz
model H2K and Poincaré disk P2K . Unlike Euclidean space, distances between points grow exponentially as you move away from
the origin in hyperbolic space, and thus the shortest paths between
points in hyperbolic space go through a common parent node (i.e.,
the origin), giving rise to hierarchical and tree-like structure.

approximations, facilitates efficient inference, at the cost of
limiting the expressiveness of the learned posterior.
In recent years, the power of these SVI methods has been
further improved by employing normalizing flows, which
greatly increase the flexibility of the approximate posterior distribution. Normalizing flows involve learning a series of invertible transformations, which are used to transform a sample from a simple base distribution to a sample
from a richer distribution (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015).
Indeed, flow-based posteriors enjoy many advantages such
as efficient sampling, exact likelihood estimation, and lowvariance gradient estimates when the base distribution is
reparametrizable, making them ideal for modern machine
learning problems. There have been numerous advances in
normalizing flow construction in Euclidean spaces, such as
RealNVP (Dinh et al., 2017), B-NAF (Huang et al., 2018;
De Cao et al., 2019), and FFJORD (Grathwohl et al., 2018),
to name a few.
However, current normalizing flows are restricted to Euclidean space, and as a result, these approaches are illequipped to model data with an underlying hierarchical structure. Many real-world datasets—such as ontolo-

