Generalization Guarantees for Sparse Kernel Approximation
with Entropic Optimal Features
Liang Ding 1 Rui Tuo 1 Shahin Shahrampour 1

Abstract
Despite their success, kernel methods suffer from
a massive computational cost in practice. In this
paper, in lieu of commonly used kernel expansion with respect to N inputs, we develop a novel
optimal design maximizing the entropy among
kernel features. This procedure results in a kernel
expansion with respect to entropic optimal features (EOF), improving the data representation
dramatically due to features dissimilarity. Under
mild technical assumptions, our generalization
1
bound shows that with only O(N 4 ) features (disregarding logarithmic factors), we can p
achieve the
optimal statistical accuracy (i.e., O(1/ N )). The
salient feature of our design is its sparsity that significantly reduces the time and space costs. Our
numerical experiments on benchmark datasets verify the superiority of EOF over the state-of-the-art
in kernel approximation.

1. Introduction
Kernel methods are powerful tools in describing nonlinear
data models. However, despite their success in various
machine learning tasks, kernel methods always suffer from
scalability issues, especially when the learning task involves
matrix inversion (e.g., kernel ridge regression). This is
simply due to the fact that for a dataset of size N , the
inversion step requires O(N 3 ) time cost. To tackle this
problem, a great deal of research has been dedicated to the
approximation of kernels using low-rank surrogates (Smola
& Schökopf, 2000; Fine & Scheinberg, 2001; Rahimi &
Recht, 2008). By approximating the kernel, these methods
deal with a linear problem, potentially solvable in a linear
time with respect to N (see e.g. (Joachims, 2006) for linear
1
The authors are with Wm Michael Barnes ’64 Department of
Industrial and Systems Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA. Correspondence to: Shahin Shahrampour
<shahin@tamu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Support Vector Machines (SVM)).
In the approximation of kernel with a finite number of features, one fundamental question is how to select the features.
As an example, in supervised learning, we are interested
in identifying features that lead to low out-of-sample error.
This question has been studied in the context of random features, which is an elegant method for kernel approximation
(Rahimi & Recht, 2008). Most of the works in this area
improve the out-of-sample performance by modifying the
stochastic oracle from which random features are sampled
(Sinha & Duchi, 2016; Avron et al., 2017; Shahrampour
et al., 2018). Nevertheless, these methods deal with dense
feature matrices (due to randomness) and still require a large
number of features to learn the data subspace. Decreasing
the number of features directly affects the time and space
costs, and to achieve that, we must choose features that are
as distinct as possible (to better span the space). Focusing on
explicit features, we aim to achieve this goal in the current
work.
1.1. Our Contributions
In this paper, we study low-rank kernel approximation by
finding a set of mutually orthogonal features with nested
and compact supports. We first theoretically characterize a
condition (based on the Sturm-Liouville problem), which
allows us to obtain such features. Then, we propose a novel
optimal design method that maximizes the metric entropy
among those features. The problem is formulated as a combinatorial optimization with a constraint on the number of
features used for approximation. The optimization is generally NP-hard but yields closed-form solutions for specific
numbers of features. The algorithm, dubbed entropic optimal features (EOF), can use these features for supervised
learning. The construction properties of features (orthogonality, compact support, and nested support) result in a
sparse approximation saving dramatically on time and space
costs. We establish a generalization bound for EOF that
1
shows with only O(N 4 ) features (disregarding logarithmic
factors), we
p can achieve the optimal statistical accuracy
(i.e., O(1/ N )). Our numerical experiments on benchmark datasets verify the superiority of EOF over the stateof-the-art in kernel approximation. While we postpone the

