Goodness-of-Fit Tests for Inhomogeneous Random Graphs

Soham Dan 1 Bhaswar B. Bhattacharya 2

Abstract
Hypothesis testing of random networks is an
emerging area of modern research, especially in
the high-dimensional regime, where the number
of samples is smaller or comparable to the size of
the graph. In this paper we consider the goodnessof-fit testing problem for large inhomogeneous
random (IER) graphs, where given a (known) reference symmetric matrix Q ∈ [0, 1]n×n and m
independent samples from an IER graph given
by an unknown symmetric matrix P ∈ [0, 1]n×n ,
the goal is to test the hypothesis P = Q versus
||P − Q|| ≥ ε, where || · || is some specified norm
on symmetric matrices. Building on recent related
work on two-sample testing for IER graphs, we
derive the optimal minimax sample complexities
for the goodness-of-fit problem in various natural norms, such as the Frobenius norm and the
operator norm. We also propose practical implementations of natural test statistics, using their
asymptotic distributions and through the parametric bootstrap. We compare the performances of
the different tests in simulations, and show that
the proposed tests outperform the baseline tests
across various natural random graphs models.

1. Introduction
With the ubiquitous presence networks in bioinformatics and social sciences, developing statistical methods for
graph-valued data has become increasingly important. Although network analysis has been an area of active interest in statistics and machine learning, most classical approaches for graph testing are applicable in the relatively
low-dimensional setting, where the population size (number
of graphs) is larger than the size of the graphs (number of
1

Department of Computer and Information Science, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA, 2 Department of Statistics,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA. Correspondence
to: Soham Dan <sohamdan@seas.upenn.edu>, Bhaswar B. Bhattacharya <bhaswar@wharton.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

vertices). However, in the modern high-dimensional regime
[19] the number of samples m could be potentially much
smaller or comparable to the size of the graph n, for example, graphs may correspond to different sets of relations
constructed for a set of actors [16]. As a result, theoretical understanding for testing random graphs is an area of
emerging interesting. Most of the recent work has focussed
primarily on detecting planted communities or sparse structures in the network [3, 4, 22, 26], and testing for network
dependence [2, 8].
Here, we consider the problem of goodness-of-fit testing for
network data, which involves developing statistical tests for
assessing whether a given sample of networks fits a specified
model. This problem has found many applications recently,
for example, in assessing fit of protein-protein interaction
(PPI) networks [9, 27] and in functional neuroimaging data
[15]. In particular, Ospina-Forero et al. [27] developed a
non-parametric procedure for testing whether network models used as backgrounds in community detection of social
networks, such as the Erdős-Rényi model or the Chung-Lu
model [6], can also be used to describe the appearance of
subgraph counts in the Facebook networks in US universities. They also applied their method for assessing fit in PPI
networks, which arise in many biological studies, such as
the discovery of disease risk pathways and the investigation
of genes undergoing age expression changes. Another application is in functional neuro-imaging data [15], where the
vertices correspond to regions of interest in the brain, and an
edge between two regions indicates functional connectivity,
in the sense that the two regions interact together to achieve
some higher-order function. Here, Ginestet et al. [15] considered the problem of testing whether the Laplacian matrix
of the model generating a given sample of networks is equal
to a reference Laplacian matrix, based on the asymptotics of
the sample (Fréchet) mean, when the graph sizes are fixed
and the sample sizes grow to infinity. Other goodness-of-fit
tests for the β-model and the exponential random graph
model (ERGM) are discussed in [7] and [23], respectively.
In this paper, we propose theoretically optimal and computationally efficient methods for network goodness-of-fit
for inhomogeneous Erdős-Rényi (IER) random graph models. This is a general class of random graph model, which
includes several popular network models, such as the ChungLu model [6], the β-model [5], random dot product graphs

