From Chaos to Order: Symmetry and Conservation Laws in Game Dynamics

Sai Ganesh Nagarajan 1 David Balduzzi 2 Georgios Piliouras 1

Abstract
Games are an increasingly useful tool for training
and testing learning algorithms. Recent examples include GANs, AlphaZero and the AlphaStar
league. However, multi-agent learning can be extremely difficult to predict and control. Learning dynamics even in simple games can yield
chaotic behavior. In this paper, we present basic
mechanism design tools for constructing games
with predictable and controllable dynamics. We
show that arbitrarily large and complex network
games, encoding both cooperation (team play)
and competition (zero-sum interaction), exhibit
conservation laws when agents use the standard
regret-minimizing dynamics known as Followthe-Regularized-Leader. These laws persist when
different agents use different dynamics and encode long-range correlations between agents’ behavior, even though the agents may not interact
directly. Moreover, we provide sufficient conditions under which the dynamics have multiple, linearly independent, conservation laws. Increasing
the number of conservation laws results in more
predictable dynamics, eventually making chaotic
behavior formally impossible in some cases.

1. Introduction
Games have become a powerful training mechanism used
in learning how to generate photorealistic images (Goodfellow et al., 2014a), and also how to play Go, Chess and
StarCraft (Tesauro, 1995; Bansal et al., 2018; Silver et al.,
2017; Jaderberg et al., 2018; Vinyals et al., 2019). The underlying assumption behind this family of architectures is
that competition between learning algorithms forces them
to continually improve their performance. However, this
1

Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore 2 Google DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to: Sai
Ganesh Nagarajan <sai nagarajan@mymail.sutd.edu.sg>, David
Balduzzi <dbalduzzi@google.com>, Georgios Piliouras <georgios@sutd.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

assumption is not always valid in practice. Indeed, in numerous cases of multi-agent competition (or even cooperation) the resulting dynamics can be unpredictable or, even
worse, formally chaotic (Sato et al., 2002; Galla & Farmer,
2013; Piliouras & Shamma, 2014; Palaiopanos et al., 2017;
Chotibut et al., 2018). This raises our central problem: How
can we effectively control learning dynamics in games?
Naturally, this is an important and well studied problem.
The classic mechanism design approach to it works in two
steps. Step one, design a game with “good” equilibria.
Ideally a game where all its equilibria (or at least some
prominent set of equilibria) satisfy the desirable properties.
Step two, apply/design algorithms that provably converge
to these equilibria.
Although such approaches are powerful, they exhibit serious
limitations in practice. For example, Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014b) have been
designed to follow exactly this one-two step approach. Designed as a competitive game between two networks (a
generator and a discriminator), this setting has a particularly
desirable equilibrium. In this equilibrium, the generator
produces realistic images and the discriminator not being
able to discern real and generated images classifies the images as fake or real uniformly at random. Step one is thus
guaranteed. Unfortunately, step two is far from guaranteed.
Standard learning dynamics, such as gradient descent ascent,
do not converge to Nash equilibria even in toy zero-sum
games (e.g., Matching Pennies) (Mertikopoulos et al., 2018;
Bailey & Piliouras, 2018; Cheung & Piliouras, 2019). Even
if we design algorithms with provable guarantees in simple
zero-sum games (Daskalakis et al., 2018; Balduzzi et al.,
2018; Mertikopoulos et al., 2019; Gidel et al., 2019a;b),
there is no guarantee that they converge in the high dimensional network settings that we care about and even if they
do they may very well end up converging to artificial fixed
points (Daskalakis & Panageas, 2018; Adolphs et al., 2018;
Flokas et al., 2019).
Once we move from two agents to numerous agents then
whatever little structure we had to exploit goes away. For example, in networks of zero-sum games, the notion of a value
of an agent no longer exists, e.g., there may exist multiple
equilibria where the same agent strictly prefers one of them
(Cai et al., 2016). In the case of networks of coordination

