How to Train Your Neural ODE: the World of Jacobian and Kinetic
Regularization

Chris Finlay 1 Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen 2 Levon Nurbekyan 3 Adam M Oberman 1

Abstract
Training neural ODEs on large datasets has not
been tractable due to the necessity of allowing
the adaptive numerical ODE solver to refine its
step size to very small values. In practice this
leads to dynamics equivalent to many hundreds
or even thousands of layers. In this paper, we
overcome this apparent difficulty by introducing
a theoretically-grounded combination of both optimal transport and stability regularizations which
encourage neural ODEs to prefer simpler dynamics out of all the dynamics that solve a problem
well. Simpler dynamics lead to faster convergence and to fewer discretizations of the solver,
considerably decreasing wall-clock time without
loss in performance. Our approach allows us to
train neural ODE-based generative models to the
same performance as the unregularized dynamics,
with significant reductions in training time. This
brings neural ODEs closer to practical relevance
in large-scale applications.

1. Introduction
Recent research has bridged dynamical systems, a
workhorse of mathematical modeling, with neural networks,
the defacto function approximator for high dimensional data.
The great promise of this pairing is that the vast mathematical machinery stemming from dynamical systems can be
leveraged for modelling high dimensional problems in a
dimension-independent fashion.
Connections between neural networks and ordinary differential equations (ODEs) were almost immediately noted
after residual networks (He et al., 2016) were first proposed.
1

Department of Mathematics & Statistics, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada 2 Vector Institute, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 3 Department of Mathematics, UCLA, California, USA. Correspondence to: Chris Finlay
<christopher.finlay@mcgill.ca>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

(a) Optimal transport map

(b) generic flow

Figure 1. Optimal transport map and a generic normalizing flow.

Indeed, it was observed that there is a striking similarity
between ResNets and the numerical solution of ordinary
differential equations (E, 2017; Haber & Ruthotto, 2017;
Ruthotto & Haber, 2018; Chen et al., 2018; 2019). In these
works, deep networks are interpreted as discretizations of
an underlying dynamical system, where time indexes the
“depth” of the network and the parameters of the discretized
dynamics are learned. An alternate viewpoint was taken by
neural ODEs (Chen et al., 2018), where the dynamics of
the neural network are approximated by an adaptive ODE
solver on the fly. This latter approach is quite compelling
as it does not require specifying the number of layers of the
network beforehand. Furthermore, it allows the learning of
homeomorphisms without any structural constraints on the
function computed by the residual block.
Neural ODEs have shown great promise in the physical sciences (Köhler et al., 2019), in modeling irregular time series
(Rubanova et al., 2019), mean field games (Ruthotto et al.,
2019), continuous-time modeling (Yildiz et al., 2019; Kanaa
et al., 2019), and for generative modeling through normalizing flows with free-form Jacobians (Grathwohl et al., 2019).

