Multi-objective Bayesian Optimization using Pareto-frontier Entropy

Shinya Suzuki 1 Shion Takeno 1 2 Tomoyuki Tamura 3 4 Kazuki Shitara 5 6 Masayuki Karasuyama 1 4 7

Abstract
This paper studies an entropy-based multiobjective Bayesian optimization (MBO). Existing entropy-based MBO methods need complicated approximations to evaluate entropy or employ over-simplification that ignores trade-off
among objectives. We propose a novel entropybased MBO called Pareto-frontier entropy search
(PFES), which is based on the information gain
of Pareto-frontier. We show that our entropy
evaluation can be reduced to a closed form whose
computation is quite simple while capturing the
trade-off relation in Pareto-frontier. We further
propose an extension for the “decoupled” setting, in which each objective function can be observed separately, and show that the PFES-based
approach derives a natural extension of the original acquisition function which can also be evaluated simply. Our numerical experiments show effectiveness of PFES through several benchmark
datasets, and real-word datasets from materials
science.

1. Introduction
This paper studies the black-box optimization problem
with multiple objective functions. A variety of engineering
problems require optimally designing multiple utility evaluations. For example, in materials design of the lithium-ion
batteries, simultaneously maximizing ion-conductivity and
stability is required for practical use. This type of problems
1

Department of Computer Science, Nagoya Institute of Technology, Aichi, Japan 2 Center for Advanced Intelligence Project,
RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan 3 Department of Physical Science and Engineering, Nagoya Institute of Technology, Aichi, Japan 4 Center for
Materials Research by Information Integration, National Institute
for Material Science, Ibaraki, Japan 5 Joining and Welding Research Institute, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan 6 Nanostructures
Research Laboratory, Japan Fine Ceramics Center, Aichi, Japan
7
PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Saitama,
Japan. Correspondence to: Masayuki Karasuyama <karasuyama@nitech.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

can be formulated as jointly maximizing L unknown functions f 1 (x), . . . , f L (x) on some input domain X , which
is called a multi-objective optimization (MOO) problem.
MOO is often quite challenging because, typically, there
does not exist any single optimal option due to the tradeoff relation among different objectives. Further, as in the
case of the single-objective black-box optimization, obtaining observations of each objective function is often highly
expensive. For example, in the scientific experimental design such as synthesizing proteins, querying one observation can take more than a day. Since in MOO, the unique
optimal point cannot be determined usually, a common approach is to search a set of Pareto-optimal points. For
Pareto-optimal fx := (f 1 (x), . . . , f L (x))⊤ , there should
not exist an alternative fx′ that improves all the objectives
simultaneously, and Pareto-frontier F ∗ is defined as a set
of Pareto-optimal fx s (see Section 2 for the formal definition).
1.1. Related Work
The combination of scalarization and evolutionary computations have been quite popular (e.g., Knowles, 2006;
Zhang et al., 2010) for MOO problems. In particular,
ParEGO (Knowles, 2006) has been widely known for
its outstanding performance. The scalarization approach
transforms MOO into a single-objective problem by which
the Pareto-optimal solutions can be obtained under the certain regularity conditions. However, acquisition functions
for the transformed single-objective are expected to be suboptimal. Although recently, some studies (Paria et al.,
2018; Marban & Frazier, 2017) have explored extensions
of scalarization for identifying a specific subset of Paretofrontier, we focus on identifying the entire Pareto-frontier
in this paper.
Extending acquisition functions of usual Bayesian optimization (BO) has been a popular direction in MOO studies. An extension of standard expected improvement (EI)
considers increase of Pareto hyper-volume (Emmerich,
2005), which we call expected hyper-volume improvement
(EHI). Further, Shah & Ghahramani (2016) extended EHI
to correlated objectives. Although EI is a widely accepted
criterion, it measures the local utility only. Upper confidence bound (UCB) is another well-known acquisition
function for BO (Srinivas et al., 2010). SMSego (Pon-

