Simple and Deep Graph Convolutional Networks

Ming Chen 1 Zhewei Wei 2 3 4 Zengfeng Huang 5 Bolin Ding 6 Yaliang Li 6

Abstract
Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) are a powerful deep learning approach for graph-structured
data. Recently, GCNs and subsequent variants
have shown superior performance in various application areas on real-world datasets. Despite
their success, most of the current GCN models
are shallow, due to the over-smoothing problem.
In this paper, we study the problem of designing and analyzing deep graph convolutional networks. We propose the GCNII, an extension of
the vanilla GCN model with two simple yet effective techniques: Initial residual and Identity
mapping. We provide theoretical and empirical
evidence that the two techniques effectively relieves the problem of over-smoothing. Our experiments show that the deep GCNII model outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on various
semi- and full-supervised tasks.

1. Introduction
Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) (Kipf & Welling,
2017) generalize convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (LeCun et al., 1995) to graph-structured data. To learn the graph
representations, the “graph convolution” operation applies
the same linear transformation to all the neighbors of a node
followed by a nonlinear activation function. In recent years,
GCNs and their variants (Defferrard et al., 2016; Veličković
et al., 2018) have been successfully applied to a wide range
of applications, including social analysis (Qiu et al., 2018;
Li & Goldwasser, 2019), traffic prediction (Guo et al., 2019;
Li et al., 2019b), biology (Fout et al., 2017; Shang et al.,
2019), recommender systems (Ying et al., 2018), and computer vision (Zhao et al., 2019; Ma et al., 2019).
1
School of Information, Renmin University of China 2 Gaoling
School of Articial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
3
Beijing Key Lab of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
4
MOE Key Lab of Data Engineering and Knowledge Engineering 5 School of Data Science, Fudan University 6 Alibaba Group.
Correspondence to: Zhewei Wei <zhewei@ruc.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Despite their enormous success, most of the current GCN
models are shallow. Most of the recent models, such as
GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017) and GAT (Veličković et al.,
2018), achieve their best performance with 2-layer models.
Such shallow architectures limit their ability to extract information from high-order neighbors. However, stacking
more layers and adding non-linearity tends to degrade the
performance of these models. Such a phenomenon is called
over-smoothing (Li et al., 2018b), which suggests that as
the number of layers increases, the representations of the
nodes in GCN are inclined to converge to a certain value
and thus become indistinguishable. ResNet (He et al., 2016)
solves a similar problem in computer vision with residual
connections, which is effective for training very deep neural
networks. Unfortunately, adding residual connections in
the GCN models merely slows down the over-smoothing
problem (Kipf & Welling, 2017); deep GCN models are still
outperformed by 2-layer models such as GCN or GAT.
Recently, several works try to tackle the problem of oversmoothing. JKNet (Xu et al., 2018) uses dense skip connections to combine the output of each layer to preserve
the locality of the node representations. Recently, DropEdge (Rong et al., 2020) suggests that by randomly removing
out a few edges from the input graph, one can relieve the
impact of over-smoothing. Experiments (Rong et al., 2020)
suggest that the two methods can slow down the performance drop as we increase the network depth. However,
for semi-supervised tasks, the state-of-the-art results are
still achieved by the shallow models, and thus the benefit
brought by increasing the network depth remains in doubt.
On the other hand, several methods combine deep propagation with shallow neural networks. SGC (Wu et al.,
2019) attempts to capture higher-order information in the
graph by applying the K-th power of the graph convolution matrix in a single neural network layer. PPNP and
APPNP (Klicpera et al., 2019a) replace the power of the
graph convolution matrix with the Personalized PageRank
matrix to solve the over-smoothing problem. GDC (Klicpera
et al., 2019b) further extends APPNP by generalizing Personalized PageRank (Page et al., 1999) to an arbitrary graph
diffusion process. However, these methods perform a linear
combination of neighbor features in each layer and lose the
powerful expression ability of deep nonlinear architectures,
which means they are still shallow models.

