Coresets for Data-efficient Training of Machine Learning Models
Baharan Mirzasoleiman 1 Jeff Bilmes 2 Jure Leskovec 3

Abstract
Incremental gradient (IG) methods, such as
stochastic gradient descent and its variants are
commonly used for large scale optimization in
machine learning. Despite the sustained effort to
make IG methods more data-efficient, it remains
an open question how to select a training data subset that can theoretically and practically perform
on par with the full dataset. Here we develop
CRAIG, a method to select a weighted subset (or
coreset) of training data that closely estimates the
full gradient by maximizing a submodular function. We prove that applying IG to this subset is
guaranteed to converge to the (near)optimal solution with the same convergence rate as that of
IG for convex optimization. As a result, CRAIG
achieves a speedup that is inversely proportional
to the size of the subset. To our knowledge, this is
the first rigorous method for data-efficient training
of general machine learning models. Our extensive set of experiments show that CRAIG, while
achieving practically the same solution, speeds up
various IG methods by up to 6x for logistic regression and 3x for training deep neural networks.

1. Introduction
Mathematical optimization lies at the core of training largescale machine learning systems, and is now widely used over
massive data sets with great practical success, assuming sufficient data resources are available. Achieving this success,
however, also requires large amounts of (often GPU) computing, as well as concomitant financial expenditures and
energy usage (Strubell et al., 2019). Significantly decreasing
these costs without decreasing the learnt system’s resulting
accuracy is one of the grand challenges of machine learning
1

Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Los Angeles, USA 2 Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, USA 3 Department of Computer
Science, Stanford University, Stanford, USA. Correspondence to:
Baharan Mirzasoleiman <baharan@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

and artificial intelligence today (Asi & Duchi, 2019).
Training machine learning models often reduces to optimizing a regularized empirical risk function. Given a convex
loss l, and a µ-strongly convex regularizer r, one aims to
find model parameter vector w⇤ over the parameter space
W that minimizes the loss f over the training data V :
X
w⇤ 2 arg minw2W f (w), f (w) :=
fi (w) + r(w),
i2V

fi (w) = l(w, (xi , yi )),

(1)

where V = {1, . . . , n} is an index set of the training data,
and functions fi : Rd ! R are associated with training
examples (xi , yi ), where xi 2 Rd is the feature vector, and
yi is the point i’s label.
Standard Gradient Descent can find the minimizer of this
problem, but requires repeated computations of the full gradient rf (w)—sum of the gradients over all training data
points/functions i—and is therefore prohibitive for massive
data sets. This issue is further exacerbated in case of deep
neural networks where gradient computations (backpropagation) are expensive. Incremental Gradient (IG) methods,
such as Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) and its accelerated variants, including SGD with momentum (Qian, 1999),
Adagrad (Duchi et al., 2011), Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014),
SAGA (Defazio et al., 2014), and SVRG (Johnson & Zhang,
2013) iteratively estimate the gradient on random subsets/batches of training data. While this provides an unbiased estimate of the full gradient, the randomized batches introduce
variance in the gradient estimate (Hofmann et al., 2015), and
therefore stochastic gradient methods are in general slow
to converge (Johnson & Zhang, 2013; Defazio et al., 2014).
The majority of the work speeding up IG methods has thus
primarily focused on reducing the variance of the gradient
estimate (SAGA (Defazio et al., 2014), SVRG (Johnson &
Zhang, 2013), Katysha (Allen-Zhu, 2017)) or more carefully
selecting the gradient stepsize (Adagrad (Duchi et al., 2011),
Adadelta (Zeiler, 2012), Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014)).
However, the direction that remains largely unexplored is
how to carefully select a small subset S ✓ V of the full
training data V , so that the model is trained only on the
subset S while still (approximately) converging to the globally optimal solution (i.e., the model parameters that would
be obtained if training/optimizing on the full V ). If such

