An EM Approach to Non-autoregressive Conditional Sequence Generation

Zhiqing Sun 1 Yiming Yang 1

Abstract

conditional probability of y given x is factorized as:
0

Autoregressive (AR) models have been the dominating approach to conditional sequence generation, but are suffering from the issue of high inference latency. Non-autoregressive (NAR) models
have been recently proposed to reduce the latency
by generating all output tokens in parallel but
could only achieve inferior accuracy compared to
their autoregressive counterparts, primarily due to
a difficulty in dealing with the multi-modality in
sequence generation. This paper proposes a new
approach that jointly optimizes both AR and NAR
models in a unified Expectation-Maximization
(EM) framework. In the E-step, an AR model
learns to approximate the regularized posterior of
the NAR model. In the M-step, the NAR model
is updated on the new posterior and selects the
training examples for the next AR model. This
iterative process can effectively guide the system
to remove the multi-modality in the output sequences. To our knowledge, this is the first EM
approach to NAR sequence generation. We evaluate our method on the task of machine translation.
Experimental results on benchmark data sets show
that the proposed approach achieves competitive,
if not better, performance with existing NAR models and significantly reduces the inference latency.

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art conditional sequence generation models (Bahdanau et al., 2014; Gehring et al., 2017; Vaswani
et al., 2017) typically rely on an AutoRegressive (AR) factorization scheme to produce the output sequences. Denoting
by x = (x1 , . . . , xT ) an input sequence of length T , and
by y = (y1 , . . . , yT 0 ) a target sequence of length T 0 , the
1
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA. Correspondence to: Zhiqing Sun <zhiqings@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

pAR (y|x) =

T
Y

p(yi |x, y1 , y2 , . . . , yi−1 ).

(1)

i=1

As such a sequential factorization cannot take the full advantage of parallel computing, it yields high inference latency
as a limitation.
Recently, Non-AutoRegressive (NAR) sequence models (Gu
et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2018) are proposed to tackle the
problem of inference latency, by removing the sequential
dependencies among the output tokens as:
N AR

p

0

(y|x) = p(T |x)

0
T
Y

p(yi |x, T 0 ).

(2)

i=1

This formulation allows each token to be decoded in parallel
and hence brings a significant reduction of the inference
latency. However, NAR models also suffer from the conditional independence assumption among the output tokens,
and usually do not perform as well as their AR counterparts.
Such a performance gap is particularly evident when the output distributions exhibit a multi-modality phenomenon (Gu
et al., 2017). which means that the input sequence can
be mapped to multiple correct output sequences. Such a
multi-modal output distribution cannot be represented as the
product of conditionally independent distributions for each
position in NAR models (See 3.2 for a detailed discussion).
How to overcome the multi-modality issue has been a central focus in recent efforts for improving NAR models. A
standard approach is to use sequence-level knowledge distillation (Hinton et al., 2015; Kim & Rush, 2016), which
means to replace the target part y of each training instance
(x, y) with the system-predicted ŷ from a pre-trained AR
model (a.k.a. the ”teacher model”). Such a replacement
strategy removes the one-to-many mappings from the original dataset. The justification for doing so is that in practice
we do not really need the sequence generation models to
mimic a diverse output distribution for sequence generation
tasks such as machine translation1 and text summarization.
Such a knowledge distillation strategy has shown to be effective for improving the performance of NAR models in
1
For example, Google Translate only provide one translation
for the input text.

