Small-GAN: Speeding up GAN Training using Core-Sets

Samarth Sinha 1 Han Zhang 2 Anirudh Goyal 3 Yoshua Bengio 3 Hugo Larochelle 2 3 Augustus Odena 2

Abstract
Recent work by Brock et al. (2018) suggests
that Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
benefit disproportionately from large mini-batch
sizes. Unfortunately, using large batches is slow
and expensive on conventional hardware. Thus,
it would be nice if we could generate batches
that were effectively large though actually small.
In this work, we propose a method to do this,
inspired by the use of Coreset-selection in active learning. When training a GAN, we draw
a large batch of samples from the prior and then
compress that batch using Coreset-selection. To
create effectively large batches of ‘real’ images,
we create a cached dataset of Inception activations of each training image, randomly project
them down to a smaller dimension, and then
use Coreset-selection on those projected activations at training time. We conduct experiments
showing that this technique substantially reduces
training time and memory usage for modern
GAN variants, that it reduces the fraction of
dropped modes in a synthetic dataset, and that
it allows GANs to reach a new state of the art in
anomaly detection.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al., 2014) have become a popular research topic. Arguably the most impressive results have been in image
synthesis (Brock et al., 2018; Salimans et al., 2018; Miyato et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018; 2017), but they have
also been applied fruitfully to text generation (Fedus et al.,
2018; Guo et al., 2018), domain transfer learning (Zhu
et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2017; Isola et al., 2017), and various other tasks (Xian et al., 2018; Ledig et al., 2017; Zhu
& Bento, 2017).
1

University of Toronto, Vector Institute 2 Google Brain 3 Mila,
Universite de Montreal. Correspondence to: Samarth Sinha
<samarth.sinha@mail.utoronto.ca>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

Recently, Brock et al. (2018) substantially improved the
results of Zhang et al. (2018) by using very large minibatches during training. The effect of large mini-batches
in the context of deep learning is well-studied (Smith et al.,
2017; Goyal et al., 2017; Keskar et al., 2016; Shallue et al.,
2018) and general consensus is that they can be helpful in
many circumstances, but the results of Brock et al. (2018)
suggest that GANs benefit disproportionately from large
batches. In fact, Table 1 of Brock et al. (2018) shows that
for the Frechet Inception Distance (FID) metric (Heusel
et al., 2017) on the ImageNet dataset, scores can be improved from 18.65 to 12.39 simply by making the batch
eight times larger.
Unfortunately, increasing the batch size in this way is not
always possible, since it increases the computational resources required to train these models – often beyond the
reach of conventional hardware. The experiments from the
BigGAN paper require a full ‘TPU Pod’. The ‘unofficial’
open source release of BigGAN works around this by accumulating gradients across 8 different V100 GPUs and only
performing a gradient update on the parameters, every 8
gradient accumulation steps. It’s important to note that doing this type of gradient accumulation is (due to the parallel nature of modern computing hardware) essentially 8
times slower than training on TPUs. Thus, while gradient check-pointing will technically allow you to train these
large models on conventional hardware, it’s far from an
ideal solution.
Future research on GANs would be much easier if we could
have the gains from large batches without such pain points.
In this paper, we take steps toward accomplishing that goal
by proposing a technique that allows for mimicking large
batches without the computational costs of actually using
large batches.
In this work, we use Core-set selection (Agarwal et al.,
2005) to sub-sample a large batch to produce a smaller
batch. The large batches are then discarded, and the subsampled, smaller, batches are used to train the GAN. Informally, this procedure yields small batches with ‘coverage’
similar to that of the large batch – in particular the small
batch tries to ‘cover’ all the same modes as are covered in
the large batch. This technique yields many of the benefits of having large batches with much less computational

