SimGANs: Simulator-Based Generative Adversarial Networks
for ECG Synthesis to Improve Deep ECG Classification

Tomer Golany 1 Daniel Freedman 2 Kira Radinsky 1

Abstract
Generating training examples for supervised tasks
is a long sought after goal in AI. We study
the problem of heart signal electrocardiogram
(ECG) synthesis for improved heartbeat classification. ECG synthesis is challenging: the generation of training examples for such biologicalphysiological systems is not straightforward, due
to their dynamic nature in which the various parts
of the system interact in complex ways. However,
an understanding of these dynamics has been developed for years in the form of mathematical
process simulators. We study how to incorporate this knowledge into the generative process by
leveraging a biological simulator for the task of
ECG classification. Specifically, we use a system
of ordinary differential equations (ODE) representing heart dynamics, and incorporate this ODE
system into the optimization process of a generative adversarial network to create biologically
plausible ECG training examples. We perform
empirical evaluation and show that heart simulation knowledge during the generation process
improves ECG classification.

1. Introduction
In the early days of AI research, it was claimed that “the
power of an intelligent program to perform its task well
depends primarily on the quantity and quality of knowledge
it has about that task” (Buchanan & Feigenbaum, 1982).
Indeed, in the last two decades it has been shown repeatedly that access to the wealth of knowledge possessed by
humans significantly improves machine learning algorithms
1

Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Tomer Golany
<tomer.golany@cs.technion.ac.il>, Kira Radinsky <kirar@cs.technion.ac.il>,
Daniel Freedman <danielfreedman@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

on various tasks (Gabrilovich & Markovitch, 2009; Zhang
et al., 2016). Knowledge has been introduced into machinelearning algorithms in a host of different ways: by enriching
the features (Gabrilovich & Markovitch, 2009), by reducing
the labeling work (Mintz et al., 2009), and by encoding conditional dependencies (Wainwright & Jordan, 2008). However, it is less straightforward to introduce prior knowledge
about biological and physiological systems. This is at least
partially due to the fact that the complexity of biological
systems stems from their dynamic nature. Each part of the
system interacts and behaves collectively to produce distinct
physiologic states and functionality. To fully understand
the system, one needs to model its dynamics. Consider the
problem of detecting cardiac abnormalities from an electrocardiogram (ECG) which measures the electrical activity
generated by the heart. In recent years, deep learning algorithms have been applied for the problem, yielding state-ofthe-art results (Kachuee et al., 2018; Al Rahhal et al., 2016).
While the performance of such algorithms is quite promising, they are purely data-driven; they do not make use of the
fact that at a fundamental level the interpretation of an ECG
signal involves the understanding of the electrical conduction system of the heart. Intuitively, it seems reasonable that
knowledge about the physics of the heart’s electrical and
mechanical activity might improve the performance of deep
learning models. This knowledge has been developed for
years in the form of mathematical process simulators. The
challenge then becomes how to incorporate this knowledge
into machine learning models. In this work we tackle this
challenge directly, and propose a technique which allows
us to leverage a biological simulator for the task of ECG
heartbeat classification.
A simulator is a model of a phenomenon or a process created by a researcher to imitate the operation of a process
or system (Banks et al., 2000). Simulation is often used
to model natural systems to better understand their behavior. By changing variables in the simulation, one can make
predictions about the behavior of the system over time. Simulators have been developed in a variety of fields, including chemistry, biology, and physics. Developing such a
model requires deep understanding of how the system is
constructed and operates. For example, a heart simulator
requires understanding of the heart mechanics and anatomy.

