Efficient Intervention Design for Causal Discovery with Latents
Raghavendra Addanki 1 Shiva Prasad Kasiviswanathan 2 Andrew McGregor 1 Cameron Musco 1

Abstract
We consider recovering a causal graph in presence
of latent variables, where we seek to minimize the
cost of interventions used in the recovery process.
We consider two intervention cost models: (1) a
linear cost model where the cost of an intervention on a subset of variables has a linear form,
and (2) an identity cost model where the cost of
an intervention is the same, regardless of what
variables it is on, i.e., the goal is just to minimize
the number of interventions. Under the linear cost
model, we give an algorithm to identify the ancestral relations of the underlying causal graph,
achieving within a 2-factor of the optimal intervention cost. This approximation factor can be
improved to 1 + ✏ for any ✏ > 0 under some mild
restrictions. Under the identity cost model, we
bound the number of interventions needed to recover the entire causal graph, including the latent
variables, using a parameterization of the causal
graph through a special type of colliders. In particular, we introduce the notion of p-colliders, that
are colliders between pair of nodes arising from a
specific type of conditioning in the causal graph,
and provide an upper bound on the number of
interventions as a function of the maximum number of p-colliders between any two nodes in the
causal graph.

1. Introduction
Causality has long been a key tool in studying and analyzing various behaviors in fields such as genetics, psychology,
and economics [Pearl, 2009]. Causality also plays a pivotal
role in helping us build systems that can understand the
1
College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, USA. 2 Amazon. Correspondence to: Raghavendra Addanki <raddanki@cs.umass.edu>,
Shiva Prasad Kasiviswanathan <kasivisw@gmail.com>, Andrew McGregor <mcgregor@cs.umass.edu>, Cameron Musco
<cmusco@cs.umass.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

world around us, and in turn, in helping us understand the
behavior of machine learning systems deployed in the real
world. Although the theory of causality has been around for
more than three decades, for these reasons it has received
increasing attention in recent years. In this paper, we study
one of the fundamental problems of causality: causal discovery. In causal discovery, we want to learn all the causal
relations existing between variables (nodes of the causal
graph) of our system. It has been shown that, under certain
assumptions, observational data alone only lets us recover
the existence of a causal relationship between two variables,
but not the direction of all relationships. To recover the
directions of causal edges, we use the notion of an intervention described in the Structural Causal Models (SCM)
framework introduced by Pearl [2009].
An intervention requires us to fix a subset of variables to a
set of values, inducing a new distribution on the free variables. Such a system manipulation is generally expensive
and thus there has been significant interest in trying to minimize the number of interventions and their cost in causal
discovery. In a general cost model, intervening on any subset of variables has a cost associated with it, and the goal is
to identify all causal relationships and their directions while
minimizing the total cost of interventions applied. This captures the fact that some interventions are more expensive
than others. For example, in a medical study, intervening
on certain variables might be impractical or unethical. In
this work, we study two simplifications of this general cost
model. In the linear cost model, each variable has an intervention cost, and the cost of an intervention on a subset of
variables is the sum of costs for each variable in the set [Kocaoglu et al., 2017a; Lindgren et al., 2018]. In the identity
cost model, every intervention has the same cost, regardless
of what variables it contains and therefore minimizing the
intervention cost is the same as minimizing the number of
interventions [Kocaoglu et al., 2017b].
As is standard in the causality literature, we assume that
our causal relationship graph satisfies the causal Markov
condition and faithfulness [Spirtes et al., 2000b]. We assume that faithfulness holds both in the observational and
interventional distributions following [Hauser & Bühlmann,
2014]. As is common, we also assume that we are given
access to an oracle that can check if two variables are independent, conditioned on a subset of variables. We discuss

