Adaptive Droplet Routing in Digital Microfluidic Biochips Using
Deep Reinforcement Learning
Tung-Che Liang 1 Zhanwei Zhong 1 Yaas Bigdeli 1 Tsung-Yi Ho 2 Krishnendu Chakrabarty 1 Richard Fair 1

Abstract
We present and investigate a novel application
domain for deep reinforcement learning (RL):
droplet routing on digital microfluidic biochips
(DMFBs). A DMFB, composed of a twodimensional electrode array, manipulates discrete
fluid droplets to automatically execute biochemical protocols such as point-of-care clinical diagnosis. However, a major concern associated with
the use of DMFBs is that electrodes in a biochip
can degrade over time. Droplet-transportation operations associated with the degraded electrodes
can fail, thereby compromising the integrity of the
bioassay outcome. We show that casting droplet
transportation as an RL problem enables the training of deep network policies to capture the underlying health conditions of electrodes and provide
reliable fluidic operations. We propose a new RLbased droplet-routing flow that can be used for
various sizes of DMFBs, and demonstrate reliable
execution of an epigenetic bioassay with the RL
droplet router on a fabricated DMFB. To facilitate
further research, we also present a simulation environment based on the OpenAI Gym Interface for
RL-guided droplet-routing problems on DMFBs.

1. Introduction
There has been rapid progress in recent years on using deep
neural networks trained by reinforcement learning (RL).
These systems have outperformed humans in games (Mnih
et al., 2013; Silver et al., 2017), and they have also shown
tremendous promise in robotics (Gu et al., 2017) and natural
language processing (He et al., 2016; Narasimhan et al.,
2015). This is because RL-guided systems that are cast in
dynamic environments can learn from previous experience
and improve their reaction to the environment. In this paper, we show that since the electrode condition of a digital
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke
University, Durham, NC, USA 2 Department of Computer Science,
National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. Correspondence
to: Tung-Che Liang <tung.che.liang@duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

microfluidic biochip (DMFB) dynamically changes over
time, we can exploit advances in RL to ensure more reliable
droplet transportation in DMFBs.
1.1. Digital Microfluidic Biochips
A digital microfluidic biochip (DMFB) is composed of a
two-dimensional electrode array that manipulates discrete
fluid droplets. When driven by a sequence of control voltages, the electrode array can perform fluidic operations, such
as dispensing, mixing, and splitting (Choi et al., 2012; Ho
et al., 2010). Because of the precise control over microfluidic operations, DMFBs are employed in lab-on-a-chip systems for high-throughput DNA sequencing and point-ofcare clinical diagnosis (Myers & Lee, 2008; Liu et al., 2013;
Lehotay & Cook, 2015; Perut et al., 2016). Figure 1(a)
shows a DMFB, where two droplets are present on a patterned electrode array.
DMFBs manipulate nanoliter droplets using the principle of
electrowetting-on-dielectric (EWOD) (Pollack et al., 2000).
EWOD refers to the modulation of the interfacial tension
between a conductive fluid and a solid electrode coated with
a dielectric layer by applying an electric field between them.
As shown in Figure 1(b), an imbalance of interfacial tension
is created if an electric field is applied to only one side of the
droplet; this interfacial tension gradient forces the droplet
to move toward to the right.
Illumina, a market leader in DNA sequencing, transitioned
digital microfluidics to the marketplace for sample preparation in 2015 through NeoPrep—a ∼ $40K instrument to
automate the preparation of up to 16 sequencing libraries
at a time (Illumina, 2015). This technology has also been
deployed by Genmark for infectious disease testing (Pierce
& Hodinka, 2012) and by Baebies to detect lysosomal storage diseases in newborns (Hopkins et al., 2015). These
commercialization success stories highlight the emergence
of DMFB technology in the marketplace.
However, reliability is still a critical concern in DMFB systems. Illumina announced in February 2017 that it is immediately halting sales of NeoPrep. In its letter to customers,
Illumina cited reliability issues in-house and far worse ones
in the field. While biochips are tested immediately after
production to ensure biochip integrity, biochip defects, such
as electrode degradation, can occur throughout the lifetime

