Learning Algebraic Multigrid Using Graph Neural Networks

Ilay Luz 1 Meirav Galun 1 Haggai Maron 2 Ronen Basri 1 Irad Yavneh 3

Abstract
Efficient numerical solvers for sparse linear systems are crucial in science and engineering.
One of the fastest methods for solving largescale sparse linear systems is algebraic multigrid
(AMG). The main challenge in the construction
of AMG algorithms is the selection of the prolongation operator—a problem-dependent sparse
matrix which governs the multiscale hierarchy of
the solver and is critical to its efficiency. Over
many years, numerous methods have been developed for this task, and yet there is no known
single right answer except in very special cases.
Here we propose a framework for learning AMG
prolongation operators for linear systems with
sparse symmetric positive (semi-) definite matrices. We train a single graph neural network to
learn a mapping from an entire class of such matrices to prolongation operators, using an efficient
unsupervised loss function. Experiments on a
broad class of problems demonstrate improved
convergence rates compared to classical AMG,
demonstrating the potential utility of neural networks for developing sparse system solvers.

1. Introduction
Algebraic multigrid (AMG) is a well-developed efficient
numerical approach for solving large ill-conditioned sparse
linear systems and eigenproblems. Introduced in the
1980’s (Brandt et al., 1984; Ruge, 1983; Ruge & Stüben,
1987), AMG and its many variants have been applied to
diverse problems, including partial differential equations
(PDEs), sparse Markov chains, and problems involving
graph Laplacians, (e.g., Brezina et al. (2000); Henson &
Vassilevski (2001); Heys et al. (2005); Stüben (2001); Horton & Leutenegger (1994); Virnik (2007); H. De Sterck et al.
(2008; 2010); Treister & Yavneh (2010); Livne & Brandt
1

Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel. 2 NVIDIA
Research 3 Technion, Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.
Correspondence to: Ilay Luz <ilayluz@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

(2013); Napov & Notay (2016); Fox & Manteuffel (2018)).
While AMG is mathematically well grounded, its application involves the selection of problem-dependent parameters
and heuristics, requiring expert knowledge and experience.
Machine learning may therefore offer effective tools for
developing efficient AMG algorithms.
AMG is a multi-level iterative method for linear systems,
Ax = b,

(1)

where A ∈ Rn×n is a sparse matrix and x, b ∈ Rn , with x
the unknown solution vector. Given an initial approximate
solution x0 ∈ Rn , the (k + 1)st iteration of AMG proceeds
as follows, with details provided in Section 3. Given the
kth iteration, x(k) , a few steps of a simple iterative solver
(typically Gauss-Seidel relaxation) are applied, followed by
the construction of a smaller linear system for the error at a
“coarser scale”. This is done by selecting a subset of nc < n
“representative” variables (called the coarse variables), and
constructing a prolongation operator P ∈ Rn×nc relating
the coarse variables in Rnc to the variables in Rn . This
smaller problem is treated recursively, by applying relaxation and appealing to a still coarser representation, and so
on. Using P , the resulting solution is then “prolongated”
back to the fine level to update the approximate solution,
and a few additional relaxation sweeps are applied, yielding x(k+1) . Note that the AMG procedure is analogous to
the classical geometric multigrid algorithm (GMG) (Brandt,
1977; Briggs et al., 2000; Trottenberg et al., 2001), but unlike GMG (and other common multilevel algorithms) the
variables need not lie on a regular grid or even be associated
with a metric space.
The AMG procedure involves two critical heuristics which
are applied at each level of the recursion, selection of coarse
variables and construction of the prolongation matrix. Here
we will use machine learning to address the latter heuristic. The choice of prolongation matrix P critically depends on A, and it strongly influences the efficiency of the
AMG algorithm. After decades of research which yielded
numerous theoretical insights and practical developments,
there is still no single recipe for constructing prolongation
operators that are optimal for a given class of problems.
This paper proposes a framework for learning maps from
entire classes of sparse symmetric positive definite and
semidefinite (SPD/SPSD) matrices to prolongation opera-

