Nested Subspace Arrangement for Representation of Relational Data

Nozomi Hata * 1 Shizuo Kaji * 2 Akihiro Yoshida 1 Katsuki Fujisawa 2

Abstract
Studies on acquiring appropriate continuous representations of discrete objects, such as graphs
and knowledge base data, have been conducted
by many researchers in the field of machine learning. In this study, we introduce Nested SubSpace
(NSS) arrangement, a comprehensive framework
for representation learning. We show that existing
embedding techniques can be regarded as special cases of the NSS arrangement. Based on the
concept of the NSS arrangement, we implement a
Disk-ANChor ARrangement (DANCAR), a representation learning method specialized to reproducing general graphs. Numerical experiments have
shown that DANCAR has successfully embedded
WordNet in R20 with an F1 score of 0.993 in the
reconstruction task. DANCAR is also suitable for
visualization in understanding the characteristics
of graphs.

1. Introduction
Studies on acquiring the appropriate continuous representation of discrete objects have been closely associated with
machine learning. These studies aim to obtain the lowdimensional vector representations of the objects by preserving their characteristics. Recent algorithms of representation learning have broad applications, such as preprocessing in machine learning or visualization. As discrete
objects, graphs, knowledge bases, and social networks are
the primary research targets in these fields.
By representation, we mean the following: let V be a set of
objects with a certain discrete structure. An embedding or a
representation of V is a mapping Ψ : V → X , where X is a
space parametrized by real vectors. Through Ψ, the set V
can be equipped with various structures of X such as addi*
Equal contribution 1 Graduate School of Mathematics, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan 2 Institute of Mathematics for Industry,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. Correspondence to: Nozomi
Hata <n.hata@kyudai.jp>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

tion, multiplication, differentiation, metric, and topology so
that various operations, analysis, optimization techniques
become available to deal with the elements of V. Representation has served as a fundamental building block for various
algorithms such as classification, clustering, information
retrieval, link prediction, and visualization.
Below, we review some existing works according to the
type of V and X , categorized in Table 1. The most classical
and fundamental case is when V is the set of (non-directed,
simple) graphs, and X is point clouds in a Euclidean space
Rk , where vertices of a graph are mapped as points in Rk .
Existing works in this direction include matrix factorization
models (Chung, 1997; Cao et al., 2015; Ou et al., 2016;
Singh & Gordon, 2008; Cox & Cox, 2000; Balasubramanian
& Schwartz, 2002), random walk based models (Grover &
Leskovec, 2016; Perozzi et al., 2014; Dong et al., 2017;
Pan et al., 2016; Yanardag & Vishwanathan, 2015), and
others (Kipf & Welling, 2016; Wang et al., 2016; Chami
et al., 2019; Khasanova & Frossard, 2017; Li et al., 2016;
Duvenaud et al., 2015; Monti et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2018).
A common problem with these methods is the determination
of the embedding dimension k. If it is too small, the embedding does not preserve structures of V. To achieve a high
fidelity embedding, using point clouds in the Poincaré disk
as the target space X was proposed (Nickel & Kiela, 2017).
In particular, they succeeded in obtaining a low-dimensional
representation of tree-like graphs.
In search of representations of more general graphs, the
Disk Embedding (Suzuki et al., 2019) was proposed to deal
with directed acyclic graphs (DAGs). Their idea is to use
as X the set of disks (balls) in a metric space such as a
Euclidean space, a spherical space, or a hyperbolic space.
This approach generalizes existing works for embedding
DAGs such as the Order Embedding (Vendrov et al., 2016)
and the Hyperbolic Entailment Cones (Ganea et al., 2018).
The key idea of the Disk Embedding is to represent an edge
of a graph by an inclusion relation between two disks, which
leads to a successful embedding for DAGs.
Moreover, some embedding algorithms for hypergraphs
have been recently proposed (Feng et al., 2019; Tu et al.,
2018; Yang et al., 2019).
Other than graphs, knowledge bases have also been inten-

