Learning Representations that Support Extrapolation

Taylor W. Webb 1 Zachary Dulberg 2 Steven M. Frankland 2 Alexander A. Petrov 3 Randall C. O’Reilly 4
Jonathan D. Cohen 2

Abstract
Extrapolation – the ability to make inferences that
go beyond the scope of one’s experiences – is a
hallmark of human intelligence. By contrast, the
generalization exhibited by contemporary neural
network algorithms is largely limited to interpolation between data points in their training corpora.
In this paper, we consider the challenge of learning representations that support extrapolation. We
introduce a novel visual analogy benchmark that
allows the graded evaluation of extrapolation as
a function of distance from the convex domain
defined by the training data. We also introduce
a simple technique, temporal context normalization, that encourages representations that emphasize the relations between objects. We find that
this technique enables a significant improvement
in the ability to extrapolate, considerably outperforming a number of competitive techniques.

1. Introduction
The notion of interpolation is built into the assumptions
underlying most approaches to generalization in machine
learning, in which it is typically assumed that training and
test samples are drawn from the same distribution. There is
a widely shared view that human reasoning involves something more than this, that human reasoning involves the
ability to extrapolate (Lake et al., 2017; Marcus, 2001). In
particular, advocates of this view sometimes point to analogical reasoning as a clear example of this capacity, in which
a reasoner extrapolates from knowledge in one domain to
make inferences in a different, often less familiar, domain,
based on common structure between the two (Gentner, 1983;
1
Department of Psychology, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 2 Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton, NJ 3 Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 4 Department of Psychology, University of California Davis, Davis, CA. Correspondence to: Taylor Webb <taylor.w.webb@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Holyoak, 2012).
What are the prospects for capturing the capacity for extrapolation in neural network algorithms? Recent results
have begun to address this question. In general, these results point to the conclusion that generalization in neural
networks, even in relatively sophisticated domains such as
relational or mathematical reasoning, is primarily limited
to interpolation between data points within the convex hull
(i.e. boundaries defined by the extremes) of the training set
(Lake & Baroni, 2017; Santoro et al., 2018; Hill et al., 2019;
Saxton et al., 2019).
It is worth considering how extrapolation is possible at all.
Consider, for example, theoretical physics, a spectacularly
successful paradigm of extrapolation. Physical laws discovered on the basis of terrestrial observations make precise
quantitative predictions about phenomena in distant galaxies. This is possible because physical laws are characterized
by certain symmetries – that is, they are invariant with respect to a group of transformations such as translation and
rotation in space, translation in time, etc. (Feynman, 1966).
As Feynman puts it, “nature uses only the longest threads to
weave her patterns, so each small piece of her fabric reveals
the organization of the entire tapestry” (Feynman, 1967).
In this work, we exploit the fact that many domains can
be characterized by such symmetries, and test the idea that
extrapolation can be enabled by encouraging the learning of
representations that reflect these symmetries. To do so, we
introduce temporal context normalization (TCN), a simple
inductive bias in which normalization is applied over a taskrelevant temporal window. This technique preserves local
relational information (e.g. the size of one object relative
to another), while introducing both scale and translation
invariance over the broader scope of the learned representational space. We hypothesized that the application of TCN
would improve the ability of neural networks to extrapolate.
Critically, when trained end-to-end, we expect the presence
of TCN to impose constraints on both upstream (computed
prior to a layer with normalization) and downstream (computed post-normalization) representations, promoting the acquisition of abstract representations that reflect task-relevant
symmetries.
In an effort to aid the systematic evaluation of extrapolation

