Bayesian Experimental Design for Implicit Models
by Mutual Information Neural Estimation

Steven Kleinegesse 1 Michael U. Gutmann 1

Abstract
Implicit stochastic models, where the datageneration distribution is intractable but sampling
is possible, are ubiquitous in the natural sciences.
The models typically have free parameters that
need to be inferred from data collected in scientific experiments. A fundamental question is
how to design the experiments so that the collected data are most useful. The field of Bayesian
experimental design advocates that, ideally, we
should choose designs that maximise the mutual
information (MI) between the data and the parameters. For implicit models, however, this approach
is severely hampered by the high computational
cost of computing posteriors and maximising MI,
in particular when we have more than a handful
of design variables to optimise. In this paper, we
propose a new approach to Bayesian experimental
design for implicit models that leverages recent
advances in neural MI estimation to deal with
these issues. We show that training a neural network to maximise a lower bound on MI allows
us to jointly determine the optimal design and the
posterior. Simulation studies illustrate that this
gracefully extends Bayesian experimental design
for implicit models to higher design dimensions.

1. Introduction
Many processes in nature can be described by a parametric
statistical model from which we can simulate data. When
the corresponding data-generating distribution is intractable
we refer to it as an implicit model. These models are
abundant in science and engineering, having been used,
for instance, in high-energy physics (Agostinelli et al.,
2003), cosmology (M. Schafer & Freeman, 2012), epidemi*

Equal contribution 1 School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. Correspondence to: Steven Kleinegesse
<steven.kleinegesse@ed.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

ology (Corander et al., 2017), cell biology (Vo et al., 2015)
and pharmacokinetics (Donnet & Samson, 2013). Usually,
we wish to infer the free parameters θ of the implicit model
in order to understand the underlying natural process better or to predict some future events. Since the likelihood
function is intractable for implicit models, we have to revert
to likelihood-free inference methods such as approximate
Bayesian computation (for recent reviews see e.g. Lintusaari et al., 2017; Sisson et al., 2018).
While considerable research effort has focused on developing efficient likelihood-free inference methods (e.g. Papamakarios et al., 2019; Chen & Gutmann, 2019; Gutmann &
Corander, 2016; Papamakarios & Murray, 2016; Ong et al.,
2018), the quality of the estimated parameters θ ultimately
depends on the quality of the data y that are available for
inference in the first place. We here consider the scenario
where we have control over experimental designs d that affect the data collection process. For example, these might be
the spatial location or time at which we take measurements,
or they might be the stimulus that is used to perturb the
natural system. Our overall goal is then to find experimental
designs d that yield the most information about the model
parameters.
In Bayesian experimental design (BED), we construct and
optimise a utility function U (d) that indicates the value of
a design d. A choice for the utility function that is firmly
rooted in information theory is the mutual information (MI)
I(θ, y; d) between model parameters and data,

I(θ, y; d) = Ep(θ,y|d)


p(θ | y, d)
log
,
p(θ)

(1)

where p(θ | y, d) is the posterior distribution of θ given
data y that were obtained with design d, and p(θ) is the
prior belief of θ.1 MI describes the expected uncertainty
reduction in the model parameters θ when collecting data
with experimental design d, which makes it an effective utility function for BED. Since MI depends on the full posterior
p(θ | y, d), it is sensitive to deviations from the prior, e.g.
nonlinear correlations or multi-modality, that other utility
functions do not capture (Ryan et al., 2016).
1

It is typically assumed that p(θ) is not affected by d.

