When Demands Evolve Larger and Noisier:
Learning and Earning in a Growing Environment

Feng Zhu 1 Zeyu Zheng 2

Abstract
We consider a single-product dynamic pricing
problem under a specific non-stationary setting,
where the underlying demand process grows over
time in expectation and also possibly in the level
of random fluctuation. The decision maker sequentially sets price in each time period and learns
the unknown demand model, with the goal of maximizing expected cumulative revenue over a time
horizon T . We prove matching upper and lower
bounds on regret and provide near-optimal pricing
policies. We show how the growth rate of random
fluctuation over time affects the best achievable
regret order and the near-optimal policy design.
In the analysis, we show that whether the seller
knows the length of time horizon T in advance or
not surprisingly render different optimal regret orders. We then extend the demand model such that
the optimal price may vary with time and present
a novel and near-optimal policy for the extended
model. Finally, we consider an analogous nonstationary setting in the canonical multi-armed
bandit problem, and points out that knowing or
not knowing the length of time horizon T render
the same optimal regret order, in contrast to the
non-stationary dynamic pricing problem.

1. Introduction
In a standard dynamic pricing problem, a merchant, not
knowing the demand model at the beginning, dynamically
chooses at each time period a price, observes a demand, and
collects revenue. Specifically, the price elasticity, that the
ratio of change in mean demand in response to a change
1
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China 2 Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations
Research, University of California, Berkeley, USA. Correspondence to: Feng Zhu <lingxiyuan@pku.edu.cn>, Zeyu Zheng
<zyzheng@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

in price, is not known a priori. The merchant dynamically
sets price to learn the price elasticity and to trigger revenue
collection, with the goal of maximizing the expected cumulative revenue over a time horizon of T . Such a problem
has been extensively studied under convenient yet often violated assumptions on stationarity or stable scale. That is, if
given a fixed price over time, the random demand in each
period remains the same in distribution, or varies from time
to time within a fixed range of distributions in an adversarial
sense (stable scale). However, in many business settings,
the underlying demand for a product can be growing over
time, possibly due to growth of business scale, increasing
popularity, stronger advertisement, network effects, among
other reasons. For example, the demand typically presents
a growing trend for successful start-up companies offering
new services or products. The demand growth can also be
found for certain products sold on e-commerce platforms;
see (Glynn & Zheng, 2019). When the demand distribution
does not remain stationary or stable in scale over time, the
optimal dynamic pricing strategy and best achievable performance analysis in the stationary or stable scale setting
may not be valid.
This paper considers a specific non-stationary growing setting where the demand’s expectation and its level of random
fluctuation grow over time t at rates of tγ and tα respectively
for α, γ ≥ 0. We assume that the base-line demand model is
unknown, while the the growth rates γ and α are known. By
defining revenue regret as the expected optimal cumulative
revenue if the demand model is known a prior subtracted
by the expected cumulative revenue achieved by a feasible policy, we prove matching upper and lower bounds on
revenue regret, and provide new dynamic pricing policies
that are near-optimal (off by a logarithm order). We show
how different growth rates α in random fluctuation render
different designs of near-optimal pricing policies as well as
different best achievable regret orders. Furthermore, in our
analysis, we distinguish the cases on whether the merchant
knows the length of time horizon T in advance (fixed-time
scheme) or not (any-time scheme), and show that it leads
to different optimal regret orders. Lastly, we contrast the
dynamic pricing setting with a classical bandit setting in a
growing environment and illustrate the differences.

