Scaling up Hybrid Probabilistic Inference
with Logical and Arithmetic Constraints via Message Passing

Zhe Zeng * 1 Paolo Morettin * 2 Fanqi Yan * 3 Antonio Vergari 1 Guy Van den Broeck 1

Abstract
Weighted model integration (WMI) is an appealing framework for probabilistic inference: it allows for expressing the complex dependencies
in real-world problems, where variables are both
continuous and discrete, via the language of Satisfiability Modulo Theories (SMT), as well as to
compute probabilistic queries with complex logical and arithmetic constraints. Yet, existing WMI
solvers are not ready to scale to these problems.
They either ignore the intrinsic dependency structure of the problem entirely, or they are limited to
overly restrictive structures. To narrow this gap,
we derive a factorized WMI computation enabling
us to devise a scalable WMI solver based on
message passing, called MP-WMI. Namely, MPWMI is the first WMI solver that can (i) perform
exact inference on the full class of tree-structured
WMI problems, and (ii) perform inter-query amortization, e.g., to compute all marginal densities
simultaneously. Experimental results show that
our solver dramatically outperforms the existing
WMI solvers on a large set of benchmarks.

1. Introduction
In many real-world scenarios, performing probabilistic inference requires reasoning over domains with complex logical
and arithmetic constraints while dealing with variables that
are heterogeneous in nature, i.e., both continuous and discrete. Consider for example the task of matching players in
a game by their skills. Performing probabilistic inference for
this task has been popularized by Minka et al. (2018) and is
at the core of several online gaming services. A probabilistic
*

Equal contribution 1 Computer Science Department University of California, Los Angeles, USA 2 DISI, University of Trento,
Italy, Italy 3 Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China. Correspondence to: Zhe Zeng
<zhezeng@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

model for this task has to deal with continuous variables,
such as the player and team performance, and reason over
discrete attributes such as membership in a squad and the
achieved scores. Moreover, such a model would need to
take into account constraints such as the team performance
being bounded by that of the players in it, and that forming
a squad boosts performance. Ultimately, this translates into
performing probabilistic inference in the presence of logical
and arithmetic constraints and dependencies.
These hybrid scenarios are beyond the reach of probabilistic models including variational autoencoders (Kingma &
Welling, 2013) and generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014), whose inference capabilities, despite
their recent success, are limited. Classical probabilistic
graphical models (Koller & Friedman, 2009), while providing more flexible inference routines, are generally incapacitated when dealing with continuous and discrete variables
at once (Shenoy & West, 2011), or they tend to make simplistic (Heckerman & Geiger, 1995; Lauritzen & Wermuth,
1989) or overly strong assumptions about their parametric
forms (Yang et al., 2014). Even recent efforts in modeling these hybrid scenarios while delivering tractable inference (Molina et al., 2018; Vergari et al., 2019) can not
perform inference in the presence of complex constraints.
Weighted Model Integration (WMI) (Belle et al., 2015;
Morettin et al., 2017) is a recent framework for probabilistic inference that offers all the aforementioned “ingredients” needed for hybrid probabilistic reasoning with logical
constraints, by design. WMI leverages the expressive language of Satisfiability Modulo Theories (SMT) (Barrett
et al., 2010) for describing problems over continuous and
discrete variables. Moreover, WMI provides a principled
way to perform hybrid probabilistic inference: asking for the
probability of a complex query with logical and arithmetic
constraints can be done by integrating weight functions over
the regions that satisfy the constraints and query at hand.
Despite these appealing features, current state-of-theart WMI solvers are far from being applicable to highdimensional real-world scenarios. This is due to the fact
that most solvers ignore the dependency structure of the
problem, here expressible through the notion of a primal
or factor graph of an SMT formula (Dechter & Mateescu,

