On the Iteration Complexity of Hypergradient Computation

Riccardo Grazzi 1 2 Luca Franceschi 1 2 Massimiliano Pontil 1 2 Saverio Salzo 1

Abstract
We study a general class of bilevel problems, consisting in the minimization of an upper-level objective which depends on the solution to a parametric fixed-point equation. Important instances
arising in machine learning include hyperparameter optimization, meta-learning, and certain graph
and recurrent neural networks. Typically the gradient of the upper-level objective (hypergradient) is hard or even impossible to compute exactly, which has raised the interest in approximation methods. We investigate some popular
approaches to compute the hypergradient, based
on reverse mode iterative differentiation and approximate implicit differentiation. Under the hypothesis that the fixed point equation is defined
by a contraction mapping, we present a unified
analysis which allows for the first time to quantitatively compare these methods, providing explicit
bounds for their iteration complexity. This analysis suggests a hierarchy in terms of computational
efficiency among the above methods, with approximate implicit differentiation based on conjugate
gradient performing best. We present an extensive experimental comparison among the methods
which confirm the theoretical findings.

et al., 2018), as well as recurrent and graph neural networks
(Almeida, 1987; Pineda, 1987; Scarselli et al., 2008).
In large scale scenarios, there are thousands or even millions
of parameters to find in the upper-level problem, making
black-box approaches like grid and random search (Bergstra
& Bengio, 2012) or Bayesian optimization (Snoek et al.,
2012) impractical. This has made gradient-based methods
(Domke, 2012; Maclaurin et al., 2015; Pedregosa, 2016)
popular in such settings, but also it has raised the issue of
designing efficient procedures to approximate the gradient
of the upper-level objective (hypergradient) when finding a
solution to the lower-level problem is costly.
The principal goal of this paper is to study the degree of approximation to the hypergradient of certain iterative schemes
based on iterative or implicit differentiation1 . In the rest of
the introduction we present the bilevel framework, alongside some relevant examples in machine learning. We then
outline the gradient approximation methods that we analyse
in the paper and highlight our main contributions. Finally,
we discuss and compare our results with previous work in
the field.
The bilevel framework. In this work, we consider the
following bilevel problem.
min f (λ) := E(w(λ), λ)
λ∈Λ

(1)

subject to w(λ) = Φ(w(λ), λ),

1. Introduction
Several problems arising in machine learning and related
disciplines can be formulated as bilevel problems, where
the lower-level problem is a fixed point equation whose solution is part of an upper-level objective. Instances of this
framework include hyperparameter optimization (Maclaurin et al., 2015; Franceschi et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2018;
Lorraine et al., 2019; Elsken et al., 2019), meta-learning
(Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Finn et al., 2017; Franceschi

where Λ is a closed convex subset of Rn and E : Rd × Λ →
R and Φ : Rd × Λ → Rd are continuously differentiable
functions. We assume that the lower-level problem in (1)
(which is a fixed point-equation) admits a unique solution.
However, in general, explicitly computing such solution is
either impossible or expensive. When f is differentiable,
this issue affects the evaluation of the hypergradient ∇f (λ),
which at best can only be approximately computed.
A prototypical example of the bilevel problem (1) is

1

Computational Statistics and Machine Learning, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genoa, Italy 2 Department of Computer Science, University College London, London, UK. Correspondence
to: Riccardo Grazzi <riccardo.grazzi@iit.it>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

min f (λ) := E(w(λ), λ))
λ∈Λ

subject to w(λ) = arg min `(u, λ),

(2)

u∈Rd

1

The reader interested in the convergence analysis of gradientbased algorithms for bilevel optimization is referred to (Pedregosa,
2016; Rajeswaran et al., 2019) and references therein.

