Data Amplification: Instance-Optimal Property Estimation

Yi Hao 1 Alon Orlitsky 1

Abstract
The best-known and most commonly used technique for distribution-property estimation uses a
plug-in estimator, with empirical frequency replacing the underlying distribution. We present
novel linear-time-computable estimators that significantly “amplify” the effective amount of data
available. For a large variety of distribution properties including four of the most popular ones and
for every underlying distribution, they achieve the
accuracy that the empirical-frequency plug-in estimators would attain using a logarithmic-factor
more samples. Specifically, for Shannon entropy
and a broad class of Lipschitz properties including the L1 distance to a fixed distribution, the new
estimators use n samples to achieve the accuracy
attained by the empirical estimators with n log n
samples. For support-size and coverage, the new
estimators use n samples to achieve the performance of empirical frequency with sample size
n times the logarithm of the property value. Significantly strengthening the traditional min-max
formulation, these results hold not only for the
worst distributions, but for each and every underlying distribution. Furthermore, the logarithmic
amplification factors are optimal. Experiments on
a wide variety of distributions show that the new
estimators outperform the previous state-of-theart estimators designed for each specific property.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen significant interest in estimating
properties of distributions over large domains (Valiant &
Valiant, 2013; Jiao et al., 2015; 2018; Wu & Yang, 2016;
Orlitsky et al., 2016; Acharya et al., 2017a; Hao et al., 2018;
Wu & Yang, 2019; Hao & Orlitsky, 2019a;c; Charikar et al.,
2019; Hao & Li, 2020). Chief among these properties are
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, San Diego, USA. Correspondence to: Yi Hao
<yih179@eng.ucsd.edu>, Alon Orlitsky <alon@ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

support size and coverage, Shannon entropy, and L1 distance to a known distribution. The main achievement of
these papers is essentially estimating properties of distributions with alphabet size k using just k/ log k samples.
In practice however, the underlying distributions are often
simple, and their properties can be accurately estimated with
significantly fewer than k/ log k samples. For example, if
the distribution is concentrated on a small part of the domain,
or is exponential, very few samples may suffice to estimate
the property. To address this discrepancy, Hao et al. (2018)
took the following competitive approach.
The best-known distribution property estimator is the empirical estimator that replaces the unknown underlying distribution by the observed empirical distribution. For example,
Pwith n samples, it estimates entropy by the formula
− i (Ni /n) log(Ni /n) where Ni is the number of times
symbol i appeared. Besides its simple and intuitive form,
the empirical estimator is also consistent, stable, and universal. It is therefore the most commonly used property
estimator for data-science applications.
The estimator in Hao et al. (2018) uses n samples and for
any underlying distribution achieves the same performance
√
that the empirical estimator would achieve with n log n
samples. It therefore provides an effective √
way to amplify
the amount of data available by a factor of log n, regardless of the domain or structure of the underlying distribution.
In this paper we present novel estimators that increase
the amplification factor for all sufficiently smooth
prop√
erties including those mentioned above from log n to the
information-theoretic bound of log n. Namely, for every
distribution their expected estimation error with n samples
is that of the empirical estimator with n log n samples and
no further uniform amplification is possible.
It can further be shown (Valiant & Valiant, 2013; Jiao et al.,
2015; Acharya et al., 2017a; Wu & Yang, 2019) that the
empirical estimator estimates all of the aforementioned four
properties with linearly many samples, hence the sample
size required by the new estimators is always at most the
k/ log k guaranteed by the state-of-the-art estimators.
The current formulation has several additional advantages
over previous approaches, which we illustrate as follows.

