On Layer Normalization in the Transformer Architecture

Ruibin Xiong†* 1 2 Yunchang Yang* 3 Di He 4 5 Kai Zheng 4 Shuxin Zheng 5 Chen Xing 6 Huishuai Zhang 5
Yanyan Lan 1 2 Liwei Wang 4 3 Tie-Yan Liu 5

Abstract
The Transformer is widely used in natural language processing tasks. To train a Transformer
however, one usually needs a carefully designed
learning rate warm-up stage, which is shown to
be crucial to the ﬁnal performance but will slow
down the optimization and bring more hyperparameter tunings. In this paper, we ﬁrst study
theoretically why the learning rate warm-up stage
is essential and show that the location of layer normalization matters. Speciﬁcally, we prove with
mean ﬁeld theory that at initialization, for the
original-designed Post-LN Transformer, which
places the layer normalization between the residual blocks, the expected gradients of the parameters near the output layer are large. Therefore, using a large learning rate on those gradients makes
the training unstable. The warm-up stage is practically helpful for avoiding this problem. On the
other hand, our theory also shows that if the layer
normalization is put inside the residual blocks
(recently proposed as Pre-LN Transformer), the
gradients are well-behaved at initialization. This
motivates us to remove the warm-up stage for the
training of Pre-LN Transformers. We show in our
experiments that Pre-LN Transformers without
the warm-up stage can reach comparable results
with baselines while requiring signiﬁcantly less
training time and hyper-parameter tuning on a
wide range of applications.
*
Equal contribution † Works done while interning at Microsoft
Research Asia 1 CAS Key Laboratory of Network Data Science
and Technology, Institute of Computing Technolog, Chinese
Academy of Sciences 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Center for Data Science, Peking University, Beijing Institute of Big Data Research 4 Key Laboratory of Machine Perception,
MOE, School of EECS, Peking University 5 Microsoft Research
6
College of Computer Science, Nankai University. Correspondence to: Shuxin Zheng <shuxin.zheng@microsoft.com>, Di He
<dihe@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
The Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) is one of the most
commonly used neural network architectures in natural language processing. Layer normalization (Lei Ba et al., 2016)
plays a key role in Transformer’s success. The originally designed Transformer places the layer normalization between
the residual blocks, which is usually referred to as the Transformer with Post-Layer Normalization (Post-LN) (Wang
et al., 2019). This architecture has achieved state-of-the-art
performance in many tasks including language modeling
(Dai et al., 2019; Al-Rfou et al., 2018) and machine translation (Dehghani et al., 2018; Edunov et al., 2018). Unsupervised pre-trained models based on the Post-LN Transformer
architecture also show impressive performance in many
downstream tasks (Radford et al., 2019; Devlin et al., 2018;
Yang et al., 2019b).
Despite its great success, people usually need to deal with
the optimization of the Post-LN Transformer more carefully
than convolutional networks or other sequence-to-sequence
models (Popel & Bojar, 2018). In particular, to train the
model from scratch, any gradient-based optimization approach requires a learning rate warm-up stage (Vaswani
et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2019a): the optimization starts with
an extremely small learning rate, and then gradually increases it to a pre-deﬁned maximum value in a pre-deﬁned
number of iterations. Such a warm-up stage not only slows
down the optimization process but also brings more hyperparameter tunings. Popel & Bojar (2018) has shown that
the ﬁnal model performance is quite sensitive to the value
of the maximum learning rate and the number of warm-up
iterations. Tuning such sensitive hyper-parameters is costly
in training large-scale models, e.g., BERT (Devlin et al.,
2018) or XLNet (Yang et al., 2019b).
In this paper, we try to alleviate this problem by ﬁnding
ways to safely remove the learning rate warm-up stage. As
the warm-up stage happens in the ﬁrst several iterations, we
investigate the optimization behavior at initialization using
mean ﬁeld theory (Lee et al., 2017; Xiao et al., 2018; Yang
et al., 2019a; Yang, 2019; Lee et al., 2019; Zhang et al.,
2019). According to our theoretical analysis, when putting
the layer normalization between the residual blocks, the
expected gradients of the parameters near the output layer

