Superpolynomial Lower Bounds for Learning One-Layer Neural Networks
using Gradient Descent

Surbhi Goel 1 Aravind Gollakota 1 Zhihan Jin 2 Sushrut Karmalkar 1 Adam Klivans 1

Abstract
We give the first superpolynomial lower bounds
for learning one-layer neural networks with respect to the Gaussian distribution for a broad
class of algorithms. We prove that gradient descent run on any classifier with respect to square
loss will fail to achieve small test error in polynomial time. Prior work held only for gradient descent run with small batch sizes and sufficiently smooth classifiers. For classification, we
give a stronger result, namely that any statistical query (SQ) algorithm (including gradient descent) will fail to achieve small test error in polynomial time. Our lower bounds hold for commonly used activations such as ReLU and sigmoid. The core of our result relies on a novel
construction of a simple family of neural networks that are exactly orthogonal with respect to
all spherically symmetric distributions.

1. Introduction
A major challenge in the theory of deep learning is to understand when gradient descent can efficiently learn simple
families of neural networks. The associated optimization
problem is nonconvex and well known to be computationally intractable in the worst case. For example, cyphertexts
from public-key cryptosystems can be encoded into a training set labeled by simple neural networks (Klivans & Sherstov, 2009), implying that the corresponding learning problem is as hard as breaking cryptographic primitives. These
hardness results, however, rely on discrete representations
and produce relatively unrealistic joint distributions.
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Texas
at Austin 2 Department of Computer Science, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University.
Correspondence to: Aravind Gollakota <aravindg@cs.utexas.edu>, Adam Klivans <klivans@cs.utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Our Results. In this paper we give the first superpolynomial lower bounds for learning neural networks using gradient descent in arguably the simplest possible setting: we
assume the marginal distribution is a spherical Gaussian,
the labels are noiseless and are exactly equal to the output of a one-layer neural network (a linear combination of
say ReLU or sigmoid activations), and the goal is to output
a classifier whose test error (measured by square-loss) is
small. We prove—unconditionally—that gradient descent
fails to produce a classifier with small square-loss if it is
required to run in polynomial time in the dimension. Our
lower bound depends only on the algorithm used (gradient
descent) and not on the architecture of the underlying classifier. That is, our results imply that current popular heuristics such as running gradient descent on an overparameterized network (for example, working in the NTK regime
(Jacot et al., 2018)) will require superpolynomial time to
achieve small test error.
Statistical Queries. We prove our lower bounds in the
now well-studied statistical query (SQ) model of (Kearns,
1998) that captures most learning algorithms used in
practice. For a loss function ` and a hypothesis hθ
parameterized by θ, the true population loss with respect to joint distribution D on X × Y is given by
E(x,y)∼D [`(hθ (x), y)], and the gradient with respect to θ
is given by E(x,y)∼D [`0 (hθ (x), y)∇θ hθ (x)]. In the SQ
model, we specify a query function φ(x, y) and receive
an estimate of |E(x,y)∼D [φ(x, y)]| to within some tolerance
parameter τ . An important special class of queries are correlational or inner-product queries, where the query function φ is defined only on X and we receive an estimate of
|E(x,y)∼D [φ(x) · y]| within some tolerance τ . It is not difficult to see that (1) the gradient of a population loss can
be approximated to within τ using statistical queries of tolerance τ and (2) for square-loss only inner-product queries
are required.
Since the convergence analysis of gradient descent holds
given sufficiently strong approximations of the gradient,
lower bounds for learning in the SQ model (Kearns, 1998;
Blum et al., 1994; Szörényi, 2009; Feldman, 2012; 2017)
directly imply unconditional lower bounds on the running
time for gradient descent to achieve small error. We give

