Inexact Tensor Methods with Dynamic Accuracies

Nikita Doikov 1 Yurii Nesterov 2

Abstract
In this paper, we study inexact high-order Tensor
Methods for solving convex optimization problems with composite objective. At every step of
such methods, we use approximate solution of the
auxiliary problem, defined by the bound for the
residual in function value. We propose two dynamic strategies for choosing the inner accuracy:
the first one is decreasing as 1/k p+1 , where p ≥ 1
is the order of the method and k is the iteration
counter, and the second approach is using for the
inner accuracy the last progress in the target objective. We show that inexact Tensor Methods with
these strategies achieve the same global convergence rate as in the error-free case. For the second
approach we also establish local superlinear rates
(for p ≥ 2), and propose the accelerated scheme.
Lastly, we present computational results on a variety of machine learning problems for several
methods and different accuracy policies.

1. Introduction
1.1. Motivation
With the growth of computing power, high-order optimization methods are becoming more and more popular
in machine learning, due to their ability to tackle the illconditioning and to improve the rate of convergence. Based
on the work (Nesterov & Polyak, 2006), where global complexity guarantees for the Cubic regularization of Newton
method were established, a significant leap in the development of second-order optimization algorithms was made,
discovering stochastic and randomized methods (Kohler &
Lucchi, 2017; Tripuraneni et al., 2018; Cartis & Schein1

Institute of Information and Communication Technologies, Electronics and Applied Mathematics (ICTEAM), Catholic
University of Louvain (UCL), Belgium 2 Center for Operations Research and Econometrics (CORE), Catholic University of Louvain (UCL), Belgium.
Correspondence to:
Nikita Doikov <nikita.doikov@uclouvain.be>, Yurii Nesterov
<yurii.nesterov@uclouvain.be>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

berg, 2018; Doikov & Richtárik, 2018; Wang et al., 2018;
Zhou et al., 2019), which have better convergence rate, than
the corresponding first-order analogues. The main weakness, though, is that every step of Newton method is much
more expensive. It requires to solve the subproblem, which
is a minimization of quadratic function with a regularizer,
and possibly with some additional nondifferentiable components. Therefore, the idea to employ higher derivatives
into optimization schemes was remaining questionable, because of the high cost of the computations. However, recently (Nesterov, 2019a) it was shown, that the third-order
Tensor Method for convex minimization problems admits
very effective implementation, with the cost, which is comparable to that of the Newton step.
Now we have a family of methods (starting from the methods of order one), for each iteration of which may need to
call some auxiliary subsolver. Thus, it becomes important to
study: which level of exactness we need to ensure at the step
for not loosing the fast convergence of the initial method. In
this work, we suggest to describe approximate solution of
the subproblem in terms of the residual in function value.
We propose two strategies for the inner accuracies, which
are dynamic (changing with iterations). Indeed, there is no
need to have a very precise solution of the subproblem at the
first iterations, but we reasonably ask for higher precision
closer to the end of the optimization process.
1.2. Related Work
Global convergence of the first-order methods with inexact proximal-gradient steps was studied in (Schmidt et al.,
2011). The authors considered the errors in the residual
in function value of the subproblem, and require them to
decrease with iterations at an appropriate rate. This setting
is the most similar to the current work.
In (Cartis et al., 2011a;b), adaptive second-order methods
with cubic regularization and inexact steps were proposed.
High-order inexact tensor methods were considered in (Birgin et al., 2017; Jiang et al., 2018; Grapiglia & Nesterov,
2019c;d; Cartis et al., 2019; Lucchi & Kohler, 2019). In all
of these works, the authors describe approximate solution
of the subproblem in terms of the corresponding first-order
optimality condition (using the gradients). This can be difficult to achieve by the current optimization schemes, since

