Randomized Block-Diagonal Preconditioning for Parallel Learning

Celestine Mendler-Dünner 1 Aurelien Lucchi 2

Abstract

update ∆x, ii) they implement asynchronous updates (Niu
et al., 2011; Liu et al., 2015), where stochastic updates are
interleaved, or iii) they compute block updates (Richtárik
& Takáč, 2016), where multiple coordinates of x are updated independently and in parallel. The primary goal of all
these methods is to introduce parallel computations into an
otherwise stochastic algorithm in order to better utilize the
number of available cores.

We study preconditioned gradient-based optimization methods where the preconditioning matrix
has block-diagonal form. Such a structural constraint comes with the advantage that the update
computation can be parallelized across multiple
independent tasks. Our main contribution is to
demonstrate that the convergence of these methods can significantly be improved by a randomization technique which corresponds to repartitioning coordinates across tasks during the optimization procedure. We provide a theoretical analysis
that accurately characterizes the expected convergence gains of repartitioning and validate our findings empirically on various traditional machine
learning tasks. From an implementation perspective, block-separable models are well suited for
parallelization and, when shared memory is available, randomization can be implemented on top
of existing methods very efficiently to improve
convergence.

Ioannou et al. (2019) argue that these methods are often not
able to utilize the full potential of parallel systems because
they make simplified modeling assumptions of the underlying hardware: They treat a multi-core machine as a uniform
collection of cores whereas in fact it is a more elaborate
system with complex data access patterns and cache structures. As a consequence, memory contention issues and
false sharing can significantly impede their performance.
To resolve this the authors have proposed a novel approach
to parallel learning that relies on block-separable models,
so far solely used for distributed learning. Such models have
the advantage that, in addition to computational parallelism,
they implement a stricter separability between computational tasks which enables more efficient implementations.
This potentially comes at the cost of slower convergence.

1. Introduction
We focus on the task of parallel learning where we want to
solve the convex and smooth optimization problem
min f (x)

x∈Rn

(1)

on a multi-core machine with shared memory. In this context
we study iterative optimization methods where the repeated
computation of the incremental update
xt+1 ← xt + ∆x

(2)

is parallelized across cores. Such methods traditionally
build on one of the following three approaches: i) they implement a mini-batch algorithm (Dekel et al., 2012), where
a finite sample approximation to f is used to compute the
1
University of California, Berkeley 2 ETH Zürich. Correspondence to: Celestine Mendler-Dünner <mendler@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Interestingly, this new application area of block-separable
models in a single machine setting with shared memory
opens the door to previously unstudied algorithmic optimization techniques. Namely, we can relax strong communication constraints, as long as we do not compromise the
desired separability between computational tasks.
One such algorithmic technique that preserves separability and can help convergence is repartitioning. It refers to
randomly assigning coordinates to tasks for each update
step. In a distributed setting repartitioning would involve expensive communication of large amounts of data across the
network and has thus not been considered as an option. But
in a single machine setting we can reassign coordinates to
cores without incurring significant overheads. This has been
verified empirically by Ioannou et al. (2019) who showed
that for the specific example of training a logistic regression
classifier using the C O C OA method (Smith et al., 2018)
the convergence gains of repartitioning can significantly
prevail the overheads of reassign coordinates to cores in a
shared-memory setting.

