Online Pricing with Offline Data: Phase Transition and Inverse Square Law

Jinzhi Bu 1 David Simchi-Levi 1 Yunzong Xu 1

Abstract
This paper investigates the impact of pre-existing
offline data on online learning, in the context of
dynamic pricing. We study a single-product dynamic pricing problem over a selling horizon of
T periods. The demand in each period is determined by the price of the product according to
a linear demand model with unknown parameters. We assume that the seller already has some
pre-existing offline data before the start of the selling horizon. The seller wants to utilize both the
pre-existing offline data and the sequential online
data to minimize the regret of the online learning
process. We characterize the joint effect of the
size, location and dispersion of the offline data on
the optimal regret of the online learning process.
Our results reveal surprising transformations of
the optimal regret rate with respect to the size of
the offline data, which we refer to as phase transitions. In addition, our results demonstrate that
the location and dispersion of the offline data also
have an intrinsic effect on the optimal regret, and
we quantify this effect via the inverse-square law.

1. Introduction
Classical statistical learning theory distinguishes between
offline and online learning. Offline learning deals with a
setting where the entire training data set is directly available
before the algorithm is applied, while online learning deals
with a setting where data become available in a sequential
manner that may depend on the actions taken by the algorithm. While offline learning assumes access to offline data
(but not online data) and online learning assumes access to
online data (but not offline data), in reality, a broad class of
real-world problems incorporate both aspects: there is an
offline historical data set (based on historical actions) at the
1
Institute for Data, Systems, and Society, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139. Correspondence to: Jinzhi Bu <jzbu@mit.edu>, David Simchi-Levi
<dslevi@mit.edu>, Yunzong Xu <yxu@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

time that the learner starts an online learning process.
Currently, there is no standard framework for the above type
of learning problems, as classical offline learning theory
and online learning theory have different settings and goals.
While establishing a framework that bridges all aspects of
offline and online learning is generally a very complicated
task, in this paper, we propose a framework that bridges the
gap between offline and online learning in a specific problem
setting, which, however, already captures the essence of
many dynamic pricing problems that sellers face in practice.
The problem: online pricing with offline data. We study
the “Online Pricing with Offline Data” (OPOD) problem as
follows. Consider a seller offering a single product with
an infinite amount of inventory over a selling horizon of
T periods. Customer demand is determined by the price
charged by the seller according to an underlying linear demand model. The seller knows neither the true demand
parameters nor the distribution of random noise. However,
we assume that before the selling horizon starts, she has
used some historical prices in the past and collected market
sales data. In other words, the seller has a pre-existing offline data set before the start of the online learning process.
We assume that the pre-existing offline data set contains
n samples: {(p̂1 , D̂1 ), . . . , (p̂n , D̂n )}, where each sample
(p̂i , D̂i ) is an input-output pair consisting of a historical
price p̂i and an associated demand observation D̂i generated from the same linear demand model (i = 1, . . . , n).
The seller’s objective is to design a learning algorithm that
utilizes both the offline data and the data collected on-thefly to learn the unknown demand model while concurrently
maximizing total revenue over T periods.
Following the convention of online learning, we measure
the performance of an algorithm for the aforementioned
OPOD problem by regret, which is the difference between
the optimal expected revenue and the total expected revenue
generated by the algorithm over T periods in the online
stage. A notable difference between the regret defined here
and the classical one is that the regret of the OPOD problem
depends on the pre-existing offline data. We refer to the
best achievable regret (which depends on offline data) as the
optimal regret of the OPOD problem.
At a high level, we seek to answer the following question:
How do offline data affect the statistical complexity of on-

