The Impact of Neural Network Overparameterization on
Gradient Confusion and Stochastic Gradient Descent
Karthik A. Sankararaman* 1 2 Soham De* 3 Zheng Xu 2 W. Ronny Huang 2 Tom Goldstein 2

Abstract
This paper studies how neural network architecture affects the speed of training. We introduce a
simple concept called gradient confusion to help
formally analyze this. When gradient confusion
is high, stochastic gradients produced by different
data samples may be negatively correlated, slowing down convergence. But when gradient confusion is low, data samples interact harmoniously,
and training proceeds quickly. Through theoretical and experimental results, we demonstrate how
the neural network architecture affects gradient
confusion, and thus the efficiency of training. Our
results show that, for popular initialization techniques, increasing the width of neural networks
leads to lower gradient confusion, and thus faster
model training. On the other hand, increasing
the depth of neural networks has the opposite
effect. Our results indicate that alternate initialization techniques or networks using both batch
normalization and skip connections help reduce
the training burden of very deep networks.

1. Introduction
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Robbins & Monro,
1951) and its variants with momentum have become the
standard optimization routine for neural networks due to
their fast convergence and good generalization properties
(Wilson et al., 2017; Sutskever et al., 2013; Smith et al.,
2020). Yet the convergence behavior of SGD on neural
networks still eludes full theoretical understanding. Furthermore, it is not well understood how design choices on
neural network architecture affect training performance. In
this paper, we make progress on these open questions.
*
Equal contribution 1 Facebook. 2 University of Maryland, College Park. 3 DeepMind, London.. Correspondence to: Karthik
A. Sankararaman <karthikabinavs@gmail.com>, Soham De <sohamde@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Classical stochastic optimization theory predicts that the
learning rate of SGD needs to decrease over time for convergence to be guaranteed to the minimizer of a convex
function (Shamir & Zhang, 2013; Bertsekas, 2011). For
strongly convex functions for example, such results show
that a decreasing learning rate schedule of O(1/k) is required to guarantee convergence to within -accuracy of the
minimizer in O(1/) iterations, where k denotes the iteration number. Such decay schemes, however, typically lead
to poor performance on standard neural network problems.
Neural networks operate in a regime where the number
of parameters is much larger than the number of training
data. In this “over-parameterized” regime, SGD seems to
converge quickly with constant learning rates. Most neural network practitioners use a constant learning rate for
the majority of training (with exponential decay only towards the end of training) without seeing the method stall
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014; He
et al., 2016; Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016). With constant
learning rates, theoretical guarantees show that SGD converges quickly to a neighborhood of the minimizer, but then
reaches a noise floor beyond which it stops converging; this
noise floor depends on the learning rate and the variance of
the gradients (Moulines & Bach, 2011; Needell et al., 2014).
Recent results show that convergence without a noise floor
is possible without decaying the learning rate, provided the
model is strongly convex and overfitting occurs (Schmidt &
Roux, 2013; Ma et al., 2017; Vaswani et al., 2018).
While these results do give important insights, they do not
fully explain the dynamics of SGD on neural networks,
and how they relate to over-parameterization. Furthermore,
training performance is strongly influenced by network architecture. It is common knowledge among practitioners
that, under standard Gaussian initialization techniques (Glorot & Bengio, 2010; He et al., 2015), deeper networks train
slower (Bengio et al., 1994; Saxe et al., 2013). This has
led to several innovations over the years to get deeper nets
to train more easily, such as careful initialization strategies
(Xiao et al., 2018), residual connections (He et al., 2016),
and normalization schemes like batch normalization (Ioffe
& Szegedy, 2015). Furthermore, there is evidence to indicate that wider networks are faster to train (Zagoruyko &
Komodakis, 2016; Nguyen & Hein, 2017), and recent the-

