What is Local Optimality in Nonconvex-Nonconcave Minimax Optimization?

Chi Jin 1 Praneeth Netrapalli 2 Michael I. Jordan 3

Abstract
Minimax optimization has found extensive applications in modern machine learning, in settings
such as generative adversarial networks (GANs),
adversarial training and multi-agent reinforcement learning. As most of these applications
involve continuous nonconvex-nonconcave formulations, a very basic question arises—“what is
a proper definition of local optima?”
Most previous work answers this question using
classical notions of equilibria from simultaneous
games, where the min-player and the max-player
act simultaneously. In contrast, most applications
in machine learning, including GANs and adversarial training, correspond to sequential games,
where the order of which player acts first is crucial (since minimax is in general not equal to
maximin due to the nonconvex-nonconcave nature of the problems). The main contribution of
this paper is to propose a proper mathematical
definition of local optimality for this sequential
setting—local minimax, as well as to present its
properties and existence results. Finally, we establish a strong connection to a basic local search
algorithm—gradient descent ascent (GDA): under
mild conditions, all stable limit points of GDA are
exactly local minimax points up to some degenerate points.

1. Introduction
Minimax optimization refers to problems of two agents—
one agent tries to minimize the payoff function f : X ×Y →
R while the other agent tries to maximize it. Such problems arise in a number of fields, including mathematics,
1

Princeton University 2 Microsoft Research, India 3 University
of California, Berkeley.
Correspondence to: Chi Jin
<chij@princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

biology, social science, and particularly economics (Myerson, 2013). Due to the wide range of applications of these
problems and their rich mathematical structure, they have
been studied for several decades in the setting of zero-sum
games (Morgenstern and Von Neumann, 1953). In the last
few years, minimax optimization has also found significant
applications in machine learning, in settings such as generative adversarial networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014),
adversarial training (Madry et al., 2017) and multi-agent reinforcement learning (Omidshafiei et al., 2017). In practice,
these minimax problems are often solved using gradientbased algorithms, especially gradient descent ascent (GDA),
an algorithm that alternates between a gradient descent step
for x and some number of gradient ascent steps for y.
A well-known notion of optimality in this setting is that
of a Nash equilibrium—no player can benefit by changing strategy while the other player keeps hers unchanged.
That is, a Nash equilibrium is a point (x? , y? ) where x?
is a global minimum of f (·, y? ) and y? is a global maximum of f (x? , ·). In the convex-concave setting, it can
be shown that an approximate Nash equilibrium can be
found efficiently by variants of GDA (Bubeck, 2015; Hazan,
2016). However, most of the minimax problems arising
in modern machine learning applications do not have this
simple convex-concave structure. Meanwhile, in the general
nonconvex-nonconcave setting, one cannot expect to find
Nash equilibria efficiently as the special case of nonconvex optimization is already NP-hard. This motivates the
quest to find a local surrogate instead of a global optimal
point. Most previous work (e.g., Daskalakis and Panageas,
2018; Mazumdar and Ratliff, 2018; Adolphs et al., 2018)
studied a notion of local Nash equilibrium which replaces
all the global minima or maxima in the definition of Nash
equilibrium by their local counterparts.
The starting point of this paper is the observation that the
notion of local Nash equilibrium is not suitable for most
machine learning applications of minimax optimization. In
fact, the notion of Nash equilibrium (on which local Nash
equilibrium is based), was developed in the context of simultaneous games, and so it does not reflect the order between
the min-player and the max-player. In contrast, most applications in machine learning, including GANs and adversarial
training, correspond to sequential games, where one player
acts first and the other acts second. When f is nonconvex-

