Learning What to Defer for Maximum Independent Sets

Sungsoo Ahn 1 Younggyo Seo 2 Jinwoo Shin 2 1

Abstract
Designing efficient algorithms for combinatorial
optimization appears ubiquitously in various scientific fields. Recently, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) frameworks have gained considerable
attention as a new approach: they can automate
the design of a solver while relying less on sophisticated domain knowledge of the target problem.
However, the existing DRL solvers determine the
solution using a number of stages proportional
to the number of elements in the solution, which
severely limits their applicability to large-scale
graphs. In this paper, we seek to resolve this issue by proposing a novel DRL scheme, coined
learning what to defer (LwD), where the agent
adaptively shrinks or stretch the number of stages
by learning to distribute the element-wise decisions of the solution at each stage. We apply
the proposed framework to the maximum independent set (MIS) problem, and demonstrate its
significant improvement over the current state-ofthe-art DRL scheme. We also show that LwD can
outperform the conventional MIS solvers on largescale graphs having millions of vertices, under a
limited time budget.

1. Introduction
Combinatorial optimization is an important mathematical
field addressing fundamental questions of computation,
where its popular examples include the maximum independent set (MIS, Miller & Muller, 1960), satisfiability
(SAT, Schaefer, 1978) and traveling salesman problem (TSP,
Voigt, 1831). Such problems arise in various applications,
e.g., sociology (Harary & Ross, 1957), operations research
(Feo et al., 1994) and bioinformatics (Gardiner et al., 2000).
However, most combinatorial optimization problems are NP1
School of Electrical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, South Korea
2
Graduate School of AI, KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea. Correspondence to: Sungsoo Ahn <sungsoo.ahn@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

hard and exact solutions are typically intractable to find in
practical situations. Over the past decades, researchers have
made significant efforts for resolving this issue by designing fast heuristic solvers (Knuth, 1997; Biere et al., 2009;
Mezard et al., 2009) that generate approximate solutions.
Recently, the remarkable progress in deep learning has stimulated increased interest in learning such heuristics based
on deep neural networks (DNNs). Such learning-based approaches are attractive for being able to train a solver on
a particular problem while relying less on expert knowledge. As the most straight-forward way, supervised learning
schemes train the DNNs to imitate the solutions obtained
from existing solvers (Vinyals et al., 2015; Li et al., 2018;
Selsam et al., 2019). However, the resulting quality and
applicability are constrained by those of existing solvers.
An ideal direction is to discover new solutions in a fully unsupervised manner, potentially outperforming those based
on domain-specific knowledge.
To this end, recent works (Bello et al., 2016; Khalil et al.,
2017; Deudon et al., 2018; Kool et al., 2019) consider using
deep reinforcement learning (DRL) based on the Markov
decision process (MDP) naturally designed with rewards derived from the optimization objective of the target problem.
Then, the corresponding agent can be trained based on existing training schemes of DRL, e.g., Bello et al. (Bello et al.,
2016) trained a TSP solver based on actor-critic framework.
Such DRL-based methods are especially attractive since
they can even solve unexplored problems where domain
knowledge is scarce, and no efficient heuristic is known.
Unfortunately, the existing DRL-based methods struggle
to compete with the existing highly optimized solvers. In
particular, the gap becomes significant when the problem
requires solutions with higher dimensions. The reasoning
is that they mostly emulate greedy algorithms (Bello et al.,
2016; Khalil et al., 2017), i.e., choosing one element of the
solution at each stage of MDP. Such a procedure quickly
becomes computationally prohibitive for obtaining a largescale solution. This motivates us to seek for an alternative
DRL scheme.
Contribution. In this paper, we propose a new DRL
framework, coined learning what to defer (LwD), for solving large-scale combinatorial optimization problems. Our
framework is designed for locally decomposable problems,

