Neuro-Symbolic Visual Reasoning: Disentangling “Visual” from “Reasoning”

Saeed Amizadeh 1 Hamid Palangi * 2 Oleksandr Polozov * 2 Yichen Huang 2 Kazuhito Koishida 1

Abstract
Visual reasoning tasks such as visual question
answering (VQA) require an interplay of visual
perception with reasoning about the question semantics grounded in perception. However, recent
advances in this area are still primarily driven by
perception improvements (e.g. scene graph generation) rather than reasoning. Neuro-symbolic
models such as Neural Module Networks bring
the benefits of compositional reasoning to VQA,
but they are still entangled with visual representation learning, and thus neural reasoning is hard to
improve and assess on its own. To address this, we
propose (1) a framework to isolate and evaluate
the reasoning aspect of VQA separately from its
perception, and (2) a novel top-down calibration
technique that allows the model to answer reasoning questions even with imperfect perception. To
this end, we introduce a differentiable first-order
logic formalism for VQA that explicitly decouples question answering from visual perception.
On the challenging GQA dataset, this framework
is used to perform in-depth, disentangled comparisons between well-known VQA models leading
to informative insights regarding the participating
models as well as the task.

1. Introduction
Visual reasoning (VR) is the ability of an autonomous system to construct a rich representation of a visual scene and
perform multi-step inference over the scene’s constituents
and their relationships. It stands among the key outstanding
challenges in computer vision. Common tangible instantiations of VR include language-driven tasks such as Visual
Question Answering (VQA) (Antol et al., 2015) and Visual Commonsense Reasoning (VCR) (Zellers et al., 2019).
*

1

Equal contribution
Microsoft Applied Sciences Group
(ASG), Redmond WA, USA 2 Microsoft Research AI, Redmond WA, USA. Correspondence to: Saeed Amizadeh
<saamizad@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Recent advances in computer vision, representation learning, and natural language processing have enabled continued progress on VQA with a wide variety of modeling
approaches (Anderson et al., 2018; Andreas et al., 2016;
Hudson & Manning, 2019a; 2018; Tan & Bansal, 2019).
A defining characteristic of VR is the interaction between
a perception system (i.e. object detection and scene representation learning) and a reasoning system (i.e. question interpretation and inference grounded in the scene). However,
this interaction is difficult to capture and assess accurately.
For example, the definition of VQA has evolved over time
to eliminate language biases that impeded its robustness
as a VR metric. The early VQA datasets were biased to
real-world language priors to the extent that many questions
were answerable without looking at the image (Agrawal
et al., 2018). Subsequent versions improved the balance but
still mostly involved simple inference questions with little
requirement for multi-step reasoning.
To facilitate progress in VR, Hudson & Manning (2019b)
proposed GQA, a procedurally generated VQA dataset of
multi-step inference questions. Although GQA targets compositional multi-step reasoning, the current GQA Challenge
primarily evaluates visual perception rather than reasoning of a VQA model. As we show in Section 4, a neurosymbolic VQA model that has access to ground-truth scene
graphs achieves 96% accuracy on GQA. Moreover, language interpretation (i.e. semantic parsing) alone does not
capture the complexity of VR due to the language in questions being procedurally generated. As a result, while GQA
is well suited as an evaluation environment for VR (e.g. for
multi-modal pretraining tasks (Tan & Bansal, 2019; Zhou
et al., 2020)), a higher GQA accuracy does not necessarily
imply a higher reasoning capability. In this work, we supplement GQA with a differentiable first-order logic framework
∇-FOL that allows us to isolate and assess the reasoning
capability of a VQA model separately from its perception.
The ∇-FOL Framework1 : ∇-FOL is a neuro-symbolic
VR model. Neuro-symbolic models such as MAC (Hudson & Manning, 2018), Neural Module Networks (Andreas
et al., 2016), and Neural State Machines (Hudson & Manning, 2019a) implement compositional multi-step inference
1
The PyTorch code for the ∇-FOL framework is publicly available at https://github.com/microsoft/DFOL-VQA.

