Approximating Stacked and Bidirectional Recurrent Architectures with the
Delayed Recurrent Neural Network

Javier S. Turek 1 Shailee Jain 2 Vy A. Vo 1 Mihai Capotă 1 Alexander G. Huth 2 3 Theodore L. Willke 1

Abstract
Recent work has shown that topological enhancements to recurrent neural networks (RNNs) can
increase their expressiveness and representational
capacity. Two popular enhancements are stacked
RNNs, which increases the capacity for learning non-linear functions, and bidirectional processing, which exploits acausal information in a
sequence. In this work, we explore the delayedRNN, which is a single-layer RNN that has a
delay between the input and output. We prove
that a weight-constrained version of the delayedRNN is equivalent to a stacked-RNN. We also
show that the delay gives rise to partial acausality,
much like bidirectional networks. Synthetic experiments confirm that the delayed-RNN can mimic
bidirectional networks, solving some acausal
tasks similarly, and outperforming them in others. Moreover, we show similar performance
to bidirectional networks in a real-world natural
language processing task. These results suggest
that delayed-RNNs can approximate topologies
including stacked RNNs, bidirectional RNNs, and
stacked bidirectional RNNs – but with equivalent
or faster runtimes for the delayed-RNNs.

1. Introduction
Recurrent neural networks (RNN) have successfully been
used for sequential tasks like language modeling (Sutskever
et al., 2011), machine translation (Sutskever et al., 2014),
and speech recognition (Amodei et al., 2016). They approximate complex, non-linear temporal relationships by
maintaining and updating an internal state for every input
1

Intel Labs, Hillsboro, Oregon, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas,
USA 3 Department of Neuroscience, The University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, Texas, USA. Correspondence to: Javier S. Turek
<javier.turek@intel.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

element. However, they face several challenges while modeling long-term dependencies, motivating work on variant
architectures.
Firstly, due to the long credit assignment paths in RNNs,
the gradients might vanish or explode (Bengio et al., 1994).
This has led to gated variants like the Long Short-term
Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) that
can retain information over long timescales. Secondly, it
is well known that deeper networks can more efficiently
approximate a broader range of functions (Bengio et al.,
2007; Bianchini & Scarselli, 2014). While RNNs are deep
in time, they are limited in the number of non-linearities
applied to recent inputs.
To increase depth, there has been extensive work on stacking RNNs into multiple layers (Schmidhuber, 1992; Bengio,
2009). In vanilla stacked RNNs, each layer applies a nonlinearity and passes information to the next layer, while
also maintaining a recurrent connection to itself. To effectively propagate gradients across the hierarchy, skip or
shortcut connections can be used (Raiko et al., 2012; Graves,
2013; Campos et al., 2018). Alternatives like recurrent highway networks (Zilly et al., 2017) introduce non-linearities
between timesteps through “micro-ticks" (Graves, 2016).
Pascanu et al. (2014) increase depth by adding feedforward
layers between state-to-state transitions. Gated feedback
networks (Chung et al., 2015) allow for layer-to-layer interactions between adjacent timesteps. All these variants
thus introduce topological modifications to retain information over longer timescales and model hierarchical temporal
dependencies.
Another development is the bidirectional RNN (Bi-RNN)
(Schuster & Paliwal, 1997; Graves & Schmidhuber, 2005).
While RNNs are inherently causal, Bi-RNNs model acausal
interactions by processing sequences in both forward and
backward directions. They achieve state-of-the-art performance on parts-of-speech tagging (Plank et al., 2016) and
sentiment analysis (Baziotis et al., 2017), demonstrating
that some natural language processing (NLP) tasks benefit
greatly from combining past and future inputs.
The successes of these RNN architectural variants seem to
derive from two common properties: depth and acausality.

