Kernel Methods for Cooperative Multi-Agent Contextual Bandits

Abhimanyu Dubey 1 Alex Pentland 1

Abstract
Cooperative multi-agent decision making involves
a group of agents cooperatively solving learning
problems while communicating over a network
with delays. In this paper, we consider the kernelised contextual bandit problem, where the reward obtained by an agent is an arbitrary linear
function of the contexts’ images in the related
reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS), and
a group of agents must cooperate to collectively
solve their unique decision problems. For this
problem, we propose C OOP -K ERNEL UCB, an algorithm that provides near-optimal bounds on the
per-agent regret, and is both computationally and
communicatively efficient. For special cases of
the cooperative problem, we also provide variants
of C OOP -K ERNEL UCB that provides optimal peragent regret. In addition, our algorithm generalizes several existing results in the multi-agent bandit setting. Finally, on a series of both synthetic
and real-world multi-agent network benchmarks,
we demonstrate that our algorithm significantly
outperforms existing benchmarks.

1. Introduction
An emerging problem in online learning and multi-agent
distributed systems is the cooperative multi-agent bandit.
It involves a group V of V agents collectively solving a
decision problem while communicating with each other.
The problem proceeds in rounds t = 1, 2, ..., T , where at
any trial t = 1, 2, ..., each agent v ∈ V is presented with a
decision set Dv,t , and selects an action xv,t ∈ Dv,t . Each
agent obtains a stochastic reward yv,t , following:
yv,t = f (xv,t ) + εv,t ,
where εv,t is i.i.d. noise, and f is an unknown (but fixed)
function. The collective objective of the group of agents is
1

Media Lab and Institute for Data, Systems and Society, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Abhimanyu Dubey <dubeya@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

to select actions that minimize the expected group regret:
RG (T ) =

X T
X


f (x∗v,t ) − f (xv,t ) ,

v∈V t=1

where, x∗t = arg maxx∈Dv,t f (x). The research objective for this problem is to design multi-agent algorithms
that can leverage communication to improve overall performance (Landgren et al., 2016a; Szorenyi et al., 2013).
Agents communicate via an undirected graph G = (V, E),
where (i, j) ∈ E if agents i and j are connected. Messages
from any agent v are available to agent v 0 after d(v, v 0 ) − 1
trials of the bandit, where d is the distance between the
agents in G. This gradually creates heterogeneity between
the information available to each agent, and is the primary
technical challenge in algorithm design for this problem.
Moreover, recent work assumes that the bandit problem
is common (i.e., f is identical for all agents), but this
assumption does not hold for most decentralized applications (Boldrini et al., 2018). For instance, in a decentralized
supply chain network (Thadakamaila et al., 2004), agents
interact with similar but non-identical decision problems,
since loads are generally distributed non-uniformly. In this
setting, naı̈vely incorporating observations from neighboring agents may not be beneficial, and algorithms must be
carefully designed to optimally leverage cooperation.
A related problem is the online social network clustering
of bandits, where, at every trial, a randomly selected agent
interacts with the bandit (Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2013; Gentile
et al., 2014; 2017; Li et al., 2016; 2019). In this formulation, a fixed (but unknown) clustering over the agents
is assumed, where agents within a cluster have identical context functions. While the assumptions of linearity and clustering are feasible in the context of social networks (Al Mamunur Rashid et al., 2006), these assumptions
may not hold for general multi-agent environments, such
as geographically-distributed computational clusters (Cano
et al., 2016). In the case when each agent has its own unique
decision problem, the clustering approach leads to an O(V )
multiplicative increase in the group regret. Moreover, the social network clustering problem is single-agent, since at any
trial, only one agent interacts with the bandit. This makes
it less challenging compared to the multi-agent cooperative
bandit, since there is no heterogeneity of information (as

