Guided Learning of Nonconvex Models through Successive Functional
Gradient Optimization

Rie Johnson 1 Tong Zhang 2

Abstract
This paper presents a framework of successive
functional gradient optimization for training nonconvex models such as neural networks, where
training is driven by mirror descent in a function
space. We provide a theoretical analysis and empirical study of the training method derived from
this framework. It is shown that the method leads
to better performance than that of standard training techniques.

1. Introduction
This paper presents a new framework to train nonconvex
models such as neural networks. The goal is to learn a
vector-valued function f (θ; x) that predicts an output y
from input x, where θ is the model parameter. For example, for K-class classification where y ∈ {1, 2, . . . , K},
f (θ; x) is K-dimensional, and it can be linked to conditional probabilities via the soft-max logistic function.
Given a set of training data S, the standard method for
solving this problem is to use stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) for finding a parameter that minimizes on S a loss
function
(θ; x), y) with a regularization
term R(θ):
h L(f
i
P
1
minθ |S| (x,y)∈S L(f (θ; x), y) + R(θ) .
In this paper, we consider a new framework that guides
training through successive functional gradient descent so
that training proceeds with alternating the following:
• Generate a guide function so that it is ahead (but not
too far ahead) of the current model with respect to the
minimization of the loss. This is done by functional
gradient descent.
• ‘Push’ the model towards the guide function.
1
RJ Research Consulting, Tarrytown, New York, USA 2 Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Rie Johnson <riejohnson@gmail.com>, Tong
Zhang <tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Our original motivation was functional gradient learning of
additive models in gradient boosting (Friedman, 2001). In
our framework, essentially, training proceeds with repeating
a local search, which limits the searched parameter space to
the functional neighborhood of the current parameter at each
iteration, instead of searching the entire space at once as
the standard method does. This is analogous to ε-boosting
where the use of a very small step-size (for successively
expanding the ensemble of weak functions) is known to
achieve better generalization (Friedman, 2001).
For measuring the distances between models, we use the
Bregman divergence (see e.g., (Bubeck, 2015)) by applying
it to the model output. Given a convex function h, the
Bregman divergence Dh is defined by
Dh (u, v) = h(u) − h(v) − ∇h(v)> (u − v).

(1)

This is the difference between h(u) and the approximation
of h(u) based on the first-order Taylor expansion around v.
This means that when u − v is small,
Dh (u, v) ≈

1
(u − v)> (H (h(v)))(u − v),
2

(2)

where H (h(v)) denotes the Hessian matrix of h with respect
to v. Therefore, use of the Bregman divergence has the
beneficial effect of utilizing the second-order information.
We show that the parameter update rule of an induced
method generalizes that of distillation (Hinton et al., 2014).
That is, our framework subsumes iterative self-distillation
as a special case.
Distillation was originally proposed to transfer knowledge
from a high-performance but cumbersome model to a more
manageable model. Various forms of self-distillation, which
applies distillation to the models of the same architecture,
has been empirically studied (Xu & Liu, 2019; Yang et al.,
2019a; Lan et al., 2018; Furlanello et al., 2018; Anil et al.,
2018; Zhang et al., 2018; Tarvainen & Valpola, 2017; Yim
et al., 2017). One trend is to add to the original scheme, e.g.,
adding a term to the update rule, data distortion/division,
more models for mutual learning, and so forth. However,
we are not aware of any work on theoretical understanding
such as a convergence analysis of the basic self-learning
scheme.

