Off-Policy Actor-Critic with
Shared Experience Replay

Simon Schmitt 1 Matteo Hessel 1 Karen Simonyan 1

Abstract
We investigate the combination of actor-critic reinforcement learning algorithms with a uniform
large-scale experience replay and propose solutions for two ensuing challenges: (a) efficient
actor-critic learning with experience replay (b)
the stability of off-policy learning where agents
learn from other agents behaviour. To this end
we analyze the bias-variance tradeoffs in V-trace,
a form of importance sampling for actor-critic
methods. Based on our analysis, we then argue
for mixing experience sampled from replay with
on-policy experience, and propose a new trust
region scheme that scales effectively to data distributions where V-trace becomes unstable. We
provide extensive empirical validation of the proposed solutions on DMLab-30 and further show
the benefits of this setup in two training regimes
for Atari: (1) a single agent is trained up until
200M environment frames per game (2) a population of agents is trained up until 200M environment frames each and may share experience.
We demonstrate state-of-the-art data efficiency
among model-free agents in both regimes.

1. Introduction
Value-based and actor-critic policy gradient methods are the
two leading model-free techniques of constructing general
and scalable reinforcement learning agents (Sutton et al.,
2018). Both have been combined with non-linear function
approximation (Tesauro, 1995; Williams, 1992), and have
achieved remarkable successes on multiple challenging domains; yet, these algorithms still require large amounts of
data to determine good policies for any new environment.
To improve data efficiency, experience replay agents store
experience in a memory buffer (replay) (Lin, 1992), and
1
DeepMind.
Correspondence to:
<suschmitt@google.com>.

Simon Schmitt

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

Table 1. Comparison of model-free state-of-the-art agents on 57
Atari games in the standard regime: Here no experience is shared
between agents (differently from Figure 1 and Table 2). One
agent is trained per game for up until 200M environment steps
per game. We observe that our proposed LASER (LArge Scale
Experience Replay) agent achieves a substantially higher score
than all model-free prior art.

AGENTS ( TRAINED IN STANDARD
REGIME )
LASER ( OURS )
M ETA -G RADIENT (X U ET AL ., 2018)
RAINBOW (H ESSEL ET AL ., 2017)
IQN (DABNEY ET AL ., 2018)
REACTOR (G RUSLYS ET AL ., 2018)
DQN (M NIH ET AL ., 2013)

ATARI -57 M EDIAN
AT 200M
431%
288%
223%
218%
187%
79%

reuse it multiple times to perform reinforcement learning
updates (Riedmiller, 2005). Replay is often combined with
the value-based Q-learning (Mnih et al., 2015), as it is an offpolicy algorithm by construction, and can perform well even
if the sampling distribution from replay is not aligned with
the latest agent’s policy. Combining experience replay with
actor-critic algorithms can be harder due to their on-policy
nature. Hence, most established actor-critic algorithms with
replay such as (Wang et al., 2017; Gruslys et al., 2018;
Haarnoja et al., 2018) employ and maintain Q-functions to
learn from the replayed off-policy experience.
In this paper, we demonstrate that off-policy actor-critic
learning with experience replay can be achieved without
surrogate Q-function approximators using V-trace by employing the following approaches:
• Off-policy replay experience needs to be mixed with a
proportion of on-policy experience. We experimentally
observe severe degradation in performance if this is
missed (Figure 2) and theoretically that the V-trace
policy gradient is otherwise not guaranteed to converge
to a locally optimal solution.
• A trust region scheme (Conn et al., 2000; Schulman
et al., 2015; 2017) can mitigate bias and enable efficient
learning in a strongly off-policy regime, where distinct

