Dual Mirror Descent for Online Allocation Problems
Santiago Balseiro 1 2 Haihao Lu 2 Vahab Mirrokni 2

Abstract
We consider online allocation problems with concave revenue functions and resource constraints,
which are central problems in revenue management and online advertising. In these settings, requests arrive sequentially during a finite horizon
and, for each request, a decision maker needs to
choose an action that consumes a certain amount
of resources and generates revenue. The revenue
function and resource consumption of each request are drawn independently and at random
from a probability distribution that is unknown to
the decision maker. The objective is to maximize
cumulative revenues subject to a constraint on the
total consumption of resources.
We design a general class of algorithms that
achieve sub-linear expected regret compared to
the hindsight optimal allocation. Our algorithms
operate in the Lagrangian dual space: they maintain a dual multiplier for each resource that is
updated using online mirror descent. By choosing
the reference function accordingly, we recover
dual sub-gradient descent and dual exponential
weights algorithm. The resulting algorithms are
simple, efficient, and shown to attain the optimal
order of regret when the length of the horizon and
the initial number of resources are scaled proportionally. We discuss applications to online bidding
in repeated auctions with budget constraints and
online proportional matching with high entropy.

1. Introduction
A central problem in revenue management and online advertising is the online allocation of requests subject to resource
constraints. In revenue management, for example, firms
such as hotels and airlines need to decide, when a request
for a room or a flight arrives, whether to accept or decline
1
Columbia University, New York, USA 2 Google Research, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Santiago
Balseiro <srb2155@columbia.edu>,
Haihao Lu <haihao.lu@chicagobooth.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

the request (Talluri & van Ryzin, 2004). In search advertising, each time a user makes a search, the search engine has
an opportunity to show an advertisement next to the organic
search results (Mehta et al., 2007b). For each arriving user,
the website collects bids from various advertisers who are
interested in showing an ad and then needs to decide, in real
time, which ad to show to the user. Such decisions are not
made in isolation because resources are limited: hotels have
limited number of rooms, planes have limited number of
seats, and advertisers have limited budgets.
In this paper, we study allocation problems with concave
revenue functions and resource constraints. Requests arrive
sequentially during a finite horizon and, for each request,
the decision maker needs to choose an action that consumes
certain amount of resources and generates revenue. The
objective of the decision maker is to maximize cumulative
revenues subject to a constraint on the total consumption
of resources. The revenue function and resource consumption of each request is learnt by the decision maker before
making a decision. For example, airlines know the fare
requested by the consumer before deciding whether to sell
the ticket and search engines know advertisers’ bids before deciding which ad to show. We assume that the revenue function and resource consumption of each request are
drawn independently and at random from a fixed probability distribution. In practice, decision makers rarely know
the probability distribution of requests in advance. Thus
motivated, we consider a data-driven setting in which the
underlying probability distribution is unknown to the decision maker. Performance of an online algorithm is measured
using regret, which is given by the difference between the
revenue attained by the optimal allocation with the benefit
of hindsight (also referred as the offline optimum) and the
cumulative revenues collected by the algorithm.
1.1. Our Results
We design a general class of algorithms that operate in the
Lagrangian dual space. If the optimal dual variables were
known in advance, the decision maker could, in principle,
use these dual variables to price resources and decompose
the problem across time periods. In practice, however, the
optimal dual variables depend on the entire sequence of requests and are not known to the decision maker in advance.
Our algorithms circumvent this issue by maintaining a dual

