Learning Robot Skills with Temporal Variational Inference

Tanmay Shankar 1 Abhinav Gupta 1

Abstract
In this paper, we address the discovery of robotic
options from demonstrations in an unsupervised
manner. Specifically, we present a framework to
jointly learn low-level control policies and higherlevel policies of how to use them from demonstrations of a robot performing various tasks. By representing options as continuous latent variables,
we frame the problem of learning these options as
latent variable inference. We then present a temporal formulation of variational inference based on
a temporal factorization of trajectory likelihoods,
that allows us to infer options in an unsupervised
manner. We demonstrate the ability of our framework to learn such options across three robotic
demonstration datasets, and provide our code 1 .

1. Introduction
The robotics community has long since sought to acquire
general purpose and reusable robotic skills, to enable robots
to execute a wide range of tasks. The idea of such skills is
attractive; by abstracting away the details of low-level control and reasoning over high-level skills instead, a robot can
address more complex and longer term tasks. Further, the
ability to compose skills leads to a combinatorial increase
in the robot’s capabilities (Leslie Pack Kaelbling, 2017),
ideally spanning the abilities required for the robot to complete the desired tasks. For example, a robot equipped with
reaching, grasping, and pouring skills could compose them
to make a cup of tea as well as pour cereal into a bowl.

aside, these ideas share the notion of eliciting a certain pattern or template of action in response to a particular situation,
differing in their exact implementations and how these skills
are obtained. For example, while previous works (Muelling
et al., 2010; Mülling et al., 2013; Konidaris & Barto, 2009)
manually defined these skills, more recent approaches have
sought to learn these skills, either from interaction (Kulkarni et al., 2016) or from demonstrations (Xu et al., 2018;
Huang et al., 2019; Fox et al., 2017; Krishnan et al., 2017;
Kipf et al., 2019).
Learning skills from demonstrations is appealing, since it
allows non-robotics-expert humans to demonstrate solving
the target tasks, bypassing the tedium of manually specifying these skills or carefully engineering solutions to the
tasks (Argall et al., 2009). But even using demonstrations,
approaches such as Xu et al. (2018); Huang et al. (2019) require heavy supervision such as segmentation of demonstration data. Instead, learning skills in an unsupervised, datadriven manner not only avoids having to annotate demonstrations; it also enables the use of large scale and diverse
demonstration data in robotics (Sharma et al., 2018; Mandlekar et al., 2018). This in turn enables learning a correpsondingly diverse set of skills, as well as how to use them
to achieve a variety of tasks.

*
Equal contribution 1 Facebook AI Research, Pittsburgh,
PA, USA. Correspondence to:
Tanmay Shankar <tanmay.shankar@gmail.com>.

Aside from the issue of learning and representing individual
skills, is the notion of composing them. The efficacy of these
skills is rather limited when used in isolation; by selecting
and sequencing the appropriate skills however, a robot can
achieve a variety of complex tasks, as illustrated by the tea
and cereal example. A rich body of literature addresses
composing skills, including sequencing skills (Neumann
et al., 2014; Peters et al., 2013), hierarchical approaches
(Lioutikov et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2018; Huang et al., 2019;
Konidaris et al., 2012; Konidaris & Barto, 2009; Shankar
et al., 2020), options (Sutton et al., 1999), etc. Some works
(Fox et al., 2017; Krishnan et al., 2017; Kipf et al., 2019)
address jointly learning skills and how to compose them.
Jointly learning both levels of this hierarchy not only addresses how to use these skills, but also allows for adapting
the skills based on how useful they are to the task at hand.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Unfortunately, these works have their own limitations.
While Neumann et al. (2014); Niekum et al. (2012);
Konidaris & Barto (2009) do learn to sequence skills, they

Indeed, the promise of skills has been explored in several
contexts, be it options in reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton et al., 1999), operators in the planning (Fikes & Nilsson,
1971), primitives and behaviours in robotics (Muelling et al.,
2010), or abstractions (Kim et al., 2019). Nomenclature

1

github.com/facebookresearch/CausalSkillLearning

