Optimizer Benchmarking Needs to Account for Hyperparameter Tuning

Prabhu Teja S * 1 2 Florian Mai * 1 2 Thijs Vogels 2 Martin Jaggi 2 François Fleuret 2 3 #

Abstract
The performance of optimizers, particularly in
deep learning, depends considerably on their chosen hyperparameter configuration. The efficacy
of optimizers is often studied under near-optimal
problem-specific hyperparameters, and finding
these settings may be prohibitively costly for practitioners. In this work, we argue that a fair assessment of optimizers’ performance must take
the computational cost of hyperparameter tuning
into account, i.e., how easy it is to find good hyperparameter configurations using an automatic
hyperparameter search. Evaluating a variety of
optimizers on an extensive set of standard datasets
and architectures, our results indicate that Adam
is the most practical solution, particularly in lowbudget scenarios.

The performance of optimizers strongly depends on the
choice of hyperparameter values such as the learning rate.
In the machine learning research community, the sensitivity
of models to hyperparameters has been of great debate recently, where in multiple cases, reported model advances did
not stand the test of time because they could be explained
by better hyperparameter tuning (Lucic et al., 2018; Melis
et al., 2018; Henderson et al., 2018; Dodge et al., 2019).
This has led to calls for using automatic hyperparameter
optimization methods (HPO) with a fixed budget for a fairer
comparison of models (Sculley et al., 2018; Hutter et al.,
2019b; Eggensperger et al., 2019). This eliminates biases
introduced by humans through manual tuning. For industrial applications, automated machine learning (AutoML,
Hutter et al., 2019a), which has automatic hyperparameter
optimization as one of its key concepts, is becoming increasingly more important. In all these cases, an optimization
algorithm that achieves good performances with relatively

1. Introduction

*
Equal contribution 1 Idiap Research Institute, Switzerland
EPFL, Switzerland 3 University of Geneva, Switzerland. # Work
done at Idiap Research Institute. Correspondence to: Prabhu Teja
S <prabhu.teja@idiap.ch>, Florian Mai <fmai@idiap.ch>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Probability of being the best

With the ubiquity of deep learning in various applications,
a multitude of first-order stochastic optimizers (Robbins
& Monro, 1951) have been in vogue. They have varying
algorithmic components like momentum (Sutskever et al.,
2013) and adaptive learning rates (Tieleman & Hinton, 2012;
Duchi et al., 2011; Kingma & Ba, 2015). As the field grows
with newer variants being proposed, the standard method
to benchmark the performance of these optimizers has been
to compare the best possible generalization performance.
While it is certainly an important characteristic to be taken
into account, we argue that in practice an even more important characteristic is the performance achievable with
available resources. A similar view of performance measurement has been recently argued for in the deep learning
community owing to the strong debate on sustainable and
GreenAI (Strubell et al., 2019; Schwartz et al., 2019).

1.0

SGD (l.r. schedule tuned, ﬁxed mom. and w.d.) 12%
SGD (tuned l.r., ﬁxed mom. and w.d.)

0.8

13%

Adam (all params. tuned) 17%

0.6
0.4

Adam (only l.r. tuned)

58%

0.2
0.0
10

20

30

40

50

60

Budget for hyperparameter optimization (# models trained)

Figure 1: Hyperparameter optimization budget affects the
performance of optimizers. We show the probability of
finding a hyperparameter configuration for an optimizer
that performs the best at a given search budget on any task
(sampled from our benchmark). This is encoded by the
height of the respective area in the chart. Generally, we
see that tuning more hyperparameters becomes more useful
with higher budgets. On our 9 diverse tasks that include
vision problems, natural language processing, regression
and classification, tuning only the learning rate for Adam is
the most reliable option, even at large budgets.

