Student Specialization in Deep Rectified Networks With Finite Width and
Input Dimension

Yuandong Tian 1

Abstract
We consider a deep ReLU / Leaky ReLU student network trained from the output of a fixed
teacher network of the same depth, with Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). The student network is over-realized: at each layer l, the number nl of student nodes is more than that (ml )
of teacher. Under mild conditions on dataset and
teacher network, we prove that when the gradient is small at every data sample, each teacher
node is specialized by at least one student node
at the lowest layer. For two-layer network, such
specialization can be achieved by training on any
dataset of polynomial size O(K 5/2 d3 −1 ). √
until
the gradient magnitude drops to O(/K 3/2 d).
Here d is the input dimension, K = m1 + n1 is
the total number of neurons in the lowest layer of
teacher and student. Note that we require a specific form of data augmentation and the sample
complexity includes the additional data generated from augmentation. To our best knowledge,
we are the first to give polynomial sample complexity for student specialization of training twolayer (Leaky) ReLU networks with finite depth
and width in teacher-student setting, and finite
complexity for the lowest layer specialization in
multi-layer case, without parametric assumption
of the input (like Gaussian). Our theory suggests
that teacher nodes with large fan-out weights get
specialized first when the gradient is still large,
while others are specialized with small gradient,
which suggests inductive bias in training. This
shapes the stage of training as empirically observed in multiple previous works. Experiments
on synthetic and CIFAR10 verify our findings.
The code is released in https://github.
com/facebookresearch/luckmatters.
1

Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to: Yuandong Tian
<yuandong@fb.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

1. Introduction
While Deep Learning has achieved great success in different empirical fields (Silver et al., 2016; He et al., 2016; Devlin et al., 2018), it remains an open question how such networks can generalize to new data. As shown by empirical
studies (e.g., (Zhang et al., 2017)), for deep models, training on real or random labels might lead to very different
generalization behaviors. Without any assumption on the
dataset, the generalization bound can be vacuous, i.e., the
same network with zero training error can either generalize
well or perform randomly in the test set.
One way to impose that is via teacher-student setting:
given N input samples, a fixed teacher network provides
the label for a student to learn. The setting has a long history (Gardner & Derrida, 1989) and offers multiple benefits. First, while worst-case performance on arbitrary data
distributions may not be a good model for real structured
dataset and can be hard to analyze, using a teacher network
implicitly enforces an inductive bias and could potentially
lead to better generalization bound. Second, the existence
of teacher is often guaranteed by expressiblility (e.g., even
one-hidden layer can fit any function (Hornik et al., 1989)).
Finally, a reference network could facilitate and deepen our
understanding of the training procedure.
Specialization, i.e., a student node becomes increasingly
correlated with a teacher node during training (Saad &
Solla, 1996), is one important topic in this setup. If all student nodes are specialized to the teacher, then student tends
to output the same as the teacher and generalization performance can be expected. Empirically, it has been observed
in 2-layer networks (Saad & Solla, 1996; Goldt et al., 2019)
and multi-layer networks (Tian et al., 2019; Li et al., 2016),
in both synthetic and real dataset. In contrast, theoretical
analysis is limited with strong assumptions (e.g., Gaussian
inputs, infinite input dimension, local convergence, 2-layer
setting, small number of hidden nodes).
In this paper, we analyze student specialization when both
teacher and student are deep ReLU / Leaky ReLU (Maas
et al., 2013) networks. Similar to (Goldt et al., 2019),
the student is over-realized compared to the teacher: at
each layer l, the number nl of student nodes is larger than

