The Intrinsic Robustness of Stochastic Bandits to Strategic Manipulation

Zhe Feng 1 David C. Parkes 1 Haifeng Xu 2

Abstract
Motivated by economic applications such as recommender systems, we study the behavior of
stochastic bandits algorithms under strategic behavior conducted by rational actors, i.e., the arms.
Each arm is a self-interested strategic player who
can modify its own reward whenever pulled, subject to a cross-period budget constraint, in order to maximize its own expected number of
times of being pulled. We analyze the robustness of three popular bandit algorithms: UCB,
ε-Greedy, and Thompson Sampling. We prove
that all three algorithms achieve a regret upper
bound O(max{B, K ln T }) where B is the total
budget across arms, K is the total number of arms
and T is length of the time horizon. This regret
guarantee holds under arbitrary adaptive manipulation strategy of arms. Our second set of main
results shows that this regret bound is tight— in
fact for UCB it is tight even when we restrict the
arms’ manipulation strategies to form a Nash equilibrium. The lower bound makes use of a simple
manipulation strategy, the same for all three algorithms, yielding a bound of Ω(max{B, K ln T }).
Our results illustrate the robustness of classic bandits algorithms against strategic manipulations as
long as B = o(T ).

1. Introduction
Multi-armed bandits (MAB) algorithms play a significant
role in learning to make decisions across the digital economy, for example in online advertising (Chapelle et al.,
2014; Feng et al., 2019), search engines (Kveton et al.,
2015), and recommender systems (Li et al., 2010). Classical
stochastic MAB models assume that the reward feedback
of each arm is drawn from a fixed distribution. However, in
many economic applications, an arm may be strategic and
1

Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA. Correspondence to: Zhe Feng <zhe_feng@harvard.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

able to modulate its own reward feedback in order to further
its own objective, e.g., increasing the number of times it
is selected. For instance, restaurants may offer discounts
or free dishes in order to entice customers to return, and
sellers on Amazon may offer discounts or coupons in order
to receive higher ratings and thus increase their ranking.
We distinguish two different kinds of actors in our strategic
setting: the principal and the arms. The principal represents a multi-armed bandit algorithm, corresponding to a
system, such as the Amazon marketplace platform. The
arms represent the parties who generate reward feedback
to the principal, for example the sellers on Amazon. We
assume that the true reward of each arm is drawn from an
underlying distribution. Further, we model each arm i as
a strategic agent, able to manipulate its own reward, but
subject to a total budget Bi across all time periods. The
objective of an arm is to maximize its expected number of
times being pulled. Arms can only modify their own reward feedback, and have no control over the rewards of the
other arms. An arm’s strategy can be adaptive— that is, the
amount by which an arm modulates the current reward can
depend on his own history of realized rewards and manipulations. Since arms’ strategies affect each other, through the
MAB algorithm, this dynamic interaction forms a situation
of strategic interdependence among arms, more precisely, a
stochastic game.
This study is motivated by various economic applications of
MAB, where strategic manipulations appear more realistic
than the more conservative consideration of adversarial
attacks (Jun et al., 2018; Lykouris et al., 2018). The central
question that we study in this paper is the following:
Are existing stochastic bandit algorithms robust
to strategic manipulation by arms? Quantitatively,
can we characterize their regret bounds?
For a motivating example, suppose that a recommender
system such as Yelp runs a stochastic bandit algorithm to
recommend a single restaurant to each user. The arms correspond to restaurants to be recommended and each user
access to the system corresponds to a pull of the arms. The
true service quality of each restaurant follows some underlying distribution. However, restaurants are strategic, and
a natural objective is to maximize the expected number of
times a restaurant is recommended to users. To do so, it

