Word-level Speech Recognition with a Letter to Word Encoder

Ronan Collobert 1 Awni Hannun 1 Gabriel Synnaeve 1

Abstract
We propose a direct-to-word sequence model
which uses a word network to learn word embeddings from letters. The word network can
be integrated seamlessly with arbitrary sequence
models including Connectionist Temporal Classification and encoder-decoder models with attention. We show our direct-to-word model can
achieve word error rate gains over sub-word level
models for speech recognition. We also show that
our direct-to-word approach retains the ability
to predict words not seen at training time without any retraining. Finally, we demonstrate that
a word-level model can use a larger stride than
a sub-word level model while maintaining accuracy. This makes the model more efficient both
for training and inference.

1. Introduction
Predicting words directly has the potential to allow for more
accurate, more efficient and simpler end-to-end automatic
speech recognition (ASR) systems. For example, outputting
words enables a word-level learning objective which more
directly optimizes the quality of the transcription. While
phonemes last 50-150 milliseconds and graphemes can be
shorter or even silent, words are on average much longer.
This allows the acoustic model to capture meaning more
holistically, operating at a lower frequency with a larger
context. To operate at a lower frequency the acoustic model
takes larger strides (e.g. sub-samples more), which contributes to a much faster transcription speed and a lower
memory footprint.
One major hurdle for direct-to-word approaches is transcribing words not found in the training vocabulary. Unlike
phone-based or letter-based systems, the output lexicon in
a word-based model is bounded by the words observed in
1

Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to: Ronan Collobert
<locronan@fb.com>, Awni Hannun <awni@fb.com>, Gabriel Synnaeve <gab@fb.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

the training transcriptions. Here, we propose an end-toend model which outputs words directly, yet is still able
to dynamically modify the lexicon with words not seen at
training time. The method consists in jointly training an
acoustic model which outputs word embeddings with a subword model (e.g. graphemes or word pieces) which also
outputs word embeddings. The transcription of a new word
is generated by inputting the individual tokens of the word
into the sub-word model to obtain an embedding. We then
match this embedding to the output of the acoustic model.
For instance, assume the word “caterpillar” was not seen
at training time, but “cat” and “pillar” were. If we input
“caterpillar” into the word embedding model it should yield
an embedding close to the embedding of the acoustic model
when observing speech with the words “cat” and “pillar”.
Another hurdle for direct-to-word approaches is the need
for massive datasets since some words may be seen only
a few times in a data set with even 1,000 hours of speech.
For example, Soltau et al. (2016) demonstrate competitive
word-based speech recognition but require 100,000 hours
of captioned video to do so. Our approach circumvents
this issue by learning an embedding from the sub-word
tokens of the word. By jointly optimizing the word model
and the acoustic model, we gain the added advantage of
learning acoustically relevant word embeddings. In order
to efficiently optimize both the acoustic and word models
simultaneously, we use a simple sampling based approach to
approximate the normalization term over the full vocabulary.
We also show how to efficiently integrate the word model
with a beam search decoder.
We validate our method on two commonly used models for
end-to-end speech recognition. The first is a Connectionist
Temporal Classification (CTC) model (Graves et al., 2006)
and the second is a sequence-to-sequence model with attention (seq2seq) (Bahdanau et al., 2014; Cho et al., 2014;
Sutskever et al., 2014). We show competitive performance
with both approaches and demonstrate the advantage of predicting words directly, especially when decoding without
the use of an external language model. We also validate that
our method enables the use of a dynamic lexicon and can
predict words not seen at training time more accurately than
a word piece baseline. Finally, we show that with our word
level model, we are able to surpass state-of-the-art word
error rate (WER) for end-to-end models on a low resource

