Adversarial Nonnegative Matrix Factorization

Lei Luo 1 2 Yanfu Zhang 2 Heng Huang 1 2

Abstract
Nonnegative Matrix Factorization (NMF) has become an increasingly important research topic
in machine learning. Despite all the practical
success, most of existing NMF models are still
vulnerable to adversarial attacks. To overcome
this limitation, we propose a novel Adversarial
NMF (ANMF) approach in which an adversary
can exercise some control over the perturbed data
generation process. Different from the traditional
NMF models which focus on either the regular
input or certain types of noise, our model considers potential test adversaries that are beyond the
pre-defined constraints, which can cope with various noises (or perturbations). We formulate the
proposed model as a bilevel optimization problem
and use Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM) to solve it with convergence
analysis. Theoretically, the robustness analysis
of ANMF is established under mild conditions
dedicating asymptotically unbiased prediction.
Extensive experiments verify that ANMF is robust to a broad categories of perturbations, and
achieves state-of-the-art performances on distinct
real-world benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
The nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) has been a
prevalent nonnegative dimensionality reduction method and
successfully applied to many fields such as feature extraction
(Zhi et al., 2011), video tracking (Bucak & Gunsel, 2007),
image processing (Geng et al., 2012) and document clustering (Guan et al., 2012). Given a data matrix Y ∈ <m×N
with non-negative entries, the goal of NMF is to factorize
Y into the product AX of two nonnegative matrices, with n
columns in A, where n is generally small.
1
JD Finance America Corporation, Mountain View, CA, USA
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Heng Huang
<heng.huang@pitt.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

Since NMF was popularized by Lee and Seung (Lee &
Seung, 1999), various NMF methods have been proposed.
However, most of them independently deal with each element of X, regardless of the relationship between elements.
To address this issue, some scholars considered the structural information of data or variate in modeling. Specifically,
Cai et al. (Cai et al., 2010) exploited the intrinsic geometry
of the data distribution and constructed a nearest neighbor
graph to model the manifold structure term. Kim et al. (Kim
et al., 2012) leveraged a mixed norm regularization to promote group sparsity in the factor matrices of NMF. Haeffele
et al. (Haeffele et al., 2014) explored a matrix factorization
technique suitable for large datasets that captures additional
structure in the factors by using a projective tensor norm.
It is noteworthy that the NMF models mentioned above are
limited to the regular input, and they are more inclined to
use the simple L2 -norm to characterize the residual between
matrices Y with AX. Such a strategy obviously contradicts
to the practical observations where data often contains noise
which may have heavy-tailed attribute. Thus, in recent research, Robust Nonnegative Matrix Factorization (RNMF)
methods have gained increasing attentions. For instance,
Kong et al. (Kong et al., 2011) presented a novel robust formulation of NMF by using L2,1 -norm loss function which
can accommodate outliers and noises in a better way than
L2 -norm. Subsequently, Huang et al. (Huang et al., 2014)
generalized (Kong et al., 2011) by adopting manifold regularization. Based on the correntropy induced metric, Du et
al. (Du et al., 2012) introduced a robust NMF method which
can effectively cope with the practical noise. Guan et al.
(Guan et al., 2017) proposed a Truncated Cauchy NMF loss
that handles outliers by truncating large errors, while Gao
et al. (Gao et al., 2015) employed capped norm to remove
the effect of extreme data outliers in NMF.
However, the RNMF methods are only suitable for some
special types of noises, e.g., Laplacian or Cauchy noise,
which cannot show the flexibility in facing the worst-case
(i.e., adversarial) perturbations of data points. Compared
with random noise, perturbations caused by specific features or the noise are more common and complex, but often
contaminate the input data in practical applications. Sometimes, they are hardly perceptible to the human eye, yet
sufficient to change the output of an algorithm. As a result,
how to increase the robustness of models against the general

