Certified Data Removal from Machine Learning Models

Chuan Guo 1 Tom Goldstein 2 Awni Hannun 2 Laurens van der Maaten 2

Abstract
Good data stewardship requires removal of data
at the request of the data’s owner. This raises the
question if and how a trained machine-learning
model, which implicitly stores information about
its training data, should be affected by such a removal request. Is it possible to “remove” data
from a machine-learning model? We study this
problem by defining certified removal: a very
strong theoretical guarantee that a model from
which data is removed cannot be distinguished
from a model that never observed the data to begin
with. We develop a certified-removal mechanism
for linear classifiers and empirically study learning settings in which this mechanism is practical.

inference attacks (Yeom et al., 2018; Carlini et al., 2019) are
unsuccessful on data that was removed from the model. We
emphasize that certified removal is a very strong notion of
removal; in practical applications, less constraining notions
may equally fulfill the data owner’s expectation of removal.
We develop a certified-removal mechanism for L2 regularized linear models that are trained using a differentiable convex loss function, e.g., logistic regressors. Our
removal mechanism applies a Newton step on the model
parameters that largely removes the influence of the deleted
data point; the residual error of this mechanism decreases
quadratically with the size of the training set. To ensure
that an adversary cannot extract information from the small
residual (i.e., to certify removal), we mask the residual using an approach that randomly perturbs the training loss
(Chaudhuri et al., 2011). We empirically study in which
settings the removal mechanism is practical.

1. Introduction
Machine-learning models are often trained on third-party
data, for example, many computer-vision models are trained
on images provided by Flickr users (Thomee et al., 2016).
When a party requests that their data be removed from such
online platforms, this raises the question how such a request
should impact models that were trained prior to the removal.
A similar question arises when a model is negatively impacted by a data-poisoning attack (Biggio et al., 2012). Is it
possible to “remove” data from a model without re-training
that model from scratch?
We study this question in a framework we call certified removal, which theoretically guarantees that an adversary cannot extract information about training data that was removed
from a model. Inspired by differential privacy (Dwork,
2011), certified removal bounds the max-divergence between the model trained on the dataset with some instances
removed and the model trained on the dataset that never
contained those instances. This guarantees that membership1

Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, New
York, USA 2 Facebook AI Research, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Chuan Guo <cg563@cornell.edu>, Laurens van der
Maaten <lvdmaaten@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

2. Certified Removal
Let D be a fixed training dataset and let A be a (randomized)
learning algorithm that trains on D and outputs a model
h ∈ H, that is, A : D → H. Randomness in A induces a
probability distribution over the models in the hypothesis
set H. We would like to remove a training sample, x ∈ D,
from the output of A.
To this end, we define a data-removal mechanism M that
is applied to A(D) and aims to remove the influence of
x. If removal is successful, the output of M should be
difficult to distinguish from the output of A applied on
D \ x. Given  > 0, we say that removal mechanism M
performs -certified removal (-CR) for learning algorithm
A if ∀T ⊆ H, D ⊆ X , x ∈ D:
e− ≤

P (M (A(D), D, x) ∈ T )
≤ e .
P (A(D \ x) ∈ T )

(1)

This definition states that the ratio between the likelihood
of (i) a model from which sample x was removed and (ii) a
model that was never trained on x to begin with is close to
one for all models in the hypothesis set, for all possible data
sets, and for all removed samples. Note that although the
definition requires that the mechanism M is universally applicable to all training data points x ∈ D, it is also allowed
to be data-dependent, i.e., both the training set D and the

