LEEP: A New Measure to Evaluate Transferability of Learned Representations

Cuong V. Nguyen 1 Tal Hassner 2 Matthias Seeger 1 Cedric Archambeau 1

Abstract
We introduce a new measure to evaluate the transferability of representations learned by classifiers.
Our measure, the Log Expected Empirical Prediction (LEEP), is simple and easy to compute:
when given a classifier trained on a source data
set, it only requires running the target data set
through this classifier once. We analyze the properties of LEEP theoretically and demonstrate its
effectiveness empirically. Our analysis shows that
LEEP can predict the performance and convergence speed of both transfer and meta-transfer
learning methods, even for small or imbalanced
data. Moreover, LEEP outperforms recently proposed transferability measures such as negative
conditional entropy and H scores. Notably, when
transferring from ImageNet to CIFAR100, LEEP
can achieve up to 30% improvement compared to
the best competing method in terms of the correlations with actual transfer accuracy.

1. Introduction
Transferability estimation (Eaton et al., 2008; Ammar et al.,
2014; Sinapov et al., 2015) is the problem of quantitatively
estimating how easy it is to transfer knowledge learned
from one classification task to another. Specifically, given a
source task, represented by a labeled data set or a pre-trained
model, and a target task, represented by a labeled data set,
transferability estimation aims to develop a measure (or
a score) that can tell us, ideally without training on the
target task, how effectively transfer learning algorithms can
transfer knowledge from the source task to the target task.
Answering this question is important, since good estimations of transferability can help understand the relationships
between tasks (Tran et al., 2019), select groups of highly
transferable tasks for joint training (Zamir et al., 2018), or
1

Amazon Web Services 2 Facebook AI (Work done before joining Facebook). Correspondence to: Cuong V. Nguyen <nguycuo@amazon.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

choose good source models for a given target task (Achille
et al., 2019; Bao et al., 2019; Bhattacharjee et al., 2019). Previous approaches to transferability estimation often require
running a transfer learning algorithm that involves expensive
parameter optimization (Zamir et al., 2018; Achille et al.,
2019), do not have a simple interpretation (Bao et al., 2019),
or make strong assumptions about the data sets that limit
their applicability (Zamir et al., 2018; Tran et al., 2019).
We propose a novel measure called the Log Expected
Empirical Prediction (LEEP) for transferability estimation
of deep networks that overcomes all the shortcomings above.
In contrast to previous approaches, LEEP scores are obtained without training on the target task, thus avoiding the
expensive parameter optimization step. Additionally, they
have a simple interpretation and can be applied in general
settings to a wide range of modern deep networks.
In particular, LEEP scores are obtained from a source model
and a target data set by making a single forward pass of
the model through the target data. This is a simpler process
than previous methods, such as Taskonomy (Zamir et al.,
2018) and Task2Vec (Achille et al., 2019), where one has
to re-train at least part of the source model on the target
data set. Furthermore, LEEP has a simple interpretation:
it is the average log-likelihood of the expected empirical
predictor, a simple classifier that makes prediction based
on the expected empirical conditional distribution between
source and target labels. Finally, LEEP does not make any
assumption on the source and target input samples, except
that they have the same size. This is more general and
applicable than previous work (Zamir et al., 2018; Tran
et al., 2019) where source and target data sets were assumed
to share the same input samples.
Contributions. We formally define LEEP and rigorously
analyze it, both theoretically and empirically. We show two
theoretical properties of the measure: (1) LEEP is upper
bounded by the average log-likelihood of the optimal model,
obtained by re-training the head classifier while freezing
the feature extractor; (2) LEEP is related to the negative
conditional entropy measure proposed by Tran et al. (2019).
We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate our LEEP
measure in several scenarios. We show that the measure is useful for predicting the performance of two com-

