Continuous-time Lower Bounds for Gradient-based Algorithms

Michael Muehlebach 1 Michael I. Jordan 1

Abstract
This article derives lower bounds on the convergence rate of continuous-time gradient-based optimization algorithms. The algorithms are subjected to a time-normalization constraint that
avoids a reparametrization of time in order to
make the discussion of continuous-time convergence rates meaningful. We reduce the multidimensional problem to a single dimension, recover well-known lower bounds from the discretetime setting, and provide insight into why these
lower bounds occur. We present algorithms that
achieve the proposed lower bounds, even when
the function class under consideration includes
certain nonconvex functions.

1. Introduction
Many problems in machine learning and statistics can be
formulated as optimization problems. First-order optimization algorithms, such as gradient descent, are commonly
used due to their simplicity and due to the fact that their
complexity scales mildly in the number of decision variables. These algorithms are known to have natural limits on
their convergence rate. We will examine these complexity
lower bounds from a dynamical systems perspective. Unusually for the literature on lower bounds, we will work in
continuous time. Our continuous-time perspective not only
leads to insights into why complexity bounds arise, but also
provides guidance for algorithm design.
A commonly used technique for deriving lower bounds is
to construct a function that is difficult to optimize (see, e.g.,
Nesterov, 2004, p. 59). Such a function is typically obtained
by ensuring that, at the jth iteration, all gradients that an algorithm has evaluated so far belong to a (j +1)-dimensional
subspace which is far away from the optimum. Dimension1
Division of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
and Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, USA. Correspondence to: Michael Muehlebach
<michaelm@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

independent lower bounds then result from an unbounded
increase in the problem dimension. This establishes, for
example, that for the
√ class of smooth and strongly convex
functions at least κ/2 ln(c/) iterations are needed to
achieve an -distance to the optimizer (for large κ), where c
is a constant and κ refers to the condition number (Nesterov,
2004, p. 68). The lower bound is achieved by accelerated
gradient methods; for example, Scoy et al. (2018) provide
an algorithm that attains the lower bound up to a factor of
two. In the nonconvex setting, deriving tight lower bounds
for smooth functions is an active area of research, where
important recent contributions have been made by Carmon
et al. (2019), for example.
We are motivated by a line of recent work that views optimization algorithms as continuous-time dynamical systems
(see, e.g., Su et al., 2016; Krichene et al., 2015; Wibisono
et al., 2016; Diakonikolas & Jordan, 2019; Muehlebach &
Jordan, 2019). This work has provided significant insight
into convergence rates of discrete-time algorithms via translating upper bounds from continuous time to discrete time.
We ask the question whether it is also possible to obtain
insight into lower bounds on gradient-based algorithms via
a continuous-time analysis.
Instead of constructing a function that is difficult to optimize,
we exploit invariance properties of the function class under
consideration, which, combined with a local analysis about
a (local) minimum, greatly simplifies the dynamics that
need to be considered. This reduces the problem of determining the worst-case convergence rate over the given class
of functions to the analysis of a parameter-dependent characteristic polynomial. We show that under certain circumstances the classical dimension-independent discrete-time
lower bound for smooth and strongly convex functions can
be recovered. We also derive continuous-time algorithms
that achieve faster convergence rates. These algorithms
include very fast dynamics and it is a matter of future research to investigate whether it is possible to derive practical
discretizations of these dynamics.
A related—but discrete-time—perspective has been presented by Arjevani et al. (2016), where optimization algorithms are modeled by kth-order linear dynamical systems, and the complexity is shown to be lower bounded

