Accelerated Stochastic Gradient-free and Projection-free Methods

Feihu Huang 1 2 Lue Tao 1 2 Songcan Chen 1 2

Abstract

In the paper, we propose a class of accelerated
stochastic gradient-free and projection-free (a.k.a.,
zeroth-order Frank-Wolfe) methods to solve the
constrained stochastic and finite-sum nonconvex
optimization. Specifically, we propose an accelerated stochastic zeroth-order Frank-Wolfe (AccSZOFW) method based on the variance reduced
technique of SPIDER/SpiderBoost and a novel
momentum accelerated technique. Moreover, under some mild conditions, we prove that the AccSZOFW
√ has the function query complexity of
O(d n−2 ) for finding an -stationary point in
the finite-sum problem, which improves
the ex√
iting best result by a factor of O( n−2 ), and
has the function query complexity of O(d−3 ) in
the stochastic problem, which improves the exiting best result by a factor of O(−1 ). To relax
the large batches required in the Acc-SZOFW,
we further propose a novel accelerated stochastic
zeroth-order Frank-Wolfe (Acc-SZOFW*) based
on a new variance reduced technique of STORM,
which still reaches the function query complexity of O(d−3 ) in the stochastic problem without
relying on any large batches. In particular, we
present an accelerated framework of the FrankWolfe methods based on the proposed momentum
accelerated technique. The extensive experimental results on black-box adversarial attack and
robust black-box classification demonstrate the
efficiency of our algorithms.

1
College of Computer Science & Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing 211106, China
2
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis & Machine Intelligence.
Correspondence to: Feihu Huang <huangfeihu@nuaa.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
In the paper, we focus on solving the following constrained
stochastic and finite-sum optimization problems

E [f (x; ξ)]
(stochastic)

 ξ
n
X
(1)
min f (x) = 1
x∈X

fi (x)
(finite-sum)
n
i=1
where f (x) : Rd → R is a nonconvex and smooth loss
function, and the restricted domain X ⊆ Rd is supposed
to be convex and compact, and ξ is a random variable that
following an unknown distribution. When f (x) denotes the
expected risk function, the problem (1) will be seen as a
stochastic problem. While f (x) denotes the empirical risk
function, it will be seen as a finite-sum problem. In fact, the
problem (1) appears in many machine learning models such
as multitask learning, recommendation systems and, structured prediction (Jaggi, 2013; Lacoste-Julien et al., 2013;
Hazan & Luo, 2016). For solving the constrained problem
(1), one common approach is the projected gradient method
(Iusem, 2003) that alternates between optimizing in the unconstrained space and projecting onto the constrained set
X . However, the projection is quite expensive to compute
in many constrained sets such as the set of all bounded
nuclear norm matrices. The Frank-Wolfe algorithm (i.e.,
conditional gradient)(Frank & Wolfe, 1956; Jaggi, 2013) is
a good candidate for solving the problem (1), which only
needs to compute a linear operator instead of projection operator at each iteration. Following (Jaggi, 2013), the linear
optimization on X is much faster than the projection onto
X in many problems such as the set of all bounded nuclear
norm matrices.
Due to its projection-free property and ability to handle
structured constraints, the Frank-Wolfe algorithm has recently regained popularity in many machine learning applications, and its variants have been widely studied. For
example, several convex variants of Frank-Wolfe algorithm
(Jaggi, 2013; Lacoste-Julien & Jaggi, 2015; Lan & Zhou,
2016; Xu & Yang, 2018) have been studied. In the big
data setting, the corresponding online and stochastic FrankWolfe algorithms (Hazan & Kale, 2012; Hazan & Luo, 2016;
Hassani et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2019) have been developed,
and their convergence rates were studied. The above FrankWolfe algorithms were mainly studied in the convex setting.

