The k-tied Normal Distribution: A Compact Parameterization of
Gaussian Mean Field Posteriors in Bayesian Neural Networks

Jakub Swiatkowski 1 + Kevin Roth 2 + Bastiaan S. Veeling 3 4 + Linh Tran 5 + Joshua V. Dillon 4 Jasper Snoek 4
Stephan Mandt 6 + Tim Salimans 4 Rodolphe Jenatton 4 Sebastian Nowozin 7 +

Abstract
Variational Bayesian Inference is a popular
methodology for approximating posterior distributions over Bayesian neural network weights.
Recent work developing this class of methods
has explored ever richer parameterizations of the
approximate posterior in the hope of improving
performance. In contrast, here we share a curious experimental ﬁnding that suggests instead
restricting the variational distribution to a more
compact parameterization. For a variety of deep
Bayesian neural networks trained using Gaussian
mean-ﬁeld variational inference, we ﬁnd that the
posterior standard deviations consistently exhibit
strong low-rank structure after convergence. This
means that by decomposing these variational parameters into a low-rank factorization, we can
make our variational approximation more compact without decreasing the models’ performance.
Furthermore, we ﬁnd that such factorized parameterizations improve the signal-to-noise ratio of
stochastic gradient estimates of the variational
lower bound, resulting in faster convergence.

1. Introduction
Bayesian neural networks (MacKay, 1992; Neal, 1993) are a
popular class of deep learning models. The most widespread
approach for training these models relies on variational inference (Peterson, 1987; Hinton & Van Camp, 1993), a
training paradigm that approximates a Bayesian posterior
with a simpler class of distributions by solving an optimization problem. The common wisdom is that more expressive
+

Work done while at Google 1 University of Warsaw
ETH Zurich 3 University of Amsterdam 4 Google Research
5
Imperial College London 6 University of California, Irvine
7
Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: Jakub Swiatkowski
<jakub.swiatkowski@mimuw.edu.pl>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

distributions lead to better posterior approximations and
ultimately to better model performance. This paper puts
this into question and instead ﬁnds that for Bayesian neural
networks, more restrictive classes of distributions, based
on low-rank factorizations, can outperform the common
mean-ﬁeld family.
Bayesian Neural Networks explicitly represent their
parameter-uncertainty by forming a posterior distribution
over model parameters, instead of relying on a single point
estimate for making predictions, as is done in traditional
deep learning. For neural network weights w, features x
and labels y, the posterior distribution p(w|x, y) is computed using Bayes’ rule, which multiplies the prior distribution p(w) and data likelihood p(y|w, x) and renormalizes.
When predicting with Bayesian neural networks, we form
an average over model predictions where each prediction is
generated using a set of parameters that is randomly sampled from the posterior distribution. This can be viewed as
a type of ensembling, of which various types have proven
highly effective in deep learning (see e.g. Goodfellow et al.,
2016, sec 7.11).
Besides offering improved predictive performance over single models, Bayesian ensembles are also more robust because ensemble members will tend to make different predictions on hard examples (Raftery et al., 2005). In addition,
the diversity of the ensemble represents predictive uncertainty and can be used for out-of-domain detection or other
risk-sensitive applications (Ovadia et al., 2019).
Variational inference is a popular class of methods for approximating the posterior distribution p(w|x, y), since the
exact Bayes’ rule is often intractable to compute for models
of practical interest. This class of methods speciﬁes a distribution qθ (w) of given parametric or functional form as the
posterior approximation, and optimizes the approximation
by solving an optimization problem. In particular, we minimize the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence DKL between
the variational distribution qθ (w) and the true posterior dis-

