Convolutional Kernel Networks for Graph-Structured Data

Dexiong Chen 1 Laurent Jacob 2 Julien Mairal 1

Abstract
We introduce a family of multilayer graph kernels and establish new links between graph convolutional neural networks and kernel methods.
Our approach generalizes convolutional kernel
networks to graph-structured data, by representing graphs as a sequence of kernel feature maps,
where each node carries information about local
graph substructures. On the one hand, the kernel point of view offers an unsupervised, expressive, and easy-to-regularize data representation,
which is useful when limited samples are available. On the other hand, our model can also be
trained end-to-end on large-scale data, leading
to new types of graph convolutional neural networks. We show that our method achieves competitive performance on several graph classification benchmarks, while offering simple model
interpretation. Our code is freely available at
https://github.com/claying/GCKN.

1. Introduction
Graph kernels are classical tools for representing graphstructured data (see Kriege et al., 2020, for a survey).
Most successful examples represent graphs as very-highdimensional feature vectors that enumerate and count occurences of local graph sub-structures. In order to perform
well, a graph kernel should be as expressive as possible, i.e.,
able to distinguish graphs with different topological properties (Kriege et al., 2018), while admitting polynomial-time
algorithms for its evaluation. Common sub-structures include walks (Gärtner et al., 2003), shortest paths (Borgwardt
& Kriegel, 2005), subtrees (Shervashidze et al., 2011), or
graphlets (Shervashidze et al., 2009).
1
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK,
38000 Grenoble, France 2 Univ. Lyon, Université Lyon 1,
CNRS, Laboratoire de Biométrie et Biologie Evolutive UMR
5558, 69000 Lyon, France. Correspondence to: Dexiong Chen,
Julien Mairal <firstname.lastname@inria.fr>, Laurent Jacob
<laurent.jacob@univ-lyon1.fr>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Graph kernels have shown to be expressive enough to yield
good empirical results, but decouple data representation and
model learning. In order to obtain task-adaptive representations, another line of research based on neural networks
has been developed recently (Niepert et al., 2016; Kipf &
Welling, 2017; Xu et al., 2019; Verma et al., 2018). The resulting tools, called graph neural networks (GNNs), are conceptually similar to convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
for images; they provide graph-structured multilayer models, where each layer operates on the previous layer by
aggregating local neighbor information. Even though harder
to regularize than kernel methods, these models are trained
end-to-end and are able to extract features adapted to a specific task. In a recent work, Xu et al. (2019) have shown that
the class of GNNs based on neighborhood aggregation is
at most as powerful as the Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL) graph
isomorphism test, on which the WL kernel is based (Shervashidze et al., 2011), and other types of network architectures than simple neighborhood aggregation are needed for
more powerful features.
Since GNNs and kernel methods seem to benefit from different characteristics, several links have been drawn between
both worlds in the context of graph modeling. For instance,
Lei et al. (2017) introduce a class of GNNs whose output
lives in the reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) of a
WL kernel. In this line of research, the kernel framework is
essentially used to design the architecture of the GNN since
the final model is trained as a classical neural network. This
is also the approach used by Zhang et al. (2018a) and Morris
et al. (2019). By contrast, Du et al. (2019) adopt an opposite strategy and leverage a GNN architecture to design new
graph kernels, which are equivalent to infinitely-wide GNNs
initialized with random weights and trained with gradient
descent. Other attempts to merge neural networks and graph
kernels involve using the metric induced by graph kernels
to initialize a GNN (Navarin et al., 2018), or using graph
kernels to obtain continuous embeddings that are plugged
to neural networks (Nikolentzos et al., 2018).
In this paper, we go a step further in bridging graph neural networks and kernel methods by proposing an explicit
multilayer kernel representation, which can be used either
as a traditional kernel method, or trained end-to-end as a
GNN when enough labeled data are available. The multilayer construction allows to compute a series of maps

