Decentralized Reinforcement Learning:
Global Decision-Making via Local Economic Transactions

Michael Chang 1 Sidhant Kaushik 1 S. Matthew Weinberg 2 Thomas L. Griffiths 2 Sergey Levine 1

Abstract
This paper1 seeks to establish a framework for
directing a society of simple, specialized, selfinterested agents to solve what traditionally are
posed as monolithic single-agent sequential decision problems. What makes it challenging to
use a decentralized approach to collectively optimize a central objective is the difficulty in characterizing the equilibrium strategy profile of noncooperative games. To overcome this challenge,
we design a mechanism for defining the learning
environment of each agent for which we know
that the optimal solution for the global objective
coincides with a Nash equilibrium strategy profile
of the agents optimizing their own local objectives.
The society functions as an economy of agents
that learn the credit assignment process itself by
buying and selling to each other the right to operate on the environment state. We derive a class of
decentralized reinforcement learning algorithms
that are broadly applicable not only to standard
reinforcement learning but also for selecting options in semi-MDPs and dynamically composing
computation graphs. Lastly, we demonstrate the
potential advantages of a society’s inherent modular structure for more efficient transfer learning.

You know that everything you think and do is thought and
done by you. But what’s a “you”? What kinds of smaller
entities cooperate inside your mind to do your work?
(Minsky, 1988)

1

Department of Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, Princeton University, USA. Correspondence to: Michael Chang
<mbchang@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
1
Code, talk, and blog here.

Figure 1. We study how a society of primitives agents can be
abstracted as a super-agent. The incentive mechanism is the abstraction barrier that relates the optimization problems of the superagent with those of its constituent primitive agents.

1. Introduction
Biological processes, corporations, and ecosystems – physically decentralized, yet in some sense functionally unified.
A corporation, for example, optimizes for maximizing profits as it were a single rational agent. But this agent abstraction is an illusion: the corporation is simply a collection of
human agents, each solving their own optimization problems, most not even knowing the existence of many of their
colleagues. But the human as the decision-making agent is
also simply an abstraction of the trillions of cells making
their own simpler decisions. The society of agents is itself an
agent. What mechanisms bridge between these two levels
of abstraction, and under what framework can we develop
learning algorithms for studying the self-organizing nature
of intelligent societies that pervade so much of the world?
Both the monolithic and the multi-agent optimization frameworks in machine learning offer a language for representing
only one of the levels of abstraction but not the relation
between both. The monolithic framework, the most commonly used in much of modern machine learning, considers
a single agent that optimizes a single objective in an environment, whether it be minimizing classification loss or
maximizing return. The multi-agent framework considers
multiple agents that each optimize their own independent
objective and each constitute each other’s learning environments. What distinguishes the multi-agent from the monolithic is the presence of multiple independent optimization
problems. The difficulty of interpreting a learner in the
monolithic framework as a society of simpler components
is that all components are still globally coupled together by
the same optimization problem without independent local

