The Neural Tangent Kernel in High Dimensions:
Triple Descent and a Multi-Scale Theory of Generalization

Ben Adlam * † 1 Jeffrey Pennington * 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Machine learning models based on deep neural networks
have achieved widespread success across a variety of domains, often playing integral roles in products and services
people depend on. As users rely on these systems in increasingly important scenarios, it becomes paramount to establish
Equal contribution † Work done as a member of the Google AI
Residency Program. 1 Google Brain. Correspondence to: Jeffrey
Pennington <jpennin@google.com>.
*

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Abundant parameterization

Superabundant parameterization

Linear
scaling

Quadratic
scaling

Loss

Modern deep learning models employ considerably more parameters than required to fit the training data. Whereas conventional statistical wisdom
suggests such models should drastically overfit,
in practice these models generalize remarkably
well. An emerging paradigm for describing this
unexpected behavior is in terms of a double descent curve, in which increasing a model’s capacity causes its test error to first decrease, then
increase to a maximum near the interpolation
threshold, and then decrease again in the overparameterized regime. Recent efforts to explain
this phenomenon theoretically have focused on
simple settings, such as linear regression or kernel regression with unstructured random features,
which we argue are too coarse to reveal important
nuances of actual neural networks. We provide
a precise high-dimensional asymptotic analysis
of generalization under kernel regression with the
Neural Tangent Kernel, which characterizes the
behavior of wide neural networks optimized with
gradient descent. Our results reveal that the test
error has non-monotonic behavior deep in the
overparameterized regime and can even exhibit
additional peaks and descents when the number of
parameters scales quadratically with the dataset
size.

Classical regime

Deterministic
NTK

p  m2

pm
Trainable parameters

Figure 1. An illustration of multi-scale generalization phenomena
for neural networks and related kernel methods. The classical
U-shaped under- and over-fitting curve is shown on the far left.
After a peak near the interpolation threshold, when the number
of parameters p equals the number of samples m, the test loss decreases again, a phenomenon known as double descent. On the far
right is the limit when p → ∞, which is described by the Neural
Tangent Kernel. In this work, we identify a new scale of interest in
between these two regimes, namely when p is quadratic in m, and
show that it exhibits complex non-monotonic behavior, suggesting
that double descent does not provide a complete picture. Putting
these observations together we define three regimes separated by
two transitional phases: (i) the classical regime of underparameterization when p < m, (ii) the abundant parameterization regime
when m < p < m2 , and (iii) the superabundant parameterization
regime when p > m2 . The transitional phases between them are
of particular interest as they produce non-monotonic behavior.

a rigorous understanding for when the models might work,
and, crucially, when they might not. Unfortunately, the current theoretical understanding of deep learning is modest at
best, as large gaps persist between theory and observation
and many basic questions remain unanswered.
One of the most conspicuous such gaps is the unexpectedly good generalization performance of large, heavilyoverparameterized models. These models can be so expressive that they can perfectly fit the training data (even
when the labels are replace by pure noise), but still manage
to generalize well on real data (Zhang et al., 2016). An
emerging paradigm for describing this behavior is in terms
of a double descent curve (Belkin et al., 2019a), in which
increasing a model’s capacity causes its test error to first
decrease, then increase to a maximum near the interpolation threshold (where the number of parameters equals the
number of samples), and then decrease again in the overparameterized regime.

