Learning with Good Feature Representations in Bandits and in RL with a
Generative Model
Tor Lattimore 1 Csaba Szepesvári 2 3 Gellért Weisz 1

Abstract
The construction by Du et al. (2019) implies that
even if a learner is given linear features in Rd
that approximate the rewards in a bandit with a
uniform error of ε, then searching for an action
that is optimal up to O(ε) requires examining
essentially all actions. We use the Kiefer–
Wolfowitz theorem to prove a positive result that
by checking only a few actions, a learner can
always find an action that
√ is suboptimal with an
error of at most O(ε d). Thus, features are
useful when the approximation error is small
relative to the dimensionality of the features.
The idea is applied to stochastic bandits and
reinforcement learning with a generative model
where the learner has access to d-dimensional
linear features that approximate the action-value
functions for all policies to an accuracy of ε. For
linear bandits,
we prove a√bound on the regret
p
of order dn log(k) + εn d log(n) with k the
number of actions and n the horizon. For RL we
show that approximate policy iteration can learn
a policy√that is optimal up to an additive error of
order ε d/(1 − γ)2 and using d/(ε2 (1 − γ)4 )
samples from a generative model.

1. Introduction
Du et al. (2019) ask whether “good feature representation” is
sufficient for efficient reinforcement learning and suggest a
negative answer. Efficiency here means learning a good
policy with a small number of interactions either with
the environment (on-line learning), or with a simulator
(planning). A linear feature representation is called “good”
if it approximates the value functions of all policies with a
small uniform error. The same question can also be asked
1

DeepMind, London 2 DeepMind, Edmonton 3 University
of Alberta.
Correspondence to: Tor Lattimore <lattimore@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

for learning in bandits. The ideas by Du et al. (2019) suggest
that the answer is also negative in finite-armed bandits with
a misspecified linear model. All is not lost, however. By
relaxing the objective, we will show that one can obtain
positive results showing that efficient learning is possible in
interactive settings with good feature representations.
The rest of this article is organised as follows. First we
introduce the problem of learning to identify a near-optimal
action with side information about the possible reward
(Section 2). We then adapt the argument of Du et al. (2019)
to show that no algorithm can find an O(ε)-optimal action
without examining nearly all the actions, even when the
rewards lie within an ε-vicinity of a subspace spanned
by some features available to the algorithm (Section 3).
The negative result is complemented by a positive result
showing that there exists an algorithm such that for any
feature map of dimension d, the algorithm is able√to
find an action with suboptimality gap of at most O(ε d)
where ε is the maximum distance between the reward
and the subspace spanned by the features in the maxnorm. The algorithm only needs to investigate the reward
at O(d log log d) well-chosen actions. The main idea is
to use the Kiefer-Wolfowitz theorem with a least-squares
estimator of the reward function. Finally, we apply the idea
to stochastic bandits (Section 5) and reinforcement learning
with a generative model (Section 6).
Related work Despite its importance, the problem of
identifying near-optimal actions when rewards follow
a misspecified linear model has only recently received
attention. Of course, there is the recent paper by Du et al.
(2019), whose negative result inspired this work and is
summarised for our setting in Section 3. A contemporaneous
work also addressing the issues raised by Du et al. (2019)
is by Van Roy and Dong (2019), who make a connection
to the Eluder dimension (Russo and Van Roy, 2013) and
prove a variation on our Proposition 4.2. The setting
studied here in Section 3 is closely related to the query
complexity of exactly maximising a function in a given
function class, which was studied by Amin et al. (2011).
They introduced the haystack dimension as a hardness
measure for exact maximisation. Unfortunately, their results
for infinite classes are generally not tight and no results for

