Provably Efficient Model-based Policy Adaptation

Yuda Song 1 Aditi Mavalankar 1 Wen Sun 2 Sicun Gao 1

Abstract
The high sample complexity of reinforcement
learning challenges its use in practice. A promising approach is to quickly adapt pre-trained policies to new environments. Existing methods for
this policy adaptation problem typically rely on
domain randomization and meta-learning, by sampling from some distribution of target environments during pre-training, and thus face difficulty
on out-of-distribution target environments. We
propose new model-based mechanisms that are
able to make online adaptation in unseen target
environments, by combining ideas from no-regret
online learning and adaptive control. We prove
that the approach learns policies in the target environment that can recover trajectories from the
source environment, and establish the rate of convergence in general settings. We demonstrate the
benefits of our approach for policy adaptation in
a diverse set of continuous control tasks, achieving the performance of state-of-the-art methods
with much lower sample complexity. Our project
website, including code, can be found at https:
//yudasong.github.io/PADA.

1. Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods typically require a very large number of interactions with environments,
making them difficult to be used on practical systems (Tan
et al., 2018). A promising direction is to adapt policies
trained in one environment to similar but unseen environments, such as from simulation to real robots. Existing approaches for policy adaptation mostly focus on pre-training
the policies to be robust to predefined distributions of disturbances in the environment, by increasing the sample diversity during training (Peng et al., 2018; Tobin et al., 2017;
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University
of California, San Diego, La Jolla, USA 2 Department of Computer
Science, Cornell University, Ithaca , USA. Correspondence to:
Yuda Song <yus167@ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Mordatch et al., 2015), or meta-learn policies or models that
can be quickly adapted to in-distribution environments (Finn
et al., 2017a; Nagabandi et al., 2019a;b; Yu et al., 2018a).
A key assumption for these approaches is that the distribution of the target environments is known, and that it can be
efficiently sampled during training. On out-of-distribution
target environments, these methods typically do not deliver
good performance, reflecting common challenges in generalization (Na et al., 2020). If we observe how humans and
animals adapt to environment changes, clearly there is an
online adaptation process in addition to memorization (Staddon, 2016). We can quickly learn to walk with a slightly
injured leg even if we have not experienced the situation.
We draw experiences from normal walking and adapt our
actions online, based on how their effects differ from what
we are familiar with in normal settings. Indeed, this intuition has recently led to practical approaches for policy
adaptation. The work in (Christiano et al., 2016) uses a pretrained policy and model of the training environment, and
learns an inverse dynamics model from scratch in the new
environment by imitating the behaviors of the pre-trained
policy. However, it does not involve mechanisms for actively reducing the divergence between the state trajectories
of the two environments, which leads to inefficiency and
distribution drifting, and does not fully capture the intuition
above. The work in (Zhu et al., 2018) uses Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning (GAIL) (Ho & Ermon, 2016)
to imitate the source trajectories in the new environment,
by adding the GAIL discriminator to the reward to reduce
divergence, but relies on generic policy optimization methods with high sample complexity. In general, these recent
approaches show the feasibility of policy adaptation, but are
not designed for optimizing sample efficiency. There has
been no theoretical analysis of whether policy adaptation
methods can converge in general, or their benefits in terms
of sample complexity.
In this paper, we propose a new model-based approach for
the policy adaptation problem that focuses on efficiency
with theoretical justification. In our approach, the agent attempts to predict the effects of its actions based on a model
of the training environment, and then adapts the actions to
minimize the divergence between the state trajectories in the
new (target) environment and in the training (source) environment. This is achieved by iterating between two steps: a

