On Coresets for Regularized Regression

Rachit Chhaya 1 Anirban Dasgupta 1 Supratim Shit 1

Abstract
We study the effect of norm based regularization on the size of coresets for regression problems. Specifically, given a matrix A ∈ Rn×d with
n  d and a vector b ∈ Rn and λ > 0, we analyze the size of coresets for regularized versions
of regression of the form kAx − bkrp + λkxksq .
Prior work has shown that for ridge regression
(where p, q, r, s = 2) we can obtain a coreset that
is smaller than the coreset for the unregularized
counterpart i.e. least squares regression (Avron
et al., 2017). We show that when r 6= s, no coreset
for regularized regression can have size smaller
than the optimal coreset of the unregularized version. The well known lasso problem falls under
this category and hence does not allow a coreset
smaller than the one for least squares regression.
We propose a modified version of the lasso problem and obtain for it a coreset of size smaller than
the least square regression. We empirically show
that the modified version of lasso also induces
sparsity in solution, similar to the original lasso.
We also obtain smaller coresets for `p regression
with `p regularization. We extend our methods to
multi response regularized regression. Finally, we
empirically demonstrate the coreset performance
for the modified lasso and the `1 regression with
`1 regularization.

1. Introduction
Most of the applications of machine learning require huge
amounts of data to train models. As the algorithms to train
models run in time dependent on the size of the data, the
task becomes computationally inefficient. A coreset is a subsample of appropriately reweighted points from the original
data which can be used to train models with competitive
accuracy and provable guarantees. The size of a coreset is
1

Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar, Gandhinagar, India . Correspondence to:
Rachit Chhaya <rachit.chhaya@iitgn.ac.in>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

usually independent of the size of the original dataset making training on them much quicker. Sampling based coresets
also allow better interpretability in contrast to data reduction
techniques which project data points in some other space.
Regression is a widely used technique in machine learning and statistics, the most popular variants being the least
square regression (`2 regression) and least absolute deviation (`1 regression). A coreset construction for `2 regression
based on leverage scores is given in (Drineas et al., 2006)
whereas coresets for `p regression have been created based
either on norms of the so called well-conditioned basis (Dasgupta et al., 2009; Sohler & Woodruff, 2011) or based on
Lewis weights (Cohen & Peng, 2015).
A common variant of regression is to use regularization,
meant to either achieve numerical stability, to prevent overfitting or to induce sparsity in the solution– ridge and lasso
being the most commonly used regularizers. Since regularization imposes a constraint on the solution space, we can
potentially expect regularized problems to have a smaller
size coreset, than the unregularized version. Indeed, this
intuition has been formalized in the case of ridge regression (Woodruff et al., 2014) using the ridge leverage scores.
Pilanci et al. (Pilanci & Wainwright, 2015) construct small
sized coresets for constrained version of lasso using random
projections; these coresets are, however, not (scaled) subsample of data points. To the best of our knowledge ours is
the first work to study coresets for `p regularized regression
for p 6= 2. Our first result is negative– we show that it is
not always possible to build smaller coresets for regularized
regression. For a specific class of problems we show that
smaller coresets are possible and we show how to construct
them.
To construct such coresets, we follow the sensitivity framework given in (Feldman & Langberg, 2011). Sensitivities
defined in (Langberg & Schulman, 2010) capture the importance of a data point for a particular optimization function.
If we sample points using a probability distribution based
on sensitivities, the sample size depends on the sum of the
sensitivities and the dimension of the solution space. The
core idea behind our bounds is that due to regularization,
the sensitivities of points change – while the sensitivity of
very low sensitivity points might increase slightly (by additive 1/n), the higher sensitivities are pulled down. The

