Robust Graph Representation Learning via Neural Sparsification

Cheng Zheng 1 Bo Zong 2 Wei Cheng 2 Dongjin Song 2 Jingchao Ni 2 Wenchao Yu 2 Haifeng Chen 2
Wei Wang 1

Abstract
Graph representation learning serves as the core
of important prediction tasks, ranging from product recommendation to fraud detection. Reallife graphs usually have complex information
in the local neighborhood, where each node is
described by a rich set of features and connects to dozens or even hundreds of neighbors.
Despite the success of neighborhood aggregation in graph neural networks, task-irrelevant information is mixed into nodes’ neighborhood,
making learned models suffer from sub-optimal
generalization performance. In this paper, we
present NeuralSparse, a supervised graph sparsification technique that improves generalization power by learning to remove potentially
task-irrelevant edges from input graphs. Our
method takes both structural and non-structural
information as input, utilizes deep neural networks to parameterize sparsification processes,
and optimizes the parameters by feedback signals from downstream tasks. Under the NeuralSparse framework, supervised graph sparsification could seamlessly connect with existing
graph neural networks for more robust performance. Experimental results on both benchmark
and private datasets show that NeuralSparse can
yield up to 7.2% improvement in testing accuracy when working with existing graph neural
networks on node classification tasks.

1. Introduction
Representation learning has been in the center of many machine learning tasks on graphs, such as name disambigua1

Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA 2 NEC Laboratories America, Princeton, NJ, USA. Correspondence to:
Cheng
Zheng <chengzheng@cs.ucla.edu>, Wei Wang <weiwang@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

tion in citation networks (Zhang et al., 2018), spam detection in social networks (Akoglu et al., 2015), recommendations in online marketing (Ying et al., 2018), and many
others (Yu et al., 2018; Li et al., 2018). As a class of models that can simultaneously utilize non-structural (e.g., node
and edge features) and structural information in graphs,
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) construct effective representations for downstream tasks by iteratively aggregating neighborhood information (Li et al., 2016; Hamilton
et al., 2017; Kipf & Welling, 2017). Such methods have
demonstrated state-of-the-art performance in classification
and prediction tasks on graph data (Veličković et al., 2018;
Chen et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2019; Ying et al., 2019).
Meanwhile, the underlying motivation why two nodes get
connected may have no relation to a target downstream
task, and such task-irrelevant edges could hurt neighborhood aggregation as well as the performance of GNNs.
Consider the following example shown in Figure 1. Blue
and Red are two classes of nodes, whose two-dimensional
features are generated following two independent Gaussian
distributions, respectively. As shown in Figure 1(a), the
overlap between their feature distributions makes it difficult to find a good boundary that well separates the Blue
and Red nodes by node features only. Blue and Red nodes
are also inter-connected forming a graph. For each node
(either Blue or Red), it randomly selects 10 nodes as its
one-hop neighbors, and the resulting edges may not be related to node labels. On such a graph, we train a two-layer
GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017), and the node representations
output from the two-layer GCN is illustrated in Figure 1(b).
When task-irrelevant edges are mixed into neighborhood
aggregation, the trained GCN fails to learn better representations, and it becomes difficult to learn a subsequent
classifier with strong generalization power.
In this paper, we study how to utilize supervision signals
to remove task-irrelevant edges in an inductive manner to
achieve robust graph representation learning. Conventional
methods, such as graph sparsification (Liu et al., 2018;
Zhang & Patone, 2017; Leskovec & Faloutsos, 2006; Sadhanala et al., 2016), are unsupervised such that the resulting
sparsified graphs may not favor downstream tasks. Several works (Zeng et al., 2020; Hamilton et al., 2017; Chen
et al., 2018) focus on downsampling under predefined dis-

