Monte-Carlo tree search as regularized policy optimization

Jean-Bastien Grill * 1 Florent Altché * 1 Yunhao Tang * 1 2 Thomas Hubert 3 Michal Valko 1
Ioannis Antonoglou 3 Rémi Munos 1

Abstract
The combination of Monte-Carlo tree search
(MCTS) with deep reinforcement learning has
led to significant advances in artificial intelligence. However, AlphaZero, the current stateof-the-art MCTS algorithm, still relies on handcrafted heuristics that are only partially understood. In this paper, we show that AlphaZero’s
search heuristics, along with other common ones
such as UCT, are an approximation to the solution of a specific regularized policy optimization
problem. With this insight, we propose a variant
of AlphaZero which uses the exact solution to
this policy optimization problem, and show experimentally that it reliably outperforms the original
algorithm in multiple domains.

1. Introduction
Policy gradient is at the core of many state-of-the-art deep
reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms. Among many successive improvements to the original algorithm (Sutton et al.,
2000), regularized policy optimization encompasses a large
family of such techniques. Among them trust region policy
optimization is a prominent example (Schulman et al., 2015;
2017; Abdolmaleki et al., 2018; Song et al., 2019). These algorithmic enhancements have led to significant performance
gains in various benchmark domains (Song et al., 2019).
As another successful RL framework, the AlphaZero family
of algorithms (Silver et al., 2016; 2017b;a; Schrittwieser
et al., 2019) have obtained groundbreaking results on challenging domains by combining classical deep learning (He
et al., 2016) and RL (Williams, 1992) techniques with
Monte-Carlo tree search (Kocsis and Szepesvári, 2006).
To search efficiently, the MCTS action selection criteria
takes inspiration from bandits (Auer, 2002). Interestingly,
*

Equal contribution 1 DeepMind, Paris, FR 2 Columbia University, New York, USA 3 DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence
to: Jean-Bastien Grill <jbgrill@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

AlphaZero employs an alternative handcrafted heuristic to
achieve super-human performance on board games (Silver
et al., 2016). Recent MCTS-based MuZero (Schrittwieser
et al., 2019) has also led to state-of-the-art results in the
Atari benchmarks (Bellemare et al., 2013).
Our main contribution is connecting MCTS algorithms,
in particular the highly-successful AlphaZero, with MPO,
a state-of-the-art model-free policy-optimization algorithm (Abdolmaleki et al., 2018). Specifically, we show that
the empirical visit distribution of actions in AlphaZero’s
search procedure approximates the solution of a regularized
policy-optimization objective. With this insight, our second
contribution a modified version of AlphaZero that comes
significant performance gains over the original algorithm,
especially in cases where AlphaZero has been observed to
fail, e.g., when per-search simulation budgets are low (Hamrick et al., 2020).
In Section 2, we briefly present MCTS with a focus on AlphaZero and provide a short summary of the model-free
policy-optimization. In Section 3, we show that AlphaZero
(and many other MCTS algorithms) computes approximate
solutions to a family of regularized policy optimization
problems. With this insight, Section 4 introduces a modified
version of AlphaZero which leverages the benefits of the
policy optimization formalism to improve upon the original algorithm. Finally, Section 5 shows that this modified
algorithm outperforms AlphaZero on Atari games and continuous control tasks.

2. Background
Consider a standard RL setting tied to a Markov decision
process (MDP) with state space X and action space A. At a
discrete round t ≥ 0, the agent in state xt ∈ X takes action
at ∈ A given a policy at ∼ π(·|st ), receives reward rt ,
and transitions to a next state xt+1 ∼ p(·|xt , at ). The RL
problem consists in finding a policy
P which maximizes the
discounted cumulative return Eπ [ t≥0 γ t rt ] for a discount
factor γ ∈ (0, 1). To scale the method to large environments,
we assume that the policy πθ (a|x) is parameterized by a
neural network θ.

