Amortized Population Gibbs Samplers with Neural Sufficient Statistics

Hao Wu 1 Heiko Zimmermann 1 Eli Sennesh 1 Tuan Anh Le 2 Jan-Willem van de Meent 1

Abstract
We develop amortized population Gibbs (APG)
samplers, a class of scalable methods that frames
structured variational inference as adaptive importance sampling. APG samplers construct highdimensional proposals by iterating over updates
to lower-dimensional blocks of variables. We
train each conditional proposal by minimizing the
inclusive KL divergence with respect to the conditional posterior. To appropriately account for
the size of the input data, we develop a new parameterization in terms of neural sufficient statistics. Experiments show that APG samplers can
train highly structured deep generative models in
an unsupervised manner, and achieve substantial
improvements in inference accuracy relative to
standard autoencoding variational methods.

1. Introduction
Many inference tasks involve hierarchical structure. For
example, when modeling a corpus of videos that contain
moving objects, we may wish to reason about three levels
of representation. At the corpus level, we can reason about
the distribution over objects and dynamics of motion. At the
instance level, i.e. for each video, we can reason the visual
features and trajectories of individual objects. Finally, at a
data point level, i.e. for each video frame, we can reason
about the visibility of objects and their position.
In the absence of supervision, uncovering hierarchical structure from data requires inductive biases. Deep generative
models let us incorporate biases in the form of priors that
mirror the structure of the problem domain. By parameterizing conditional distributions with neural networks, we
hope to learn models that use corpus-level characteristics
(e.g. the appearance of objects and the motion dynamics) to
1
Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA 2 Department of Brain and Cognitive
Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA,
USA. Correspondence to: Hao Wu <haowu@ccs.neu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

make data-efficient inferences about instance-level variables
(e.g. object appearance and positions).
In recent years we have seen applications of amortized variational methods to inference in hierarchical domains, such as
object detection (Eslami et al., 2016), modeling of user reviews (Esmaeili et al., 2019), and object tracking (Kosiorek
et al., 2018). These approaches build on the framework of
variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2013;
Rezende et al., 2014) to train structured deep generative
models. However, scaling up these approaches to more complex domains still poses significant challenges. Whereas it
is easy to train VAEs on large corpora of data, it is not easy
to train structured encoders for models with a large number
of (correlated) variables at the instance level.
In this paper, we develop methods for amortized inference
that scale to structured models with hundreds of latent variables. Our approach takes inspiration from work by Johnson
et al. (2016), which develops methods for efficient inference
in deep generative models with conjugate-exponential family priors. In this class of models, we can perform inference using variational Bayesian expectation maximization
(VBEM) (Beal, 2003; Bishop, 2006; Wainwright & Jordan, 2008), which iterates between closed-form updates to
blocks of variables. VBEM is computationally efficient,
often converges in a small number of iterations, and scales
to a large number of variables. However, VBEM is also
model-specific, difficult to implement, and only applicable
to a restricted class of conjugate-exponential models.
To overcome these limitations, we develop a more general
approach that frames variational inference as importance
sampling with amortized proposals. We propose amortized
population Gibbs samplers, a class of methods that iterate
between conditional proposals to blocks of variables. To
train these proposals, we minimize the inclusive KL divergence w.r.t. the conditional posterior. We use proposals
in a sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) sampler to reduce the
variance of importance weights, which improves efficiency
during training and inference at test time.
Our experiments establish that APG samplers can capture
the hierarchical structure in deep generative models in an
unsupervised manner. In Gaussian mixture models, where
Gibbs updates can be computed in closed form, the learned
proposals converge to the conditional posteriors. To evalu-

