The Boomerang Sampler

Joris Bierkens 1 Sebastiano Grazzi 1 Kengo Kamatani 2 Gareth Roberts 3

Abstract
This paper introduces the Boomerang Sampler as
a novel class of continuous-time non-reversible
Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithms. The
methodology begins by representing the target
density as a density, e−U , with respect to a
prescribed (usually) Gaussian measure and constructs a continuous trajectory consisting of a
piecewise elliptical path. The method moves
from one elliptical orbit to another according to
a rate function which can be written in terms of
U . We demonstrate that the method is easy to implement and demonstrate empirically that it can
out-perform existing benchmark piecewise deterministic Markov processes such as the bouncy
particle sampler and the Zig-Zag. In the Bayesian
statistics context, these competitor algorithms are
of substantial interest in the large data context due
to the fact that they can adopt data subsampling
techniques which are exact (ie induce no error
in the stationary distribution). We demonstrate
theoretically and empirically that we can also construct a control-variate subsampling boomerang
sampler which is also exact, and which possesses
remarkable scaling properties in the large data
limit. We furthermore illustrate a factorised version on the simulation of diffusion bridges.

1. Introduction
Markov chain Monte Carlo remains the gold standard for
asymptotically exact (ie bias-free) Bayesian inference for
complex problems in Statistics and Machine Learning; see
for example (Brooks et al., 2011). Yet a major impediment
to its routine implementation for large data sets is the need
to evaluate the target density (and possibly other related
functionals) at each algorithm iteration.
1
Technische Universiteit Delft, Netherlands 2 Graduate School
of Engineering Science, Osaka University, Japan 3 Department of
Statistics, University of Warwick, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Joris Bierkens <joris.bierkens@tudelft.nl>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Partly motivated by this, in recent years there has been a
surge in the development of innovative piecewise deterministic Monte Carlo methods (PDMC, most notably the Bouncy
Particle Sampler (BPS) (Bouchard-Côté et al., 2017) and
the Zig-Zag Sampler (ZZ) (Bierkens et al., 2019)), as a competitor for classical MCMC algorithms such as MetropolisHastings and Gibbs sampling. We refer to (Fearnhead et al.,
2018) for an accessible introduction to the PDMC setting.
The primary benefits of these methods are the possibility of
exact subsampling and non-reversibility. Exact subsampling
refers to the possibility of using only a subset of the full
data set (or even just a single observation) at each iteration
of the algorithm, without introducing bias in the output of
the algorithm (Fearnhead et al., 2018). Non-reversibility
is a property of MCMC algorithms related to a notion of
direction of the algorithm, reducing the number of backtracking steps, thus reducing the diffusivity of the algorithm
and reducing the asymptotic variance; as analyzed e.g. in
(Diaconis et al., 2000; Andrieu & Livingstone, 2019).
The current key proponents BPS and ZZ of the PDMC
paradigm share the following description of their dynamics. The process moves continuously in time according to a
constant velocity over random time intervals, which are separated by ‘switching events’. These switching events occur
at stochastic times at which the velocity, or a component of
it, is either reflected, or randomly refreshed. The direction
of a reflection, and the random time at which it occurs, is
influenced by the target probability distribution.
In this paper we explore the effect of modifying the property of constant velocity. By doing so we introduce the
Boomerang Sampler which has dynamics of the simple
dv
form dx
dt = v, dt = −x. Similar ideas were introduced
in (Vanetti et al., 2017) and termed Hamiltonian-BPS, a
method which can be seen as a special case of our approach.
We generalise the Hamiltonian-BPS algorithm in three important ways.
1. We relax a condition which restricts the covariance function of the auxiliary velocity process to be
isotropic. This generalisation is crucial to ensure good
convergence properties of the algorithm.
2. Furthermore we extend the Boomerang Sampler to
allow for exact subsampling (as introduced above),

