Semiparametric Nonlinear Bipartite Graph Representation Learning
with Provable Guarantees
Sen Na 1 Yuwei Luo 1 Zhuoran Yang 2 Zhaoran Wang 3 Mladen Kolar 4

Abstract
Graph representation learning is a ubiquitous task
in machine learning where the goal is to embed
each vertex into a low-dimensional vector space.
We consider the bipartite graph and formalize its
representation learning problem as a statistical
estimation problem of parameters in a semiparametric exponential family distribution: the bipartite graph is assumed to be generated by a semiparametric exponential family distribution, whose
parametric component is given by the proximity
of outputs of two one-layer neural networks that
take high-dimensional features as inputs, while
nonparametric (nuisance) component is the base
measure. In this setting, the representation learning problem is equivalent to recovering the weight
matrices, and the main challenges of estimation
arise from the nonlinearity of activation functions
and the nonparametric nuisance component of
the distribution. To overcome these challenges,
we propose a pseudo-likelihood objective based
on the rank-order decomposition technique and
show that the proposed objective is strongly convex in a neighborhood around the ground truth,
so that a gradient descent-based method achieves
linear convergence rate. Moreover, we prove that
the sample complexity of the problem is linear
in dimensions (up to logarithmic factors), which
is consistent with parametric Gaussian models.
However, our estimator is robust to any model
misspecification within the exponential family,
which is validated in extensive experiments.

1

Department of Statistics, University of Chicago, Chicago IL,
USA 2 Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton NJ, USA 3 Department of
Industrial Engineering and Management Sciences, Northwestern
University, Chicago IL, USA 4 Booth School of Business, University of Chicago, Chicago IL, USA. Correspondence to: Sen Na
<senna@uchicago.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Graphs naturally arise as models in a variety of applications,
ranging from social networks (Scott, 1988) and molecular
biology (Higham et al., 2008) to recommendation systems
(Ma et al., 2018) and transportation (Bell & Iida, 1997). In
a variety of problems, graphs tend to be high-dimensional
and highly entangled, and hence difficult to directly learn
from. As a prominent remedy, graph representation learning aims to learn a mapping that represents each vertex
as low-dimensional vector such that structural properties
of the original graph are preserved. Those learned lowdimensional representations, also called embeddings, are
further used as the input features in downstream machine
learning tasks, such as link prediction (Taskar et al., 2004;
Al Hasan & Zaki, 2011), node classification (Bhagat et al.,
2011), and community detection (Fortunato, 2010).
There are three major approaches to graph embedding: matrix factorization-based algorithms (Belkin & Niyogi, 2002;
Ahmed et al., 2013), random walk algorithms (Perozzi et al.,
2014; Grover & Leskovec, 2016), and graph neural networks (Scarselli et al., 2008; Zhou et al., 2018; Wu et al.,
2019). These approaches can be unified via the encoderdecoder framework proposed in Hamilton et al. (2017b). In
this framework, the encoder is a mapping that projects each
vertex or a subgraph to a low-dimensional vector, whereas
the decoder is a probability model that infers the structural
information of the graph from the embeddings generated
by the encoder. The structural information here depends on
the specific downstream tasks of interest, which also determines the loss function of the decoder. The desired graph
representations are hence obtained by minimizing the loss
function as a function of embedding vectors. For example,
in the link prediction task, the decoder predicts whether an
edge between two vertices exists or not using a Bernoulli
model and logistic loss function, and the model parameter
is a function of embeddings (Baldin & Berthet, 2018).
Such an encoder-decoder architecture motivates the study of
graph representation learning through the lens of statistical
estimation for generative models. In particular, suppose the
observed graph is generated by a statistical model specified
by the decoder with true graph representations as its inputs.
We can then assess the performance of a graph embedding
algorithm by examining the difference between the learned
representation and the ground truth. Baldin & Berthet (2018)

