Schatten Norms in Matrix Streams: Hello Sparsity, Goodbye Dimension

Vladimir Braverman 1 Robert Krauthgamer 2 Aditya Krishnan 1 Roi Sinoff 2

Abstract
Spectral functions of large matrices contain important structural information about the underlying data, and are thus becoming increasingly important. Many times, large matrices representing real-world data are sparse or doubly sparse
(i.e., sparse in both rows and columns), and are
accessed as a stream of updates, typically organized in row-order. In this setting, where space
(memory) is the limiting resource, all known algorithms require space that is polynomial in the
dimension of the matrix, even for sparse matrices. We address this challenge by providing the
first algorithm whose space requirement is independent of the matrix dimension, assuming the
matrix is doubly-sparse and presented in roworder. Our algorithms approximate the Schatten
p-norms, which we use in turn to approximate
other spectral functions, such as logarithm of the
determinant, trace of matrix inverse, and Estrada
index. We validate these theoretical performance
bounds by numerical experiments on real-world
matrices representing social networks. We further prove that multiple passes are unavoidable in
this setting, and show extensions of our primary
technique, including a trade-off between space
requirements and number of passes.

1. Introduction
Large matrices are often used to represent real-world data
sets like text documents, images and social networks, however analyzing them is increasingly challenging, as their
Authors are listed in alphabetical order.
Full version : (Braverman et al., 2019) 1 Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, USA. 2 Department
of Computer Science & Applied Mathematics, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel.
Correspondence to:
Vladimir Braverman <vova@cs.jhu.edu>, Robert Krauthgamer
<robert.krauthgamer@weizmann.ac.il>, Aditya Krishnan <akrish23@jhu.edu>, Roi Sinoff <roi.sinoff@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

sheer size renders many algorithms impractical. Fortunately, in several application domains, input matrices are
often very sparse, meaning that only a small fraction of
their entries are non-zero. In fact, in applications related
to natural language processing, image recognition, medical imaging and computer vision (e.g. (Ganitkevitch et al.,
2013; Goyette et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2015)), the matrices are often doubly sparse, i.e., sparse in both rows and
columns. Throughout, we say that a matrix is k-sparse if
every row and every column has at most k non-zero entries. The current work devises new algorithms to analyze
the spectrum (singular values) of such sparse matrices, aiming to achieve efficiency (storage requirement in streaming
model) that depends on matrix sparsity k instead of matrix
dimension n.
We focus on fundamental functions of the spectrum, called
Schatten norms. Formally, the Schatten p-norm of a matrix
A ∈ Rm×n , m ≥ n with singular values σ1 ≥ . . . ≥ σn ≥
0 is defined for every p ≥ 1 as
kAkSp :=

n
X

σip

1/p

.

i=1

This definition extends also to p = 0, ∞ by taking the
limit. Frequently used cases include p = 0, representing
the rank of A, and p = 1, 2, ∞, commonly known as the
trace/nuclear norm, Frobenius norm, and spectral/operator
norm, respectively. Schatten norms are often used as surrogates for the spectrum, as explained in (Zhang et al.,
2015; Kong and Valiant, 2016; Napoli et al., 2016; Khetan
and Oh, 2019), and some specific cases have applications
in optimization, image processing, and differential privacy
etc. (Xie et al., 2016; Musco et al., 2018). For simplicity,
we focus on the case m = n.
For a positive semidefinite (PSD) matrix A, the Schatten
norms can be easily used to approximate other important
spectral functions. One example is the trace of matrix inverse Tr(A−1 ), which is used for image restoration, for
counting triangles in graphs, to measure the uncertainty
in data collections, and to bound the total variance of unbiased estimators (see e.g. (Wu et al., 2016; Chen, 2016;
Han et al., 2017; Braverman, 2019)). Another example
is the Estrada index, which has applications in chemistry,
physics, network theory and information theory (see the

