Implicit Class-Conditioned Domain Alignment
for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation

Xiang Jiang 1 2 Qicheng Lao 1 3 Stan Matwin 2 4 Mohammad Havaei 1

Abstract
We present an approach for unsupervised domain
adaptation—with a strong focus on practical considerations of within-domain class imbalance and
between-domain class distribution shift—from a
class-conditioned domain alignment perspective.
Current methods for class-conditioned domain
alignment aim to explicitly minimize a loss
function based on pseudo-label estimations of
the target domain. However, these methods suffer
from pseudo-label bias in the form of error accumulation. We propose a method that removes the need
for explicit optimization of model parameters from
pseudo-labels. Instead, we present a samplingbased implicit alignment approach, where the
sample selection is implicitly guided by the pseudolabels. Theoretical analysis reveals the existence
of a domain-discriminator shortcut in misaligned
classes, which is addressed by the proposed
approach to facilitate domain-adversarial learning.
Empirical results and ablation studies confirm the
effectiveness of the proposed approach, especially
in the presence of within-domain class imbalance
and between-domain class distribution shift.

1. Introduction
Supervised learning aims to extract statistical patterns from
data by learning to approximate the conditional density
p(y|x). However, the generalization of the approximation
is often sensitive to some dataset-specific factors. Dataset
shift (Quionero-Candela et al., 2009) frequently arises from
real-world applications and can manifest in many different
ways, such as sample selection bias (Heckman, 1979; Torralba et al., 2011), class distribution shift (Webb & Ting,
2005), and covariate shift (Shimodaira, 2000). Unsupervised
1

Imagia, Canada 2 Dalhousie University, Canada 3 Mila,
Université de Montréal, Canada 4 Polish Academy of Sciences,
Poland. Correspondence to: Xiang Jiang <xiang.jiang@dal.ca>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the
author(s).

Domain Adaptation (UDA) aims to address domain shift with
access to labeled data in the source domain and unlabeled data
in the target domain (Pan & Yang, 2009). The fundamental
algorithmic issue is to infer domain-invariant representations.
While considerable progress has been made in UDA (Ganin
et al., 2016), they tend to focus on marginal distribution
matching in the feature space, and less emphasis is made
on discovering label distributions. In real-world applications, it is very common to have class imbalance (Japkowicz
& Stephen, 2002; Chawla, 2009) within each domain and
class distribution shift (Tan et al., 2019) between different
domains, necessitating the incorporation of label space distribution into adaptation. Explicit class-conditioned domain
alignment (Xie et al., 2018; Pan et al., 2019; Liang et al.,
2019a; Deng et al., 2019) has emerged as a key approach to
promoting class-conditioned invariance by aligning prototypical representations of each class. While explicit alignment
has the advantage of directly minimizing class-conditioned
misalignment, it presents critical vulnerabilities to error accumulation (Chen et al., 2019a) and ill-calibrated probabilities (Guo et al., 2017) due to its dependence on explicit supervision from pseudo-labels provided by model predictions.
We propose Implicit Class-Conditioned Domain Alignment
that removes the need for explicit pseudo-label based optimization. Instead, we use the pseudo-labels implicitly to sample class-conditioned data in a way that maximally aligns the
joint distribution between features and labels. The primary
advantage of the sampling-based implicit domain alignment
is the ability to address within-domain class imbalance and
between-domain class distribution shift, in addition to many
other benefits such as applications in cost-sensitive learning.
The proposed method is simple, effective, and is supported by
theoretical analysis on the empirical estimations of domain divergence measures. It also overcomes limitations of explicit
alignment by allowing the domain adaptation algorithm to
discover class-conditioned domain-invariance in an unsupervised way without explicit supervision from pseudo-labels.
The contributions of this paper are as follows: (i) We
propose implicit class-conditioned domain alignment to
address the challenge of within-domain class imbalance and
between-domain class distribution shift, which overcomes
the limitation of error accumulation in explicit domain align-

