Explainable k-Means and k-Medians Clustering
Sanjoy Dasgupta 1 Nave Frost 2 Michal Moshkovitz 1 Cyrus Rashtchian 1

Abstract
Many clustering algorithms lead to cluster assignments that are hard to explain, partially because
they depend on all the features of the data in a
complicated way. To improve interpretability, we
consider using a small decision tree to partition a
data set into clusters, so that clusters can be characterized in a straightforward manner. We study
this problem from a theoretical viewpoint, measuring cluster quality by the k-means and k-medians
objectives. In terms of negative results, we show
that popular top-down decision tree algorithms
may lead to clusterings with arbitrarily large cost,
and any clustering based on a tree with k leaves
must incur an ⌦(log k) approximation factor compared to the optimal clustering. On the positive
side, for two means/medians, we show that a single threshold cut can achieve a constant factor approximation, and we give nearly-matching lower
bounds; for general k 2, we design an efficient
algorithm that leads to an O(k) approximation to
the optimal k-medians and an O(k 2 ) approximation to the optimal k-means. Prior to our work, no
algorithms were known with provable guarantees
independent of dimension and input size.

1. Introduction
A central direction in machine learning is understanding the
reasoning behind decisions made by learned models (Lipton,
2018; Molnar, 2019; Murdoch et al., 2019). Prior work on
AI explainability focuses on the interpretation of a black-box
model, known as post-modeling explainability (Baehrens
et al., 2010; Deutch & Frost, 2019). While methods such as
LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016) or Shapley explanations (Lundberg & Lee, 2017) have made progress in this direction, they
do not provide direct insight into the underlying data set,
1
University of California, San Diego 2 Tel Aviv University. Correspondence to: Nave Frost <navefrost@mail.tau.ac.il>, Michal
Moshkovitz <mmoshkovitz@eng.ucsd.edu>, Cyrus Rashtchian
<crashtchian@eng.ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

and the explanations depend heavily on the given model.
This has raised concerns about the applicability of current
solutions, leading researchers to consider more principled
approaches to interpretable methods (Rudin, 2019).
We address the challenge of developing machine learning
systems that are explainable by design, starting from an
unlabeled data set. Specifically, we consider pre-modeling
explainability in the context of clustering. A common use
of clustering is to identify patterns or discover structural
properties in a data set by quantizing the unlabeled points.
For instance, k-means clustering may be used to discover
coherent groups among a supermarket’s customers. While
there are many good clustering algorithms, the resulting
cluster assignments can be hard to understand because the
clusters may be determined using all the features of the data,
and there may be no concise way to explain the inclusion of
a particular point in a cluster. This limits the ability of users
to discern the commonalities between points within a cluster
or understand why points ended up in different clusters.
Our goal is to develop accurate, efficient clustering algorithms with concise explanations of the cluster assignments.
There should be a simple procedure using a few features
to explain why any point belongs to its cluster. Small decision trees have been identified as a canonical example of
an easily explainable model (Molnar, 2019; Murdoch et al.,
2019), and previous work on explainable clustering uses an
unsupervised decision tree (Bertsimas et al., 2018; Fraiman
et al., 2013; Geurts et al., 2007; Ghattas et al., 2017; Liu
et al., 2005). Each node of the binary tree iteratively partitions the data by thresholding on a single feature. We focus
on finding k clusters, and hence, we use trees with k leaves.
Each leaf corresponds to a cluster, and the tree is as small
as possible. We refer to such a tree as a threshold tree.
There are many benefits of using a small threshold tree to
produce a clustering. Any cluster assignment is explained
by computing the thresholds along the root-to-leaf path.
By restricting to k leaves, we ensure that each such path
accesses at most k 1 features, independent of the data
dimension. In general, a threshold tree provides an initial
quantization of the data set, which can be combined with
other methods for future learning tasks. While we consider
static data sets, new data points can be easily clustered by
using the tree, leading to explainable assignments.

