Single Point Transductive Prediction
Nilesh Tripuraneni 1 Lester Mackey 2

Abstract

can knowledge of a single test point x? be leveraged to
improve prediction for x? ? In the random design linear
model setting (1), we answer this question in the affirmative.

Standard methods in supervised learning separate training and prediction: the model is fit independently of any test points it may encounter.
However, can knowledge of the next test point
x? be exploited to improve prediction accuracy?
We address this question in the context of linear
prediction, showing how techniques from semiparametric inference can be used transductively to
combat regularization bias. We first lower bound
the x? prediction error of ridge regression and the
Lasso, showing that they must incur significant
bias in certain test directions. We then provide
non-asymptotic upper bounds on the x? prediction error of two transductive prediction rules. We
conclude by showing the efficacy of our methods
on both synthetic and real data, highlighting the
improvements single point transductive prediction
can provide in settings with distribution shift.

Specifically, in Section 2 we establish out-of-sample prediction lower bounds for the popular ridge and Lasso estimators,
highlighting the significant dimension-dependent bias introduced by regularization. In Section 3 we demonstrate how
this bias can be mitigated by presenting two classes of transductive estimators that exploit explicit knowledge of the
test point x? . We provide non-asymptotic risk bounds for
these estimators in the random design setting, proving that
they achieve dimension-free O( n1 ) x? -prediction risk for n
sufficiently large. In Section 4, we first validate our theory
in simulation, demonstrating that transduction improves the
prediction accuracy of the Lasso with fixed regularization
even when x? is drawn from the training distribution. We
then demonstrate that under distribution shift, our transductive methods outperform even the popular cross-validated
Lasso, cross-validated ridge, and cross-validated elastic net
estimators (which attempt to find an optimal data-dependent
trade-off between bias and variance) on both synthetic data
and a suite of five real datasets.

1. Introduction
We consider the task of prediction given independent datapoints ((yi , xi ))ni=1 from a linear model,
yi = x >
i

0 + ✏i ,

E[✏i ] = 0,

✏i ?? xi

(1)

in which our observed targets y = (y1 , . . . , yn ) 2 Rn and
covariates X = [x1 , . . . , xn ]> 2 Rn⇥p are related by an
unobserved parameter vector 0 2 Rp and noise vector
✏ = (✏1 , . . . , ✏n ) 2 Rn .

Most approaches to linear model prediction are inductive,
divorcing the steps of training and prediction; for example,
regularized least squares methods like ridge regression (Hoerl & Kennard, 1970) and the Lasso (Tibshirani, 1996) are
fit independently of any knowledge of the next target test
point x? . This suggests a tantalizing transductive question:
1

Department of EECS, University of California, Berkeley
Microsoft Research, New England. Correspondence to: Nilesh
Tripuraneni <nilesh_tripuraneni@berkeley.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1.1. Related Work
Our work is inspired by two approaches to semiparametric inference: the debiased Lasso approach introduced by
(Zhang & Zhang, 2014; Van de Geer et al., 2014; Javanmard
& Montanari, 2014) and the orthogonal machine learning
approach of Chernozhukov et al. (2017). The works (Zhang
& Zhang, 2014; Van de Geer et al., 2014; Javanmard &
Montanari, 2014) obtain small-width and asympoticallyvalid confidence intervals (CIs) for individual model parameters ( 0 )j = h 0 , ej i by debiasing an initial Lasso
estimator (Tibshirani, 1996). The works (Chao et al., 2014;
Cai & Guo, 2017; Athey et al., 2018) each consider a more
closely related problem of obtaining prediction confidence
intervals using a generalization of the debiased Lasso estimator of Javanmard & Montanari (2014). The work of
Chernozhukov et al. (2017)
p describes a general-purpose
procedure for extracting n-consistent and asymptotically
normal target parameter estimates in the presence of nuisance parameters. Specifically, Chernozhukov et al. (2017)
construct a two-stage estimator where one initially fits firststage estimates of nuisance parameters using arbitrary ML

