Communication-Efficient Distributed Stochastic AUC Maximization
with Deep Neural Networks

Zhishuai Guo 1 Mingrui Liu 1 Zhuoning Yuan 1 Li Shen 2 Wei Liu 2 Tianbao Yang 1

Abstract

In this paper, we study distributed algorithms for
large-scale AUC maximization with a deep neural network as a predictive model. Although distributed learning techniques have been investigated extensively in deep learning, they are not
directly applicable to stochastic AUC maximization with deep neural networks due to its striking differences from standard loss minimization
problems (e.g., cross-entropy).Towards addressing this challenge, we propose and analyze a
communication-efficient distributed optimization
algorithm based on a non-convex concave reformulation of the AUC maximization, in which the
communication of both the primal variable and
the dual variable between each worker and the
parameter server only occurs after multiple steps
of gradient-based updates in each worker. Compared with the naive parallel version of an existing
algorithm that computes stochastic gradients at individual machines and averages them for updating
the model parameters, our algorithm requires a
much less number of communication rounds and
still achieves a linear speedup in theory. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first work that
solves the non-convex concave min-max problem
for AUC maximization with deep neural networks
in a communication-efficient distributed manner
while still maintaining the linear speedup property
in theory. Our experiments on several benchmark
datasets show the effectiveness of our algorithm
and also confirm our theory.

1

Department of Computer Science, The University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA 2 Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China.
Correspondence to: Tianbao Yang <tianbao-yang@uiowa.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Large-scale distributed deep learning (Dean et al., 2012; Li
et al., 2014) has achieved tremendous successes in various
domains, including computer vision (Goyal et al., 2017),
natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2018; Yang et al.,
2019), generative modeling (Brock et al., 2018), reinforcement learning (Silver et al., 2016; 2017), etc. From the
perspective of learning theory and optimization, most of
them are trying to minimize a surrogate loss of a specific
error measure using parallel minibatch stochastic gradient
descent (SGD). For example, on the image classification
task, the surrogate loss is usually the cross entropy between
the estimated probability distribution according to the output of a certain neural network and the vector encoding
ground-truth labels (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Simonyan &
Zisserman, 2014; He et al., 2016), which is a surrogate loss
of the misclassification rate. Based on the surrogate loss,
parallel minibatch SGD (Goyal et al., 2017) is employed to
update the model parameters.
However, when the data for classification is imbalanced,
AUC (short for Area Under the ROC Curve) is a more
suitable measure (Elkan, 2001). AUC is defined as the
probability that a positive sample has a higher score than a
negative sample (Hanley & McNeil, 1982; 1983). Despite
the tremendous applications of distributed deep learning in
different fields, the study about optimizing AUC with distributed deep learning technologies is rare. The commonly
used parallel mini-batch SGD for minimizing a surrogate
loss of AUC will suffer from high communication costs in
a distributed setting due to the non-decomposability nature
of AUC measure. The reason is that positive and negative
data pairs that define a surrogate loss for AUC may sit on
different machines. To the best of our knowledge, Liu et al.
(2020b) is the only work trying to optimize a surrogate loss
of AUC with a deep neural network that explicitly tackles
the non-decomposability of AUC measure. Nevertheless,
their algorithms are designed only for the single-machine
setting and hence are far from sufficient when encountering
a huge amount of data. Although a naive parallel version of
the stochastic algorithms proposed in (Liu et al., 2020b) can
be used for distributed AUC maximization with a deep neural network, it would still suffer from high communication

