Leveraging Procedural Generation to Benchmark Reinforcement Learning
Karl Cobbe 1 Christopher Hesse 1 Jacob Hilton 1 John Schulman 1

Abstract

or are they approximately memorizing specific trajectories?

We introduce Procgen Benchmark, a suite of 16
procedurally generated game-like environments
designed to benchmark both sample efficiency
and generalization in reinforcement learning. We
believe that the community will benefit from increased access to high quality training environments, and we provide detailed experimental protocols for using this benchmark. We empirically
demonstrate that diverse environment distributions are essential to adequately train and evaluate RL agents, thereby motivating the extensive use of procedural content generation. We
then use this benchmark to investigate the effects
of scaling model size, finding that larger models
significantly improve both sample efficiency and
generalization.

There have been several investigations of generalization in
RL (Farebrother et al., 2018; Packer et al., 2018; Zhang
et al., 2018a; Lee et al., 2019), but progress has largely
proved elusive. Arguably one of the principal setbacks has
been the lack of environments well-suited to measure generalization. While previously mentioned studies (Zhang
et al., 2018c; Cobbe et al., 2019; Justesen et al., 2018; Juliani et al., 2019) reveal intriguing trends, it is hard to draw
general conclusions from so few environments.

1. Introduction
Generalization remains one of the most fundamental challenges in deep reinforcement learning. In several recent
studies (Zhang et al., 2018c; Cobbe et al., 2019; Justesen
et al., 2018; Juliani et al., 2019), agents exhibit the capacity to overfit to remarkably large training sets. This evidence raises the possibility that overfitting pervades classic
benchmarks like the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE)
(Bellemare et al., 2013), which has long served as a gold
standard in RL. While the diversity between games in the
ALE is one of the benchmark’s greatest strengths, the low
emphasis on generalization presents a significant drawback. Previous work has sought to alleviate overfitting in
the ALE by introducing sticky actions (Machado et al.,
2018) or by embedding natural videos as backgrounds
(Zhang et al., 2018b), but these methods only superficially
address the underlying problem — that agents perpetually
encounter near-identical states. For each game the question
must be asked: are agents robustly learning a relevant skill,
1
OpenAI, San Francisco, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Karl
Cobbe <karl@openai.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

We seek the best of both worlds: a benchmark with overall diversity comparable to the ALE, comprised of environments that fundamentally require generalization. We have
created Procgen Benchmark to fulfill this need. This benchmark is ideal for evaluating generalization, as distinct training and test sets can be generated for each environment.
This benchmark is also well-suited to evaluate sample efficiency, as all environments pose diverse and compelling
challenges for RL agents. The environments’ intrinsic diversity demands that agents learn robust policies; overfitting to narrow regions in state space will not suffice. Put
differently, the ability to generalize becomes an integral
component of success when agents are faced with everchanging levels. All environments are open-source and can
be found at https://github.com/openai/procgen.

2. Procgen Benchmark
Procgen Benchmark consists of 16 unique environments
designed to measure both sample efficiency and generalization in reinforcement learning. These environments greatly
benefit from the use of procedural content generation, the
algorithmic creation of a near-infinite supply of highly randomized content. In these environments, employing procedural generation is far more effective than relying on fixed,
human-designed content.
Procedural generation logic governs the level layout (Johnson et al., 2010), the selection of game assets, the location and spawn times of entities, and other game-specific
details. To master any one of these environments, agents
must learn a policy that is robust across all axes of variation. Learning such a policy is both more challenging and
more relevant than overfitting to a handful of fixed levels.

