Learning to Navigate The Synthetically Accessible Chemical Space Using
Reinforcement Learning
Sai Krishna Gottipati * 1 Boris Sattarov * 1 Sufeng Niu 2 Yashaswi Pathak 1 3 Haoran Wei 1 4 Shengchao Liu 5 6
Karam J. Thomas 1 Simon Blackburn 6 Connor W. Coley 7 Jian Tang 8 6 9 Sarath Chandar 10 8 6
Yoshua Bengio 5 11 8 6

Abstract
Over the last decade, there has been significant
progress in the field of machine learning for de
novo drug design, particularly in generative modeling of novel chemical structures. However, current generative approaches exhibit a significant
challenge: they do not ensure that the proposed
molecular structures can be feasibly synthesized
nor do they provide the synthesis routes of the
proposed small molecules, thereby seriously limiting their practical applicability. In this work,
we propose a novel reinforcement learning (RL)
setup for de novo drug design: Policy Gradient
for Forward Synthesis (PGFS), that addresses this
challenge by embedding the concept of synthetic
accessibility directly into the de novo drug design
system. In this setup, the agent learns to navigate through the immense synthetically accessible
chemical space by subjecting initial commercially
available molecules to valid chemical reactions at
every time step of the iterative virtual synthesis
process. The proposed environment for drug discovery provides a highly challenging test-bed for
RL algorithms owing to the large state space and
high-dimensional continuous action space with hierarchical actions. PGFS achieves state-of-the-art
performance in generating structures with high
QED and clogP. Moreover, we validate PGFS
in an in-silico proof-of-concept associated with

three HIV targets. Finally, we describe how the
end-to-end training conceptualized in this study
represents an important paradigm in radically expanding the synthesizable chemical space and automating the drug discovery process.

1. Introduction
In the last decade, the role of machine learning and artificial
intelligence techniques in chemical sciences and drug discovery has substantially increased (Schneider (2018); Butler
et al. (2018); Goh et al. (2017)). Deep generative models
such as GANs and VAEs have emerged as promising new
techniques to design novel molecules with desirable properties (Sanchez-Lengeling & Aspuru-Guzik (2018); Assouel
et al. (2018); Elton et al. (2019)). Generative models using
either string-based (e.g., Segler et al. (2017)) or graph-based
representations (e.g., Jin et al. (2018)) are able to output
chemically valid molecules in a manner that can be biased
towards properties like drug-likeness.

*
Equal contribution 1 99andBeyond, Montreal, Canada
Clemson University, South Carolina 3 Center for Computational
Natural Sciences and Bioinformatics, IIIT Hyderabad, India
4
University of Delaware 5 University of Montreal, Montreal,
Canada 6 Mila - Quebec AI Institute 7 Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusets Institute of Technology, Massachusetts,
USA 8 Canada CIFAR AI Chair 9 HEC Montréal 10 École Polytechnique de Montréal, Montreal, Canada 11 CIFAR Senior Fellow.
Correspondence to: Sai Krishna <saikrishnagv1996@gmail.com>,
Boris Sattarov <brois475@gmail.com>.

However, the majority of de novo drug design methodologies do not explicitly account for synthetic feasibility, and
thus cannot ensure whether the generated molecules can
be produced in the physical world. Synthetic complexity
scores (Ertl & Schuffenhauer (2009); Coley et al. (2018b))
can be introduced into the scoring function to complement
generative models. However, like any other data-driven
predictive model, these heuristics are prone to exploitation
by the generator, i.e, certain generated molecules with high
accessibility scores will still be impossible or challenging to
produce (Gao & Coley (2020)). Even though there is great
work that has been done in the field of computer aided synthesis planning (Szymkuc et al. (2016); Segler et al. (2018);
Coley et al. (2018a; 2019b)), relying on these programs
creates a disjoint search pipeline that necessitates a separate
algorithm for molecule generation and never guarantees that
the generative model learns anything about synthesizability.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Directly embedding synthetic knowledge into de novo
drug design would allow us to constrain the search to
synthetically-accessible routes and theoretically guarantee

2

