Adaptive Checkpoint Adjoint Method for Gradient Estimation in Neural ODE

Juntang Zhuang 1 Nicha Dvornek 1 2 Xiaoxiao Li 1 Sekhar Tatikonda 3 Xenophon Papademetris 1 2 4
James Duncan 1 2 4

Abstract
The empirical performance of neural ordinary differential equations (NODEs) is significantly inferior to discrete-layer models on benchmark tasks
(e.g. image classification). We demonstrate an explanation is the inaccuracy of existing gradient estimation methods: the adjoint method has numerical errors in reverse-mode integration; the naive
method suffers from a redundantly deep computation graph. We propose the Adaptive Checkpoint
Adjoint (ACA) method: ACA applies a trajectory
checkpoint strategy which records the forwardmode trajectory as the reverse-mode trajectory
to guarantee accuracy; ACA deletes redundant
components for shallow computation graphs; and
ACA supports adaptive solvers. On image classification tasks, compared with the adjoint and naive
method, ACA achieves half the error rate in half
the training time; NODE trained with ACA outperforms ResNet in both accuracy and test-retest
reliability. On time-series modeling, ACA outperforms competing methods. Furthermore, NODE
with ACA can incorporate physical knowledge to
achieve better accuracy.

1. Introduction
Conventional neural networks with discrete layers have
achieved great success in various tasks, such as image classification (He et al., 2016), segmentation (Long et al., 2015)
and machine translation (Sutskever et al., 2014). However,
it’s difficult for these discrete-layer networks to model continuous processes. The recently proposed neural ordinary
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Yale University, New Haven, CT USA 2 Department of Radiology & Biomedical Imaging, Yale School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT USA 3 Department of Statistics and DataScience, Yale
University, New Haven, CT USA 4 Department of Electrical Engineering, Yale University, New Haven, CT USA. Correspondence to: Juntang Zhuang <j.zhuang@yale.edu>, james Duncan
<james.duncan@yale.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

differential equation (NODE) (Chen et al., 2018) views the
model as an ordinary differential equation (ODE), whose
derivative is parameterized by the network. NODE can
be viewed as an initial value problem (IVP), whose initial
condition is input to the model. NODE achieves great success in free-form reversible generative models (Grathwohl
et al., 2018), time series analysis (Rubanova et al., 2019)
and system identification (Quaglino et al., 2019; Ayed et al.,
2019). However, the empirical performance of NODE is
significantly inferior to discrete-layer models on benchmark
classification tasks (error rate: 19% (NODE) vs 5% (ResNet)
on CIFAR10) (Dupont et al., 2019; Gholami et al., 2019).
We demonstrate that performance is adversely affected by
inaccurate gradient estimation for NODEs using existing
methods. NODEs are typically trained with the adjoint
method (Pontryagin, 1962; Chen et al., 2018), which is
memory-efficient but sensitive to numerical errors; because
the forward-mode and reverse-mode trajectories are treated
as two separate IVPs, they are not accurately equal, causing error in gradient estimation (Gholami et al., 2019).
The naive method directly back-propagates through ODE
solvers; however, it has a redundantly deep computation
graph when adaptive solvers search for optimal stepsize
(Wanner & Hairer, 1996).
We propose the adaptive checkpoint adjoint (ACA) method
to accurately estimate the gradient for NODEs. ACA supports adaptive ODE solvers. In automatic differentiation,
ACA applies a trajectory checkpoint strategy, which stores
the forward-mode trajectory with minimal memory; the
forward-mode trajectory is used as the reverse-mode trajectory to guarantee numerical accuracy. ACA deletes redundant components during the backward-pass for a shallow computation graph and accurate gradient estimation.
We provide the PyTorch implementation of ACA: https:
//github.com/juntang-zhuang/torch-ACA.
Our contributions can be summarized as:
(1) We theoretically analyze the numerical error with the
adjoint and naive methods, and propose ACA to accurately
estimate gradients of NODEs.
(2) On image classification tasks, compared with the adjoint
and naive methods, ACA achieves twice the speed and half
the error rate; furthermore, to our knowledge, ACA is the

