Domain Aggregation Networks for Multi-Source Domain Adaptation
Junfeng Wen 1 Russ Greiner 1 Dale Schuurmans 1 2

Abstract
In many real-world applications, we want to exploit multiple source datasets to build a model for
a different but related target dataset. Despite the
recent empirical success, most existing research
has used ad-hoc methods to combine multiple
sources, leading to a gap between theory and practice. In this paper, we develop a finite-sample generalization bound based on domain discrepancy
and accordingly propose a theoretically justified
optimization procedure. Our algorithm, Domain
AggRegation Network (DARN), can automatically and dynamically balance between including more data to increase effective sample size
and excluding irrelevant data to avoid negative
effects during training. We find that DARN can
significantly outperform the state-of-the-art alternatives on multiple real-world tasks, including
digit/object recognition and sentiment analysis.

1. Introduction
Many machine learning algorithms assume the learned predictor will be tested on the data from the same distribution
as the training data. This assumption, although reasonable,
is not necessarily true for many real-world applications. For
example, patients from one hospital may have a different
distribution of gender, height and weight from another hospital. Consequently, a diagnostic model constructed at one
location may not be directly applicable to another location
without proper adjustment. The situation becomes even
more challenging when we want to use data from multiple
source domains to build a model for a target domain, as this
requires deciding, e.g., how to select the relevant source domains and how to effectively aggregate these domains when
training complex models like neural networks. Including
irrelevant data from certain source domains can severely
reduce the performance on the target domain.
1

Amii, Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada 2 Google Brain. Correspondence to:
Junfeng Wen <junfengwen@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

To address this problem, researchers have been exploring
methods of transfer learning (Pan & Yang, 2009) or domain adaptation (Mansour et al., 2009a; Cortes et al., 2019),
where a model is trained based on labelled source data and
unlabelled target data. Most existing works have focused on
single-source to single-target (“one-to-one”) domain adaptation, using different assumptions such as covariate shift (Shimodaira, 2000; Gretton et al., 2009; Sugiyama & Kawanabe,
2012) or concept drift (Jiang & Zhai, 2007; Gama et al.,
2014). When dealing with multiple source domains, one
may attempt to directly use these approaches by combining
all source data into a large joint dataset and then apply oneto-one adaptation. This naı̈ve aggregation method will often
fail as not all source domains are equally important when
transferring to a specific target domain. There are some
works on multi-source to single-target adaptation. Although
some of them are theoretically motivated with cross-domain
generalization bounds, they either use ad-hoc aggregation
rules when developing practical algorithms (Zhao et al.,
2018; Li et al., 2018) or lack finite-sample analysis (Mansour et al., 2009b;c; Hoffman et al., 2018a). This leaves
a gap between the theory for multi-source adaptation and
practical algorithm for domain aggregation.
This research has three contributions: First, we develop a
finite-sample cross-domain generalization bound for multisource adaptation, which is based on the discrepancy introduced by Cortes et al. (2019). We show that in order to
improve performance on the specific target domain, there is
a trade-off between including all source domains to increase
effective sample size, versus excluding less relevant source
domains to avoid negative outcomes. Second, motivated
by our theory and domain adversarial method (Ganin &
Lempitsky, 2015; Ganin et al., 2016), we propose Domain
AggRegation Network (DARN), which can dynamically adjust the importance weights of the source domains during the
course of training. Unlike previous works, our aggregation
scheme (Eq. (7)), which itself is of independent interest in
some other contexts, is a direct optimization of our generalization upper bound (Eq. (4)) without resorting to surrogates.
Third, our experiments on digit/object recognition and sentiment analysis show that DARN can significantly outperform
state-of-the-art methods.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces
necessary background on one-to-one adaptation based on

