Adversarial Risk via Optimal Transport and Optimal Couplings

Muni Sreenivas Pydi 1 Varun Jog 1

Abstract
The accuracy of modern machine learning algorithms deteriorates severely on adversarially manipulated test data. Optimal adversarial risk quantifes the best error rate of any classifer in the
presence of adversaries, and optimal adversarial
classifers are sought that minimize adversarial
risk. In this paper, we investigate the optimal adversarial risk and optimal adversarial classifers
from an optimal transport perspective. We present
a new and simple approach to show that the optimal adversarial risk for binary classifcation with
0 − 1 loss function is completely characterized by
an optimal transport cost between the probability
distributions of the two classes. We propose a
novel coupling strategy that achieves the optimal
transport cost for several univariate distributions
like Gaussian, uniform, and triangular. Using the
optimal couplings, we obtain the optimal adversarial classifers in these settings and show how
they differ from optimal classifers in the absence
of adversaries. Based on our analysis, we evaluate algorithm-independent fundamental limits on
adversarial risk for CIFAR-10, MNIST, FashionMNIST and SVHN datasets, and Gaussian mixtures based on them.

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning algorithms based on deep learning have had tremendous success in recent times, producing
state-of-the-art results in many domains such as image classifcation, game playing, speech and natural language processing. Along with the success, it was also discovered that
these algorithms exhibit surprising vulnerability to adversarial perturbations that are imperceptible to humans. Since the
discovery in (Szegedy et al., 2013), there has been a slew
of adversarial attacks on neural network based classifers
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA. Correspondence
to: Muni Sreenivas Pydi <pydi@wisc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

(Athalye et al., 2018; Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Goodfellow et al., 2014) and defense methods against such attacks
(Madry et al., 2018; Papernot et al., 2016; Cisse et al., 2017).
Often, the defense methods either fall short of new attacks
or are computationally intractable for large neural networks.
Recent work has focused on certifable defenses that are
provably robust against a pre-specifed class of adversaries
(Cohen et al., 2019; Sinha et al., 2017; Raghunathan et al.,
2018; Diochnos et al., 2018). Existence of adversarial examples has been attributed to various causes: concentration
phenomena in high-dimensional spaces (A. et al., 2019;
Mahloujifar et al., 2019; Gilmer et al., 2018; Fawzi et al.,
2018); linearity of decision boundaries (Goodfellow et al.,
2014); and reliance on non-robust features (Tsipras et al.,
2019; Ilyas et al., 2019).
In this paper, we take a step back from deep learningfocused adversarial machine learning. We consider the
simplest setting: binary classifcation with the 0 − 1 loss
and known data distributions. Our goal is to investigate
the notions of adversarial risk and robustness in this setting. In particular, we are interested in analyzing algorithmindependent (information-theoretic) limits on optimal adversarial risk. The frst question we investigate is the following:
Question 1. How much can the optimal adversarial risk
differ from optimal standard risk?
It is easy to see that the optimal adversarial risk is at least as
large as optimal standard risk (see Section 2). Is it possible
to derive a tighter lower bound for the optimal adversarial
risk? Recent works derive upper and lower bounds on the optimal adversarial risk with respect to a fxed set of classifers,
by extending the PAC learning theory to encompass adversaries. For instance, (Khim & Loh, 2018) and (Yin et al.,
2019) develop risk bounds based on a notion of adversarial
Rademacher complexity, that is a function of both the data
generating distribution and class of classifers under consideration. In a similar vein, several works (Attias et al., 2018;
Cullina et al., 2018) derive sample-complexity bounds for
robust learning. More recent works (Diochnos et al., 2019;
Gourdeau et al., 2019) specifcally focus on lower bounds
for sample-complexity, in order to characterize the hardness
of robust learning. However, deriving lower bounds on the
optimal adversarial risk that are classifer agnostic has not
received much attention. Another related question is the fol-

