Discriminative Adversarial Search for Abstractive Summarization
Thomas Scialom 1 2 Paul-Alexis Dray 1 Sylvain Lamprier 2 Benjamin Piwowarski 2 3 Jacopo Staiano 1

Abstract
We introduce a novel approach for sequence
decoding, Discriminative Adversarial Search
(DAS), which has the desirable properties of alleviating the effects of exposure bias without requiring external metrics. Inspired by Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs), wherein a discriminator is used to improve the generator, our
method differs from GANs in that the generator
parameters are not updated at training time and
the discriminator is only used to drive sequence
generation at inference time. We investigate the
effectiveness of the proposed approach on the
task of Abstractive Summarization: the results
obtained show that DAS improves over the stateof-the-art methods, with further gains obtained
via discriminator retraining. Moreover, we show
how DAS can be effective for cross-domain adaptation. Finally, all results reported are obtained
without additional rule-based filtering strategies,
commonly used by the best performing systems
available: this indicates that DAS can effectively
be deployed without relying on post-hoc modifications of the generated outputs.

1. Introduction
In the context of Natural Language Generation (NLG), a
majority of approaches propose sequence to sequence models trained via maximum likelihood estimation; a Teacher
Forcing (Williams & Zipser, 1989) strategy is applied during training: ground-truth tokens are sequentially fed into
the model to predict the next token. Conversely, at inference
time, ground-truth tokens are not available: the model can
only have access to its previous outputs. In the literature
(Bengio et al., 2015; Ranzato et al., 2015), such mismatch
is referenced to as exposure bias: as mistakes accumulate,
this can lead to a divergence from the distribution seen at
1

reciTAL, Paris, France 2 Sorbonne Université, CNRS, LIP6, F75005 Paris, France 3 CNRS, France. Correspondence to: Thomas
Scialom <thomas@recital.ai>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

training time, resulting in poor generation outputs.
Several works have focused on alleviating this issue, proposing to optimize a sequence level metric such as BLEU or
ROUGE: Wiseman & Rush (2016) used beam search optimisation while Ranzato et al. (2015) framed text generation as
a reinforcement learning problem, using the chosen metric
as reward. Still, these automated metrics suffer from known
limitations: Sulem et al. (2018) showed how BLEU metrics
do not reflect meaning preservation, while Novikova et al.
(2017) pointed out that, for NLG tasks, they do not map
well to human judgements.
Similar findings have been reported for ROUGE, in the
context of abstractive summarization (Paulus et al., 2017):
for the same input, several correct outputs are possible;
nonetheless, the generated output is often compared to a
single human reference, given the lack of annotated data.
Complementary metrics have been proposed to evaluate
NLG tasks, based on Question Answering (Scialom et al.,
2019) or learned from human evaluation data (Böhm et al.,
2019). Arguably, though, the correlation of such metrics to
human judgments is still unsatisfactory.
To tackle exposure bias, Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) represent a natural alternative to the proposed approaches: rather than learning
from a specific metric, the model learns to generate text that
a discriminator cannot differentiate from human-produced
content. However, the discrete nature of text makes the
classifier signal non-differentiable. A solution would be
to use reinforcement learning with the classifier prediction
as a reward signal. However, due to reward sparsity and
mode collapse (Zhou et al., 2020), text GANs failed so far
to be competitive with state-of-the-art models trained with
teacher forcing on NLG tasks (Caccia et al., 2018; Clark
et al., 2019), and are mostly evaluated on synthetic datasets.
Inspired by Generative Adversarial Networks, we propose
an alternative approach for sequence decoding: first, a discriminator is trained to distinguish human-produced texts
from machine-generated ones. Then, this discriminator is
integrated into a beam search: at each decoding step, the
generator output probabilities are refined according to the
likelihood that the candidate sequence is human-produced.
This is equivalent to optimize the search for a custom and
dynamic metric, learnt to fit the human examples.

