Logarithmic Regret for Adversarial Online Control

Dylan J. Foster 1 Max Simchowitz 2

Abstract
We introduce a new algorithm for online linearquadratic control in a known system subject to
adversarial disturbances.
√ Existing regret bounds
for this setting scale as T unless strong stochastic assumptions are imposed on the disturbance
process. We give the first algorithm with logarithmic regret for arbitrary adversarial disturbance
sequences, provided the state and control costs
are given by known quadratic functions. Our algorithm and analysis use a characterization for the
optimal offline control law to reduce the online
control problem to (delayed) online learning with
approximate advantage functions. Compared to
previous techniques, our approach does not need
to control movement costs for the iterates, leading
to logarithmic regret.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning and control consider the behavior
of an agent making decisions in a dynamic environment
in order to suffer minimal loss. In light of recent practical
breakthroughs in data-driven approaches to continuous RL
and control (Lillicrap et al., 2016; Mnih et al., 2015; Silver
et al., 2017), there is great interest in applying these techniques in real-world decision making applications. However,
to reliably deploy data-driven RL and control in physical
systems such as self-driving cars, it is critical to develop
principled algorithms with provable safety and robustness
guarantees. At the same time, algorithms should not be
overly pessimistic, and should be able to take advantage of
benign environments whenever possible.

by a well-behaved stochastic process or driven by a worstcase process to which the learner must remain robust in
the H∞ sense. We consider an intermediate approach introduced by Agarwal et al. (2019a) in which disturbances
are non-stochastic but performance is evaluated in terms
of regret. This benchmark forces the learner’s control policy to achieve near optimal performance on any specific
disturbance process encountered.
Concretely, we consider a setting in which the state evolves
according to linear dynamics:
xt+1 = Axt + But + wt ,

(1)

where xt ∈ Rdx are states, ut ∈ Rdu are inputs, and
A ∈ Rdx ×dx and B ∈ Rdx ×du are system matrices known
to the learner. We refer to wt ∈ Rdx as the disturbance
(or, “noise”), which we assume is selected by an adaptive
adversary and satisfies ∥wt ∥ ≤ 1; we let w refer to the entire sequence w1∶T . We consider fixed quadratic costs of
the form `(x, u) ∶= x⊺ Rx x + u⊺ Ru u, where Rx , Ru ⪰ 0
are given. This model encompasses noise which is uncorrelated (H2 ), worst-case (H∞ ), or governed by some nonstationary stochastic process. The model also approximates
control techniques such as feedback linearization and trajectory tracking (Slotine & Li, 1991), where A and B are
the result of linearizing a known nonlinear system and the
disturbances arise due to systematic errors in linearization
rather than from a benign noise process.
For any policy π that selects controls based on the current
state and disturbances observed so far, we measure its performance over a time horizon T by
T

JT (π; w) = ∑ `(xπt , uπt ),
t=1

In this paper we develop algorithms for online linearquadratic control which ensure robust worst-case performance while optimally adapting to the environment at hand.
Linear control has traditionally been studied in settings
where the dynamics of the environment are either governed
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Dylan Foster <dylanf@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

the total cost incurred by following ut = πt (xt , w1∶t−1 ).
Letting π K denote a state-feedback control law of the form
πtK (x) = −Kx for all t, the learning algorithm’s goal is to
minimize
RegT = JT (π alg ; w) − inf JT (π K ; w),
K∈K

where π alg denotes the learner’s policy and K is an appropriately defined set of stabilizing controllers. Thus, π alg has
low regret when its performance nearly matches the optimal

