Sharp Composition Bounds for Gaussian Differential Privacy via Edgeworth
Expansion

Qinqing Zheng 1 Jinshuo Dong 1 Qi Long 1 Weijie Su 1

Abstract
Datasets containing sensitive information are often sequentially analyzed by many algorithms.
This raises a fundamental question in differential
privacy regarding how the overall privacy bound
degrades under composition. To address this question, we introduce a family of analytical and sharp
privacy bounds under composition using the Edgeworth expansion in the framework of the recently
proposed f -differential privacy. In contrast to
the existing composition theorems using the central limit theorem, our new privacy bounds under composition gain improved tightness by leveraging the refined approximation accuracy of the
Edgeworth expansion. Our approach is easy to
implement and computationally efficient for any
number of compositions. The superiority of these
new bounds is confirmed by an asymptotic error analysis and an application to quantifying the
overall privacy guarantees of noisy stochastic gradient descent used in training private deep neural
networks.

1. Introduction
Machine learning, data mining, and statistical analysis are
widely applied to various applications impacting our daily
lives. While we celebrate the benefits brought by these applications, to an alarming degree, the algorithms are accessing
datasets containing sensitive information such as individual
behaviors on the web and health records. By simply tweaking the datasets and leveraging the output of algorithms, it
is possible for an adversary to learn information about and
even identify certain individuals (Fredrikson et al., 2015;
Shokri et al., 2017). In particular, privacy concerns become
even more acute when the same dataset is probed by a sequence of algorithms. With knowledge of the dataset from
1
University of Pennsylvania. Correspondence to: Qinqing
Zheng <zhengqinqing@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

the prior algorithms’ output, an adversary can adaptively
analyze the dataset to cause additional privacy loss at each
round. This reality raises one of the most fundamental problems in the area of private data analysis:
How can we accurately and efficiently quantify the cumulative privacy loss under composition of private algorithms?
To address this important problem, one has to start with a
formal privacy definition. To date, the most popular statistical privacy definition is (, δ)-differential privacy (DP)
(Dwork et al., 2006a;b), with numerous deployments in both
industrial applications and academic research (Erlingsson
et al., 2014; Abadi et al., 2016; Papernot et al., 2016; Ding
et al., 2017; Apple, 2017; Abowd, 2018). Informally, this
privacy definition requires an unnoticeable change in a (randomized) algorithm’s output due to the replacement of any
individual in the dataset. More concretely, letting  ≥ 0 and
0 ≤ δ ≤ 1, an algorithm M is (ε, δ)-differentially private if
for any pair of neighboring datasets S, S 0 (in the sense that
S and S 0 differs in only one individual) and any event E,
P(M (S) ∈ E) ≤ eε P(M (S 0 ) ∈ E) + δ.

(1.1)

Unfortunately, this privacy definition comes with a drawback when handling composition. Explicitly, (, δ)-DP is
not closed under composition in the sense that the overall
privacy bound of a sequence of (at least two) (, δ)-DP algorithms cannot be precisely described by a single pair of
the parameters , δ (Kairouz et al., 2017). Although the
precise bound can be collectively represented by infinitely
many pairs of , δ, Murtagh & Vadhan (2016) shows that
it is computationally hard to find such a pair of privacy
parameters.
The need for a better treatment of composition has triggered a surge of interest in proposing generalizations of
(, δ)-DP, including divergence-based relaxations (Dwork &
Rothblum, 2016; Bun & Steinke, 2016; Mironov, 2017; Bun
et al., 2018) and, more recently, a hypothesis testing-based
extension termed f -differential privacy (f -DP) (Dong et al.,
2019). This privacy definition leverages the hypothesis testing interpretation of differential privacy, and characterizes
the privacy guarantee using the trade-off between type I
and type II errors given by the associated hypothesis testing
problem. As an advantage over the divergence-based privacy

