Optimizing Data Usage via Differentiable Rewards

Xinyi Wang * 1 Hieu Pham * 1 2 Paul Michel 1 Antonios Anastasopoulos 1 Jaime Carbonell 1 Graham Neubig 1

Abstract
To acquire a new skill, humans learn better and
faster if a tutor informs them of how much attention they should pay to particular content or practice problems based on their current knowledge
level. Similarly, a machine learning model could
potentially be trained better if data is presented in
a way that adapts to its current learning state. In
this paper, we examine the problem of training an
adaptive scorer that weights data instances to maximally benefit learning. Training such as scorer
efficiently is a challenging problem; in order to
precisely quantify the effect of a data instance on
the final model, a naive approach would require
completing the entire training process and observing final performance. We propose an efficient
alternative – Differentiable Data Selection (DDS)
– that formulates a scorer as a learnable function
of the training data that can be efficiently updated
along with the main model being trained. Specifically, DDS updates the scorer with an intuitive
reward signal: it should up-weigh the data that has
a similar gradient with a development set upon
which we would finally like to perform well. Without significant computing overhead, DDS delivers consistent improvements over several strong
baselines on two very different tasks of machine
translation and image classification.1

1. Introduction
While deep learning models are remarkably good at fitting
large data sets, their performance is also highly sensitive to
the structure and domain of their training data. Training on
out-of-domain data can lead to worse model performance,
while using more relevant data can assist transfer learning.
*

Equal contribution 1 Language Technology Institute, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA 2 Google Research,
Brain Team, Mountain View, CA 94043, USA. Correspondence to:
Xinyi Wang, Hieu Pham <{xinyiw1,hyhieu}@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).
1
Code will be released soon.

Previous work has attempted to create strategies to handle
this sensitivity by selecting subsets of the data to train the
model on (Jiang & Zhai, 2007; Wang et al.; Axelrod et al.,
2011; Moore & Lewis, 2010), providing different weights
for each example (Sivasankaran et al., 2017; Ren et al.,
2018), or changing the presentation order of data (Bengio
et al., 2009; Kumar et al., 2019).
However, there are several challenges with existing work on
better strategies for data usage. Most data filtering critera
or training curriculum rely on domain-specific knowledge
and hand-designed heuristics, which can be sub-optimal. To
avoid hand-designed heuristics, several works propose to
optimize a parameterized neural network to learn the data
usage schedule, but most of them are tailored to specific use
cases, such as handling noisy data for classification (Jiang
et al., 2018), learning a curriculum learning strategy for
specific tasks (Kumar et al., 2019; Tsvetkov et al., 2016),
and actively selecting data for annotation (Fang et al., 2017;
Wu et al., 2018). Fan et al. (2018b) proposes a more general teacher-student framework that first trains a “teacher
network” to select data that directly optimizes development
set accuracy over multiple training runs. However, because
running multiple runs of training simply to learn this teacher
network entails an n-fold increase in training time for n
runs, this is infeasible in many practical settings. In addition, in preliminary experiments we also found the single
reward signal provided by dev set accuracy at the end of
training to be noisy, to the extent that we were not able to
achieve results competitive with simpler heuristic training
methods.
In this paper, we propose an alternative: a general Reinforcement Learning (RL) framework for optimizing training
data usage by training a scorer network that minimizes the
model loss on the development set. We formulate the scorer
network as a function of the current training examples, and
update the scorer along with the main model being trained.
Thus, our method requires no heuristics and is generalizable to various tasks. To make the scorer adaptive, we train
it using frequent and efficient updates towards a reward
function inspired by recent work on learning from auxiliary
tasks (Du et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019b), which uses the
similarity between two gradients as a measure of task relevance. We propose to use the gradient alignment between
the training examples and the dev set as a reward signal for a

