Aggregation of Multiple Knockoffs

Tuan-Binh Nguyen 1 2 Jérôme-Alexis Chevalier 2 Bertrand Thirion 2 Sylvain Arlot 1

Abstract
We develop an extension of the knockoff inference procedure, introduced by Barber & Candès
(2015). This new method, called aggregation of
multiple knockoffs (AKO), addresses the instability inherent to the random nature of knockoffbased inference. Specifically, AKO improves both
the stability and power compared with the original knockoff algorithm while still maintaining
guarantees for false discovery rate control. We
provide a new inference procedure, prove its core
properties, and demonstrate its benefits in a set of
experiments on synthetic and real datasets.

1. Introduction
In many fields, multivariate statistical models are used to
fit some outcome of interest through a combination of measurements or features. For instance, one might predict the
likelihood for individuals to declare a certain type of disease based on genotyping information. Besides prediction
accuracy, the inference problem consists in defining which
measurements carry useful features for prediction. More
precisely, we aim at conditional inference (as opposed to
marginal inference), that is, analyzing which features carry
information given the other features. This inference is however very challenging in high-dimensional settings.
Among the few available solutions, knockoff-based (KO)
inference (Barber & Candès, 2015; Candès et al., 2018)
consists in introducing noisy copies of the original variables
that are independent from the outcome conditional on the
original variables, and comparing the coefficients of the
original variables to those of the knockoff variables. This
approach is particularly attractive for several reasons: i) it
is not tied to a given statistical model, but can work instead
for many different multivariate functions, whether linear
1
Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, Inria, Laboratoire de
mathématiques d’Orsay, 91405, Orsay, France 2 Inria, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay, France. Correspondence to: Tuan-Binh Nguyen
<tuan-binh.nguyen@inria.fr>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

or not; ii) it requires a good generative model for features,
but poses few conditions for the validity of inference; and
iii) it controls the false discovery rate (FDR, Benjamini &
Hochberg 1995), a more useful quantity than multiplicitycorrected error rates.
Unfortunately, KO has a major drawback, related to the random nature of the knockoff variables: two different draws
yield two different solutions, leading to large, uncontrolled
fluctuations in power and false discovery proportion across
experiments (see Figure 1 below). This makes the ensuing
inference irreproducible. An obvious way to fix the problem
is to rely on some type of statistical aggregation, in order
to consolidate the inference results. Such procedures have
been introduced by Gimenez & Zou (2019) and by Emery
& Keich (2019), but they have several limitations: the computational complexity scales poorly with the number B of
bootstraps, while the power of the method decreases with B.
In high-dimensional settings that we target, these methods
are thus only usable with a limited number of bootstraps.
In this work, we explore a different approach, that we call
aggregation of multiple knockoffs (AKO): it rests on a reformulation of the original knockoff procedure that introduces intermediate p-values. As it is possible to aggregate
such quantities even without assuming independence (Meinshausen et al., 2009), we propose to perform aggregation
at this intermediate step. We first establish the equivalence
of AKO with the original knockoff aggregation procedure
in case of one bootstrap (Proposition 1). Then we show
that the FDR is also controlled with AKO (Theorem 1). By
construction, AKO is more stable than (vanilla) knockoff;
we also demonstrate empirical benefits in several examples,
using simulated data, but also genetic and brain imaging
data. Note that the added knockoff generation and inference
steps are embarrassingly parallel, making this procedure no
more costly than the original KO inference.
Notation. Let [p] denote the set {1, 2, . . . , p}; for a given
∆
set given set A, |A| = card(A); matrices are denoted
in bold uppercase letter, while vectors in bold lowercase
letter and scalars normal character. An exception for this
is the vector of knockoff statistic W, in which we follow
the notation from the original paper of Barber & Candès
(2015).

