AdaScale SGD: A User-Friendly Algorithm for Distributed Training

Tyler B. Johnson † 1 Pulkit Agrawal † 1 Haijie Gu 1 Carlos Guestrin 1

Abstract
When using large-batch training to speed up
stochastic gradient descent, learning rates must
adapt to new batch sizes in order to maximize
speed-ups and preserve model quality. Re-tuning
learning rates is resource intensive, while fixed
scaling rules often degrade model quality. We propose AdaScale SGD, an algorithm that reliably
adapts learning rates to large-batch training. By
continually adapting to the gradient’s variance,
AdaScale automatically achieves speed-ups for
a wide range of batch sizes. We formally describe this quality with AdaScale’s convergence
bound, which maintains final objective values,
even as batch sizes grow large and the number of
iterations decreases. In empirical comparisons,
AdaScale trains well beyond the batch size limits of popular “linear learning rate scaling” rules.
This includes large-batch training with no model
degradation for machine translation, image classification, object detection, and speech recognition
tasks. AdaScale’s qualitative behavior is similar to that of “warm-up” heuristics, but unlike
warm-up, this behavior emerges naturally from a
principled mechanism. The algorithm introduces
negligible computational overhead and no new
hyperparameters, making AdaScale an attractive
choice for large-scale training in practice.

1. Introduction
Large datasets and large models underlie much of the recent
success of machine learning. Training such models is time
consuming, however, often requiring days or even weeks.
Faster training enables consideration of more data and models, which expands the capabilities of machine learning.
Stochastic gradient descent and its variants are fundamental
†

1
Equal contribution.
Apple, Seattle, WA. Correspondence to: T. Johnson <tbjohns@apple.com>, P. Agrawal
<pulkit_agrawal@apple.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

training algorithms. During each iteration, SGD applies a
small and noisy update to the model, based on a stochastic gradient. By applying thousands of such updates in
sequence, a powerful model can emerge over time.
To speed up SGD, a general strategy is to improve the signalto-noise ratio of each update, i.e., reduce the variance of the
stochastic gradient. Some tools for this include SVRG-type
gradient estimators (Johnson & Zhang, 2013; Defazio et al.,
2014) and prioritization of training data via importance
sampling (Needell et al., 2014; Zhao & Zhang, 2015). Data
parallelism—our focus in this work—is perhaps the most
powerful of such tools. By processing thousands of training
examples for each gradient estimate, distributed systems can
drastically lower the gradient’s variance. Only the system’s
scalability, not the algorithm, limit the variance reduction.
Smaller variances alone, however, typically result in unimpressive speed-ups. To fully exploit the noise reduction,
SGD must also make larger updates, i.e., increase its learning rate parameter. While this fact applies universally (including for SVRG (Johnson & Zhang, 2013), data parallelism (Goyal et al., 2017), and importance sampling (Johnson & Guestrin, 2018)), the precise relationship between
variance and learning rates remains poorly quantified.
For this reason, practitioners often turn to heuristics in order
to adapt learning rates. This applies especially to distributed
training, for which case “fixed scaling rules” are standard
but unreliable strategies. For example, Goyal et al. (2017)
popularized “linear learning rate scaling,” which succeeds in
limited cases (Krizhevsky, 2014; Devarakonda et al., 2017;
Jastrz˛ebski et al., 2018; Smith et al., 2018; Lin et al., 2019).
For other problems or greater scales, however, linear scaling
leads to poor model quality and even divergence—a result
known both in theory (Yin et al., 2018; Jain et al., 2018; Ma
et al., 2018) and in practice (Goyal et al., 2017).
In this work, we introduce AdaScale SGD, an algorithm that
more reliably adjusts learning rates for large-batch training.
AdaScale achieves speed-ups that depend naturally on the
gradient’s variance before it is decreased—nearly perfect linear speed-ups in cases of large variance, and smaller speedups otherwise. For contrast, we also show that as batch sizes
increase, linear learning rate scaling progressively degrades
model quality, even when including “warm-up” heuristics
(Goyal et al., 2017) and additional training iterations.

