Optimizing Black-box Metrics with Adaptive Surrogates
Qijia Jiang 1 * Olaoluwa Adigun 2 * Harikrishna Narasimhan 3 Mahdi Milani Fard 3 Maya Gupta 3

Abstract
We address the problem of training models with
black-box and hard-to-optimize metrics by expressing the metric as a monotonic function of a
small number of easy-to-optimize surrogates. We
pose the training problem as an optimization over
a relaxed surrogate space, which we solve by estimating local gradients for the metric and performing inexact convex projections. We analyze gradient estimates based on finite differences and local
linear interpolations, and show convergence of
our approach under smoothness assumptions with
respect to the surrogates. Experimental results
on classification and ranking problems verify the
proposal performs on par with methods that know
the mathematical formulation, and adds notable
value when the form of the metric is unknown.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of training a machine learning
model when the true evaluation metric is difficult to optimize on the training set. This general problem arises with
many flavors and in different scenarios. For example, we
may have a black-box metric whose mathematical expression is unknown or difficult to approximate with a convex
training loss. This is the case with non-decomposable evaluation metrics, such as the F-measure or ranking metrics like
Precision@K, where it is not straight-forward to construct
a smooth objective that closely approximates the metric.
Another example is when the training labels are only a
proxy for the true label. This arises in problems where one
has access to cheap-to-acquire noisy labels, such as clicks,
but wishes to optimize for a more expensive label, such as
whether users rate a result as good. If we have access to a
small auxiliary validation set with true labels, how can this
information be used to influence the training loss? Similar
*

Equal contribution 1 Stanford University, USA 2 University of
Southern California, USA 3 Google Research USA. Correspondence to: Harikrishna Narasimhan <hnarasimhan@google.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

examples also arise when the training data has noisy features
and we have a small validation set with clean features, or in
machine learning fairness problems where the training data
contains group-dependent noise, but we may have access to
a small set of auxiliary clean data.
In many of the above scenarios, one wishes to optimize a
black-box metric M over d model parameters, but does not
have access to explicit gradients for M , nor is it practical
to obtain reliable gradient estimates when d is large. We
provide a general solution to this problem by choosing K ⌧
d convex surrogate losses, and expressing M as an unknown
monotonic function : RK
+ ! R of the K surrogates. We
then reformulate the original problem as an optimization of
over the K-dimensional surrogate space. The choice of
surrogates can be as simple as the hinge losses on positive
and negative samples, which should work well for metrics
like the F-measure, or the surrogates can be chosen to be
a family of different convex losses to handle robustness to
training noise given a small set of clean validation samples.
Our strategy is to estimate gradients for the unknown function with respect to its K inputs by measuring changes
in the metric M and the K surrogates for different perturbations on the model, and use the estimates for r to
perform projected gradient descent over the K-dimensional
surrogate space. We show how the projection step can be
implemented inexactly but with convergence guarantees by
solving a convex problem in the original d parameters. We
are thus able to adaptively combine the K surrogates to
align well with the target metric M .
The main contributions of this paper include:
1. A novel formulation that poses the problem of optimizing a black-box metric as a lower-dimensional problem
in a surrogate space.
2. A projected gradient descent based training algorithm
using finite-differences and local linear interpolations
to estimate gradients.
3. Theoretical results showing convergence to a stationary
point under smoothness assumptions on .
4. Experiments showing that the proposed approach
works as well as methods that take advantage of the
form of the metric if known, and can give substantial
gains when the metric truly is a black-box.

