Improving the Sample and Communication Complexity for Decentralized
Non-Convex Optimization: Joint Gradient Estimation and Tracking
Haoran Sun 1 Songtao Lu 2 Mingyi Hong 1

Abstract
Many modern large-scale machine learning problems benefit from decentralized and stochastic
optimization. Recent works have shown that utilizing both decentralized computing and local
stochastic gradient estimates can outperform stateof-the-art centralized algorithms, in applications
involving highly non-convex problems, such as
training deep neural networks. In this work, we
propose a decentralized stochastic algorithm to
deal with certain smooth non-convex problems
where there are m nodes in the system, and each
node has a large number of samples (denoted as
n). Differently from the majority of the existing decentralized learning algorithms for either
stochastic or finite-sum problems, our focus is
given to both reducing the total communication
rounds among the nodes, while accessing the minimum number of local data samples. In particular,
we propose an algorithm named D-GET (decentralized gradient estimation and tracking), which
jointly performs decentralized gradient estimation (which estimates the local gradient using a
subset of local samples) and gradient tracking
(which tracks the global full gradient using local estimates). We show that, to achieve certain
✏ stationary solution of the deterministic finite
sum problem, the proposed algorithm achieves an
O(mn1/2 ✏ 1 ) sample complexity and an O(✏ 1 )
communication complexity. These bounds significantly improve upon the best existing bounds
of O(mn✏ 1 ) and O(✏ 1 ), respectively. Similarly, for online problems, the proposed method
achieves an O(m✏ 3/2 ) sample complexity and
an O(✏ 1 ) communication complexity.
1

Department of ECE, University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, MN USA 2 IBM Research AI, IBM Thomas J. Watson
Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY USA. Correspondence
to: Haoran Sun <sun00111@umn.edu>, Songtao Lu <songtao@ibm.com>, Mingyi Hong <mhong@umn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Recent advances of decentralized optimization enable us
to utilize distributed resources to significantly improve the
computation efficiency (Boyd et al., 2011; Lian et al., 2017).
Compared to the typical parameter-server type distributed
system with a fusion center, decentralized optimization has
its unique advantages in preserving data privacy, enhancing
network robustness, and improving the computation efficiency (Lian et al., 2017; Nedic & Ozdaglar, 2009; Chen
& Sayed, 2012; Yuan et al., 2016). Furthermore, in many
emerging applications such as collaborative filtering (Ali
& Van Stam, 2004), federated learning (Konečnỳ et al.,
2016) and dictionary learning (Chen et al., 2014), the data
is naturally collected in a decentralized setting, and it is
not possible to transfer the distributed data to a central location. Therefore, decentralized computation has sparked
considerable interest in both academia and industry.
Motivated by these facts, in this paper we consider the
following decentralized optimization problem,
m
1 X i
min f (x) =
f (xi ),
(1)
m i=1
x2Rmd
s.t.

xi = xk ,

8(i, k) 2 E.

where f i (·) : Rd ! R denotes the loss function which is
smooth (possibly non-convex), and m is the total number
of such functions. We consider the scenario where each
node i 2 [m] := {1, · · · , m} can only access its local
function f i (·), and can communicate with its neighbors via
an undirected and unweighted graph G = {E, V}. And x
stacks all the variables: x := [x1 ; x2 ; · · · ; xm ] 2 Rmd .
In this work, we consider two typical representations of the
local cost functions:

1. Finite-Sum Setting: Each f i (·) is defined as the average cost of n local samples, that is:
n

f i (·) =

1X i
f (·), 8i
n j=1 j

(2)

where n is the total number of local samples at node i,
fji (·) denotes the cost for jth data sample at ith node.
2. Online Setting: Each f i (·) is defined as:

