Efficient Non-conjugate Gaussian Process Factor Models for Spike Count Data
using Polynomial Approximations

Stephen L. Keeley 1 David M. Zoltowski 1 Yiyi Yu 2 Jacob L. Yates 3 Spencer L. Smith 2 Jonathan W. Pillow 1

Abstract
Gaussian Process Factor Analysis (GPFA) has
been broadly applied to the problem of identifying smooth, low-dimensional temporal structure
underlying large-scale neural recordings. However, spike trains are non-Gaussian, which motivates combining GPFA with discrete observation
models for binned spike count data. The drawback to this approach is that GPFA priors are
not conjugate to count model likelihoods, which
makes inference challenging. Here we address
this obstacle by introducing a fast, approximate
inference method for non-conjugate GPFA models. Our approach uses orthogonal second-order
polynomials to approximate the nonlinear terms
in the non-conjugate log-likelihood, resulting in
a method we refer to as polynomial approximate
log-likelihood (PAL) estimators. This approximation allows for accurate closed-form evaluation of
marginal likelihoods and fast numerical optimization for parameters and hyperparameters. We derive PAL estimators for GPFA models with binomial, Poisson, and negative binomial observations
and find the PAL estimation is highly accurate,
and achieves faster convergence times compared
to existing state-of-the-art inference methods. We
also find that PAL hyperparameters can provide
sensible initialization for black box variational inference (BBVI), which improves BBVI accuracy.
We demonstrate that PAL estimators achieve fast
and accurate extraction of latent structure from
multi-neuron spike train data.1
1

Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA 2 Dept. of Electrical Computer Engineering, University of California Santa Barbara Santa Barbara, CA, USA
3
Department of Biology, University of Maryland, MD, USA. Correspondence to: Stephen Keeley <skeeley@princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).
1
Code available at https://github.com/skeeley/
Count_GPFA

1. Introduction
Recent advances in neural recording technologies have enabled the collection of increasingly high-dimensional neural
data-sets. Making sense of such data requires new statistical
methods for extracting shared latent structure underlying
multi-neuron responses. Factor models provide one popular
approach to this problem (Archer et al., 2015; Cunningham
& Yu, 2014; Lakshmanan et al., 2015; Wu et al., 2017; Yu
et al., 2009). These models seek to characterize the structure
underlying neural data in terms of a small number of latent
variables. These models have been widely successful in both
uncovering interpretable structure from neural population
data and providing insight into representations of stimulus
input and behavior in population activity (Wu et al., 2017;
Zhao & Park, 2017; Zhao et al., 2019). However, factor
models can be cumbersome to learn when the prior distribution over the latent variables and the likelihood governing
the observations are non-conjugate. This arises commonly
for neural data, where binned spiking observations are best
characterized by count models (e.g., binomial, Poisson, and
negative-binomial).
Formally, latent factor models seek to explain shared
structure underlying high-dimensional observations
(y1 , y2 , . . . , yT ) ∈ RN ×T in terms of low-dimensional
latent variables (x1 , x2 , . . . , xT ) ∈ RP ×T , where N > P
and the observations are ordered sequentially in time from
t = 1 to t = T . A popular approach is to model the time
series of latent variables with a Gaussian process (GP),
which makes few assumptions about latent trajectories
beyond the fact that they evolve smoothly in time. When
combined with a Gaussian observations model, the resulting
approach is known as Gaussian Process Factor Analysis
(GPFA) (Yu et al., 2009). Recent work has extended GPFA
to incorporate Poisson observations, which provides a
more appropriate model for spike train data (Buesing et al.,
2012; Macke et al., 2011; Wu et al., 2017; Zhao & Park,
2017; Zhao et al., 2019). However, closed-form inference
under GPFA models is only possible when the model
likelihood and prior are conjugate. Consequently, Poisson
and other non-conjugate models require approximations to
fit hyperparameters or obtain parametric expressions for the
posterior distribution over latents.

