Randomly Projected Additive Gaussian Processes for Regression

Ian Delbridge 1 David Bindel 1 Andrew Gordon Wilson 2

Abstract
Gaussian processes (GPs) provide flexible distributions over functions, with inductive biases
controlled by a kernel. However, in many applications Gaussian processes can struggle with
even moderate input dimensionality. Learning
a low dimensional projection can help alleviate
this curse of dimensionality, but introduces many
trainable hyperparameters, which can be cumbersome, especially in the small data regime. We use
additive sums of kernels for GP regression, where
each kernel operates on a different random projection of its inputs. Surprisingly, we find that as
the number of random projections increases, the
predictive performance of this approach quickly
converges to the performance of a kernel operating on the original full dimensional inputs, over
a wide range of data sets, even if we are projecting into a single dimension. As a consequence,
many problems can remarkably be reduced to one
dimensional input spaces, without learning a transformation. We prove this convergence and its rate,
and additionally propose a deterministic approach
that converges more quickly than purely random
projections. Moreover, we demonstrate our approach can achieve faster inference and improved
predictive accuracy for high-dimensional inputs
compared to kernels in the original input space.

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes (GPs) are flexible Bayesian nonparametric models with well-calibrated predictive uncertainties. Gaussian processes can also naturally encode inductive biases, such as smoothness or periodicity, through a
choice of kernel function (Rasmussen and Williams, 2006).
Gaussian processes have been especially impactful in the
1
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca,
New York, USA 2 Center for Data Science, New York University, New York City, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Ian
Delbridge <iad35@cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

small-data regime, where careful uncertainty representation
is particularly crucial, strong priors provide useful biases
where learning is difficult, and exact inference is tractable.
Additionally, Gaussian processes have been most successfully applied to low-dimensional input (predictor) spaces,
such as time series, and spatiotemporal regression problems
(e.g., Wilson and Adams, 2013; Duvenaud, 2014; Herlands
et al., 2019). In these settings, canonical kernels — such as
the RBF or Matérn kernels — provide reasonable similarity
measures over pairs of data instances; for example, if we are
modelling CO2 concentrations indexed by time, then CO2
levels at times which are close together in `2 or `1 distance
will be treated as highly correlated under these kernels.
For higher dimensional problems, these standard distance
metrics become less compelling. For example, with an RBF
kernel, the fraction of data space with high covariance with
a given point decreases exponentially with dimension. Additionally, in many online settings where Gaussian processes
are used as regression models, such as Bayesian optimization, there is exponential regret with dimensionality (Srinivas et al., 2010; Bull, 2011). Furthermore, scalable Gaussian
processes which have a high degree of accuracy often only
apply for up to a few input dimensions (e.g., Wilson and
Nickisch, 2015; Gilboa et al., 2013).
To help circumvent such issues, there are two popular approaches. The first approach is to learn a projection into
a lower dimensional space, such as through deep kernel
learning (Wilson et al., 2016). While such approaches are
highly flexible, they introduce many hyperparameters to
train, which can be burdensome and impractical in the small
data regime. Alternatively, additive Gaussian processes
(Duvenaud, 2014; Kandasamy et al., 2015; Hastie and Tibshirani, 1986) instead consider a sum of kernels, with each
kernel operating on subsets of the input dimensions. This
structure can both help reduce the effective dimensionality
of the problem, and provide a useful inductive bias with
compelling sample complexity (Stone et al., 1985). However, while assuming a fully additive decomposition of an
untransformed space can provide a useful inductive bias for
many real data sets, it is often too restrictive (Li et al., 2016).
Moreover, methods for learning additive structure, as with
standard projection approaches, are either computationally
expensive or require learning a large number of parameters,
which may overfit or hurt uncertainty estimation.

