Learning to Simulate and Design for Structural Engineering

Kai-Hung Chang 1 Chin-Yi Cheng 1

Abstract
The structural design process for buildings is timeconsuming and laborious. To automate this process, structural engineers combine optimization
methods with simulation tools to find an optimal design with minimal building mass subject
to building regulations. However, structural engineers in practice often avoid optimization and
compromise on a suboptimal design for the majority of buildings, due to the large size of the
design space, the iterative nature of the optimization methods, and the slow simulation tools. In
this work, we formulate the building structures
as graphs and create an end-to-end pipeline that
can learn to propose the optimal cross-sections
of columns and beams by training together with
a pre-trained differentiable structural simulator.
The performance of the proposed structural designs is comparable to the ones optimized by genetic algorithm (GA), with all the constraints satisfied. The optimal structural design with the
reduced the building mass can not only lower the
material cost, but also decrease the carbon footprint.

1. Introduction
Structural design of buildings is to design the optimal structures subject to a design objective, such as minimizing material usage for cost and sustainability reasons. The design
also has to satisfy a set of rules from established standards
known as building codes, for example, a limited displacement under loading and seismic force. However, most structural engineers do not employ optimization in real-world
cases for several reasons. First, the design space is large. A
classic five-story building has typically over 500 columns
and beams as design variables. Moreover, optimization algorithms usually require many iterations, and the evaluation
1

Autodesk Research, San Francisco, California, United
States.
Correspondence to:
Kai-Hung Chang <kaihung.chang@autodesk.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. The iterative industrial structural design workflow.

for each optimization iteration takes 2 to 15 minutes to run
structural simulation. As a result, a single optimization process can take days to converge, which does not fit the need
for frequent design changes in a construction project. In
practice, the majority of structural engineers complete structural designs with trial-and-error. After getting simulation
results from a proposed design, structural engineers have
to revise the design iteratively until all the building codes
are satisfied. Since finding a valid design is already challenging and laborious, the outcome is usually over-designed,
which means it satisfies the code and constraints but has
poor performance in the design objective.
The main contribution of this paper is proposing an end-toend solution to automate the structural design process. As
visualized in Figure 1, a typical structural design process
starts from a given building design, and then the structural
engineer will propose a skeleton design, where the locations and connectivities of columns and beams are defined.
After proposing the skeleton, the engineer will decide the
cross-section size for each bar (column and beam). The
engineer will then evaluate the design by running structural
simulation and update the skeleton and cross-section sizes
iteratively. As a starting point, the scope of this work only
focuses on automating the size design as well as the structural simulation process.
We discover that a building skeleton can be naturally represented as a graph and therefore propose two graph neural
networks, NeuralSim and NeuralSizer. We train NeuralSizer to assign the optimal cross-section sizes to the given
columns and beams and evaluate the size design using the
pre-trained neural approximator, NeuralSim, instead of using real structural simulation tool. Taking advantage of
the differentiable nature of NeuralSim, the gradient of the

