Full Law Identification in Graphical Models of Missing Data:
Completeness Results

Razieh Nabi * 1 Rohit Bhattacharya * 1 Ilya Shpitser 1

Abstract
Missing data has the potential to affect analyses
conducted in all fields of scientific study including healthcare, economics, and the social sciences.
Several approaches to unbiased inference in the
presence of non-ignorable missingness rely on
the specification of the target distribution and its
missingness process as a probability distribution
that factorizes with respect to a directed acyclic
graph. In this paper, we address the longstanding
question of the characterization of models that are
identifiable within this class of missing data distributions. We provide the first completeness result
in this field of study – necessary and sufficient
graphical conditions under which, the full data
distribution can be recovered from the observed
data distribution. We then simultaneously address
issues that may arise due to the presence of both
missing data and unmeasured confounding, by
extending these graphical conditions and proofs
of completeness, to settings where some variables
are not just missing, but completely unobserved.

1. Introduction
Missing data has the potential to affect analyses conducted
in all fields of scientific study, including healthcare, economics, and the social sciences. Strategies to cope with
missingness that depends only on the observed data, known
as the missing at random (MAR) mechanism, are wellstudied (Dempster et al., 1977; Cheng, 1994; Robins et al.,
1994; Tsiatis, 2006). However, the setting where missingness depends on covariates that may themselves be missing,
known as the missing not at random (MNAR) mechanism,
is substantially more difficult and under-studied (Fielding
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA. Correspondence to:
Razieh Nabi <rnabi@jhu.edu>, Rohit Bhattacharya <rbhattacharya@jhu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

et al., 2008; Marston et al., 2010). MNAR mechanisms
are expected to occur quite often in practice, for example,
in longitudinal studies with complex patterns of dropout
and re-enrollment, or in studies where social stigma may
prompt non-response to questions pertaining to drug-use,
or sexual activity and orientation, in a way that depends on
other imperfectly collected or censored covariates (Robins
& Gill, 1997; Vansteelandt et al., 2007; Marra et al., 2017).
Previous work on MNAR models has proceeded by imposing a set of restrictions on the full data distribution (the
target distribution and its missingness mechanism) that are
sufficient to yield identification of the parameter of interest.
While there exist MNAR models whose restrictions cannot
be represented graphically (Tchetgen Tchetgen et al., 2018),
the restrictions posed in several popular MNAR models such
as the permutation model (Robins & Gill, 1997), the blocksequential MAR model (Zhou et al., 2010), the itemwise
conditionally independent nonresponse (ICIN) model (Shpitser, 2016; Sadinle & Reiter, 2017), and those in (Daniel
et al., 2012; Thoemmes & Rose, 2013; Martel Garcı́a, 2013;
Mohan et al., 2013; Mohan & Pearl, 2014; Saadati & Tian,
2019) are either explicitly graphical or can be interpreted as
such.
Despite the popularity of graphical modeling approaches
for missing data problems, characterization of the class
of missing data distributions identified as functionals of
the observed data distribution has remained an open question (Bhattacharya et al., 2019). Several algorithms for the
identification of the target distribution have been proposed
(Mohan & Pearl, 2014; Shpitser et al., 2015; Tian, 2017;
Bhattacharya et al., 2019). We show that even the most
general algorithm currently published (Bhattacharya et al.,
2019) still retains a significant gap in that there exist target
distributions that are identified which the algorithm fails
to identify. We then present what is, to our knowledge,
the first completeness result for missing data models representable as directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) – a necessary
and sufficient graphical condition under which the full data
distribution is identified as a function of the observed data
distribution. For any given field of study, such a characterization is one of the most powerful results that identification
theory can offer, as it comes with the guarantee that if these

