Learning Deep Kernels for Non-Parametric Two-Sample Tests

Feng Liu * 1 2 Wenkai Xu * 2 Jie Lu 1 Guangquan Zhang 1 Arthur Gretton 2 Danica J. Sutherland 3

Abstract
We propose a class of kernel-based two-sample
tests, which aim to determine whether two sets
of samples are drawn from the same distribution. Our tests are constructed from kernels parameterized by deep neural nets, trained to maximize test power. These tests adapt to variations in distribution smoothness and shape over
space, and are especially suited to high dimensions and complex data. By contrast, the simpler kernels used in prior kernel testing work
are spatially homogeneous, and adaptive only
in lengthscale. We explain how this scheme includes popular classifier-based two-sample tests
as a special case, but improves on them in general. We provide the first proof of consistency for
the proposed adaptation method, which applies
both to kernels on deep features and to simpler
radial basis kernels or multiple kernel learning.
In experiments, we establish the superior performance of our deep kernels in hypothesis testing on
benchmark and real-world data. The code of our
deep-kernel-based two sample tests is available at
github.com/fengliu90/DK-for-TST.

1. Introduction
Two sample tests are hypothesis tests aiming to determine
whether two sets of samples are drawn from the same distribution. Traditional methods such as t-tests and KolmogorovSmirnov tests are mainstays of statistical applications, but
require strong parametric assumptions about the distributions being studied and/or are only effective on data in ex*
1
Equal contribution
Australian Artificial Intelligence
Institute, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, NSW,
Australia 2 Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, University College London, London, UK 3 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. Correspondence to:
Feng Liu <Feng.Liu@uts.edu.au>, Wenkai
Xu <wenkaix@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk>, Danica J. Sutherland
<djs@djsutherland.ml>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

tremely low-dimensional spaces. A broad set of recent work
in statistics and machine learning has focused on relaxing
these assumptions, with methods either generally applicable or specific to various more complex domains (Gretton
et al., 2012a; Székely & Rizzo, 2013; Heller & Heller, 2016;
Jitkrittum et al., 2016; Ramdas et al., 2017; Lopez-Paz &
Oquab, 2017; Chen & Friedman, 2017; Gao et al., 2018;
Ghoshdastidar et al., 2017; Ghoshdastidar & von Luxburg,
2018; Li & Wang, 2018; Kirchler et al., 2020). These tests
have also allowed application in various machine learning
problems such as domain adaptation, generative modeling,
and causal discovery (Binkowski et al., 2018; Gong et al.,
2016; Stojanov et al., 2019; Lopez-Paz & Oquab, 2017).
A popular class of non-parametric two-sample tests is based
on kernel methods (Smola & Schölkopf, 2001): such tests
construct a kernel mean embedding (Berlinet & ThomasAgnan, 2004; Muandet et al., 2017) for each distribution,
and measure the difference in these embeddings. For any
characteristic kernel, two distributions are the same if and
only if their mean embeddings are the same; the distance
between mean embeddings is the maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) (Gretton et al., 2012a). There are also several
closely related methods, including tests based on checking
for differences in mean embeddings evaluated at specific
locations (Chwialkowski et al., 2015; Jitkrittum et al., 2016)
and kernel Fisher discriminant analysis (Harchaoui et al.,
2007). These tests all work well for samples from simple
distributions when using appropriate kernels.
Problems that we care about, however, often involve distributions with complex structure, where simple kernels will
often map distinct distributions to nearby (and hence hard to
distinguish) mean embeddings. Figure 1a shows an example
of a multimodal dataset, where the overall modes align but
the sub-mode structure varies differently at each mode. A
translation-invariant Gaussian kernel only “looks at” the
data uniformly within each mode (see Figure 1b), requiring
many samples to correctly distinguish the two distributions.
The distributions can be distinguished more effectively if
we understand the structure of each mode, as with the more
complex kernel illustrated in Figure 1c.
To model these complex functions, we adopt a deep kernel approach (Wilson et al., 2016; Sutherland et al., 2017;
Li et al., 2017; Jean et al., 2018; Wenliang et al., 2019),

