Can Autonomous Vehicles Identify, Recover From,
and Adapt to Distribution Shifts?

Angelos Filos * 1 Panagiotis Tigas * 1 Rowan McAllister 2 Nicholas Rhinehart 2 Sergey Levine 2 Yarin Gal 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Autonomous agents hold the promise of systematizing
decision-making to reduce catastrophes due to human mistakes. Recent advances in machine learning (ML) enable
the deployment of such agents in challenging, real-world,
safety-critical domains, such as autonomous driving (AD)
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Oxford 2 University
of California, Berkeley.
Correspondence to: Angelos
Filos <angelos.filos@cs.ox.ac.uk>, Panagiotis Tigas <ptigas@robots.ox.ac.uk>. Code and videos are made available at
sites.google.com/view/av-detect-recover-adapt
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

y2

y3

q1

0.6

0.1

0.3

y1

q2

0.3

0.4

0.3

y2

q3

0.2

0.2

0.6

y3

mink

0.2

0.1

0.3

y3

models, qk

Out-of-training-distribution (OOD) scenarios are
a common challenge of learning agents at deployment, typically leading to arbitrary deductions and poorly-informed decisions. In principle,
detection of and adaptation to OOD scenes can
mitigate their adverse effects. In this paper, we
highlight the limitations of current approaches to
novel driving scenes and propose an epistemic
uncertainty-aware planning method, called robust
imitative planning (RIP). Our method can detect
and recover from some distribution shifts, reducing the overconfident and catastrophic extrapolations in OOD scenes. If the model’s uncertainty
is too great to suggest a safe course of action,
the model can instead query the expert driver for
feedback, enabling sample-efficient online adaptation, a variant of our method we term adaptive
robust imitative planning (AdaRIP). Our methods
outperform current state-of-the-art approaches in
the nuScenes prediction challenge, but since no
benchmark evaluating OOD detection and adaption currently exists to assess control, we introduce an autonomous car novel-scene benchmark,
CARNOVEL, to evaluate the robustness of driving
agents to a suite of tasks with distribution shifts,
where our methods outperform all the baselines.

trajectories, yi
y1

(a) OOD driving scenario

arg maxi

(b) Robust imitative planning

Figure 1. Didactic example: (a) in a novel, out-of-training distribution (OOD) driving scenario, candidate plans/trajectories
y1 , y2 , y3 are (b) evaluated (row-wise) by an ensemble of expertlikelihood models q1 , q2 , q3 . Under models q1 and q2 the best
plans are the catastrophic trajectories y1 and y2 respectively. Our
epistemic uncertainty-aware robust (RIP) planning method aggregates the evaluations of the ensemble and proposes the safe plan
y3 . RIP considers the disagreement between the models and avoid
overconfident but catastrophic extrapolations in OOD tasks.

in urban areas. However, it has been repeatedly demonstrated that the reliability of ML models degrades radically
when they are exposed to novel settings (i.e., under a shift
away from the distribution of observations seen during their
training) due to their failure to generalise, leading to catastrophic outcomes (Sugiyama & Kawanabe, 2012; Amodei
et al., 2016; Snoek et al., 2019). The diminishing performance of ML models to out-of-training distribution (OOD)
regimes is concerning in life-critical applications, such as
AD (Quionero-Candela et al., 2009; Leike et al., 2017).
Although there are relatively simple strategies (e.g., stay
within the lane boundaries, avoid other cars and pedestrians)
that generalise, perception-based, end-to-end approaches,
while flexible, they are also susceptible to spurious correlations. Therefore, they can pick up non-causal features that
lead to confusion in OOD scenes (de Haan et al., 2019).
Due to the complexity of the real-world and its everchanging dynamics, the deployed agents inevitably face
novel situations and should be able to cope with them, to at
least (a) identify and ideally (b) recover from them, without
failing catastrophically. These desiderata are not captured
by the existing benchmarks (Ros et al., 2019; Codevilla
et al., 2019) and as a consequence, are not satisfied by the

