Average-Case Acceleration Through Spectral Density Estimation
Fabian Pedregosa * 1 Damien Scieur * 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
The traditional analysis of optimization algorithms is a
worst-case analysis (Nemirovski, 1995; Nesterov, 2004).
This type of analysis provides a complexity bound for any
input from a function class, no matter how unlikely. However, hard-to-solve inputs might rarely occur in practice, in
which case these complexity bounds might not be representative of the observed running time.
Average-case analysis provides instead the expected complexity of an algorithm over a class of problems, and
is more representative of its typical behavior. While
the average-case analysis is standard for analyzing sorting (Knuth, 1997) and cryptography (Katz & Lindell, 2014)
algorithms, little is known of the average-complexity of op*

Equal contribution 1 Google Research 2 Samsung SAIT
AI Lab, Montreal. Correspondence to: Fabian Pedregosa
<pedregosa@google.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

worst-case

average-case

Suboptimality

We develop a framework for the average-case
analysis of random quadratic problems and derive algorithms that are optimal under this analysis. This yields a new class of methods that
achieve acceleration given a model of the Hessian’s eigenvalue distribution. We develop explicit algorithms for the uniform, MarchenkoPastur, and exponential distributions. These
methods have a simple momentum-like update,
in which each update only makes use on the current gradient and previous two iterates. Furthermore, the momentum and step-size parameters
can be estimated without knowledge of the Hessian’s smallest singular value, in contrast with
classical accelerated methods like Nesterov acceleration and Polyak momentum. Through empirical benchmarks on quadratic and logistic regression problems, we identify regimes in which
the the proposed methods improve over classical
(worst-case) accelerated methods.

Iterations
Figure 1. A worst-case analysis can lead to misleading results
where the worst-case running times is much worse than the observed running time. Above: convergence of individual random
square least squares in gray, while the average suboptimality (orange) is well below the worst-case (blue).

timization algorithms.
Our ﬁrst contribution (§2) is to develop an average-case
analysis of optimization methods on quadratic objectives.
A crucial difference with the worst-case analysis is that it
depends on the expected spectrum of the Hessian, rather on
just the extremal eigenvalues.
While it is unfeasible to assume knowledge of the full
spectrum, recent works have shown that the spectrum of
large deep learning models is highly predictable and can be
approximated using classical models from random matrix
theory, such as the Marchenko-Pastur distribution (Sagun
et al., 2017; Martin & Mahoney, 2018).
A second contribution (§3) is to exploit this regularity
to develop practical methods that are optimal under the
average-case analysis. We consider different parametric
models for the expected spectrum such as the MarchenkoPastur, uniform, and exponential distributions, and derive
for each model an average-case optimal algorithm. These
are all momentum-like methods where the hyper-parameter
of the distribution can be estimated without knowledge of
the smallest eigenvalue.
Finally, we compare these average-case optimal methods
on synthetic and real datasets. We identify regimes where
average-case exhibits a large computational gain with respect to respect to traditional accelerated methods.

