On the Expressivity of Neural Networks for Deep Reinforcement Learning

Kefan Dong * 1 Yuping Luo * 2 Tianhe Yu 3 Chelsea Finn 3 Tengyu Ma 3

Abstract
We compare the model-free reinforcement learning with the model-based approaches through
the lens of the expressive power of neural networks for policies, Q-functions, and dynamics.
We show, theoretically and empirically, that even
for one-dimensional continuous state space, there
are many MDPs whose optimal Q-functions and
policies are much more complex than the dynamics. For these MDPs, model-based planning is a
favorable algorithm, because the resulting policies can approximate the optimal policy significantly better than a neural network parameterization can, and model-free or model-based policy
optimization rely on policy parameterization. Motivated by the theory, we apply a simple multi-step
model-based bootstrapping planner (BOOTS) to
bootstrap a weak Q-function into a stronger policy. Empirical results show that applying BOOTS
on top of model-based or model-free policy optimization algorithms at the test time improves the
performance on benchmark tasks.

1. Introduction
Model-based deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms
offer a lot of potentials in achieving significantly better sample efficiency than the model-free algorithms for continuous
control tasks. We can largely categorize the model-based
deep RL algorithms into two types: 1. model-based policy
optimization algorithms which learn policies or Q-functions,
parameterized by neural networks, on the estimated dynamics, using off-the-shelf model-free algorithms or their variants (Luo et al., 2019; Janner et al., 2019; Kaiser et al., 2019;
Kurutach et al., 2018; Feinberg et al., 2018; Buckman et al.,
2018), and 2. model-based planning algorithms, which plan
*

Equal contribution 1 Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University 2 Computer Science Department, Princeton University 3 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Tengyu Ma
<tengyuma@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

with the estimated dynamics (Nagabandi et al., 2018; Chua
et al., 2018; Wang & Ba, 2019).
A deeper theoretical understanding of the pros and cons of
model-based and the model-free algorithms in the continuous state space case will provide guiding principles for
designing and applying new sample-efficient methods. The
prior work on the comparisons of model-based and modelfree algorithms mostly focuses on their sample efficiency
gap, in the case of tabular MDPs (Zanette & Brunskill,
2019; Jin et al., 2018), linear quadratic regulator (Tu &
Recht, 2018), and contextual decision process with sparse
reward (Sun et al., 2019).
In this paper, we theoretically compare model-based RL
and model-free RL in the continuous state space through
the lens of approximability by neural networks. What is the
representation power of neural networks for expressing the
Q-function, the policy, and the dynamics?
Our main finding is that even for the case of one-dimensional
continuous state space, there can be a massive gap between
the approximability of Q-function and the policy and that
of the dynamics. The optimal Q-function and policy can require exponentially more neurons to approximate by neural
networks than the dynamics.
We construct environments where the dynamics are simply piecewise linear functions with constant pieces, but
the optimal Q-functions and the optimal policy require an
exponential (in the horizon) number of linear pieces, or exponentially wide neural networks, to approximate.1 The
approximability gap can also be observed empirically on
(semi-) randomly generated piecewise linear dynamics with
a decent chance. (See Figure 1 for two examples.) This
indicates that the such MDPs are common in the sense that
they do not form a degenerate set of measure zero.
We note that for tabular MDPs, it has long been known that
for factored MDPs, the dynamics can be simple whereas the
value function is not (Koller & Parr, 1999). This is to our
knowledge the first theoretical study of the expressivity of
1
In turn, the dynamics can also be much more complex than
the Q-function. Consider the following situation: a subset of the
coordinates of the state space can be arbitrarily difficult to express
by neural networks, but the reward function can only depend on
the rest of the coordinates and remain simple.

