On the Theoretical Properties of the Network Jackknife

Qiaohui Lin 1 Robert Lunde 1 Purnamrita Sarkar 1

Abstract
We study the properties of a leave-node-out jackknife procedure for network data. Under the
sparse graphon model, we prove an Efron-Steintype inequality, showing that the network jackknife leads to conservative estimates of the variance (in expectation) for any network functional
that is invariant to node permutation. For a general class of count functionals, we also establish
consistency of the network jackknife. We complement our theoretical analysis with a range of
simulated and real-data examples and show that
the network jackknife offers competitive performance in cases where other resampling methods
are known to be valid. In fact, for several network
statistics, we see that the jackknife provides more
accurate inferences compared to related methods
such as subsampling.

1. Introduction
Network-structured data are now everywhere. The Internet is a giant, directed network of webpages pointing to
other webpages. Facebook is an undirected network built
via friendships between users. The ecological web is a directed network of different species with edges speciﬁed by
‘who-eats-whom’ relationships. Protein-protein interactions
are undirected networks consisting of pairs of bait-prey proteins that bind to each other during coafﬁnity puriﬁcation
experiments arising in mass spectrometry analysis.
In these application areas, it is often of interest to characterize a network using statistics such as the clustering
coefﬁcient, triangle density, or principal eigenvalues. There
has been a substantial amount of work on approximating
these quantities with small error on massive networks (Feige,
2006; Goldreich & Ron, 2008; Assadi et al., 2018; Eden
1

Department of Statistics and Data Sciences, University of
Texas at Austin, TX, USA. Correspondence to: Qiaohui Lin <qiaohui.lin@utexas.edu>, Robert Lunde <rlunde@utexas.edu>, Purnamrita Sarkar <purna.sarkar@austin.utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

et al., 2017; Gonen et al., 2010; Kallaugher et al., 2019).
However, comparatively little attention has been paid to
assessing the variability of these statistics with a few exceptions that we will discuss shortly. Quantifying the uncertainty of these estimators is of utmost importance, as it
gives us information about the underlying variability of the
data generating process. Take for example the problem of
comparing two networks, which is a key question in many
biological applications and in social network analysis. A natural approach would be to ﬁrst obtain resamples of networks
to construct distributions of different summary statistics and
then compare these distributions. While there has been
some recent interest in two-sample tests for networks (Kim
et al., 2014; Durante & Dunson, 2018; Ghoshdastidar et al.,
2017; Tang et al., 2017), very few works use resampling to
compare networks. Uncertainty estimates from resampling
also allow the construction of conﬁdence intervals, which is
a fundamental task in statistics and machine learning.
Resampling methods have a long and celebrated history
in statistics, with the bootstrap, jackknife,and subsampling
being the three main forms. There is a now vast literature
developing these methods for iid data; see for example,
(Quenouille, 1949; Efron & Tibshirani, 1986; Bickel et al.,
1997; Politis et al., 1999; Shao & Wu, 1989). Even when
the data are not independent, resampling methods have been
shown to yield asymptotically valid inferences for a wide
range of functionals under various dependence structures.
For weakly dependent time series, for example, the key
innovation is to resample contiguous blocks of data instead
of individual observations. Under mild conditions on the
block length and nature of dependence, blocked variants of
resampling methods, including the block bootstrap (Künsch,
1989), block subsampling (Politis & Romano, 1994), and
the blockwise jackknife (Künsch, 1989) have been shown to
asymptotically capture the dependence structure of the data,
leading to theories that closely resemble the corresponding
theories for iid data.
Recently, some work has started to emerge involving resampling procedures for networks. Levin & Levina (2019)
propose two bootstrap procedures for random dot product
graphs that involve estimating the latent positions and resampling the estimated positions to conduct inference for the
functional of interest. The authors establish bootstrap consistency for functionals that are expressible as U-statistics

