Deep PQR: Solving Inverse Reinforcement Learning using Anchor Actions

Sinong Geng 1 Houssam Nassif 2 Carlos A. Manzanares 2 A. Max Reppen 3 Ronnie Sircar 3

Abstract
We propose a reward function estimation framework for inverse reinforcement learning with deep
energy-based policies. We name our method PQR,
as it sequentially estimates the Policy, the Qfunction, and the Reward function by deep learning. PQR does not assume that the reward solely
depends on the state, instead it allows for a dependency on the choice of action. Moreover, PQR
allows for stochastic state transitions. To accomplish this, we assume the existence of one anchor
action whose reward is known, typically the action of doing nothing, yielding no reward. We
present both estimators and algorithms for the
PQR method. When the environment transition is
known, we prove that the PQR reward estimator
uniquely recovers the true reward. With unknown
transitions, we bound the estimation error of PQR.
Finally, the performance of PQR is demonstrated
by synthetic and real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) (Russell, 1998; Ng
et al., 2000) aims to estimate the reward function of an
agent given its decision-making history (often referred to
as demonstrations). IRL assumes that the policy of the
agent is optimal. The reward function characterizes the
preferences of agents used for decision-making, and is thus
crucial in many scenarios. In reinforcement learning, the
reward function is important to replicate decision-making
behavior in novel environments (Fu et al., 2018); in financial
markets, the reward function depicts the risk tolerance of
agents, suggesting how much compensation they require
in exchange for asset volatility (Merton, 1973; 1971); in
industrial organization, reward functions are synonymous
1

Department of Computer Science, Princeton University,
Princeton, New Jersey, USA 2 Amazon, Seattle, Washington, USA
3
Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, USA. Correspondence to: Sinong
Geng <sgeng@princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

with firm profit functions (Abbring, 2010; Aguirregabiria
and Nevo, 2013).
However, different reward functions may lead to the same
behaviour of agents, making it impossible to identify the
true underlying reward function (Ng et al., 2000). This identification issue has been a bottleneck for policy optimization
in a transferred environment (Fu et al., 2018), and for recovering utility and profit functions in economics (Abbring,
2010; Bajari et al., 2010; Manzanares et al., 2015). To partly
address this issue, Maximal Entropy Inverse Reinforcement
Learning (MaxEnt-IRL) (Ziebart et al., 2008; Wulfmeier
et al., 2015; Finn et al., 2016; Fu et al., 2018) introduces
stochastic policies to the problem formulation, and estimates
the reward function using maximal entropy. However, the
reward function is still not fully identifiable (Fu et al., 2018).
Based on MaxEnt-IRL, to deal with this issue, Adversarial
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (AIRL) assumes that the
reward is solely a function of state variables, and is independent of actions. However, even with state-only reward
functions, AIRL and related methods (Kostrikov et al., 2018)
are guaranteed to work only for deterministic environment
transitions with the so-called decomposability condition. In
some scenarios (especially in many real-world settings in
economics), these requirements are hard to satisfy.
This work proposes a Policy Q-function Reward (PQR)
approach, combined with an anchor-action assumption, to
identify and flexibly estimate reward functions in infinitehorizon Markov decision processes with stochastic transitions. We assume that agents follow energy-based policies
derived from optimally solving an entropy-augmented reinforcement learning objective (Kappen, 2005; Todorov, 2007;
Haarnoja et al., 2017). We estimate the policy by taking
advantage of recent developments in Maximal Entropy Adversarial Imitation Learning methods (MaxEnt-AIL), such
as Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning (GAIL) (Ho
and Ermon, 2016) and the aforementioned AIRL (Fu et al.,
2018). These methods either do not attempt to identify the
reward function, or require strong assumptions to do so.
However, they provide efficient and effective methods to
replicate the policy from agent demonstrations. We aim to
recover the reward function by leveraging the accurately
estimated policies.
Our estimators for the Q-function and reward function de-

