From ImageNet to Image Classification:
Contextualizing Progress on Benchmarks

Dimitris Tsipras * 1 Shibani Santurkar * 1 Logan Engstrom 1 Andrew Ilyas 1 Aleksander M ˛
adry 1

Abstract
Building rich machine learning datasets in a scalable manner often necessitates a crowd-sourced
data collection pipeline. In this work, we use human studies to investigate the consequences of employing such a pipeline, focusing on the popular
ImageNet dataset. We study how specific design
choices in the ImageNet creation process impact
the fidelity of the resulting dataset—including the
introduction of biases that state-of-the-art models
exploit. Our analysis pinpoints how a noisy data
collection pipeline can lead to a systematic misalignment between the resulting benchmark and
the real-world task it serves as a proxy for. Finally,
our findings emphasize the need to augment our
current model training and evaluation toolkit to
take such misalignments into account. 1

1. Introduction
Large-scale vision datasets and their associated benchmarks (Everingham et al., 2010; Deng et al., 2009; Lin
et al., 2014; Russakovsky et al., 2015) have been instrumental in guiding the development of machine learning
models (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Szegedy et al., 2016; He
et al., 2016). At the same time, while the progress made on
these benchmarks is undeniable, they are only proxies for
real-world tasks that we actually care about—e.g., object
recognition in the wild. Thus, it is natural to wonder:
How aligned are existing benchmarks with their
motivating real-world tasks?
On one hand, significant design effort goes into ensuring
that these benchmarks accurately model real-world chal*

Equal contribution 1 EECS, MIT. Correspondence to:
DT <tsipras@mit.edu>, SS <shibani@mit.edu>, LE <engstrom@mit.edu>, AI <ailyas@mit.edu>, AM <madry@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
1
We release our refined ImageNet annotations at https://
github.com/MadryLab/ImageNetMultiLabel.

(a) missile

(b) stage

(c) monastery

Figure 1: Judging the correctness of ImageNet labels may
not be straightforward. While the labels shown above appear
valid, none of them match the ImageNet labels (respectively
“projectile”, “acoustic guitar”, and “church”).

lenges (Ponce et al., 2006; Torralba & Efros, 2011; Everingham et al., 2010; Russakovsky et al., 2015). On the other
hand, the sheer size of machine learning datasets makes
meticulous data curation impossible. Dataset creators thus
resort to scalable methods such as automated data retrieval
and crowd-sourced annotation (Everingham et al., 2010;
Russakovsky et al., 2015; Lin et al., 2014; Zhou et al., 2017),
often at the cost of faithfulness to the task being modeled.
As a result, the dataset annotations obtained can sometimes
be ambiguous, incorrect, or otherwise misaligned with the
ground truth (cf. Figure 1). Still, despite our awareness of
these issues (Russakovsky et al., 2015; Recht et al., 2019;
Stock & Cisse, 2018; Hooker et al., 2019; Northcutt et al.,
2019), we lack a precise characterization of their pervasiveness and impact, even for widely-used datasets.
Our contributions
We develop a methodology for obtaining fine-grained data
annotations via large-scale human studies. These annotations allow us to precisely quantify ways in which typical
object recognition benchmarks fall short of capturing the underlying ground truth. We then study how such benchmarktask misalignment impacts state-of-the-art models—after all,
models are often developed by treating existing datasets as
the ground truth. We focus our exploration on the ImageNet
dataset (Deng et al., 2009) (specifically, the ILSVRC2012
object recognition task (Russakovsky et al., 2015)), one of
the most widely used benchmarks in computer vision.
Quantifying benchmark-task alignment. We find that
systematic annotation issues pervade ImageNet, and can

