Learning Disconnected Manifolds: a no GAN’s land

Ugo Tanielian 1 2 Thibaut Issenhuth 2 Elvis Dohmatob 2 Jérémie Mary 2

Abstract
Typical architectures of Generative Adversarial
Networks make use of a unimodal latent/input
distribution transformed by a continuous generator. Consequently, the modeled distribution always has connected support which is cumbersome
when learning a disconnected set of manifolds.
We formalize this problem by establishing a "no
free lunch" theorem for the disconnected manifold
learning stating an upper-bound on the precision
of the targeted distribution. This is done by building on the necessary existence of a low-quality
region where the generator continuously samples
data between two disconnected modes. Finally,
we derive a rejection sampling method based on
the norm of generator’s Jacobian and show its efficiency on several generators including BigGAN.

1. Introduction
GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014) provide a very effective
tool for the unsupervised learning of complex probability
distributions. For example, Karras et al. (2019) generate
very realistic human faces while Yu et al. (2017) match stateof-the-art text corpora generation. Despite some early theoretical results on the stability of GANs (Arjovsky & Bottou,
2017) and on their approximation and asymptotic properties (Biau et al., 2018), their training remains challenging.
More specifically, GANs raise a mystery formalized by
Khayatkhoei et al. (2018): how can they fit disconnected
manifolds when they are trained to continuously transform
a unimodal latent distribution? While this question remains
widely open, we will show that studying it can lead to some
improvements in the sampling quality of GANs.
Indeed, training a GAN with the objective of continuously
transforming samples from an unimodal distribution into a
disconnected requires balancing between two caveats. On
1

Université Paris-Sorbonne, Paris,
AI Lab, France.
Correspondence to:
<u.tanielian@criteo.com>.

France 2 Criteo
Ugo Tanielian

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

(a) Heatmap of the generator’s Jacobian norm. White circles: quantiles
of the latent distribution N (0, I).

(b) Green: target distribution. Coloured dots:
generated samples colored w.r.t. the Jacobian
Norm using same heatmap than (a).
Figure 1. Learning disconnected manifolds leads to the apparition
of an area with high gradients and data sampled in between modes.

one hand, the generator could just ignore all modes but one,
producing a very limited variety of high quality samples:
this is an extreme case of the well known mode collapse
(Arjovsky & Bottou, 2017). On the other hand, the generator
could cover the different modes of the target distribution and
necessarily generates samples out of the real data manifold
as previously explained by Khayatkhoei et al. (2018).
As brought to the fore by Roth et al. (2017), there is a density mis-specification between the true distribution and the
model distribution. Indeed, one cannot find parameters such
that the model density function is arbitrarily close to the true
distribution. To solve this issue, many empirical works have
proposed to over-parameterize the generative distributions,
as for instance, using a mixture of generators to better fit
the different target modes. Tolstikhin et al. (2017) rely on
boosting while Khayatkhoei et al. (2018) force each generator to target different sub-manifolds thanks to a criterion
based on mutual information. Another direction is to add
complexity in the latent space using a mixture of Gaussian
distributions (Gurumurthy et al., 2017).

