Kernelized Stein Discrepancy Tests of Goodness-of-fit for Time-to-Event Data

Tamara Fernández * 1 Nicolás Rivera * 2 Wenkai Xu * 1 Arthur Gretton 1

Abstract
Survival Analysis and Reliability Theory are concerned with the analysis of time-to-event data, in
which observations correspond to waiting times
until an event of interest such as death from a
particular disease or failure of a component in a
mechanical system. This type of data is unique
due to the presence of censoring, a type of missing
data that occurs when we do not observe the actual
time of the event of interest but, instead, we have
access to an approximation for it given by random
interval in which the observation is known to belong. Most traditional methods are not designed
to deal with censoring, and thus we need to adapt
them to censored time-to-event data. In this paper, we focus on non-parametric goodness-of-fit
testing procedures based on combining the Stein’s
method and kernelized discrepancies. While for
uncensored data, there is a natural way of implementing a kernelized Stein discrepancy test, for
censored data there are several options, each of
them with different advantages and disadvantages.
In this paper, we propose a collection of kernelized Stein discrepancy tests for time-to-event data,
and we study each of them theoretically and empirically; our experimental results show that our
proposed methods perform better than existing
tests, including previous tests based on a kernelized maximum mean discrepancy.

1. Introduction
An important topic of study in statistics is the distribution
of times to a critical event, otherwise known as survival
times: examples include the infection time from a disease
(Andersen et al., 2012; Mirabello et al., 2009); the death
*

Equal contribution 1 Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit,
University College London, United Kingdom 2 Department of
Computer Science and Technology, University of Cambridge,
United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Tamara Fernández
<t.a.fernandez@ucl.ac.uk >.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

time of a patient in a clinical trial (Collett, 2015; Biswas
et al., 2007); or the possible re-offending times for released
criminals (Chung et al., 1991). Survival data are frequently
subject to censoring: the time of interest is not observed, but
rather a bound on it. The most common scenario studied is
right censoring, where a lower bound on the survival time is
observed, for instance, a patient might leave a clinical trial
before it is completed, meaning that we only obtain a lower
bound on the time of death (the definitions and terminologies
for the survival analysis setting will be provided in Section
2).
We address the setting where a model of survival times is
proposed, and it is desired to test this model against observed
data in the presence of censoring: this is known as goodnessof-fit testing. When departures from the model follow a
known parametric family, a number of classical tests are
available, being the most popular in practice the Log-rank
test (Hollander & Proschan, 1979), and its generalization,
the weighted Log-rank test (Brendel et al., 2014). For an
overview of these and other methods we refer the reader to
(Klein & Moeschberger, 2006)
In the event of more general departures from the null, kernel methods may be used to construct a powerful class of
non-parametric tests to detect a greater range of alternative
scenarios. For the uncensored case, a popular class of kernel goodness-of-fit tests utilize Stein’s method (Barbour &
Chen, 2005; Chen et al., 2010; Ley et al., 2017; Gorham &
Mackey, 2015) to develop a test statistic (Liu et al., 2016;
Chwialkowski et al., 2016; Gorham & Mackey, 2017; Jitkrittum et al., 2017), which can be computed even when the
model is known only up to normalization. In this paper we
consider the particular case of kernel Stein discrepancies
(KSDs) which are described in Section 2. While an alternative strategy would be simply to run a two-sample test using
samples from the model, using for instance the maximum
mean discrepancy (MMD) (Gretton et al., 2012), Stein tests
are more computationally efficient (no additional sampling
is needed), and can take advantage of model structure to
achieve better test power. KSD tests have been extended
to various settings such as discrete variable models (Yang
et al., 2018), point process (Yang et al., 2019), latent variable models (Kanagawa et al., 2019), and directional data
(Xu & Matsuda, 2020).

