On Gradient Descent Ascent for Nonconvex-Concave Minimax Problems
Tianyi Lin 1 Chi Jin 2 Michael. I. Jordan 3

Abstract
We consider nonconvex-concave minimax problems, minx maxy∈Y f (x, y) where f is nonconvex in x but concave in y and Y is a convex
and bounded set. One of the most popular algorithms for solving this problem is the celebrated
gradient descent ascent (GDA) algorithm, which
has been widely used in machine learning, control theory and economics. Despite the extensive
convergence results for the convex-concave setting, GDA with equal stepsize can converge to
limit cycles or even diverge in a general setting.
In this paper, we present the complexity results
on two-time-scale GDA for solving nonconvexconcave minimax problems, showing that the algorithm can find a stationary point of the function
Φ(·) := maxy∈Y f (·, y) efficiently. To the best
our knowledge, this is the first nonasymptotic
analysis for two-time-scale GDA in this setting,
shedding light on its superior practical performance in training generative adversarial networks
(GANs) and other real applications.

1. Introduction
We consider the following smooth minimax optimization
problem:
minm max f (x, y),
(1)
x∈R

m

including generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), statistics (Xu et al., 2009; Abadeh
et al., 2015), online learning (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006),
deep learning (Sinha et al., 2018) and distributed computing (Shamma, 2008; Mateos et al., 2010). Moreover, there is
increasing awareness that machine-learning systems are embedded in real-world settings involving scarcity or competition that impose game-theoretic constraints (Jordan, 2018).
One of the simplest candidates for solving problem (1) is
the natural generalization of gradient descent (GD) known
as gradient descent ascent (GDA). At each iteration, this
algorithm performs gradient descent over the variable x
with the stepsize ηx and gradient ascent over the variable
y with the stepsize ηy . On the positive side, when the objective function f is convex in x and concave in y, there
is a vast literature establishing asymptotic and nonasymptotic convergence for the average iterates generated by GDA
with the equal stepsizes (ηx = ηy ); (see, e.g., Korpelevich,
1976; Chen & Rockafellar, 1997; Nedić & Ozdaglar, 2009;
Nemirovski, 2004; Du & Hu, 2018). Local linear convergence can also be shown under the additional assumption
that f is locally strongly convex in x and strongly concave
in y (Cherukuri et al., 2017; Adolphs et al., 2018; Liang
& Stokes, 2018). However, there has been no shortage of
research highlighting the fact that in a general setting GDA
with equal stepsizes can converge to limit cycles or even
diverge (Benaım & Hirsch, 1999; Hommes & Ochea, 2012;
Mertikopoulos et al., 2018).

y∈Y

n

where f : R ×R → R is nonconvex in x but concave in y
and where Y is a convex set. Since von Neumann’s seminal
work (Neumann, 1928), the problem of finding the solution
to problem (1) has been a major focus of research in mathematics, economics and computer science (Basar & Olsder,
1999; Nisan et al., 2007; Von Neumann & Morgenstern,
2007). In recent years, minimax optimization theory has begun to see applications in machine learning, with examples
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Industrial Engineering
and Operations Research, UC Berkeley 2 Department of Electrical Engineering, Princeton University 3 Department of Statistics
and Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, UC Berkeley.
Correspondence to: Tianyi Lin <darren lin@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Recent research has focused on alternative gradient-based
algorithms that have guarantees beyond the convex-concave
setting (Daskalakis et al., 2017; Heusel et al., 2017; Mertikopoulos et al., 2019; Mazumdar et al., 2019). Two-timescale GDA (Heusel et al., 2017) has been particularly popular. This algorithm, which involves unequal stepsizes
(ηx 6= ηy ), has been shown to empirically to alleviate the
issues of limit circles and it has theoretical support in terms
of local asymptotic convergence to Nash equilibria; (Heusel
et al., 2017, Theorem 2).
This asymptotic result stops short of providing an understanding of algorithmic efficiency, and it would be desirable
to provide a stronger, nonasymptotic, theoretical convergence rate for two-time-scale GDA in a general setting. In
particular, the following general structure arises in many applications: f (x, ·) is concave for any x and Y is a bounded

