Spectral Clustering with Graph Neural Networks for Graph Pooling

Filippo Maria Bianchi * 1 Daniele Grattarola * 2 Cesare Alippi 2 3

Abstract
Spectral clustering (SC) is a popular clustering
technique to find strongly connected communities on a graph. SC can be used in Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to implement pooling operations that aggregate nodes belonging to the
same cluster. However, the eigendecomposition
of the Laplacian is expensive and, since clustering results are graph-specific, pooling methods
based on SC must perform a new optimization
for each new sample. In this paper, we propose
a graph clustering approach that addresses these
limitations of SC. We formulate a continuous relaxation of the normalized minCUT problem and
train a GNN to compute cluster assignments that
minimize this objective. Our GNN-based implementation is differentiable, does not require to
compute the spectral decomposition, and learns
a clustering function that can be quickly evaluated on out-of-sample graphs. From the proposed
clustering method, we design a graph pooling operator that overcomes some important limitations
of state-of-the-art graph pooling techniques and
achieves the best performance in several supervised and unsupervised tasks.

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art convolutional neural networks (CNNs) alternate convolutions, which extrapolate local features from
the input signal, with pooling, which downsamples the feature maps by computing local summaries of nearby points.
Pooling helps CNNs to discard information that is superfluous for the task, provides translation invariance, and keeps
model complexity under control by reducing the size of the
intermediate representations.
*

Equal contribution 1 NORCE, the Norwegian Research Centre, Norway 2 Faculty of Informatics, Università della Svizzera
italiana, Lugano, Switzerland 3 DEIB, Politecnico di Milano, Milano, Italy. Correspondence to: Filippo Maria Bianchi <filippombianchi@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Message-passing

MinCutPool

Message-passing

Figure 1. A deep GNN architecture where message-passing is followed by the MinCutPool layer.

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) extend the convolution
operation from regular domains to arbitrary topologies and
unordered structures (Battaglia et al., 2018). As in CNNs,
graph pooling is an important operation that allows a GNN
to learn increasingly more abstract and coarser representations of the input graphs, by summarizing local components and discarding redundant information. The development of pooling strategies for GNNs, however, has lagged
behind the design of newer and more effective messagepassing (MP) operations (Gilmer et al., 2017), such as
graph convolutions. The reason, is mainly due to the difficulty of defining an aggregated version of a graph that
effectively supports the pooled node features.
Several approaches have been proposed in recent GNN
literature, ranging from model-free methods that precompute the pooled graphs by leveraging graph-theoretical
properties (Bruna et al., 2013; Defferrard et al., 2016),
to model-based methods that perform pooling trough a
learnable function of the node features (Ying et al., 2018;
Cangea et al., 2018; Hongyang Gao, 2019). However, existing model-free methods only consider the graph topology but ignore the node features, while model-based methods are mostly based on heuristics. As a consequence, the
former cannot learn how to coarsen graphs adaptively for a
specific downstream task, while the latter are unstable and
prone to find degenerate solutions even on simple tasks.
A pooling operation that is theoretically grounded and can
adapt to the data and the task is still missing.
Spectral clustering (SC) is a well-known clustering technique that leverages the Laplacian spectrum to find strongly

