Implicit Learning Dynamics in Stackelberg Games:
Equilibria Characterization, Convergence Analysis, and Empirical Study

Tanner Fiez 1 Benjamin Chasnov 1 Lillian Ratliff 1

Abstract
Contemporary work on learning in continuous
games has commonly overlooked the hierarchical decision-making structure present in machine
learning problems formulated as games, instead
treating them as simultaneous play games and
adopting the Nash equilibrium solution concept.
We deviate from this paradigm and provide a comprehensive study of learning in Stackelberg games.
This work provides insights into the optimization
landscape of zero-sum games by establishing connections between Nash and Stackelberg equilibria
along with the limit points of simultaneous gradient descent. We derive novel gradient-based
learning dynamics emulating the natural structure
of a Stackelberg game using the implicit function
theorem and provide convergence analysis for deterministic and stochastic updates for zero-sum
and general-sum games. Notably, in zero-sum
games using deterministic updates, we show the
only critical points the dynamics converge to are
Stackelberg equilibria and provide a local convergence rate. Empirically, our learning dynamics
mitigate rotational behavior and exhibit benefits
for training generative adversarial networks compared to simultaneous gradient descent.

1. Introduction
The emerging coupling between game theory and machine
learning can be credited to the formulation of learning
problems as interactions between competing objectives and
strategic agents. Indeed, generative adversarial networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), robust supervised learning (Madry et al., 2018), reinforcement and multi-agent
reinforcement learning (Dai et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019),
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington. Correspondence to:
Tanner Fiez <fiezt@uw.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

and hyperparameter optimization (Maclaurin et al., 2015)
problems can be cast as zero-sum or general-sum continuous action games. To obtain solutions in a tractable manner,
gradient-based algorithms have gained attention.
Given the motivating applications, much of the contemporary work on learning in games has focused on zerosum games with non-convex, non-concave objective functions and seeking stable critical points or local equilibria. A number of techniques have been proposed including optimistic and extra-gradient algorithms (Daskalakis
et al., 2018; Daskalakis & Panageas, 2018; Mertikopoulos
et al., 2019), gradient adjustments (Balduzzi et al., 2018;
Mescheder et al., 2017), and opponent modeling methods (Zhang & Lesser, 2010; Foerster et al., 2018; Letcher
et al., 2019; Schäfer & Anandkumar, 2019). However, only
a select number of algorithms can guarantee convergence
to stable critical points satisfying sufficient conditions for
a local Nash equilibrium (LNE) (Mazumdar et al., 2019;
Adolphs et al., 2019).
The dominant perspective in machine learning applications
of game theory has been focused on simultaneous play.
However, there are many problems exhibiting a hierarchical
order of play, and in a game theoretic context, such problems
are known as Stackelberg games. The Stackelberg equilibrium (Von Stackelberg, 2010) solution concept generalizes
the min-max solution to general-sum games. In the simplest
formulation, one player acts as the leader who is endowed
with the power to select an action knowing the other player
(follower) plays a best-response. This viewpoint has long
been researched from a control perspective on games (Basar
& Olsder, 1998) and in the bilevel optimization community (Danskin, 1967; 1966; Zaslavski, 2012).
The work from a machine learning perspective on games
with a hierarchical decision-making structure is sparse and
exclusively focuses on zero-sum games. In the most relevant
theoretical work, Jin et al. (2019) show that all stable critical
points of simultaneous gradient descent with a timescale
separation between players approaching infinity satisfy sufficient conditions for a local Stackelberg equilibrium (LSE).
The closest empirical work we are aware of is on unrolled
GANs (Metz et al., 2017), where the leader (generator) optimizes a surrogate cost function that depends on parameters

