Student-Teacher Curriculum Learning via Reinforcement Learning:
Predicting Hospital Inpatient Admission Location

Rasheed el-Bouri 1 David Eyre 1 2 Peter Watkinson 2 Tingting Zhu* 1 David A. Clifton* 1

Abstract
Accurate and reliable prediction of hospital admission location is important due to resourceconstraints and space availability in a clinical setting, particularly when dealing with patients who
come from the emergency department. In this
work we propose a student-teacher network via
reinforcement learning to deal with this specific
problem. A representation of the weights of the
student network is treated as the state and is fed
as an input to the teacher network. The teacher
network’s action is to select the most appropriate
batch of data to train the student network on from
a training set sorted according to entropy. By validating on three datasets, not only do we show that
our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods on tabular data and performs competitively on
image recognition, but also that novel curricula
are learned by the teacher network. We demonstrate experimentally that the teacher network can
actively learn about the student network and guide
it to achieve better performance than if trained
alone.

1. Introduction
A major problem that many hospital wards face is the timely
preparation of beds for patients from the emergency department (ED) who are due to be admitted as inpatients (Staib
et al., 2017). The average time between initial examination
(triage) in the ED and a request for a bed in the hospital is
4 hours (Francis, 2013) and the only information available
to staff about the patient is that collected at triage. This
information can be helpful to deduce the patient’s condition,
which in turn can be used to predict which of the relevant
inpatient wards needs to prepare space. Often, the ward is
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Oxford 2 Oxford University Hospitals Trust. Correspondence to: Rasheed el-Bouri
<rasheed.el-bouri@eng.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

requested after the 4 hours have passed in a reactive manner.
Predictively allocating patients to wards however, should
allow for the timely care and admission of the patient as
well as allocation of resource to the relevant departments.
Furthermore this may contribute to reducing crowding of
the ED as well as patient waiting times. With this in mind,
we present a method of predicting where in a hospital emergency patients will be admitted after being triaged using a
combination of reinforcement and curriculum learning.
Curriculum learning was introduced to train a neural network in a similar manner to that in which humans are educated. The approach stems from the observation that children in schools learn by beginning with simple ideas and
progressing on to more complex topics; it is believed that
neural networks may also benefit from this structured approach to learning. By initially presenting the network with
data that are ‘easier’ to fit, the optimisation surface (of network prediction error vs. network parameters) is more likely
to be convex (Bengio et al., 2009).
In this paper we propose using neural networks for classification by exploiting this notion of a curriculum and extending
the teacher-student curriculum learning method of (Matiisen et al., 2017). We use two networks, where one (the
teacher) is trained with information about the state of the
other (the student) in order to guide training and maximise
performance. A teacher’s observations of many previous
students provides them with an idea of how a student can
best learn (Papay & Kraft, 2015) using a pre-defined curriculum. This work aims to mimic this action of learning from
an agent (that is itself learning), with the aim of creating a
policy (the function that maps a state to an action) to guide
a future agent to achieve successful performance.
The contributions of this work include the development
of a student-teacher learner, where the teacher is trained
using reinforcement learning which, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, is the first work to propose such a studentteacher configuration. It is also believed to be the first work
to use a representation of the weights extracted from the
student as inputs to the teacher. This method has demonstrably better performance for our healthcare application than
all others to which it was compared. We believe that the
resulting classifier will prove a useful tool for hospitals in

