When Explanations Lie: Why Many Modified BP Attributions Fail

Leon Sixt 1 Maximilian Granz 1 Tim Landgraf 1

Abstract
Attribution methods aim to explain a neural network’s prediction by highlighting the most relevant image areas. A popular approach is to
backpropagate (BP) a custom relevance score using modified rules, rather than the gradient. We
analyze an extensive set of modified BP methods: Deep Taylor Decomposition, Layer-wise
Relevance Propagation (LRP), Excitation BP, PatternAttribution, DeepLIFT, Deconv, RectGrad,
and Guided BP. We find empirically that the explanations of all mentioned methods, except for
DeepLIFT, are independent of the parameters of
later layers. We provide theoretical insights for
this surprising behavior and also analyze why
DeepLIFT does not suffer from this limitation.
Empirically, we measure how information of later
layers is ignored by using our new metric, cosine similarity convergence (CSC). The paper provides a framework to assess the faithfulness of
new and existing modified BP methods theoretically and empirically. 2

1. Introduction
Explainable AI (XAI) aims to improve the interpretability
of machine learning models. For deep convolutional networks, attribution methods visualize the areas relevant for
the prediction with so-called saliency maps. Various attribution methods have been proposed, but do they reflect the
model behavior correctly?
(Adebayo et al., 2018) proposed a sanity check: if the parameters of the model are randomized and therefore the
network output changes, do the saliency maps change too?
Surprisingly, the saliency maps of GuidedBP (Springenberg
1

Dahlem Center of Machine Learning and Robotics, Freie
Universität Berlin, Germany. Correspondence to: Leon Sixt
<leon.sixt@fu-berlin.de>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
2
For code see: github.com/berleon/when-explanations-lie

(a) Sanity Checks (VGG-16)

(b) Image

(c) Expl. Cat (d) Expl. Dog

(e) Diff. (c) - (d)

Figure 1: (a) Sanity Checks: Saliency maps should change
if network parameters are randomized. Parameters are randomized from the last to the first layer. Red denotes positive
and blue negative relevance. (b-e) Class insensitivity of
LRPα1β0 on VGG-16. Explanation for (c) Persian cat (283)
and (d) King Charles Spaniel (156). (e) Difference (c) - (d),
both normalized to [0, 1]. L1-norm of (e) = 0.000371.

et al., 2014) stay identical, when the last layer (fc3) is randomized (see Figure 1a). A method ignoring the last layer
can not explain the network’s prediction faithfully.
In addition to (Adebayo et al., 2018), which only reported
GuidedBP to fail, we found several modified backpropagation (BP) methods fail too: Layer-wise Relevance Propagation (LRP), Deep Taylor Decomposition (DTD), PatternAttribution, Excitation BP, Deconv, GuidedBP, and RectGrad
(Bach et al., 2015; Montavon et al., 2017; Kindermans et al.,
2018; Zhang et al., 2018; Zeiler & Fergus, 2014; Springenberg et al., 2014; Kim et al., 2019). The only tested modified
BP method passing is DeepLIFT (Shrikumar et al., 2017).

