Feature Selection using Stochastic Gates
Yutaro Yamada * 1 Ofir Lindenbaum * 2 Sahand Negahban 1 Yuval Kluger 2 3

Abstract
Feature selection problems have been extensively
studied in the setting of linear estimation (e.g.
LASSO), but less emphasis has been placed on
feature selection for non-linear functions. In this
study, we propose a method for feature selection
in neural network estimation problems. The new
procedure is based on probabilistic relaxation of
the `0 norm of features, or the count of the number of selected features. Our `0 -based regularization relies on a continuous relaxation of the
Bernoulli distribution; such relaxation allows our
model to learn the parameters of the approximate
Bernoulli distributions via gradient descent. The
proposed framework simultaneously learns either
a nonlinear regression or classification function
while selecting a small subset of features. We
provide an information-theoretic justification for
incorporating Bernoulli distribution into feature
selection. Furthermore, we evaluate our method
using synthetic and real-life data to demonstrate
that our approach outperforms other commonly
used methods in both predictive performance and
feature selection.

1. Introduction
Feature selection is a fundamental task in machine learning
and statistics. Selecting a subset of relevant features may
result in several potential benefits: reducing experimental
costs (Min et al., 2014), enhancing interpretability (Ribeiro
et al., 2016), speeding up computation, reducing memory
and even improving model generalization on unseen data
(Chandrashekar & Sahin, 2014). For example, in biomedical
studies, machine learning can provide effective diagnostics
or prognostics models. However, the number of features
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics and Data Science,
Yale University, Connecticut, USA 2 Program in Applied Mathematics, Yale University, Connecticut, USA 3 School of Medicine,
Yale University, Connecticut, USA. Correspondence to: Yuval
Kluger <yuval.kluger@yale.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

(e.g., genes or proteins) often exceeds the number of samples. In this setting, feature selection can lead to improved
risk assessment and provide meaningful biological insights.
While neural networks are good candidates for learning diagnostics models, identifying relevant features while building
compact predictive models remains an open challenge.
Feature selection methods are classified into three major
categories: filter methods, wrapper methods, and embedded methods. Filter methods attempt to remove irrelevant
features prior to learning a model. These methods filter features using a per-feature relevance score that is created based
on statistical measures (Battiti, 1994; Peng et al., 2005; Estévez et al., 2009; Song et al., 2007; 2012; Chen et al., 2017).
Wrapper methods (Kohavi & John, 1997b; Stein et al., 2005;
Zhu et al., 2007; Reunanen, 2003; Allen, 2013) use the outcome of a model to determine the relevance of each feature.
Wrapper methods require recomputing the model for each
subset of features and, thus, become computationally expensive, especially in the context of deep neural networks
(Verikas & Bacauskiene, 2002; Kabir et al., 2010; Roy et al.,
2015). Embedded methods aim to remove this burden by
learning the model while simultaneously selecting the subset of relevant features. The Least Absolute Shrinkage and
Selection Operator (LASSO) (Tibshirani, 1996) is a wellknown embedded method, whose objective is to minimize
the loss while enforcing an `1 constraint on the weights of
the features. LASSO is scalable and widely used (Hans,
2009; Li et al., 2011; 2006), but it is restricted to the domain of linear functions and suffers from shrinkage of the
model parameters. It seems natural to extend the LASSO
using neural networks; however, gradient descent on an `1
regularized objective neither performs well in practice nor
sparsifies the input layer (Li et al., 2016; Scardapane et al.,
2017; Feng & Simon, 2017).
To overcome these limitations, we develop a fully embedded
feature selection method for nonlinear models. Our method
improves upon the LASSO formulation by: a) capturing
nonlinear interactions between features via neural network
modeling and b) employing an `0 -like regularization using
gates with weights parametrized by a smooth variant of a
Bernoulli distribution. These two improvements are jointly
formulated as a fully differentiable neural network that provides a solution to the important long-standing problem of
feature selection for nonlinear functions.

