Estimating Q(s, s0 ) with Deep Deterministic Dynamics Gradients

Ashley D. Edwards 1 Himanshu Sahni 2 Rosanne Liu 1 3 Jane Hung 1 Ankit Jain 1 Rui Wang 1 Adrien Ecoffet 1
Thomas Miconi 1 Charles Isbell 2 * Jason Yosinski 1 3 *

In this paper, we introduce a novel form of value
function, Q(s, s0 ), that expresses the utility of
transitioning from a state s to a neighboring state
s0 and then acting optimally thereafter. In order
to derive an optimal policy, we develop a forward
dynamics model that learns to make next-state
predictions that maximize this value. This formulation decouples actions from values while still
learning off-policy. We highlight the benefits of
this approach in terms of value function transfer, learning within redundant action spaces, and
learning off-policy from state observations generated by sub-optimal or completely random policies. Code and videos are available at http://
sites.google.com/view/qss-paper.

1. Introduction
The goal of reinforcement learning is to learn how to act
so as to maximize long-term reward. A solution is usually
formulated as finding the optimal policy, i.e., selecting the
optimal action given a state. A popular approach for finding
this policy is to learn a function that defines values though
actions, Q(s, a), where maxa Q(s, a) is a state’s value and
arg maxa Q(s, a) is the optimal action (Sutton & Barto,
1998). We will refer to this approach as QSA.
Here, we propose an alternative formulation for off-policy
reinforcement learning that defines values solely through
states, rather than actions. In particular, we introduce
Q(s, s0 ), or simply QSS, which represents the value of transitioning from one state s to a neighboring state s0 ∈ N (s)
and then acting optimally thereafter:
Q(s, s0 ) = r(s, s0 ) + γ 00max 0 Q(s0 , s00 ).
s ∈N (s )

*

Co-senior authors 1 Uber AI Labs 2 Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA 3 ML Collective. Correspondence to:
Ashley D. Edwards <ashedw88@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Action at+1

Action at+1

Abstract

Inverse Dynamics
Best s'

argmax
a

Values of
possible actions

Environment

Q(s,a)

argmax
s'
Values of
next states

Environment

Q(s,s')
State st

State st

Reward rt

Reward rt

(a) Q or QSA-learning

(b) QSS-learning

Figure 1. Formulation for (a) Q-learning, or QSA-learning vs. (b)
QSS-learning. Instead of proposing an action, a QSS agent proposes a state, which is then fed into an inverse dynamics model
that determines the action given the current state and next state
proposal. The environment returns the next observation and reward
as usual after following the action.

In this formulation, instead of proposing an action, the agent
proposes a desired next state, which is fed into an inverse
dynamics model that outputs the appropriate action to reach
it (see Figure 1). We demonstrate that this formulation has
several advantages. First, redundant actions that lead to
the same transition are simply folded into one value estimate. Further, by removing actions, QSS becomes easier to
transfer than a traditional Q function in certain scenarios,
as it only requires learning an inverse dynamics function
upon transfer, rather than a full policy or value function.
Finally, we show that QSS can learn policies purely from
observations of (potentially sub-optimal) demonstrations
with no access to demonstrator actions. Importantly, unlike
other imitation from observation approaches, because it is
off-policy, QSS can learn highly efficient policies even from
sub-optimal or completely random demonstrations.
In order to realize the benefits of off-policy QSS, we must
obtain value maximizing future state proposals without performing explicit maximization. There are two problems
one would encounter in doing so. The first is that a set of
neighbors of s are not assumed to be known a priori. This is
unlike the set of actions in discrete QSA which are assumed
to be provided by the MDP. Secondly, for continuous state
and action spaces, the set of neighbors may be infinitely
many, so maximizing over them explicitly is out of the
question. To get around this difficulty, we draw inspiration
from Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) (Lillicrap et al., 2015), which learns a policy π(s) → a over

