Multidimensional Shape Constraints

Maya R. Gupta * 1 Erez Louidor * 1 Olexander Mangylov * 1 Nobuyuki Morioka * 1 Taman Narayan * 1
Sen Zhao * 1

Abstract
We propose new multi-input shape constraints
across four intuitive categories: complements,
diminishers, dominance, and unimodality constraints. We show these shape constraints can
be checked and even enforced when training
machine-learned models for linear models, generalized additive models, and the nonlinear function
class of multi-layer lattice models. Real-world
experiments illustrate how the different shape constraints can be used to increase explainability and
improve regularization, especially for non-IID
train-test distribution shift.

1. Introduction
Shape constraints are a classic way to characterize a function by whether its shape obeys certain properties (see e.g.,
Barlow et al. (1972); Groeneboom & Jongbloed (2014);
Chetverikov et al. (2018)). The most popular shape constraint in machine learning is monotonicity (see, e.g., Archer
& Wang (1993); Sill (1998); Howard & Jebara (2007);
Minin et al. (2010); Gupta et al. (2016)). For example,
suppose one is building a model to predict the price of a
house. Then one might expect the price to be a monotonically increasing function with respect to square meters,
holding fixed any value of the other inputs such as location.
Shape constraints are useful in machine learning because
they aid interpretability: they provide ways to describe the
function in terms of everyday relationships between its inputs and outputs that hold everywhere. Shape constraints are
also semantically-meaningful regularizers that can improve
generalization, especially when the distribution shifts between the train and test data (Canini et al., 2016; You et al.,
2017). Shape constraints can also be imposed to ensure
some notions of AI safety, societal norms and deontological
ethics (Wang & Gupta, 2020).
*
Equal contribution 1 Google Research, Mountain View, California, USA. Correspondence to: Sen Zhao <senzhao@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Shape constraints historically have been defined in terms
of how the function responds to changes in a single input,
e.g. how house size affects its price, with modelers often
applying many such constraints simultaneously on different
inputs. Cotter et al. (2019a) extended this idea and proposed two new shape constraints that are defined on pairs
of features that are complements with one another, such as
a measurement and its precision. For example, a model that
predicts whether a user will click on a web link might use as
features a: the past click-through-rate (CTR) for that link,
and b: the number of impressions that a was calculated from.
Intuitively, the model output should be more sensitive to the
past CTR a if the number of past impressions b used to calculate that CTR was higher, since the model can then trust
the CTR to be more accurate. Cotter et al. (2019a) captured
this type of feature interaction with two different mathematical formulations, which they termed Edgeworth and
trapezoid shape constraints, and showed these two-feature
shape constraints are broadly applicable whenever models
include a pair of inputs where input a is a measurement
correlated with the label y, and input b estimates how much
one can trust input a.
Inspired by that work, here we address the broader question,
“What multidimensional shape constraints can be specified
that would be useful to machine-learning practitioners?" We
identified four useful categories of multidimensional shape
constraints: complements, diminishers, dominance, and unimodality. We review and propose new shape constraints
spanning these four categories that we think are most valuable to practitioners, pictured in Fig. 1. We show that these
shape constraints can be expressed as linear inequality constraints for some function classes including flexible lattice
models, and thus can be efficiently checked for trained models. Moreover, we show that machine-learned models from
these function classes can be trained to respect these shape
constraints by minimizing empirical risk with the appropriate linear inequality constraints on the model parameters.
We give intuitive examples of usage, and present experimental results on benchmark and real problems illustrating the
use and effectiveness of multi-input shape constraints for
interpretability and regularization of nonlinear models.

