Better Depth-Width Trade-offs for Neural Networks
through the lens of Dynamical Systems

Vaggos Chatziafratis 1 Sai Ganesh Nagarajan 2 Ioannis Panageas 2

Abstract
The expressivity of neural networks as a function of their depth, width and type of activation
units has been an important question in deep learning theory. Recently, depth separation results for
ReLU networks were obtained via a new connection with dynamical systems, using a generalized notion of fixed points of a continuous
map f , called periodic points. In this work, we
strengthen the connection with dynamical systems
and we improve the existing width lower bounds
along several aspects. Our first main result is
period-specific width lower bounds that hold under the stronger notion of L1 -approximation error,
instead of the weaker classification error. Our second contribution is that we provide sharper width
lower bounds, still yielding meaningful exponential depth-width separations, in regimes where
previous results wouldn’t apply. A byproduct of
our results is that there exists a universal constant
characterizing the depth-width trade-offs, as long
as f has odd periods. Technically, our results
follow by unveiling a tighter connection between
the following three quantities of a given function:
its period, its Lipschitz constant and the growth
rate of the number of oscillations arising under
compositions of the function f with itself.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (NNs) with many hidden layers are
now at the core of modern machine learning applications and
can achieve remarkable performance that was previously
unattainable using shallow networks. But why are deeper
networks better than shallow? Perhaps intuitively, one can
1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
Singapore University of Technology and Design. Correspondence to: Vaggos Chatziafratis <vaggos@cs.stanford.edu>, Sai
Ganesh Nagarajan <sai_nagarajan@mymail.sutd.edu.sg>, Ioannis
Panageas <ioannis@sutd.edu.sg>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

understand that the nature of computation done by deep and
shallow networks is different; simple one hidden layer NNs
extract independent features of the input and return their
weighted sum, while deeper NNs can compute features of
features, making the features computed by deeper layers
no longer independent. Another line of intuition ((Poole
et al., 2016)), is that highly complicated manifolds in input
space can actually turn into flattened manifolds in hidden
space, thus helping with downstream tasks (e.g., classification).
To make the above intuitions formal and understand the benefits of depth, researchers try to understand the expressivity
of NNs and prove depth separation results. Early results in
this area sometimes referred to as universality theorems (Cybenko, 1989; Hornik et al., 1989), state that NNs of just one
hidden layer, equipped with standard activation units (e.g.,
sigmoids, ReLUs etc.) are “dense” in the space of continuous functions, meaning that any continuous function
can be represented by an appropriate combination of these
activation units. There is a computational caveat however,
since the width of this one hidden layer network can be
unbounded and grow arbitrarily with the input function. In
practice, resources are bounded, hence the more meaningful
questions have to do with depth separations.
This is a foundational question not only in deep learning
theory but also in other computational models (e.g., boolean
circuit complexity (Hastad, 1986; Kane & Williams, 2016))
with a rich history of prior work, bringing together ideas and
techniques from boolean functions, Fourier and harmonic
analysis, special functions, fractal geometry, differential geometry and more recently dynamical systems and chaos. At
a high level, all these works define an appropriate notion
of “complexity” and later demonstrate how deeper models are significantly more powerful than shallower models.
A partial list of the different notions of complexity that
have been considered include global curvature (Poole et al.,
2016) and trajectory length (Raghu et al., 2017), number
of activation patterns (Hanin & Rolnick, 2019) and linear
regions (Montufar et al., 2014; Arora et al., 2016), fractals (Malach & Shalev-Shwartz, 2019), the dimension of
algebraic varieties (Kileel et al., 2019), Fourier analysis (Eldan & Shamir, 2016; Bresler & Nagaraj, 2020), number of

