On Contrastive Learning for Likelihood-free Inference

Conor Durkan 1 Iain Murray 1 George Papamakarios 2

Abstract
Likelihood-free methods perform parameter inference in stochastic simulator models where evaluating the likelihood is intractable but sampling
synthetic data is possible. One class of methods for this likelihood-free problem uses a classifier to distinguish between pairs of parameterobservation samples generated using the simulator and pairs sampled from some reference distribution, which implicitly learns a density ratio
proportional to the likelihood. Another popular
class of methods fits a conditional distribution to
the parameter posterior directly, and a particular
recent variant allows for the use of flexible neural
density estimators for this task. In this work, we
show that both of these approaches can be unified
under a general contrastive learning scheme, and
clarify how they should be run and compared.

1. Introduction
Modeling systems using parameterized stochastic simulators is prevalent across many scientific and engineering
disciplines, including cosmology (Alsing et al., 2019), highenergy physics (Brehmer et al., 2018a), and computational
neuroscience (Gonçalves et al., 2019). Specifying models
in this way is appealing since it is often easier to describe a
generative process implicitly rather than reasoning directly
about an emergent probability distribution. Traditional parameter inference algorithms such as variational methods
and Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) usually don’t
apply to these models, since explicit evaluation of the likelihood function is often intractable.
In recent years, significant progress has been made toward
this challenge of likelihood-free inference (Sisson et al.,
2018). Most of the literature relies on sample-based methods that require very large numbers of simulations. Methods
1

School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom 2 DeepMind, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Conor Durkan <conor.durkan@ed.ac.uk>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

based on neural networks have reduced the number of simulations needed to perform effective inference by orders
of magnitude (Papamakarios, 2019; Cranmer et al., 2019).
Some of these can evaluate and sample from an approximate
posterior directly, bypassing the need for MCMC schemes
altogether. Ultimately, this line of work seeks to develop
a robust and practical toolkit which practitioners can rely
upon for whichever use case they desire.
In this paper, we consider two recently proposed approaches
to neural likelihood-free inference: the first uses classification to approximate density ratios proportional to the likelihood (Hermans et al., 2020), whereas the second directly
casts the problem as a conditional density estimation task
(Greenberg et al., 2019). We demonstrate that these two
methods, traditionally viewed as distinct and compared as
such in the literature, are both instances of a more general
contrastive learning scheme, and can thus be unified under a
single framework. Using this perspective, we directly compare the properties and behaviour of both algorithms, and
offer practical recommendations for those wishing to use
these methods.

2. Background
Given a vector of parameters θ, a stochastic simulator generates latent random numbers z, and produces observed
data x = g(θ, z), where g is some nonlinear function. The
likelihood of the parameters θ given observed data x is then
Z
p(x | θ) = δ(x − g(θ, z)) p(z | θ) dz,
(1)
where δ(·) is the Dirac delta, and this integral is intractable
in general. In some cases it may be possible to evaluate the
joint likelihood p(x, z | θ), but (i) this requires performing
inference on the constrained manifold (g(θ, z), z), and (ii)
often this augmented space is sufficiently high-dimensional
to make standard inference approaches infeasible. In other
cases, the simulator may be provided to us as a black-box
whose internal workings are not accessible, and it is still
desirable to carry out inference in this scenario.
We are interested in computing the posterior p(θ | x0 ) for a
specific observation x0 , where we have prior beliefs p(θ)
about the parameters. This amounts to computing the denp(θ | x0 )
0 | θ)
sity ratio p(x
p(x0 ) =
p(θ) , and this quantity need only be

