Automated Synthetic-to-Real Generalization

Wuyang Chen 1 Zhiding Yu 2 Zhangyang Wang 1 Anima Anandkumar 2 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Training a deep convolutional neural network (DCNN) can
require large amounts of labeled data in computer vision
tasks such as segmentation (Ros et al., 2016; Richter et al.,
2016; 2017), depth/flow estimation (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2015; Mayer et al., 2016; Gaidon et al., 2016), object
detection (Johnson-Roberson et al., 2016), visual navigation (Savva et al., 2019), and grasping (Coumans & Bai,
2016). When there is label scarcity, a popular approach is
to resort to training with synthetic images, where full supervision can be obtained at a low cost. This finds applications
in label-scarce domains such as robotics and autonomous
driving where simulation can play an important role.
1

Texas A&M University 2 NVIDIA 3 California Institute of Tech.
Correspondence to: Wuyang Chen <wuyang.chen@tamu.edu>,
Zhiding Yu <zhidingy@nvidia.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

55
50
45

Accuracy

Models trained on synthetic images often face
degraded generalization to real data. As a convention, these models are often initialized with
ImageNet pretrained representation. Yet the role
of ImageNet knowledge is seldom discussed despite common practices that leverage this knowledge to maintain the generalization ability. An
example is the careful hand-tuning of early stopping and layer-wise learning rates, which is shown
to improve synthetic-to-real generalization but is
also laborious and heuristic. In this work, we explicitly encourage the synthetically trained model
to maintain similar representations with the ImageNet pretrained model, and propose a learningto-optimize (L2O) strategy to automate the selection of layer-wise learning rates. We demonstrate that the proposed framework can significantly improve the synthetic-to-real generalization performance without seeing and training on
real data, while also benefiting downstream tasks
such as domain adaptation. Code is available at:
https://github.com/NVlabs/ASG.

40
35
Small LR for all layers
Large LR for all layers
Train FC only
(backbone fixed)
Small LR for backbone
Large LR for FC
IBN-Net

30
25

0

5

10

15

20

25

Epoch (Synthetic Training)

Figure 1. Both heuristic solutions (early stopping, small learning
rates, etc.) and recent works (e.g. IBN-Net (Pan et al., 2018))
fall in poor generalization in synthetic-to-real transfer learning,
which suffers from the huge appearance gap between the source
and the target domain. Here, we studied different learning rates
(“LR”) or optimization strategies for the backbone and the last
fully-connected classification layer (“FC”). All settings start with
an ImageNet-pretrained backbone and a randomly initialized classification layer. Please see section 3.2 for experiment details.

However, there are many challenges to train with synthetic
images. Models trained on synthetic images often face problems from degraded generalization on the real domain. Such
a domain gap is usually caused by limitations on rendering
quality, including unrealistic texture, appearance, illumination and scene layout, etc. As a result, networks are prone to
overfitting to the synthetic domain with learned representations that differ from those obtained on real images. To this
end, domain generalization methods (Li et al., 2017; Pan
et al., 2018; Yue et al.) have been proposed to overcome the
above domain gaps and improve model generalization on
real target domains.
Synthetic-to-real transfer learning involves training a model
only on synthetic images (source domain) without seeing
any real ones, and targets on the generalization performance
on unseen real images (target domain). Recent synthetic-toreal generalization algorithms often start with an ImageNetpretrained model. To achieve the best generalization performance, it is a common practice to fine-tune the pretrained
model on synthetic images for only a few epochs (i.e. earlystopping) with a small learning rate. Figure 1 illustrates
the evaluation dynamics of several popular heuristic solutions on the VisDA-17 dataset (Peng et al., 2017). One could

