Revisiting Spatial Invariance with Low-Rank Local Connectivity
Gamaleldin F. Elsayed 1 Prajit Ramachandran 1 Jonathon Shlens 1 Simon Kornblith 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are now the dominant approach across many computer vision tasks. Convolution layers possess two main properties that are believed to
be key to their success: local receptive fields and spatially
Author contributions: G.F.E. proposed the project idea. G.F.E.
designed the methods with contributions from S.K., P.R., and
J.S. G.F.E. wrote the code, conducted experiments, and collected
results. S.K. reviewed the code. P.R. conducted FLOP count
analysis and designed Figure 2. G.F.E., S.K., P.R., and J.S. wrote
the paper. 1 Google Research, Brain Team. Correspondence to:
Gamaleldin F. Elsayed <gamaleldin@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

H1: Spatial invariance is a good inductive bias.
H2: Spatial invariance is overly restrictive.

test accuracy

Convolutional neural networks are among the
most successful architectures in deep learning
with this success at least partially attributable
to the efficacy of spatial invariance as an inductive bias. Locally connected layers, which differ
from convolutional layers only in their lack of
spatial invariance, usually perform poorly in practice. However, these observations still leave open
the possibility that some degree of relaxation of
spatial invariance may yield a better inductive
bias than either convolution or local connectivity. To test this hypothesis, we design a method
to relax the spatial invariance of a network layer
in a controlled manner; we create a low-rank locally connected layer, where the filter bank applied at each position is constructed as a linear
combination of basis set of filter banks with spatially varying combining weights. By varying the
number of basis filter banks, we can control the
degree of relaxation of spatial invariance. In experiments with small convolutional networks, we
find that relaxing spatial invariance improves classification accuracy over both convolution and locally connected layers across MNIST, CIFAR-10,
and CelebA datasets, thus suggesting that spatial
invariance may be an overly restrictive prior.

convolution

locally connected

relaxation of spatial invariance

Figure 1: Is spatial invariance a good inductive bias?
Convolutional architectures perform better than locally connected (or fully connected) architectures on computer vision
problems. The primary distinction between convolutional
and locally connected networks is requiring spatial invariance in the learned parameter set. Spatial invariance is
imposed through weight sharing. One long-standing hypothesis (H1) is that this spatial invariance is a good inductive
bias for images (Ruderman & Bialek, 1994; Simoncelli &
Olshausen, 2001; Olshausen & Field, 1996). H1 posits that
predictive performance would systematically degrade as
spatial invariance is relaxed. An alternative hypothesis (H2)
suggests that spatial invariance is overly restrictive and some
degree of variability would aid predictive performance. The
degree to which H1 or H2 is a good hypothesis is largely
untested across natural and curated academic datasets and
the subject of this work.
invariant filters. In this work, we seek to revisit the latter.
Previous work comparing convolutional layers, which share
filters across all spatial locations, with locally connected
layers, which have no weight sharing, has found that convolution is advantageous on common datasets (LeCun, 1989;
Bartunov et al., 2018; Novak et al., 2018). However, this
observation leaves open the possibility that some departure
from spatial invariance could outperform both convolution
and local connectivity (Figure 1).
The structure of CNNs is often likened to the primate visual

