Revisiting Training Strategies and Generalization Performance
in Deep Metric Learning

Karsten Roth * 1 2 Timo Milbich * 2 Samarth Sinha 1 3 Prateek Gupta 1 4 Björn Ommer 2 Joseph Paul Cohen 1

Abstract
Deep Metric Learning (DML) is arguably one of
the most influential lines of research for learning visual similarities with many proposed approaches every year. Although the field benefits
from the rapid progress, the divergence in training
protocols, architectures, and parameter choices
make an unbiased comparison difficult. To provide a consistent reference point, we revisit the
most widely used DML objective functions and
conduct a study of the crucial parameter choices
as well as the commonly neglected mini-batch
sampling process. Under consistent comparison,
DML objectives show much higher saturation
than indicated by literature. Further based on
our analysis, we uncover a correlation between
the embedding space density and compression to
the generalization performance of DML models.
Exploiting these insights, we propose a simple,
yet effective, training regularization to reliably
boost the performance of ranking-based DML
models on various standard benchmark datasets.
Code and a publicly accessible WandB-repo
are available at https://github.com/Confusezius/
Revisiting Deep Metric Learning PyTorch.

1. Introduction
Learning visual similarity is important for a wide range of
vision tasks, such as image clustering (Bouchacourt et al.,
2018), face detection (Schroff et al., 2015) or image retrieval
(Wu et al., 2017). Measuring similarity requires learning
an embedding space which captures images and reasonably
reflects similarities using a defined distance metric. One
of the most adopted classes of algorithms for this task is
*
Equal contribution 1 Mila, Université de Montréal 2 HCI/IWR,
Heidelberg University 3 University of Toronto 4 The Alan Turing
Institute, University of Oxford. Correspondence to: Karsten Roth
<karsten.rh1@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Mean recall performance and standard deviation of various DML objectives trained with (green) and without (orange) our
proposed regularization. For all benchmarks, see appendix.

Deep Metric Learning (DML) which leverages deep neural
networks to learn such a distance preserving embedding.
Due to the growing interest in DML, a large corpus of literature has been proposed contributing to its success. However,
as recent DML approaches explore more diverse research
directions such as architectures (Xuan et al., 2018; Jacob
et al., 2019), objectives functions (Wang et al., 2019b; Yuan
et al., 2019) and additional training tasks (Roth et al., 2019;
Lin et al., 2018), an unbiased comparison of their results
becomes more and more difficult. Further, undisclosed
technical details (s.a. data augmentations or training regularization) pose a challenge to the reproducibility of such
methods, which is of great concern in the machine learning community in general (Bouthillier et al., 2019). One
goal of this work is to counteract this worrying trend by
providing a comprehensive comparison of important and
current DML baselines under identical training conditions
on standard benchmark datasets (Fig. 1). In addition, we
thoroughly review common design choices of DML models
which strongly influence generalization performance to allow for better comparability of current and future work.
On that basis, we extend our analysis to: (i) The process of
data sampling which is well-known to impact the DML optimization (Schroff et al., 2015). While previous works only
studied this process in the specific context of triplet mining strategies for ranking-based objectives (Wu et al., 2017;
Harwood et al., 2017), we examine the model-agnostic case
of sampling informative mini-batches. (ii) The generalization capabilities of DML models by analyzing the structure

