Loss Function Search for Face Recognition

Xiaobo Wang * 1 Shuo Wang * 1 Cheng Chi 2 Shifeng Zhang 2 Tao Mei 1

Abstract
In face recognition, designing margin-based (e.g.,
angular, additive, additive angular margins) softmax loss functions plays an important role in
learning discriminative features. However, these
hand-crafted heuristic methods are sub-optimal
because they require much effort to explore the
large design space. Recently, an AutoML for loss
function search method AM-LFS has been derived, which leverages reinforcement learning to
search loss functions during the training process.
But its search space is complex and unstable that
hindering its superiority. In this paper, we first analyze that the key to enhance the feature discrimination is actually how to reduce the softmax
probability. We then design a unified formulation for the current margin-based softmax losses.
Accordingly, we define a novel search space and
develop a reward-guided search method to automatically obtain the best candidate. Experimental
results on a variety of face recognition benchmarks have demonstrated the effectiveness of our
method over the state-of-the-art alternatives.

1. Introduction
Face recognition is a fundamental and of great practice
values task in the community of pattern recognition and
machine learning. The task of face recognition contains two
categories: face identification to classify a given face to a
specific identity, and face verification to determine whether
a pair of face images are of the same identity. In recent
years, the advanced face recognition methods (Simonyan &
Andrew, 2014; Guo et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2019b; Deng
et al., 2019) are built upon convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) and the learned high-level discriminative features
are adopted for evaluation. To train CNNs with discriminative features, the loss function plays an important role.
*

Equal contribution 1 JD AI Research 2 Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Science. Correspondence to: Shifeng Zhang
<shifeng.zhang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Generally, the CNNs are equipped with classification loss
functions (Liu et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2018f;e; 2019a; Yao
et al., 2018; 2017; Guo et al., 2020), metric learning loss
functions (Sun et al., 2014; Schroff et al., 2015) or both
(Sun et al., 2015; Wen et al., 2016; Zheng et al., 2018b).
Metric learning loss functions such as contrastive loss (Sun
et al., 2014) or triplet loss (Schroff et al., 2015) usually
suffer from high computational cost. To avoid this problem,
they require well-designed sample mining strategies. So
the performance is very sensitive to these strategies. Increasingly more researchers shift their attention to construct
deep face recognition models by re-designing the classical
classification loss functions.
Intuitively, face features are discriminative if their intraclass compactness and inter-class separability are well maximized. However, as pointed out by (Wen et al., 2016; Liu
et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2018b; Deng et al., 2019), the classical softmax loss lacks the power of feature discrimination.
To address this issue, Wen et al. (Wen et al., 2016) develop
a center loss to learn centers for each identity to enhance
the intra-class compactness. Wang et al. (Wang et al., 2017)
and Ranjan et al. (Ranjan et al., 2017) propose to use a
scale parameter to control the temperature of softmax loss,
producing higher gradients to the well-separated samples
to reduce the intra-class variance. Recently, several marginbased softmax loss functions (Liu et al., 2017; Chen et al.,
2018; Wang et al., 2018c;b; Deng et al., 2019) to increase the
feature margin between different classes have also been proposed. Chen et al. (Chen et al., 2018) insert virtual classes
between different classes to enlarge the inter-class margins.
Liu et al. (Liu et al., 2017) introduce an angular margin (ASoftmax) between the ground truth class and other classes to
encourage larger inter-class variance. However, it is usually
unstable and the optimal parameters need to be carefully
adjusted for different settings. To enhance the stability of
A-Softmax loss, Liang et al. (Liang et al., 2017) and Wang
et al. (Wang et al., 2018b;c) propose an additive margin
(AM-Softmax) loss to stabilize the optimization. Deng et
al. (Deng et al., 2019) develop an additive angular margin
(Arc-Softmax) loss, which has a clear geometric interpretation. However, despite great achievements have been made,
all of them are hand-crafted heuristic methods that rely on
great effort from experts to explore the large design space,
which is usually sub-optimal in practice.

