Hybrid Stochastic-Deterministic Minibatch Proximal Gradient:
Less-Than-Single-Pass Optimization with Nearly Optimal Generalization

Pan Zhou 1 Xiao-Tong Yuan 2

Abstract
Stochastic variance-reduced gradient (SVRG) algorithms have been shown to work favorably in
solving large-scale learning problems. Despite the
remarkable success, the stochastic gradient complexity of SVRG-type algorithms usually scales
linearly with data size and thus could still be expensive for huge data. To address this deficiency,
we propose a hybrid stochastic-deterministic minibatch proximal gradient (HSDMPG) algorithm
for strongly-convex problems that enjoys provably
improved data-size-independent complexity guarantees. More precisely, for quadratic loss F (θ) of
n components, we prove that HSDMPG can attain an -optimization-error
(θ ∗ )] ≤ 
 1.5 0.75 1.5 1 E[F(θ)−F

√
κ 
log (  )+1
within O
∧ κ n log1.5 1 +


n log 1
stochastic gradient evaluations, where
κ is condition number. For generic strongly convex loss functions, we prove a nearly identical
complexity bound though at the cost of slightly increased logarithmic factors. For large-scale learning problems, our complexity bounds are superior
to those of the prior state-of-the-art SVRG algorithms with or without dependence on
 size.
√ data
Particularly, in the case of  = O 1/ n which
is at the order of intrinsic excess error bound of a
learning model and thus sufficient for generalization, the stochastic gradient complexity bounds
of HSDMPG for quadratic and generic loss functions are respectively O(n0.875 log1.5 (n)) and
O(n0.875 log2.25 (n)), which to our best knowledge, for the first time achieve optimal generalization in less than a single pass over data. Extensive
numerical results demonstrate the computational
advantages of our algorithm over the prior ones.
1

2

Salesforce Research B-DAT Lab and CICAEET, Nanjing University of Information Science & Technology, Nanjing, 210044, China. Correspondence to: Xiao-Tong Yuan
<xtyuan@nuist.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
We consider the following `2 -regularized empirical risk minimization (ERM) problem:
1 Xn
µ
minθ∈Rd F (θ) :=
`(θ > xi , yi ) + kθk22 , (1)
i=1
n
2
where {(xi , yi )}ni=1 is a training set; the convex loss function `(θ > xi , yi ) measures the discrepancy between the linear prediction θ > xi and the ground truth yi ; and the regularization term µ2 kθk22 aims at enhancing generalization
ability of the linear model. In the field of statistical learning,
the formulation (1) encapsulates a vast body of problems
including least squares regression, logistic regression and
softmax regression, to name a few. In this work, we focus
on developing scalable and autonomous first-order optimization methods to solve this fundamental problem, which
has been extensively studied with a bunch of efficient algorithms proposed including gradient descent (GD) (Cauchy,
1847), stochastic GD (SGD) (Robbins & Monro, 1951),
SDCA (Shalev-Shwartz, 2012), SVRG (Johnson & Zhang,
2013), Catalyst (Lin et al., 2015), SCSG (Lei & Jordan,
2017) and Katyusha (Allen-Zhu, 2017).
Motivation. Despite the remarkable success of the stochastic gradient methods and their variance-reduced extensions,
the stochastic gradient evaluation complexity (which usually dominates the computational cost) of these algorithms
tends to scale linearly with data size n. Such a linear dependence is not only expensive when data scale is huge but also
problematic in online and life-long learning regimes where
samples are coming infinitely. As pointed out in (Lei & Jordan, 2017), there are situations in which accurate solutions
can be obtained with less than a single pass through the data,
e.g. for a large-scale dataset with similar and redundant samples. Therefore, developing data-size-independent learning
algorithms is of special importance in big data era.
Particularly, we are interested in efficiently optimizing problem (1) to its intrinsic
excess error bound which typically
√
scales as O(1/ n). As shown in (Bottou & Bousquet,
2008), the excess error, which measures the expected prediction discrepancy between the optimum model and the
learnt model over all possible samples and thus reflects the
generalization performance of the model, can be decomposed into model approximation error, estimation error and

