Learning to Simulate Complex Physics with Graph Networks

Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez * 1 Jonathan Godwin * 1 Tobias Pfaff * 1 Rex Ying * 1 2 Jure Leskovec 2
Peter W. Battaglia 1

1. Introduction
Realistic simulators of complex physics are invaluable to
many scientific and engineering disciplines, however traditional simulators can be very expensive to create and use.
Building a simulator can entail years of engineering effort, and often must trade off generality for accuracy in a
narrow range of settings. High-quality simulators require
*

Equal contribution 1 DeepMind, London, UK 2 Department
of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
Email to: alvarosg@google.com, jonathangodwin@google.com,
tpfaff@google.com, rexying@stanford.edu, jure@cs.stanford.edu,
peterbattaglia@google.com.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

“Goop”
Sand

Here we present a machine learning framework
and model implementation that can learn to
simulate a wide variety of challenging physical domains, involving fluids, rigid solids, and
deformable materials interacting with one another. Our framework—which we term “Graph
Network-based Simulators” (GNS)—represents
the state of a physical system with particles, expressed as nodes in a graph, and computes dynamics via learned message-passing. Our results show that our model can generalize from
single-timestep predictions with thousands of particles during training, to different initial conditions, thousands of timesteps, and at least an
order of magnitude more particles at test time.
Our model was robust to hyperparameter choices
across various evaluation metrics: the main determinants of long-term performance were the
number of message-passing steps, and mitigating the accumulation of error by corrupting the
training data with noise. Our GNS framework
advances the state-of-the-art in learned physical
simulation, and holds promise for solving a wide
range of complex forward and inverse problems.

Water

Abstract

Time

Figure 1. Rollouts of our GNS model for our WATER -3D, G OOP 3D and S AND -3D datasets. It learns to simulate rich materials at
resolutions sufficient for high-quality rendering [video].

substantial computational resources, which makes scaling
up prohibitive. Even the best are often inaccurate due to insufficient knowledge of, or difficulty in approximating, the
underlying physics and parameters. An attractive alternative
to traditional simulators is to use machine learning to train
simulators directly from observed data, however the large
state spaces and complex dynamics have been difficult for
standard end-to-end learning approaches to overcome.
Here we present a powerful machine learning framework for
learning to simulate complex systems from data—“Graph
Network-based Simulators” (GNS). Our framework imposes
strong inductive biases, where rich physical states are represented by graphs of interacting particles, and complex
dynamics are approximated by learned message-passing
among nodes.
We implemented our GNS framework in a single deep learning architecture, and found it could learn to accurately simulate a wide range of physical systems in which fluids, rigid
solids, and deformable materials interact with one another.
Our model also generalized well to much larger systems and

