Non-convex Learning via Replica Exchange Stochastic Gradient MCMC

Wei Deng 1 Qi Feng * 2 Liyao Gao * 1 Faming Liang 1 Guang Lin 1

Abstract
Replica exchange Monte Carlo (reMC), also
known as parallel tempering, is an important technique for accelerating the convergence of the conventional Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
algorithms. However, such a method requires the
evaluation of the energy function based on the
full dataset and is not scalable to big data. The
naı̈ve implementation of reMC in mini-batch settings introduces large biases, which cannot be directly extended to the stochastic gradient MCMC
(SGMCMC), the standard sampling method for
simulating from deep neural networks (DNNs).
In this paper, we propose an adaptive replica exchange SGMCMC (reSGMCMC) to automatically correct the bias and study the corresponding
properties. The analysis implies an accelerationaccuracy trade-off in the numerical discretization
of a Markov jump process in a stochastic environment. Empirically, we test the algorithm through
extensive experiments on various setups and obtain the state-of-the-art results on CIFAR10, CIFAR100, and SVHN in both supervised learning
and semi-supervised learning tasks.

1. Introduction
The increasing concern for AI safety problems draws our
attention to MCMC, which is known for its asymptotic uncertainty quantification (Chen et al., 2015; Teh et al., 2016),
and guarantees in non-convex optimizations (Zhang et al.,
2017; Raginsky et al., 2017). Traditional MCMC methods
have achieved tremendous success. However, the efficient
sampling algorithm in DNNs was not well studied until the
invention of stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD)
(Welling and Teh, 2011), which scales up the computation
*

Equal contribution 1 Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN,
USA. 2 University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA..
Correspondence to: Wei Deng <weideng056@gmail.com>,
Guang Lin <guanglin@purdue.edu>, Faming Liang <fmliang@purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

in DNNs by injecting noises to stochastic gradients. Since
then, various high-order SGMCMC algorithms have been
proposed, which incorporate strategies such as Hamiltonian
dynamics (Chen et al., 2014; Ma et al., 2015; Ding et al.,
2014), Hessian approximation (Li et al., 2016; Şimşekli
et al., 2016), and high-order numerical schemes (Chen et al.,
2015; Li et al., 2019) to improve the convergence.
In addition to the high-order algorithms, we can also follow traditional MCMC algorithms combined with simulated
annealing (Kirkpatrick et al., 1983), simulated tempering
(Marinari and Parisi, 1992), dynamical weighting (Wong
and Liang, 1997) or replica exchange Monte Carlo (Swendsen and Wang, 1986; Earl and Deem, 2005). Among these
advancements, simulated annealing SGMCMC (Mangoubi
and Vishnoi, 2018) and simulated tempering SGMCMC
(Lee et al., 2018) show how dynamical temperatures speed
up the convergence. However, simulated annealing is very
sensitive to the fast-decaying temperatures, and simulated
tempering requires a lot on the approximation of the normalizing constant. For the latter, the replica exchange Monte
Carlo is easier to analyze and implement and is suitable
for parallelism. Specifically, the replica exchange Langevin
diffusion utilizes multiple diffusion processes with different temperatures and proposes to swap the processes while
training. Intuitively, the high-temperature process acts as
a bridge to connect the various modes. As such, the acceleration effect can be theoretically quantified (Dupuis et al.,
2012; Chen et al., 2019). However, despite these advantages, a proper replica exchange SGMCMC (reSGMCMC)
has long been missing in the deep learning community.
A bottleneck that hinders the development of reSGMCMC
is the naı̈ve extension of the acceptance-rejection criterion
that fails in mini-batch settings. Various attempts (Bardenet
et al., 2017; Korattikara et al., 2014) were proposed to solve
this issue. However, they introduce biases even with the
ideal normality assumption on the noise. Some unbiased
estimators (Bhanot and Kennedy, 1985; Beskos et al., 2006)
have ever been presented, but the large variance leads to
inefficient inference. To remove the bias while maintaining
efficiency, Ceperley and Dewing (1999) proposed a corrected criterion under normality assumptions, and Seita et al.
(2017); Quiroz et al. (2019) further analyzed the model errors with the asymptotic normality assumptions. However,
the above algorithms fail when the required corrections are

