Sharp Statistical Guarantees for Adversarially Robust
Gaussian Classification
Chen Dan 1 Yuting Wei 1 Pradeep Ravikumar 1

Abstract
Adversarial robustness has become a fundamental
requirement in modern machine learning applications. Yet, there has been surprisingly little
statistical understanding so far. In this paper, we
provide the first result of the optimal minimax
guarantees for the excess risk for adversarially robust classification, under Gaussian mixture model
proposed by (Schmidt et al., 2018). The results
are stated in terms of the Adversarial Signal-toNoise Ratio (AdvSNR), which generalizes a similar notion for standard linear classification to the
adversarial setting. For the Gaussian mixtures
with AdvSNR value of r, we establish an excess
2
1
risk lower bound of order Θ(e−( 8 +o(1))r nd ) and
design a computationally efficient estimator that
achieves this optimal rate. Our results built upon
minimal set of assumptions while cover a wide
spectrum of adversarial perturbations including
`p balls for any p ≥ 1.

1. Introduction
Recent years, machine learning algorithms have revolutionized our life due to their tremendous success in a variety of
different domains such as image classification, natural language processing and strategy games (e.g. Krizhevsky et al.
(2012); Bahdanau et al. (2014); Silver et al. (2016)). These
algorithms often achieve extremely accurate performances
yet are susceptible to small perturbations of the inputs. In
particular, Szegedy et al. (2013) (among others e.g. Goodfellow et al. (2014); Papernot et al. (2016)) noticed that
small perturbations (nearly imperceptible) to images could
cause neural network classifiers to make wrong predictions
with high confidence. While a growing amount of effort has
been made in order to empirically improve the robustness
of these learning algorithms against adversarial attacks, the
problems of assessing statistical optimality, understanding
generalization and statistical significance are important but
1
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
Correspondence to: Chen Dan <cdan@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

far less understood. In this paper, we take a step towards
this end.
In this work, we consider the adversarially robust classification problem under the Gaussian mixture model proposed
by Schmidt et al. (2018). While the classification for mixture of Gaussian distributions — which is also referred to
as discriminant analysis — has now been standard in statistics and computer science literature (see, e.g. McLachlan &
Peel (2004)), it is only until recently that researchers start
to consider what can go wrong in the adversarial scenarios
for this simple problem. It turns out (and as is shown in the
sequel) that this simple yet instructive model demonstrates
clear tradeoffs between adversarially robustness and the statistical complexities, and at the same time, capturing some
of the features one would encounter in real applications.
Under minimal assumptions of the adversarial perturbations,
we provide optimal minimax lower bounds, and show that a
natural computationally efficient estimator achieves these
minimax lower bounds in terms of the adversarial signal
to noise ratio. Putting these together gives a sharp characterization of the intrinsic hardness of this problem in terms
of how far one can push towards a robust estimator without any essential loss of statistical accuracy. These optimal
lower and upper bounds are useful since that they provide
a comprehensive view of the adversarially robust sample
complexity of the conditional Gaussian model, which could
then be contrasted with that of the rates of the classical
conditional Gaussian model.
Despite of an extensive line of work considering this problem, Schmidt et al. (2018) and Bhagoji et al. (2019) lie
most closely to this paper. In order to obtain tight statistical characterizations of the risk, they made a number of
simplifications, which thus do not directly provide answers
to the minimax sample complexity of the original problem.
As one main contrast, they consider the Bayesian setting
where the means of the conditional Gaussians have as prior
an independent standard Gaussian distribution. For other
simplifications, Schmidt et al. (2018) considered the spherical models so that the covariance is identity and also made
additional simplifications such as large separation between
two Gaussians and an upper bound on the noise level. These
additional assumptions made it hard to compare with that
of the adversary-free scenario. More detailed comparisons

