A Graph to Graphs Framework for Retrosynthesis Prediction

Chence Shi 1 Minkai Xu 2 Hongyu Guo 3 Ming Zhang 1 Jian Tang 4 5 6

Abstract
A fundamental problem in computational chemistry is to find a set of reactants to synthesize a
target molecule, a.k.a. retrosynthesis prediction.
Existing state-of-the-art methods rely on matching the target molecule with a large set of reaction
templates, which are very computationally expensive and also suffer from the problem of coverage.
In this paper, we propose a novel template-free
approach called G2Gs by transforming a target
molecular graph into a set of reactant molecular graphs. G2Gs first splits the target molecular graph into a set of synthons by identifying
the reaction centers, and then translates the synthons to the final reactant graphs via a variational
graph translation framework. Experimental results show that G2Gs significantly outperforms
existing template-free approaches by up to 63%
in terms of the top-1 accuracy and achieves a performance close to that of state-of-the-art templatebased approaches, but does not require domain
knowledge and is much more scalable.

1. Introduction
Retrosynthesis, which devotes to find a set of reactants to
synthesize a target molecule, is of crucial importance to
the synthesis planning and drug discovery. The problem
is challenging as the search space of all possible transformations is huge by nature. For decades, people have been
seeking to aid retrosynthesis analysis with modern computer
techniques (Corey & Wipke, 1969). Among them, machine
learning plays a vital role and significant progress has been
made recently (Szymkuć et al., 2016; Coley et al., 2018).
Existing machine learning works on retrosynthesis predic1
Department of Computer Science, School of EECS,
Peking University 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 National
Research Council Canada 4 Montréal Institute for Learning Algorithms (MILA) 5 Canadian Institute for Advanced Research
(CIFAR) 6 HEC Montréal. Correspondence to: Chence Shi
<chenceshi@pku.edu.cn>, Jian Tang <jian.tang@hec.ca>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

tion mainly fall into two categories: template-based (Coley et al., 2017b; Segler & Waller, 2017; Dai et al., 2019)
and template-free models (Liu et al., 2017; Karpov et al.,
2019). The template-based approaches match the target
molecule with a large set of reaction templates, which define the subgraph patterns of a set of chemical reactions.
For example, (Coley et al., 2017b) proposed a similaritybased approach to select reaction templates for the target
molecule. (Segler & Waller, 2017; Baylon et al., 2019) cast
rule selection as a multi-class classification problem. Recently, (Dai et al., 2019) treats chemistry knowledge as logic
rules and directly models the joint probability of rules and
reactants, which achieves the new state of the art. Despite
their great potential for synthesis planning, template-based
methods, however, not only require expensive computation but also suffer from poor generalization on new target
structures and reaction types. Another line of research for
retrosynthesis prediction (Liu et al., 2017; Karpov et al.,
2019) bypasses reaction templates and formulates retrosynthesis prediction as a sequence-to-sequence problem. Such
approaches leverage the recent advances in neural machine
translation (Bahdanau et al., 2014; Vaswani et al., 2017) and
the SMILES (Weininger, 1988) representation of molecules.
However, SMILES representation assumes a sequential order between the atoms in a molecule, which cannot effectively reflect the complex relationships between atoms in
a molecule. As a result, these approaches fail to capture
the rich chemical contexts and their interplays of molecules,
resulting in unsatisfactory predictive performance.
To address the aforementioned issues, in this paper we represent each molecule as a graph and formulate retrosynthesis
prediction as a graph-to-graphs translation problem. The socalled G2Gs leverages the powerful representation of graph
for molecule and is a novel template-free approach, which
is trained with an extensive collection of molecule reaction
data. Specifically, it consists of two key components: (1) a
reaction center identification module, which splits synthons
from the target molecule and reduces the one-to-many graph
translation problem into multiple one-to-one translation processes; (2) a variational graph translation module, which
translates a synthon to a final reactant graph. We aim to
model the probability of reactant graph G conditioned on the
synthon S, i.e., P (G|S). As a synthon could be potentially
translated to different reactants in different reaction contexts,

