Modulating Surrogates for Bayesian Optimization

Erik Bodin 1 Markus Kaiser 2 3 Ieva Kazlauskaite 4 Zhenwen Dai 5 Neill D. F. Campbell 4 Carl Henrik Ek 6

Abstract
Bayesian optimization (BO) methods often rely
on the assumption that the objective function is
well-behaved, but in practice, this is seldom true
for real-world objectives even if noise-free observations can be collected. Common approaches,
which try to model the objective as precisely as
possible, often fail to make progress by spending too many evaluations modeling irrelevant details. We address this issue by proposing surrogate
models that focus on the well-behaved structure
in the objective function, which is informative
for search, while ignoring detrimental structure
that is challenging to model from few observations. First, we demonstrate that surrogate models
with appropriate noise distributions can absorb
challenging structures in the objective function
by treating them as irreducible uncertainty. Secondly, we show that a latent Gaussian process is
an excellent surrogate for this purpose, comparing with Gaussian processes with standard noise
distributions. We perform numerous experiments
on a range of BO benchmarks and find that our
approach improves reliability and performance
when faced with challenging objective functions.

1. Introduction
Bayesian optimization (BO) (Snoek et al., 2012) is a method
for finding the optimum of functions that are unknown and
expensive to evaluate. By fitting a surrogate model to the
samples of an unknown objective, the BO procedure iteratively picks the new samples of the objective believed to be
the most informative about where the optimum is located.
Model misspecification has significant negative implications
1

University of Bristol, United Kingdom 2 Siemens AG, Germany 3 Technical University of Munich, Germany 4 University
of Bath, United Kingdom 5 Spotify Research, United Kingdom
6
University of Cambridge, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Erik Bodin <erik.bodin@bristol.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

for any machine learning tasks. This is especially true for
sequential decision making tasks such as BO, where the
model is used not only to locate the optimum based on the
collected data but also to decide where to collect data for
future decisions. If the surrogate model is misspecified, it is
likely to acquire samples that are less informative about the
optimum, which will lead to a less efficient optimization.
Therefore the quality of the surrogate model is essential to
achieve both efficient and reliable results.
Many works have been done towards avoiding model
misspecification in the surrogate model for BO, such as
handling non-stationary objective functions with warpings (Snoek et al., 2014), tree-structured dependencies in
the search space (Jenatton et al., 2017), and searching the
optimum from piecewise comparisons (González et al.,
2017). Comparing with the Gaussian process (GP) regression model in the standard BO setting, these methods avoid
model misspecification in real-world problems by using
more sophisticated surrogate models that are suitable for
the corresponding problems. Bayesian inference with more
sophisticated surrogate models will often require additional
data to reduce uncertainty and confirm beliefs, because it
considers more possibilities. Importantly the ultimate goal
of BO is to find the optimum, not to model the unknown objective as precisely as possible. In practice, this means that
using a surrogate with high complexity might perform worse
compared to a simpler class even if the former contains the
true objective function.
Instead of building a complex surrogate model with minimal
model misspecification, we propose an alternative approach
which allows trading off accuracy in modeling the objective with efficiency of capturing informative structures from
small amounts of data. For example, we observe that structures such as local oscillations and discontinuities are less
important to capture for the purposes of BO. Such details often require a lot of data to be closely captured in a surrogate
model but do not help the search for the optimum, unless
the search reaches the last stage of pinpointing the exact location of the optimum. To ignore these details, we associate
an independent random input variable with every evaluation
of the unknown function. As the random variables associated with new evaluations are conditionally independent
of the posterior random variables associated with observed
data given the function, this is referred to as irreducible

