Let’s Agree to Agree: Neural Networks Share Classification Order on Real
Datasets
Guy Hacohen 1 2 Leshem Choshen 1 Daphna Weinshall 1

Abstract
We report a series of robust empirical observations, demonstrating that deep Neural Networks
learn the examples in both the training and test
sets in a similar order. This phenomenon is observed in all the commonly used benchmarks we
evaluated, including many image classification
benchmarks, and one text classification benchmark. While this phenomenon is strongest for
models of the same architecture, it also crosses
architectural boundaries – models of different architectures start by learning the same examples,
after which the more powerful model may continue to learn additional examples. We further
show that this pattern of results reflects the interplay between the way neural networks learn
benchmark datasets. Specifically, when fixing the
architecture, we describe synthetic datasets for
which this pattern is no longer observed. When
fixing the dataset, we show that other learning
paradigms may learn the data in a different order.
We hypothesize that our results reflect how neural
networks discover structure in natural datasets.

1. Introduction
Typically, neural networks (NN) in common use include
a large number of parameters and non-linear operations,
resulting in a highly non-convex, high-dimensional optimization landscape. These models are usually trained with
some variant of Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), initialized randomly, thus introducing stochasticity into the
training procedure both in the form of initialization and the
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel 2 Edmond
& Lily Safra Center for Brain Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.
Correspondence
to: Guy Hacohen <guy.hacohen@mail.huji.ac.il>, Leshem
Choshen <leshem.choshen@mail.huji.ac.il>, Daphna Weinshall
<daphna@cs.huji.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Images learned at the beginning (top row) and the end of
the training (bottom row). Top: CIFAR-100, bottom: MNIST.

sampling of gradients. As a result, training the same neural
architecture several times generates models with drastically
different weights (Li et al., 2015; Yosinski et al., 2015),
which presumably correspond to different local minima of
the optimization landscape.
In spite of this observation and for most practical purposes,
models trained with the same dataset, architecture and training protocols are typically considered similar by practitioners, as they tend to achieve similar accuracy. Neural comparison methods (Li et al., 2016; Raghu et al., 2017; Morcos
et al., 2018) find them to be more similar than models trained
on different datasets, using different comparison scores. On
the other hand, many applications consider such models to
be distinct enough to merit the use of ensemble methods
(Le & Yang, 2015; Kantor et al., 2019) and average training epochs (Vaswani et al., 2017; Junczys-Dowmunt et al.,
2018). All in all, the question of how to meaningfully evaluate the similarity between trained neural models remains
open.
Contemporary approaches tend to measure the similarity
between neural models by comparing their underlying compositional properties, as done for example in Lenc & Vedaldi
(2015); Alain & Bengio (2016); Li et al. (2016); Raghu et al.
(2017); Wang et al. (2018); Cohen et al. (2019). Instead, we
propose to measure similarity via the direct comparison of
their classification predictions per example, as formally defined in §2. Thus we show empirically that for a wide range
of classification benchmarks, including ImageNet (Deng
et al., 2009), CIFAR (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009), and text
classification (see §3.2), models of the same architecture

