Invariant Causal Prediction for Block MDPs
Amy Zhang * 1 2 3 Clare Lyle * 4 Shagun Sodhani 3 Angelos Filos 4 Marta Kwiatkowska 4 Joelle Pineau 1 2 3
Yarin Gal 4 Doina Precup 1 2 5

Abstract
Generalization across environments is critical
for the successful application of reinforcement
learning algorithms to real-world challenges. In
this paper, we consider the problem of learning
abstractions that generalize in block MDPs, families of environments with a shared latent state
space, and dynamics structure over that latent
space, but varying observations. We leverage
tools from causal inference to propose a method
of invariant prediction to learn state abstractions
that generalize to novel observations in the multienvironment setting. We prove that for certain
classes of environments, this approach outputs
with high probability a state abstraction corresponding to the causal feature set with respect
to the return. We further provide more general
bounds on model error and generalization error in the multi-environment setting in the process showing a connection between causal variable selection and the state abstraction framework for MDPs. We give empirical evidence that
our methods work in both linear and nonlinear
settings, attaining improved generalization over
single- and multi-task baselines.

1. Introduction
The canonical reinforcement learning (RL) problem assumes an agent interacting with a single MDP with a fixed
observation space and dynamics structure. This assumption is difficult to ensure in practice, where state spaces
are often large and infeasible to explore entirely during
training. However, there is often a latent structure to be
leveraged to allow for good generalization. As an example, a robot’s sensors may be moved, or the lighting con*
Equal contribution 1 McGill University 2 Mila 3 Facebook AI
Research 4 University of Oxford 5 Deepmind. Correspondence
to: Amy Zhang <amy.x.zhang@mail.mcgill.ca>, Clare Lyle
<clare.lyle@univ.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

ditions in a room may change, but the physical dynamics
of the environment are still the same. These are examples
of environment-specific characteristics that current RL algorithms often overfit to. In the worst case, some training
environments may contain spurious correlations that will
not be present at test time, causing catastrophic failures
in generalization (Zhang et al., 2018a; Song et al., 2020).
To develop algorithms that will be robust to these sorts of
changes, we must consider problem settings that allow for
multiple environments with a shared dynamics structure.
Recent works (Amit and Meir, 2018; Yin et al., 2019) have
developed generalization bounds for the multi-task problem, but they depend on the number of tasks seen at training time, which can be prohibitively expensive given how
sample inefficient RL is even in the single task regime. To
obtain stronger generalization results, we propose to consider a problem which we refer to as ‘multi-environment’
RL: like multi-task RL, the agent seeks to maximize return
on a set of environments, but only some of which it can
be trained on. We make the assumption that there exists
some latent causal structure that is shared among all of the
environments, and that the sources of variability between
environments do not affect the reward. This family of environments is called a Block MDP (Du et al., 2019), in which
the observations may change, but the latent states, dynamics, and reward function are the same. A formal definition
of this class of MDP will be presented in Section 3.
Though the setting we consider is a subset of the multi-task
RL problem, we show that the added assumption of shared
structure allows for much stronger generalization results
than have been obtained by multi-task approaches. Naive
application of generalization bounds to the multi-task reinforcement learning setting is very loose because the learner
is typically given access to only a few tasks relative to the
number of samples from each task. Indeed, Cobbe et al.
(2018); Zhang et al. (2018b) find that agents trained using
standard methods require many thousands of environments
before ‘generalizing’ to new environments.
The main contribution of this paper is to use tools from
causal inference to address generalization in the Block
MDP setting, proposing a new method based on the invariant causal prediction literature. In certain linear function
approximation settings, we demonstrate that this method

