Policy Teaching via Environment Poisoning:
Training-time Adversarial Attacks against Reinforcement Learning

Amin Rakhsha 1 Goran Radanovic 1 Rati Devidze 1 Xiaojin Zhu 2 Adish Singla 1

Abstract
We study a security threat to reinforcement learning where an attacker poisons the learning environment to force the agent into executing a target
policy chosen by the attacker. As a victim, we
consider RL agents whose objective is to find a
policy that maximizes average reward in undiscounted infinite-horizon problem settings. The
attacker can manipulate the rewards or the transition dynamics in the learning environment at
training-time and is interested in doing so in a
stealthy manner. We propose an optimization
framework for finding an optimal stealthy attack
for different measures of attack cost. We provide
sufficient technical conditions under which the
attack is feasible and provide lower/upper bounds
on the attack cost. We instantiate our attacks in
two settings: (i) an offline setting where the agent
is doing planning in the poisoned environment,
and (ii) an online setting where the agent is learning a policy using a regret-minimization framework with poisoned feedback. Our results show
that the attacker can easily succeed in teaching
any target policy to the victim under mild conditions and highlight a significant security threat to
reinforcement learning agents in practice.

adversary perturbs test data to change the algorithm’s decisions, poisoning attacks manipulate the training data to
change the algorithm’s decision-making policy itself.
Most of the existing work on data poisoning attacks has
focused on supervised learning algorithms (Biggio et al.,
2012; Mei & Zhu, 2015; Xiao et al., 2015; Alfeld et al.,
2016; Li et al., 2016; Koh et al., 2018). In contemporary
works, researchers have explored data poisoning attacks
against stochastic multi-armed bandits (Jun et al., 2018;
Liu & Shroff, 2019) and contextual bandits (Ma et al.,
2018), which belong to family of online learning algorithms with limited feedback— such algorithms are widely
used in real-world applications such as news article recommendation (Li et al., 2010) and web advertisements ranking (Chapelle et al., 2014). The feedback loop in online
learning makes these applications easily susceptible to data
poisoning, e.g., attacks in the form of click baits (Miller
et al., 2011). In this paper, we focus on data poisoning attacks against reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms, an
online learning paradigm for sequential decision-making
under uncertainty (Sutton & Barto, 2018).1 Given that RL
algorithms are increasingly used in critical applications, including cyber-physical systems (Li & Qiu, 2019) and personal assistive devices (Rybski et al., 2007), it is of utmost
importance to investigate the security threat to RL algorithms against different forms of poisoning attacks.
1.1. Overview of our Results and Contributions

1. Introduction
Understanding adversarial attacks on learning algorithms is
critical to finding security threats against the deployed machine learning systems and in designing novel algorithms
robust to those threats. We focus on training-time adversarial attacks on learning algorithms, also known as data poisoning attacks (Huang et al., 2011; Biggio & Roli, 2018;
Zhu, 2018). Different from test-time attacks where the
1

Max Planck Institute for Software Systems (MPI-SWS).
University of Wisconsin-Madison. Correspondence to: Adish
Singla <adishs@mpi-sws.org>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

In the following, we discuss a few of the types/dimensions
of poisoning attacks in RL in order to highlight the novelty
of our work in comparison to existing work.
Type of adversarial manipulation. Existing works on
poisoning attacks against RL have studied the manipulation of rewards only (Zhang & Parkes, 2008; Zhang et al.,
2009; Ma et al., 2019; Huang & Zhu, 2019). A key novelty
of our work is that we study environment poisoning, i.e.,
manipulating rewards or manipulating transition dynamics.
1
Poisoning attacks is also mathematically equivalent to the
formulation of machine teaching with teacher being the adversary (Zhu et al., 2018). However, the problem of designing optimized environments for teaching a target policy to an RL agent is
not well-understood in machine teaching.

