Estimating the Error of Randomized Newton Methods: A Bootstrap Approach

Jessie X.T. Chen 1 Miles E. Lopes 2

Abstract
Randomized Newton methods have recently become the focus of intense research activity in
large-scale and distributed optimization. In general, these methods are based on a “computationaccuracy trade-off”, which allows the user to gain
scalability in exchange for error in the solution.
However, the user does not know how much error is created by the randomized approximation,
which can be detrimental in two ways: On one
hand, the user may try to assess the unknown error
with theoretical worst-case error bounds, but this
approach is impractical when the bounds involve
unknown constants, and it often leads to excessive computation. On the other hand, the user
may select the “sketch size” and stopping criteria
in a heuristic manner, but this can lead to unreliable results. Motivated by these difficulties, we
show how bootstrapping can be used to directly
estimate the unknown error, which prevents excessive computation, and offers more confidence
about the quality of a randomized solution.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been a surge of interest in using randomized approximations to accelerate Newton methods in
large-scale and distributed optimization (e.g. Shamir et al.,
2014; Erdogdu & Montanari, 2015; Zhang & Lin, 2015;
Byrd et al., 2016; Pilanci & Wainwright, 2016; Reddi et al.,
2016; Xu et al., 2016; Pilanci & Wainwright, 2017; Wang
et al., 2017; 2018; Dünner et al., 2018; Gupta et al., 2019;
Li et al., 2020; Roosta-Khorasani & Mahoney, 2019, among
many others). At a high level, this rapid development of
research has been driven by the fact that computing a Newton step to high precision can be very costly or infeasible
in large-scale problems. Instead, randomized approaches
make it possible to overcome this challenge by exchanging
1

Department of Mathematics, University of California, Davis
2
Department of Statistics, University of California, Davis. Correspondence to: <melopes@ucdavis.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

some degree of accuracy in return for substantial reductions
in both processing and communication costs. However, one
of the common difficulties faced by users in applying randomized Newton methods is that they do not know how far
a randomized Newton step might stray from an exact one.
To deal with the uncertainty in the quality of a randomized solution, users have generally relied on two strategies,
which are to (1) assess the unknown error with theoretical
worst-case error bounds, or (2) use heuristic rules to select
the “sketch size” or number of iterations. But unfortunately,
both of these options can be detrimental to the overall performance of randomized algorithms. Indeed, the first option
of worst-case analysis is typically inefficient from a computational standpoint, because it can substantially overestimate
the actual error of a solution — and hence mislead the user
to select an excessive sketch size or number of iterations.
Also, this option is limited by the fact that theoretical error
bounds often involve unspecified constants or unknown parameters that make it difficult to extract a numerical error
bound. Meanwhile, the use of heuristics is undesirable from
the standpoint of reliability, and it can create difficulty in
tuning downstream elements of computational pipeline.
As a way of handling these difficulties, we apply the statistical technique of bootstrapping to estimate the errors of
randomized Newton methods. In particular, this approach
avoids the conservativeness of worst-case analysis by directly estimating the actual error of a given randomized
solution. In addition, the bootstrap provides the user with
more flexibility in the choice of error metric than is typically
available with worst-case error bounds. Next, in comparison
to heuristic rules, this approach offers more reliability, by
giving the user a systematic procedure that is theoretically
justified. Furthermore, the bootstrap is highly scalable in
this context (due to its embarrassingly parallel structure),
and it is promising from an empirical standpoint as well.
1.1. Background and Setting
Let a1 , . . . , an ∈ Rd be the rows of a matrix A ∈ Rn×d
with n  d, and let b1 , . . . , bn be the entries of a vector
b ∈ Rn . Consider the problem of minimizing an objective
function f : Rd → R of the form
f (w) = n1

Pn

>
i=1 ϕ(ai w, bi ) + r(w),

(1)

