On the Generalization Effects of Linear Transformations in Data Augmentation
Sen Wu * 1 Hongyang R. Zhang * 2 Gregory Valiant 1 Christopher Ré 1

Abstract
Data augmentation is a powerful technique to improve performance in applications such as image
and text classification tasks. Yet, there is little rigorous understanding of why and how various augmentations work. In this work, we consider a family of linear transformations and study their effects
on the ridge estimator in an over-parametrized linear regression setting. First, we show that transformations which preserve the labels of the data
can improve estimation by enlarging the span of
the training data. Second, we show that transformations which mix data can improve estimation
by playing a regularization effect. Finally, we validate our theoretical insights on MNIST. Based on
the insights, we propose an augmentation scheme
that searches over the space of transformations by
how uncertain the model is about the transformed
data. We validate our proposed scheme on image and text datasets. For example, our method
outperforms RandAugment by 1.24% on CIFAR100 using Wide-ResNet-28-10. Furthermore, we
achieve comparable accuracy to the SoTA Adversarial AutoAugment on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100,
SVHN, and ImageNet datasets.

1. Introduction
Data augmentation refers to the technique of enlarging the
training dataset through pre-defined transformation functions. By searching over a (possibly large) space of transformations through reinforcement learning based techniques,
augmentation schemes including AutoAugment (Cubuk
et al., 2018) and TANDA (Ratner et al., 2017) have shown remarkable gains over various models on image classification
tasks. Recent work has proposed random sampling (Cubuk
et al., 2019) and Bayesian optimization (Hataya et al., 2019)
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University 2 Department of Statistics, The Wharton School,
University of Pennsylvania. Correspondence to: all authors
<{senwu, hongyang, gvaliant, chrismre}@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

to reduce the search cost, since RL-based techniques are
computationally expensive. Despite the rapid progress of
these transformation search methods, precisely understanding their benefits remains a mystery because of a lack of analytic tools. In this work, we study when and why applying
a family of linear transformations helps from a theoretical
perspective. Building on the theory, we develop methods to
improve the efficiency of transformation search procedures.
A major challenge to understand the theory behind data
augmentation is how to model the large variety of transformations used in practice in an analytically tractable framework. The folklore wisdom behind data augmentation is
that adding more labeled data improves generalization, i.e.
the performance of the trained model on test data (Shorten
& Khoshgoftaar, 2019). Clearly, the generalization effect
of an augmentation scheme depends on how it transforms
the data. Previous work has analyzed the effect of Gaussian
augmentation (Rajput et al., 2019) and feature averaging
effect of adding transformed data (Dao et al., 2019; Chen
et al., 2019). However, there is still a large gap between
the transformations studied in these works and the ones
commonly used in augmentation schemes.
In this work, we consider linear transformations which represent a large family of image transformations. We consider three categories: (i) Label-invariant (base) transformations such as rotation and horizontal flip; (ii) Label-mixing
transformations including mixup (Zhang et al., 2017; Inoue,
2018), which produces new data by randomly mixing the
features of two data points (e.g. a cat and a dog) – the labels
are also mixed; (iii) Compositions of (label-invariant) transformations such as random cropping and rotating followed
by horizontal flipping.
To gain insight into the effects of linear transformations, we
consider a conceptually simple over-parametrized model
proposed in Bartlett et al. (2019); Xie et al. (2020); Hastie
et al. (2019) that captures the need to add more data as in
image settings. Suppose we are given n training data points
x1 , . . . , xn 2 Rp as X 2 Rn⇥p with labels Y 2 Rn . In
this setting, the labels obey the linear model under ground
truth parameters 2 Rp , i.e. Y = X + ", where " 2 Rn
denotes i.i.d. random noise with mean zero and variance 2 .
Importantly, we assume that p > n, hence the span of
the training data points does not include the entire space

