Estimating Generalization under Distribution Shifts
via Domain-Invariant Representations

Ching-Yao Chuang 1 Antonio Torralba 1 Stefanie Jegelka 1

Abstract
When machine learning models are deployed on a
test distribution different from the training distribution, they can perform poorly, but overestimate
their performance. In this work, we aim to better
estimate a model’s performance under distribution shift, without supervision. To do so, we use a
set of domain-invariant predictors as a proxy for
the unknown, true target labels. Since the error of
the resulting risk estimate depends on the target
risk of the proxy model, we study generalization
of domain-invariant representations and show that
the complexity of the latent representation has
a significant influence on the target risk. Empirically, our approach (1) enables self-tuning of
domain adaptation models, and (2) accurately estimates the target error of given models under distribution shift. Other applications include model
selection, deciding early stopping and error detection.

1. Introduction
In many applications, machine learning models are deployed
on data whose distribution is different from that of the training data. For instance, self-driving cars must be able to
adapt to different weather, change of landscape or traffic,
i.e., conditions can change at prediction time. But often,
collecting large-scale supervised data on the shifted prediction domain is prohibitively expensive or impossible. While
we may hope that the model generalizes to this new data
distribution, estimating empirically how well a given model
will actually generalize is challenging without labels.
Indeed, estimating the adaptability, i.e., the generalization
to the target distribution, and the related potentially uncertain behavior of a prediction model, is a key concern for
1

CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Ching-Yao Chuang <cychuang@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

AI Safety (Amodei et al., 2016), motivating recent work on
estimating target performance (Steinhardt & Liang, 2016;
Platanios et al., 2014).
In this work, we develop a new idea for estimating performance under distribution shift, by drawing connections with
domain adaptation. Necessarily, any method for estimating target performance must make some assumptions. Our
method assumes the existence of a domain adaptation model
that generalizes well from source (training) to target (test).
Given the empirical success of domain adaptation, this assumption is met in many practical settings. A prominent
class of domain adaptation models, domain-invariant representations (DIR) (Ben-David et al., 2007; Long et al., 2015;
Ganin et al., 2016), learns a latent, joint representation of
source and target data, and a predictor from the latent space
to the output labels. In particular, we use a set of “check”
DIR models as a proxy for the unknown, true target labels.
If there exist “good” domain adaptation models, i.e., they
achieve low source and presumably low target error, and
those models disagree with the model h we want to evaluate,
then the target risk of h is potentially high, and we should
not trust it. Our experiments show that this leads to accurate
estimates of target error that outperform previous methods.
This idea relies on good domain adaptation models, i.e., our
check models should predict well on the target distribution,
and not disagree too much with each other. But, evaluating
a domain adaptation model itself on the target distribution
is an unsolved problem. Hence, we begin by studying the
target error of DIR. We observe that in general, DIR is much
more sensitive to model complexity than supervised learning
on the source distribution. In particular, the complexity of
the representation encoder is key for target generalization
and for selecting the set of check models, and points to
an important model selection problem. For deep neural
networks, this model selection problem essentially means
how to optimally divide the network into an encoder and
predictor part. Yet, this model selection ideally demands an
estimate of target generalization, which we are developing.
We show that, with our framework for estimating target
error, it is possible to let DIR models self-tune to find the
optimal model complexity. The resulting models achieve
good target generalization, and estimate target error of other

