Dynamics of Deep Neural Networks and Neural Tangent Hierarchy

Jiaoyang Huang * 1 Horng-Tzer Yau * 2

Abstract
The evolution of a deep neural network trained by
the gradient descent in the overparametrization
regime can be described by its neural tangent kernel (NTK) (Jacot et al., 2018; Du et al., 2018b;a;
Arora et al., 2019b). It was observed (Arora et al.,
2019a) that there is a performance gap between
the kernel regression using the limiting NTK and
the deep neural networks. We study the dynamic
of neural networks of finite width and derive an
infinite hierarchy of differential equations, the
neural tangent hierarchy (NTH). We prove that
the NTH hierarchy truncated at the level p ⩾ 2
approximates the dynamic of the NTK up to arbitrary precision under certain conditions on the
neural network width and the data set dimension.
The assumptions needed for these approximations
become weaker as p increases. Finally, NTH can
be viewed as higher order extensions of NTK. In
particular, the NTH truncated at p = 2 recovers
the NTK dynamics.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have become popular due to their unprecedented success in a variety of machine learning tasks.
Image recognition (LeCun et al., 1998; Krizhevsky et al.,
2012; Szegedy et al., 2015), speech recognition (Hinton
et al., 2012; Sainath et al., 2013), playing Go (Silver et al.,
2016; 2017) and natural language understanding (Collobert
et al., 2011; Wu et al., 2016; Devlin et al., 2018) are just
a few of the recent achievements. However, one aspect of
deep neural networks that is not well understood is training. Training a deep neural network is usually done via a
gradient decent based algorithm. Analyzing such training
dynamics is challenging. Firstly, as highly nonlinear structures, deep neural networks usually involve a large number
of parameters. Secondly, as highly non-convex optimization
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Mathematics, IAS, Princeton,
NJ, USA 2 Mathematics Department, Harvard, Cambridge, MA,
USA. Correspondence to: Jiaoyang Huang <jiaoyang@ias.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

problems, there is no guarantee that a gradient based algorithm will be able to find the optimal parameters efficiently
during the training of neural networks. One question then
arises: given such complexities, is it possible to obtain a
succinct description of the training dynamics?
In this paper, we focus on the empirical risk minimization
problem with the quadratic loss function
n

1 X
(f (xα , θ) − yα )2
min L(θ) =
θ
2n α=1
where {xα }nα=1 are the training inputs, {yα }nα=1 are the
labels, and the dependence is modeled by a deep fullyconnected feedforward neural network with H hidden layers.
The network has d input nodes, and the input vector is given
by x ∈ Rd . For 1 ⩽ ` ⩽ H, the `-th hidden layer has
m neurons. Let x(`) be the output of the `-th layer with
x(0) = x. Then the feedforward neural network is given by
the set of recursive equations:
1
x(`) = √ σ(W (`) x(`−1) ),
m

` = 1, 2, · · · , H,

(1)

where W (`) ∈ Rm×d if ` = 1 and W (`) ∈ Rm×m if 2 ⩽
` ⩽ H are the weight matrices, and σ is the activation unit,
which is applied coordinate-wise to its input. The output of
the neural network is
f (x, θ) = a> x(H) ∈ R,

(2)

where a ∈ Rm is the weight matrix for the output layer.
We denote the vector containing all trainable parameters
by θ = (vec(W (1) ), vec(W (2) ) . . . , vec(W (H) ), a). We
remark that
√ this parametrization is nonstandard because of
those 1/ m factors. However, it has already been adopted
in several recent works (Jacot et al., 2018; Du et al., 2018b;a;
Lee et al., 2019). We note that the predictions and training
dynamics of (1) are identical
√ to those of standard networks,
up to a scaling factor 1/ m in the learning rate for each
parameter.
We initialize the neural network with random Gaussian
weights following the Xavier initialization scheme (Glorot & Bengio, 2010). More precisely, we set the initial
(`)
2
parameter vector θ0 as Wij ∼ N (0, σw
), ai ∼ N (0, σa2 ).
In this way, for the randomly initialized neural network,

