Optimally Solving Two-Agent Decentralized POMDPs
Under One-Sided Information Sharing

Yuxuan Xie 1 Jilles S. Dibangoye 1 Olivier Buffet 2

Abstract
Optimally solving decentralized partially observable Markov decision processes (Dec-POMDPs)
under either full or no information sharing received significant attention in recent years. However, little is known about how partial information sharing affects existing theory and algorithms.
This paper addresses this question for a team of
two agents, with one-sided information sharing,
i.e. both agents have imperfect information about
the state of the world, but only one has access to
what the other sees and does. From the perspective of a central planner, we show that the original
problem can be reformulated into an equivalent
information-state Markov decision process and
solved as such. Besides, we prove that the optimal
value function exhibits a specific form of uniform
continuity. We also present heuristic search algorithms utilizing this property and providing the
first results for this family of problems.

1. Introduction
Over the last few years, Dec-POMDPs have been used as
the underlying semantics for (optimal) planning and reinforcement learning in sequential decision making by a team
of collaborative agents (Foerster et al., 2018; Rashid et al.,
2018; Dibangoye & Buffet, 2018; Bard et al., 2020). In this
setting, every agent acts simultaneously but can neither see
the actual state of the world nor explicitly communicate its
observations with each other, due to communication cost,
latency, or noise (Bernstein et al., 2002). The critical problem with this assumption is that every decision variable, at
a given point in time, directly influences any other one at
the same point. The mutual influence of decision variables
1
Univ Lyon, INSA Lyon, INRIA, CITI, F-69621 Villeurbanne,
France 2 Université de Lorraine, INRIA, CNRS, LORIA, F-54000
Nancy, France. Correspondence to: Jilles S. Dibangoye <jillessteeve.dibangoye@insa-lyon.fr>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

along with their double exponential growth with agents and
time explain the worst-case complexity, i.e. infinite-horizon
cases are undecidable, finite-horizon ones are NEXP-hard,
and finding approximations remains hard (Bernstein et al.,
2002).
Because in Dec-POMDPs, no agent can unilaterally choose
its optimal policy, Dibangoye et al. (2014b) adopted the
viewpoint of a central planner and recast the original problem into an equivalent non-observable MDP, namely Occupancy MDPs (oMDPs). This framework allows reasoning,
all at once, about mutually dependent decision variables. In
this approach, states are sufficient statistics to jointly find
an optimal assignment to all mutually dependent decision
variables (Szer et al., 2005; Oliehoek, 2013; Nayyar et al.,
2013). In principle, theory and algorithms to optimally
solving MDPs can apply. Unfortunately, given the double
exponential growth of mutually dependent decision variables with agents and time, even a single update or backup
of a state can be prohibitively expensive (Szer et al., 2005;
Seuken & Zilberstein, 2008; Oliehoek et al., 2013; MacDermed & Isbell, 2013; Dibangoye et al., 2014c; Kumar
et al., 2015).
In many cases, however, real-world multi-agent environments contain significant structure. Indeed, several forms of
structure have been investigated in the past, ranging from
loosely coupled dynamics (Becker et al., 2004) and rewards
(Nair et al., 2005) to delayed and full information sharing
(Nayyar et al., 2011). Algorithms that take advantage of
this structure can optimally solve structured problems much
faster than generic ones (Goldman & Zilberstein, 2004;
Oliehoek & Spaan, 2012; Dibangoye et al., 2014a).
While Dec-POMDPs generally assume every agent acts
without full knowledge of what others observe or plan to
do, in many cases, one agent has access to what the others
see and do. In hierarchical organizational structures, for
example, each agent has virtually full knowledge of what
its immediate subordinates see and do. After one agent
takes a decision, its direct subordinates cannot change theirs.
Though these characteristics are embodied in many cooperative real-world applications, including military systems,
corporations, and governments, little can be said so far, the
only exceptions being Hadfield-Menell et al. (2016); Malik

