Balancing Competing Objectives with Noisy Data:
Score-Based Classiﬁers for Welfare-Aware Machine Learning

Esther Rolf 1 Max Simchowitz 1 Sarah Dean 1 Lydia T. Liu 1 Daniel Bj¨orkegren 2 Moritz Hardt 1
Joshua Blumenstock 3

Abstract
While real-world decisions involve many competing objectives, algorithmic decisions are often
evaluated with a single objective function. In this
paper, we study algorithmic policies which explicitly trade off between a private objective (such as
proﬁt) and a public objective (such as social welfare). We analyze a natural class of policies which
trace an empirical Pareto frontier based on learned
scores, and focus on how such decisions can be
made in noisy or data-limited regimes. Our theoretical results characterize the optimal strategies
in this class, bound the Pareto errors due to inaccuracies in the scores, and show an equivalence
between optimal strategies and a rich class of
fairness-constrained proﬁt-maximizing policies.
We then present empirical results in two different
contexts — online content recommendation and
sustainable abalone ﬁsheries — to underscore the
applicability of our approach to a wide range of
practical decisions. Taken together, these results
shed light on inherent trade-offs in using machine
learning for decisions that impact social welfare.

1. Introduction
From medical diagnosis and criminal justice to ﬁnancial
loans and humanitarian aid, consequential decisions increasingly rely on data-driven algorithms. Machine learning algorithms used in these contexts are mostly trained to optimize
a single metric of performance. As a result, the decisions
made by such algorithms can have unintended adverse side
1
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California, USA 2 Department of Economics, Brown University, Providence, USA 3 School of Information, University of California at
Berkeley, Berkeley, USA. Correspondence to: Esther Rolf <esther rolf@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

effects: proﬁt-maximizing loans can have detrimental effects on borrowers (Skiba & Tobacman, 2009) and fake
news can undermine democratic institutions (Persily, 2017).
The ﬁeld of fair machine learning proposes algorithmic approaches that mitigate the adverse effects of single objective
maximization. Thus far it has predominantly done so by
deﬁning various fairness criteria that an algorithm ought to
satisfy (see e.g., Barocas et al., 2019, and references therein).
However, a growing literature highlights the inability of any
one fairness deﬁnition to solve more general concerns of
social equity (Corbett-Davies & Goel, 2018). The impossibility of satisfying all desirable criteria (Kleinberg et al.,
2017) and the unintended consequences of enforcing parity
constraints based on sensitive attributes (Kearns et al., 2018)
indicate that existing fairness solutions are not a panacea for
these adverse effects. Recent work (Liu et al., 2018; Hu &
Chen, 2020) contend that while social welfare is of primary
concern in many applications, common fairness constraints
may be at odds with the relevant notion of welfare.
In this paper, we consider welfare-aware machine learning as an inherently multi-objective problem that requires
explicitly balancing multiple objectives and outcomes. A
central challenge is that certain objectives, like welfare, may
be harder to measure than others. Building on the traditional
notion of Pareto optimality, which provides a characterization of optimal policies under complete information, we
develop methods to balance multiple objectives when those
objectives are measured or predicted with error.
We study a natural class of selection policies that balance
multiple objectives (e.g., private proﬁt and public welfare)
when each individual has predicted scores for each objective
(e.g., their predicted contribution to total welfare and proﬁt).
We show that this class of score-based policies has a natural
connection to statistical parity constrained classiﬁers and
their -fair analogs. In the likely case where scores are
imperfect predictors, we bound the sub-optimality of the
multi-objective utility as a function of the estimator errors.
Simulation experiments highlight characteristics of problem
settings (e.g. correlation of the true scores) that affect the
extent to which we can jointly maximize multiple objectives.

