Extreme Multi-label Classification from Aggregated Labels
Yanyao Shen 1 Hsiang-fu Yu 2 Sujay Sanghavi 1 2 Inderjit Dhillon 2 3

Abstract
Extreme multi-label classification (XMC) is the
problem of finding the relevant labels for an input, from a very large universe of possible labels.
We consider XMC in the setting where labels are
available only for groups of samples - but not for
individual ones. Current XMC approaches are not
built for such multi-instance multi-label (MIML)
training data, and MIML approaches do not scale
to XMC sizes. We develop a new and scalable algorithm to impute individual-sample labels from
the group labels; this can be paired with any existing XMC method to solve the aggregated label
problem. We characterize the statistical properties of our algorithm under mild assumptions, and
provide a new end-to-end framework for MIML
as an extension. Experiments on both aggregated
label XMC and MIML tasks show the advantages
over existing approaches.

1. Introduction
Extreme multi-label classification (XMC) is the problem
of finding the relevant labels for an input from a very large
universe of possible labels. XMC has wide applications in
machine learning including product categorization (Agrawal
et al., 2013; Yu et al., 2014), webpage annotation (Partalas
et al., 2015) and hash-tag suggestion (Denton et al., 2015),
where both the sample size and the label size are extremely
large. Recently, many XMC methods have been proposed
with new benchmark results on standard datasets (Prabhu
et al., 2018a; Guo et al., 2019; Jain et al., 2019).
XMC problem, as well as many other modern machine learning problems, often require a large amount of data. As the
size of the data grows, the annotation of the data becomes
less accurate, and large-scale data annotation with high qual1
Department of ECE, The University of Texas at Austin, TX,
USA. 2 Amazon, CA, USA. 3 Department of Computer Science,
The University of Texas at Austin, TX, USA.. Correspondence to:
Yanyao Shen <shenyanyao@utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

ity becomes growingly expensive. As a result, modern machine learning applications need to deal with certain types
of weak supervision, including partial but noisy labeling
and active labeling. These scenarios lead to exploration of
advanced learning methods including semi(self)-supervised
learning, robust learning and active learning.
In this paper, we study a typical weak supervision setting
for XMC named Aggregated Label eXtreme Multi-label
Classification (AL-XMC), where only aggregated labels are
provided to a group of samples. AL-XMC is of interest in
many practical scenarios where directly annotated training
data can not be extracted easily, which is often due to the
way data is organized. For example, Wikipedia contains a
set of annotated labels for every wiki page, and can be used
by an XMC algorithm for the task of tagging a new wiki
page. However, if one is interested in predicting keywords
for a new wiki paragraph, there is no such directly annotated
data. Similarly, in e-commerce, the attributes of a product
may not be provided directly, but the attributes of the brand
of the product may be easier to extract. To summarize,
it is often easier to get aggregated annotations belonging
to a group of samples. This is known as multi-instance
multi-label (MIML) (Zhou et al., 2012) problem in the nonextreme label size setting.
AL-XMC raises new challenges that standard approaches
are not able to address. Because of the enormously large
label size, directly using MIML methods leads to computation and memory issues. On the other hand, standard
XMC approaches suffer from two main problems when directly applied to AL-XMC: (1) higher computation cost
due to increased number of positive labels, and (2) worse
performance due to ignoring of the aggregation structure.
In this work, we propose an Efficient AGgregated Label
lEarning algorithm (EAGLE) that assigns labels to each
sample by learning label embeddings based on the structure
of the aggregation. More specifically, the key ingredient
of EAGLE follows the simple principle that the label embedding should be close to the embedding of at least one
of the sample points in every positively labeled group. We
first formulate such an estimator, then design an iterative
algorithm that takes projected gradient steps to approximate
it. As a by-product, our algorithm naturally extends to the
non-XMC setting as a new end-to-end framework for the
MIML problem. Our main contributions include:

