Evaluating Lossy Compression Rates of Deep Generative Models

Sicong Huang * 1 2 3 Alireza Makhzani * 1 2 Yanshuai Cao 3 Roger Grosse 1 2

Abstract
The field of deep generative modeling has
succeeded in producing astonishingly realisticseeming images and audio, but quantitative evaluation remains a challenge. Log-likelihood is an
appealing metric due to its grounding in statistics
and information theory, but it can be challenging
to estimate for implicit generative models, and
scalar-valued metrics give an incomplete picture
of a model’s quality. In this work, we propose
to use rate distortion (RD) curves to evaluate and
compare deep generative models. While estimating RD curves is seemingly even more computationally demanding than log-likelihood estimation, we show that we can approximate the entire
RD curve using nearly the same computations
as were previously used to achieve a single loglikelihood estimate. We evaluate lossy compression rates of VAEs, GANs, and adversarial autoencoders (AAEs) on the MNIST and CIFAR10
datasets. Measuring the entire RD curve gives
a more complete picture than scalar-valued metrics, and we arrive at a number of insights not
obtainable from log-likelihoods alone.

1. Introduction
Generative models of images represent one of the most exciting areas of rapid progress of AI (Brock et al., 2019; Karras et al., 2018b;a). However, evaluating the performance
of generative models remains a significant challenge. Many
of the most successful models, most notably Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014),
are implicit generative models for which computation of
log-likelihoods is intractable or even undefined. Evaluation typically focuses on metrics such as the Inception
score (Salimans et al., 2016) or the Fréchet Inception Dis*
1
Equal contribution.
University of Toronto 2 Vector
Institute for Artificial Intelligence 3 Borealis AI. Correspondence to: Alireza Makhzani, Roger Grosse <makhzani,
rgrosse@cs.toronto.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

tance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017), which do not have nearly
the same degree of theoretical underpinning as likelihoodbased metrics.
Log-likelihoods are one of the most important measures of
generative models. Their utility is evidenced by the fact
that likelihoods (or equivalent metrics such as perplexity or
bits-per-dimension) are reported in nearly all cases where
it’s convenient to compute them. Unfortunately, computation of log-likelihoods for implicit generative models remains a difficult problem. Furthermore, log-likelihoods
have important conceptual limitations. For continuous inputs in the image domain, the metric is often dominated
by the fine-grained distribution over pixels rather than the
high-level structure. For models with low-dimensional
support, one needs to assign an observation model, such
as (rather arbitrary) isotropic Gaussian noise (Wu et al.,
2016). Lossless compression metrics for GANs often give
absurdly large bits-per-dimension (e.g. 1014 ) which fails to
reflect the true performance of the model (Grover et al.,
2018; Danihelka et al., 2017). See Theis et al. (2015) for
more discussion of limitations of likelihood-based evaluation.
Typically, one is not interested in describing the pixels of
an image directly, and it would be sufficient to generate images close to the true data distribution in some metric such
as Euclidean distance. For this reason, there has been much
interest in Wasserstein distance as a criterion for generative models, since the measure exploits precisely this metric structure (Arjovsky et al., 2017; Gulrajani et al., 2017;
Salimans et al., 2018). However, Wasserstein distance remains difficult to approximate, and hence it is not routinely
used to evaluate generative models.
We aim to achieve the best of both worlds by measuring lossy compression rates of deep generative models. In
particular, we aim to estimate the rate distortion function,
which measures the number of bits required to match a distribution to within a given distortion. Like Wasserstein distance, it can exploit the metric structure of the observation
space, but like log-likelihoods, it connects to the rich literature of probabilistic and information theoretic analysis of
generative models. By focusing on different parts of the
rate distortion curve, one can achieve different tradeoffs
between the description length and the fidelity of recon-

