Few-shot Relation Extraction via Bayesian Meta-learning on Relation Graphs

Meng Qu 1 2 Tianyu Gao 3 Louis-Pascal A. C. Xhonneux 1 2 Jian Tang 1 4 5

Abstract
This paper studies few-shot relation extraction,
which aims at predicting the relation for a pair
of entities in a sentence by training with a few
labeled examples in each relation. To more effectively generalize to new relations, in this paper we
study the relationships between different relations
and propose to leverage a global relation graph.
We propose a novel Bayesian meta-learning approach to effectively learn the posterior distribution of the prototype vectors of relations, where
the initial prior of the prototype vectors is parameterized with a graph neural network on the
global relation graph. Moreover, to effectively
optimize the posterior distribution of the prototype vectors, we propose to use the stochastic
gradient Langevin dynamics, which is related to
the MAML algorithm but is able to handle the
uncertainty of the prototype vectors. The whole
framework can be effectively and efficiently optimized in an end-to-end fashion. Experiments on
two benchmark datasets prove the effectiveness of
our proposed approach against competitive baselines in both the few-shot and zero-shot settings.

1. Introduction
A fundamental problem in natural language processing is
relation extraction, which aims to identify the relations between entities in sentences. The problem is usually studied
as a supervised classification task by training with labeled
sentences. However, annotating a large set of sentences is
time-consuming and expensive. As a result, the number of
labeled data is very limited for this task. In practice, a common solution to this challenge is distant supervision (Mintz
et al., 2009), where a knowledge graph is utilized to au*

Equal contribution 1 Mila - Quebec AI Institute, Montréal,
Canada 2 University of Montréal, Montréal, Canada 3 Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China 4 HEC Montréal, Montréal, Canada
5
CIFAR AI Research Chair. Correspondence to: Meng Qu
<meng.qu@umontreal.ca>, Jian Tang <jian.tang@hec.ca>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

tomatically generate training data. For example, given a
triplet (Washington, Capital, US) in a knowledge graph, all
the sentences containing the two entities Washington and
US will be labeled with the relation Capital. In this way,
a large quantity of training data can be generated for each
relation, and such an approach has been extensively studied
and has been proven very effective. However, a limitation
of distant supervision is that the generated training data can
be very noisy. This is because there could be multiple relations between two entities, and it is hard to determine which
relation the entity pair belongs to in a particular context, or
whether there is any relation expressed by the sentence.
An alternative approach for relation extraction, which is
attracting growing interest, is meta-learning for relation extraction (Han et al., 2018; Gao et al., 2019). The idea of
meta-learning is to train models with a large number of
diverse tasks, each of which has a few examples for demonstration, so that the learned model can quickly generalize
to new tasks with only a few examples. For example, the
Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) algorithm (Finn
et al., 2017) tries to find a good initialization for the parameters of a neural model, based on which the model can be
quickly adapted to a new task with several steps of gradient
descent. Another example is the prototypical network (Snell
et al., 2017), which learns a prototype vector from a few examples for each class, and further uses the prototype vectors
for prediction. Based on these techniques, handful recent
studies (Han et al., 2018; Gao et al., 2019) are able to train
relation extraction models with only a few examples for
each relation. Although these methods achieve encouraging
improvements, the performance remains unsatisfactory as
the amount of information in training data is still limited.
To more effectively generalize to new relations and tasks,
in this paper we study modeling the relationships between
different relations, and propose to leverage a global graph
between different relations. In practice, such a global graph
can be obtained in different ways. For example, we can use
the knowledge graph embedding algorithms (Bordes et al.,
2013; Sun et al., 2019) to infer the relation embeddings
and then construct a K-nearest neighbor graph based on the
relation embeddings. The global relation graph provides
the prior knowledge on the relationships between different
relations, which allows us to transfer supervision between
these relations and even generalize to these relations without

