CoMic: Complementary Task Learning & Mimicry for Reusable Skills

Leonard Hasenclever 1 Fabio Pardo 2 Raia Hadsell 1 Nicolas Heess 1 Josh Merel 1

Abstract
Learning to control complex bodies and reuse
learned behaviors is a longstanding challenge in
continuous control. We study the problem of
learning reusable humanoid skills by imitating
motion capture data and joint training with complementary tasks. We show that it is possible to
learn reusable skills through reinforcement learning on 50 times more motion capture data than
prior work. We systematically compare a variety
of different network architectures across different
data regimes both in terms of imitation performance as well as transfer to challenging locomotion tasks. Finally we show that it is possible to interleave the motion capture tracking with training
on complementary tasks, enriching the resulting
skill space, and enabling the reuse of skills not
well covered by the motion capture data such as
getting up from the ground or catching a ball.

1. Introduction
Learning policies that can produce complex motor behavior
for articulated, physically simulated bodies is a difficult challenge that is central to artificial intelligence. Recent efforts
have demonstrated that it is possible to learn robust policies
for certain locomotion behaviors from scratch (Heess et al.,
2017) in rich environments. However this can be very data
inefficient or the quality of resulting behavior may be lacking. To alleviate this problem, it is desirable to be able to
repurpose previously learned skills and use prior knowledge
to facilitate and speed up learning on subsequent tasks. Various efforts have sought to design hierarchical architectures
that enable reuse of skills (e.g. Heess et al. (2016); Florensa
et al. (2017); Haarnoja et al. (2018)), often through factoring
the problem into learning a high-level task-specific module
and a reusable low-level controller.
DeepMind, London 2 Imperial College, London, work done
during an internship at DeepMind. Correspondence to: Leonard
Hasenclever <leonardh@google.com>.

While hierarchical architectures seem especially promising in multi-task reinforcement learning, discovering robust
behaviors via standard exploration techniques remains difficult. The pretrained skills could come from other, perhaps
simpler, tasks (e.g. Riedmiller et al., 2018) but this requires
careful task design and is difficult to scale to large numbers
of tasks. Alternatively, the skills could be derived from
expert demonstrations. In the case of humanoid control,
these demonstrations can be acquired from the large amount
of motion capture (mocap) data publicly available, and the
resulting skills therefore consist of more natural movements
(Merel et al., 2019b; Peng et al., 2019). While very effective,
this approach may prevent the agent from solving tasks requiring other skills not well covered by the demonstrations.
In this paper, we explore this space further, studying the
trade-offs of various existing approaches for representing
and transferring reusable skills. How well skills can be
learned and transferred to new tasks depends on a number of
factors, including the nature and number of the pre-training
tasks as well the structure and capacity of the architecture,
which determines the ability to represent, re-use, and generalize skills. We attempt to disentangle the dimensions of the
problem through a systematic comparison of architectures
for skill representation, evaluated using different training
regimes, transfer tasks, and varying quantities of diverse
motion capture data. Simulated humanoid character control
is a suitable problem domain, because humanoids can generate a rich set of behaviors. Furthermore, motion capture
data gives us access to a very rich, dense and scalable set of
pre-training tasks that we know can be solved. This allows
us to isolate questions relating to the capacity of different
skill architectures and the ease with which the learned skills
can be used, generalized and adapted, reducing the confounding effect of other factors, such as exploration during
the initial pre-training phase. In our experiments we demonstrate that simpler architectures tend to perform better than
specialized ones, and that while a modest amount of motion
capture data is sufficient to solve challenging locomotion
tasks, asymptotic performance improves with data size.

1

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Furthermore, we propose a flexible framework to simultaneously learn to solve goal-directed tasks while learning to
track the motion capture clips. This approach allows us to
combine motion capture data with additional training tasks
to induce complementary behaviors. Our results show that

