Variance Reduction and Quasi-Newton for Particle-Based Variational Inference

Michael H. Zhu 1 Chang Liu 2 Jun Zhu 3

Abstract
Particle-based Variational Inference methods
(ParVIs), like Stein Variational Gradient Descent,
are nonparametric variational inference methods
that optimize a set of particles to best approximate
a target distribution. ParVIs have been proposed
as efficient approximate inference algorithms and
as potential alternatives to MCMC methods. However, to our knowledge, the quality of the posterior
approximation of particles from ParVIs has not
been examined before for large-scale Bayesian
inference problems. We conduct this analysis
and evaluate the sample quality of particles produced by ParVIs, and we find that existing ParVI
approaches using stochastic gradients converge
insufficiently fast under sample quality metrics.
We propose a novel variance reduction and quasiNewton preconditioning framework for ParVIs,
by leveraging the Riemannian structure of the
Wasserstein space and advanced Riemannian optimization algorithms. Experimental results demonstrate the accelerated convergence of variance reduction and quasi-Newton methods for ParVIs
for accurate posterior inference in large-scale and
ill-conditioned problems.

1. Introduction
A central problem in Bayesian inference is approximating an
intractable posterior distribution
p and estimating intractable
R
expectations Ep [f (X)] = f (x)p(x) dx with respect to p.
MCMC methods (Brooks et al., 2011) are based on simulating a Markov chain with limiting distribution p, drawing
samples x1 , x2 , . . . which represent p, and computing the
1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA 2 Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, 100080,
China 3 Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center, Tsinghua-Bosch ML Center, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, 100084, China. Correspondence to: J. Zhu <dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn>, Chang Liu <changliu@microsoft.com>,
Michael H. Zhu <mhzhu@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

PM
1
sample average M
i=1 f (xi ) which is an asymptotically
exact estimator of Ep [f (X)] as M → ∞. Variational inference (VI) methods (Wainwright & Jordan, 2008; Blei
et al., 2017) recast the inference problem as a parametric
optimization problem and attempt to globally approximate
the posterior distribution p with a tractable distribution from
some variational family. MCMC methods are asymptotically exact but can be slow; VI methods can be fast but are
generally biased.
Particle-based Variational Inference methods (ParVIs) are
nonparametric variational inference methods that optimize a
set of particles {x1 , x2 , . . . , xM } to best represent p. Stein
variational gradient descent (SVGD) (Liu & Wang, 2016)
is a leading instance of ParVIs that has received an increasing number of extensions (e.g., Zhuo et al. (2018); Chen
et al. (2018a;b); Wang et al. (2019)) and applications (e.g.,
Feng et al. (2017); Pu et al. (2017); Liu et al. (2017); Yoon
et al. (2018)). ParVIs have been proposed as efficient approximate inference algorithms potentially combining the
advantages of MCMC and VI for large-scale Bayesian inference problems. However, to our knowledge, an important
question has not yet been explored for large-scale Bayesian
inference problems: for a given posterior distribution p, how
well do the particles {x1 , x2 , . . . , xM } produced by ParVIs
represent
PM p in practice, and how accurate is the estimator
1
i=1 f (xi ) of Ep [f (X)] in practice?
M
We explore this question in the context of Bayesian linear regression and logistic regression, two fundamental real-world
inference tasks. We conduct a careful empirical inspection
of the sample quality of particles produced by ParVIs under
various metrics, including mean squared error for estimating
posterior mean and covariance, maximum mean discrepancy (Gretton et al., 2012), and kernel Stein discrepancy
(Chwialkowski et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2016). We find that
existing ParVI approaches using stochastic gradients converge insufficiently fast under these sample quality metrics,
especially in large-scale and ill-conditioned scenarios.
For accurate posterior inference, highly accurate solutions to
the ParVI optimization problem are needed. In the context
of large-scale optimization, a popular method is stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) because of the fast per-iteration
computation time. While SGD can reach an approximate
solution relatively quickly, it has slow asymptotic conver-

