Gamification of Pure Exploration for Linear Bandits

Rémy Degenne * 1 Pierre Ménard * 2 Xuedong Shang 3 Michal Valko 4

Abstract
We investigate an active pure-exploration setting,
that includes best-arm identification, in the context of linear stochastic bandits. While asymptotically optimal algorithms exist for standard multiarm bandits, the existence of such algorithms for
the best-arm identification in linear bandits has
been elusive despite several attempts to address
it. First, we provide a thorough comparison and
new insight over different notions of optimality in
the linear case, including G-optimality, transductive optimality from optimal experimental design
and asymptotic optimality. Second, we design the
first asymptotically optimal algorithm for fixedconfidence pure exploration in linear bandits. As
a consequence, our algorithm naturally bypasses
the pitfall caused by a simple but difficult instance,
that most prior algorithms had to be engineered
to deal with explicitly. Finally, we avoid the need
to fully solve an optimal design problem by providing an approach that entails an efficient implementation.

1. Introduction
Multi-armed bandits (MAB) probe fundamental explorationexploitation trade-offs in sequential decision learning. We
study the pure exploration framework, from among different MAB models, which is subject to the maximization of
information gain after an exploration phase. We are particularly interested in the case where noisy linear payoffs
depending on some regression parameter θ are assumed.
Inspired by Degenne et al. (2019), we treat the problem
as a two-player zero-sum game between the agent and the
nature (in a sense described in Section 2), and we search
for algorithms that are able to output a correct answer with
*
Equal contribution 1 INRIA - DIENS - PSL Research University, Paris, France 2 INRIA 3 INRIA - Université de Lille
4
DeepMind Paris. Correspondence to: Rémy Degenne <remydegenne@gmail.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

high confidence to a given query using as few samples as
possible.
Since the early work of Robbins (1952), a great amount of
literature explores MAB in their standard stochastic setting
with its numerous extensions and variants. Even-Dar et al.
(2002) and Bubeck et al. (2009) are among the first to study
the pure exploration setting for stochastic bandits. A nonexhaustive list of pure exploration game includes best-arm
identification (BAI), top-m identification (Kalyanakrishnan
& Stone, 2010), threshold bandits (Locatelli et al., 2016),
minimum threshold (Kaufmann et al., 2018), signed bandits (Ménard, 2019), pure exploration combinatorial bandits (Chen et al., 2014), Monte-Carlo tree search (Teraoka
et al., 2014), etc.
In this work, we consider a general pure-exploration setting (see Appendix D for details). Nevertheless, for
the sake of simplicity, in the main text we primarily focus on BAI. For stochastic bandits, BAI has been studied within two major theoretical frameworks. The first
one, fixed-budget BAI, aims at minimizing the probability of misidentifying the optimal arm within a given number of pulls (Audibert & Bubeck, 2010). In this work,
we consider another setting, fixed-confidence BAI, introduced by Even-dar et al. (2003). Its goal is to ensure that
the algorithm returns a wrong arm with probability less
than a given risk level, while using a small total number
of samples before making the decision. Existing fixedconfidence algorithms are either elimination-based such
as SuccessiveElimination (Karnin et al., 2013), rely on
confidence intervals such as UGapE (Gabillon et al., 2012),
or follow plug-in estimates of the optimal pulling proportions by a lower bound such as Track-and-Stop (Garivier
& Kaufmann, 2016). We pay particular attention to the
first two since they have been extended to the linear setting,
which is the focus of this paper. In particular, a natural
extension of pure exploration to linear bandits. Linear bandits were first investigated by Auer (2002) in the stochastic
setting for regret minimization and later considered for fixedconfidence BAI problems by Soare et al. (2014).
Linear bandits. We consider a finite-arm linear bandit
problem, where the collection of arms A ⊂ Rd is given with
|A| = A, and spans Rd . We assume that ∀a ∈ A, kak ≤ L,
where kak denotes the Euclidean norm of the vector a. The

