Poisson Learning: Graph Based Semi-Supervised Learning
At Very Low Label Rates

Jeff Calder 1 Brendan Cook 1 Matthew Thorpe 2 Dejan Slepčev 3

Abstract
We propose a new framework, called Poisson
learning, for graph based semi-supervised learning at very low label rates. Poisson learning is
motivated by the need to address the degeneracy of Laplacian semi-supervised learning in this
regime. The method replaces the assignment of label values at training points with the placement of
sources and sinks, and solves the resulting Poisson
equation on the graph. The outcomes are provably
more stable and informative than those of Laplacian learning. Poisson learning is efficient and
simple to implement, and we present numerical
experiments showing the method is superior to
other recent approaches to semi-supervised learning at low label rates on MNIST, FashionMNIST,
and Cifar-10. We also propose a graph-cut enhancement of Poisson learning, called Poisson
MBO, that gives higher accuracy and can incorporate prior knowledge of relative class sizes.

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised learning uses both labeled and unlabeled
data in learning tasks. For problems where very few labels
are available, geometric or topological structure in unlabeled
data can be used to greatly improve the performance of classification, regression, or clustering algorithms. One of the
most widely used methods in graph-based semi-supervised
learning is Laplace learning, originally proposed in (Zhu
et al., 2003), which seeks a graph harmonic function that
extends the labels. Laplace learning, and variants thereof,
have been widely applied in semi-supervised learning (Zhou
et al., 2005; 2004a;b; Ando & Zhang, 2007) and manifold
1

School of Mathematics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
USA. 2 Department of Mathematics, University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK. 3 Department of Mathematical Sciences, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA.. Correspondence to: Jeff
Calder <jwcalder@umn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

ranking (He et al., 2004; Yang et al., 2013; Xu et al., 2011),
among many other problems.
This paper is concerned with graph-based semi-supervised
learning at very low label rates. In this setting, it has been
observed that Laplace learning can give very poor classification results (Nadler et al., 2009; El Alaoui et al., 2016). The
poor results are often attributed to the fact that the solutions
develop localized spikes near the labeled points and are almost constant far from the labeled points. In particular, label
values are not propagated well by the Laplacian learning approach. To address this issue, recent work has suggested to
consider p-Laplace learning (El Alaoui et al., 2016). Several
works have rigorously studied p-Laplace regularization with
few labels (Slepčev & Thorpe, 2019; Calder, 2018; 2019),
and recent numerical results show that p > 2 is superior
to Laplace learning at low label rates (Flores et al., 2019).
The case of p = ∞ is called Lipschitz learning (Kyng et al.,
2015), which seeks the absolutely minimal Lipschitz extension of the training data. Other methods to address low
label rate problems include higher order Laplacian regularization (Zhou & Belkin, 2011) and spectral cutoffs (Belkin
& Niyogi, 2002).
While p-Laplace learning improves upon Laplace learning, the method is more computationally burdensome than
Laplace learning, since the optimality conditions are nonlinear. Other recent approaches have aimed to re-weight
the graph more heavily near labels, in order to give them
wider influence when the labeling rate is very low. One way
to re-weight the graph is the Weighted Nonlocal Laplacian
(WNLL) (Shi et al., 2017), which amplifies the weights
of edges directly connected to labeled nodes. The WNLL
achieves better results at moderately low label rates, but still
performs poorly at very low label rates (Flores et al., 2019).
To address this, (Calder & Slepčev, 2019) proposed the
Properly Weighted Laplacian, which re-weights the graph
in a way that is well-posed at arbitrarily low label rates.
Much of the recent work on low label rate problems has
focused on formulating and implementing new learning
approaches that are well-posed with few labels. The exact nature of the degeneracy in Laplace learning, and the
question of how the tails of the spikes propagate label information, has not been studied and is still poorly understood.

