Improving Robustness of Deep-Learning-Based Image Reconstruction

Ankit Raj 1 Yoram Bresler 1 Bo Li 2

Abstract
Deep-learning-based methods for various applications have been shown vulnerable to adversarial examples. Here we address the use of deeplearning networks as inverse problem solvers,
which has generated much excitement and even
adoption efforts by the main equipment vendors
for medical imaging including computed tomography (CT) and MRI. However, the recent demonstration that such networks suffer from a similar vulnerability to adversarial attacks potentially
undermines their future. We propose to modify
the training strategy of end-to-end deep-learningbased inverse problem solvers to improve robustness. To this end, we introduce an auxiliary network to generate adversarial examples, which is
used in a min-max formulation to build robust
image reconstruction networks. Theoretically, we
argue that for such inverse problem solvers, one
should analyze and study the effect of adversaries
in the measurement-space, instead of in the signalspace used in previous work. We show for a linear
reconstruction scheme that our min-max formulation results in a singular-value filter regularized
solution, which suppresses the effect of adversarial examples. Numerical experiments using the
proposed min-max scheme confirm convergence
to this solution. We complement the theory by
experiments on non-linear Compressive Sensing
(CS) reconstruction by a deep neural network on
two standard datasets, and, using anonymized clinical data, on a state-of-the-art published algorithm
for low-dose x-ray CT reconstruction. We show a
significant improvement in robustness over other
methods for deep network-based reconstruction,
by using the proposed approach.
1

Coordinated Science Laboratory and Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign (UIUC) 2 Department of Computer Science, UIUC.
Correspondence to: Ankit Raj <ankitr3@illinois.edu>, Yoram
Bresler <ybresler@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Adversarial examples for deep learning based methods have
been demonstrated for various problems (Szegedy et al.,
2013; Kurakin et al., 2016; Cisse et al., 2017a; Eykholt
et al., 2017; Xiao et al., 2018), showing that easily obtained
minute perturbations can make deep networks produce unexpected results. There has been plethora of work to defend
against these attacks as well (Madry et al., 2017; Tramèr
et al., 2017; Athalye et al., 2018; Wong et al., 2018; Jang
et al., 2019a; Jiang et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2017; Schmidt
et al., 2018). Recently, (Antun et al., 2020; Choi et al., 2019)
introduced adversarial attacks on image reconstruction networks, but no defences have been proposed. In this work,
we address this gap by proposing an adversarial training
scheme for image reconstruction deep networks.
Image reconstruction involving the recovery of an image
from indirect measurements is used in many applications,
including critical applications such as medical imaging, e.g.,
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), Computerised Tomography (CT), etc. Such applications demand the reconstruction to be stable and reliable. On the other hand, in order
to speed up the acquisition, reduce sensor cost, or reduce
radiation dose, it is highly desirable to subsample the measurement data, while still recovering the original image.
This is enabled by the compressive sensing (CS) paradigm
(Candes et al., 2006; Donoho, 2006). CS involves projecting
a high dimensional, signal x ∈ Rn to a lower dimensional
measurement y ∈ Rm , m  n, using a small set of linear,
non-adaptive frames. The noisy measurement model is:
y = Ax + v, A ∈ Rm×n ,

(1)

where A is the measurement matrix and v is the measurement noise. The goal is to recover the unobserved natural
image x, from the compressive measurement y. Although
the problem with m  n is severely ill-posed and does
not have a unique solution, CS achieves nice, stable solutions for a special class of signals x - those that are sparse
or sparsifiable, by using sparse regularization techniques
(Candes et al., 2006; Donoho, 2006; Elad & Aharon, 2006;
Dong et al., 2011; Wen et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2017; Dabov
et al., 2009; Yang et al., 2010; Elad, 2010; Li et al., 2009;
Ravishankar & Bresler, 2012).
Recently, deep learning-based methods have also been proposed as an alternative method for performing image recon-

