A Generative Model for Molecular Distance Geometry

Gregor N. C. Simm * 1 José Miguel Hernández-Lobato 1

Abstract
Great computational effort is invested in generating equilibrium states for molecular systems using, for example, Markov chain Monte Carlo. We
present a probabilistic model that generates statistically independent samples for molecules from
their graph representations. Our model learns a
low-dimensional manifold that preserves the geometry of local atomic neighborhoods through a
principled learning representation that is based on
Euclidean distance geometry. In a new benchmark
for molecular conformation generation, we show
experimentally that our generative model achieves
state-of-the-art accuracy. Finally, we show how to
use our model as a proposal distribution in an importance sampling scheme to compute molecular
properties.

1. Introduction
Over the last few years, many highly-effective deep learning
methods generating small molecules with desired properties (e.g., novel drugs) have emerged (Gómez-Bombarelli
et al., 2018; Segler et al., 2018; Dai et al., 2018; Jin et al.,
2018; Bradshaw et al., 2019a; Liu et al., 2018; You et al.,
2018; Bradshaw et al., 2019b). These methods operate
using graph representations of molecules in which nodes
and edges represent atoms and bonds, respectively. A representation that is closer to the physical system is one in
which a molecule is described by its geometry or conformation. A conformation x of a molecule is defined by a set of
v
atoms {(i , ri )}N
i=1 , where Nv is the number of atoms in the
molecule, i ∈ {H, C, O, ...} is the chemical element of the
atom i, and ri ∈ R3 is its position in Cartesian coordinates.
Importantly, the relative positions of the atoms are restricted
by the bonds in the molecule and the angles between them.
Due to thermal fluctuations resulting in stretching of and
1

Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to: Gregor N. C. Simm
<gncs2@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Standard graph representation G of a molecule (left)
with a set of possible conformations {xi } (right). It is the goal of
this work to generate such conformations from the graph representation of a molecule. Conformations feature the same atom types
and bonds but the atoms are arranged differently in space. These
differences arise from rotations around and stretching of bonds in
the molecule. Hydrogen (H), carbon (C), and oxygen (O) atoms
are colored white, gray, and red, respectively.

rotations around bonds, there exist infinitely many conformations of a molecule. A molecule’s graph representation
and a set of its conformations are shown in Fig. 1. Under
a wide range of conditions, the probability p(x) of a conformation x, is governed by the Boltzmann distribution and
is proportional to exp{−E(x)/kB T }, where E(x) is the
conformation’s energy, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and
T is the temperature.
To compute a molecular property for a molecule, one must
sample from p(x). The main approach is to start with one
conformation and make small changes to it over time, e.g.,
by using Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) or molecular dynamics (MD). These methods can be used to accurately sample equilibrium states of molecules, but they
become computationally expensive for larger ones (Shim
& MacKerell, 2011; Ballard et al., 2015; De Vivo et al.,
2016). Other heuristic approaches exist in which distances
between atoms are set to fixed idealized values (Havel, 2002;
Blaney & Dixon, 2007). Several methods based on statistical learning have also recently been developed to tackle
the issue of conformation generation. However, they are
mainly geared towards studying proteins and their folding
dynamics (AlQuraishi, 2019). Some of these models are
not targeting a distribution over conformations but the most
stable folded configuration, e.g. AlphaFold (Senior et al.,

