R2-B2: Recursive Reasoning-Based Bayesian Optimization for
No-Regret Learning in Games

Zhongxiang Dai 1 Yizhou Chen 1 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low 1 Patrick Jaillet 2 Teck-Hua Ho 3

Abstract
This paper presents a recursive reasoning formalism of Bayesian optimization (BO) to model
the reasoning process in the interactions between
boundedly rational, self-interested agents with
unknown, complex, and costly-to-evaluate payoff functions in repeated games, which we call
Recursive Reasoning-Based BO (R2-B2). Our
R2-B2 algorithm is general in that it does not constrain the relationship among the payoff functions
of different agents and can thus be applied to various types of games such as constant-sum, generalsum, and common-payoff games. We prove that
by reasoning at level 2 or more and at one level
higher than the other agents, our R2-B2 agent
can achieve faster asymptotic convergence to no
regret than that without utilizing recursive reasoning. We also propose a computationally cheaper
variant of R2-B2 called R2-B2-Lite at the expense
of a weaker convergence guarantee. The performance and generality of our R2-B2 algorithm are
empirically demonstrated using synthetic games,
adversarial machine learning, and multi-agent reinforcement learning.

1. Introduction
Several fundamental machine learning tasks in the real
world involve intricate interactions between boundedly rational1 , self-interested agents that can be modeled as a form
of repeated games with unknown, complex, and costly-toevaluate payoff functions for the agents. For example, in
1
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore 2 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
USA 3 NUS Business School, National University of Singapore,
Republic of Singapore. Correspondence to: Bryan Kian Hsiang
Low <lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
1
Boundedly rational agents are subject to limited cognition and
time in making decisions (Gigerenzer & Selten, 2002).

adversarial machine learning (ML), the interactions between
the defender D and the attacker A of an ML model can be
modeled as a repeated game in which the payoffs to D and
A are the performance of the ML model (e.g., validation accuracy) and its negation, respectively. Specifically, given a
fully trained image classification model (say, provided as an
online service), A attempts to fool the ML model into misclassification through repeated queries of the model using
perturbed input images. On the other hand, for each queried
image that is perturbed by A, D tries to ensure the correctness of its classification by transforming the perturbed
image before feeding it into the ML model. As another
example, multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) in
an episodic environment can also be modeled as a repeated
game in which the payoff to each agent is its return from
the execution of all the agents’ selected policies.
Solving such a form of repeated games in a cost-efficient
manner is challenging since the payoff functions of the
agents are unknown, complex (e.g., possibly noisy, nonconvex, and/or with no closed-form expression/derivative),
and costly to evaluate. Fortunately, the payoffs corresponding to different actions of each agent tend to be correlated.
For example, in adversarial ML, the correlated perturbations
performed by the attacker A (and correlated transformations
executed by the defender D) are likely to induce similar
effects on the performance of the ML model. Such a correlation can be leveraged to predict the payoff associated
with any action of an agent using a surrogate model such
as the rich class of Bayesian nonparametric Gaussian process (GP) models (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006) which is
expressive enough to represent a predictive belief of the unknown, complex payoff function over the action space of the
agent. Then, in each iteration, the agent can select an action
for evaluating its unknown payoff function that trades off between sampling at or near to a likely maximum payoff based
on the current GP belief (exploitation) vs. improving the
GP belief (exploration) until its cost/sampling budget is expended. To do this, the agent can use a sequential black-box
optimizer such as the celebrated Bayesian optimization (BO)
algorithm (Shahriari et al., 2016) based on the GP-upper
confidence bound (GP-UCB) acquisition function (Srinivas
et al., 2010), which guarantees asymptotic no-regret performance and is sample-efficient in practice. How then can

