One-shot Distributed Ridge Regression in High Dimensions

Edgar Dobriban * 1 Yue Sheng * 1 2

Abstract
To scale up data analysis, distributed and parallel
computing approaches are increasingly needed.
Here we study a fundamental problem in this area:
How to do ridge regression in a distributed computing environment? We study one-shot methods
constructing weighted combinations of ridge regression estimators computed on each machine.
By analyzing the mean squared error in a high
dimensional model where each predictor has a
small effect, we discover several new phenomena including that the efficiency depends strongly
on the signal strength, but does not degrade with
many workers, the risk decouples over machines,
and the unexpected consequence that the optimal
weights do not sum to unity. We also propose a
new optimally weighted one-shot ridge regression
algorithm. Our results are supported by simulations and real data analysis.

1. Introduction
Computers have changed all aspects of our world. Importantly, computing has made data analysis more convenient
than ever before. However, computers also pose limitations
and challenges for data science. For instance, hardware
architecture is based on a model of a universal computer—
a Turing machine—but in fact has physical limitations of
storage, memory, processing speed, and communication
bandwidth over a network. As large datasets become more
and more common in all areas of human activity, we need
to think carefully about working with these limitations.
How can we design methods for data analysis (statistics and
machine learning) that scale to large datasets? A general
approach is distributed and parallel computing. Roughly
*
Equal contribution 1 Wharton Statistics Department, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA 2 Graduate Group in
Applied Mathematics and Computational Science, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Edgar
Dobriban <dobriban@wharton.upenn.edu>, Yue Sheng <yuesheng@sas.upenn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

speaking, the data is divided up among computing units,
which perform most of the computation locally, and synchronize by passing relatively short messages. While the
idea is simple, a good implementation can be hard. Moreover, different problems have different inherent needs in
terms of local computation and global communication resources. For instance, in statistical problems with high levels
of noise, simple one-shot schemes like averaging estimators
computed on local datasets can sometimes work well.
In this paper, we study a fundamental problem in this area.
We are interested in linear regression, which is arguably
one of the most important problems in statistics and machine learning. A popular method for this model is ridge
regression (also known as `2 or Tikhonov regularization),
which regularizes the estimates using a quadratic penalty
to improve estimation and prediction accuracy. We aim
to understand how to do ridge regression in a distributed
computing environment. We are also interested in the highdimensional setting, where the number of features can be
large. We also work in a random-effects model where each
predictor has a small effect on the outcome, which is the
model for which ridge regression is best suited.
1.1. Main Results and Contributions
In contrast to existing work, we introduce a new mathematical approach to the problem. We leverage and further
develop sophisticated recent techniques from random matrix
theory and free probability theory in our analysis. This enables us to make contributions that were unattainable using
more ”traditional” mathematical approaches.
We find the limiting mean squared error of the one-shot
distributed ridge estimator, which takes a weighted sum
of the local ridge estimators computed on individual machines. This is a highly communication efficient method.
We characterize the optimal weights and tuning parameters,
as well as the relative efficiency compared to centralized
ridge regression, meaning the ratio of the risk of usual ridge
to the distributed estimator. This can precisely pinpoint
the computation-accuracy tradeoff achieved via one-shot
distributed estimation. See Figure 1 for an illustration.
As a consequence of our detailed risk analysis, we make
several discoveries:

