LazyIter: A Fast Algorithm for Counting Markov Equivalent DAGs and
Designing Experiments
Ali AhmadiTeshnizi 1 Saber Salehkaleybar 1 Negar Kiyavash 2

Abstract
The causal relationships among a set of random
variables are commonly represented by a Directed
Acyclic Graph (DAG), where there is a directed
edge from variable X to variable Y if X is a direct cause of Y . From the purely observational
data, the true causal graph can be identiﬁed up
to a Markov Equivalence Class (MEC), which is
a set of DAGs with the same conditional independencies between the variables. The size of an
MEC is a measure of complexity for recovering
the true causal graph by performing interventions.
We propose a method for efﬁcient iteration over
possible MECs given intervention results. We
utilize the proposed method for computing MEC
sizes and experiment design in active and passive
learning settings. Compared to previous work for
computing the size of MEC, our proposed algorithm reduces the time complexity by a factor of
O(n) for sparse graphs where n is the number of
variables in the system. Additionally, integrating
our approach with dynamic programming, we design an optimal algorithm for passive experiment
design. Experimental results show that our proposed algorithms for both computing the size of
MEC and experiment design outperform the state
of the art.

1. Introduction
Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs) are the most commonly
used structures to represent causal relations between random variables, where a directed edge X → Y means that
1
Department of Electrical Engineering, Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran 2 School of Management
of Technology, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne,
Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Ali AhmadiTeshnizi
<ali.ahmadi215@student.sharif.edu>, Saber Salehkaleybar (Corresponding author) <saleh@sharif.edu>, Negar Kiyavash <negar.kiyavash@epﬂ.ch>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

variable X is a direct cause of variable Y . Under the faithfulness assumption, conditional independencies between
different variables can be inferred from observational data
and consequently, the ground truth graph is identiﬁed up
to Markov Equivalence Class (MEC) (Pearl, 2009; Spirtes
et al., 2000). Unique identiﬁcation of the ground truth DAG
among the graphs in an MEC generally requires interventions on variables (Eberhardt & Scheines, 2007). In some
scenarios, interventions could be costly (for instance, in
biological experiments), and therefore, selecting the optimal intervention target to learn the causal structure is of
great interest (Eberhardt et al., 2005; He & Geng, 2008;
Eberhardt, 2008; Hauser & Bühlmann, 2014; Shanmugam
et al., 2015; Kocaoglu et al., 2017; Ghassami et al., 2018;
Lindgren et al., 2018; Agrawal et al., 2019). Several metrics
have been suggested in the literature for target selection (He
& Geng, 2008; Hauser & Bühlmann, 2014; Ghassami et al.,
2018; Agrawal et al., 2019). A good metric for measuring
the effectiveness of an intervention is the number of remaining DAGs in an MEC after the intervention (He & Geng,
2008). To use this metric for target selection, we must be
able to efﬁciently count the number of DAGs in an MEC.
Some previous work used the clique tree representation of
chordal graphs to divide the causal graph into smaller subgraphs, and perform counting on each subgraph separately
(Ghassami et al., 2019; Talvitie & Koivisto, 2019). The
main issue with this approach is the dependence on the maximum clique size which can result in O(n!) operations in
some cases where n is the number of variables. Ghassami
et al. (2019) and Talvitie & Koivisto (2019) used dynamic
programming to count DAGs in an MEC. The best time
complexity of these approaches is in the order of O(2n n4 ).
However, both approaches do not take advantage of sparsity
if the graph is sparse. In some other work, the number of
edges oriented after an intervention is proposed as the target
selection metric (Hauser & Bühlmann, 2014). Hauser &
Bühlmann (2014) used the idea of conditioning on different
edge orientations for edges connected to a single node to
choose the optimal single-node intervention target. The time
complexity of proposed algorithm depends on the size of
largest clique in MEC which in the worst case is exponential.
In Radhakrishnan et al. (2018) they have taken advantage
of generating functions and have discussed several families

