Estimation of Bounds on Potential Outcomes For Decision Making

Maggie Makar 1 Fredrik Johansson 2 John Guttag 1 David Sontag 1

Abstract
Estimation of individual treatment effects is commonly used as the basis for contextual decision
making in fields such as healthcare, education,
and economics. However, it is often sufficient
for the decision maker to have estimates of upper
and lower bounds on the potential outcomes of
decision alternatives to assess risks and benefits.
We show that, in such cases, we can improve sample efficiency by estimating simple functions that
bound these outcomes instead of estimating their
conditional expectations, which may be complex
and hard to estimate. Our analysis highlights a
trade-off between the complexity of the learning
task and the confidence with which the learned
bounds hold. Guided by these findings, we develop an algorithm for learning upper and lower
bounds on potential outcomes which optimize an
objective function defined by the decision maker,
subject to the probability that bounds are violated
being small. Using a clinical dataset and a wellknown causality benchmark, we demonstrate that
our algorithm outperforms baselines, providing
tighter, more reliable bounds.

1. Introduction
In many practical situations, a decision maker wishes to
intervene or assign a treatment to ensure that an outcome
of interest falls within a safe range. One example, which
we use throughout the paper, is when a physician considers
whether or not to prescribe anticoagulants to mitigate the
risk of stroke, as measured by the International Normalized
Ratio (INR). The INR reflects the time it takes for blood
to clot. For previous stroke patients, a healthy INR is 2–
3. Values lower than 2 signal elevated risk of an Ischemic
stroke, and higher than 3 signal elevated risk of a Hemorrhagic stroke. To make an informed decision, the physician
1
CSAIL, MIT 2 Chalmers University of Technology. Correspondence to: Maggie Makar <mmakar@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

needs to know if the potential outcomes under treatment
and non-treatment fall within 2–3. Learning that the difference between the potential outcomes, i.e., the Individual
Treatment Effect (ITE) is 1.5, does not immediately imply
an optimal treatment decision; it could be that the patient’s
INR decreases from 4 to 2.5 or from 5.5 to 4. More information about the potential outcomes themselves is needed, but
knowing their exact value is not necessary. It is sufficient to
know that the patient’s INR is somewhere between 2.1 and
2.9 if treated. For example, knowing that it is 2.853 does
not provide additional insight. For these two reasons, we
study the task of estimating reliable covariate-conditional
bounds on potential outcomes using observational data.
Most existing methods for estimating causal effects and
potential outcomes attempt to fit the expected outcomes
as functions of observed covariates, typically relying on
variants of Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) strategies
(Hill, 2011; Shalit et al., 2017; Alaa & van der Schaar, 2018;
2017). Some of these methods produce prediction intervals
centered around the estimated expected response (outcome)
surface, which can be used to bound the potential outcome
from above and below. These intervals have approximately
valid coverage for large samples, provided that the mean
estimate is sufficiently unbiased. However, achieving this is
not always feasible in small samples, leading to high false
coverage rates (FCRs), defined as the rate at which outcomes
are observed outside of the given prediction interval.
Instead of attempting to directly fit the potential outcomes,
which may be complex and hard to estimate from small
samples, we propose to fit simpler functions that bound the
outcomes from above and below. Within this simpler function class, we identify estimates of the potential outcomes
that maximize a utility (objective) function specified by the
decision maker. Figure 1 shows the intuition behind our approach. For example, if the decision maker wants to ensure
that the uncertainty in the potential outcome estimates is
small on average, they could require that the average interval
width (= upper bound - lower bound) is small. Alternatively,
if they wish to ensure that no patient sub-population has
excessively uncertain estimates (i.e., wide intervals) they
could require that the maximum interval width is minimized.
We make the following main contributions: (i) We give results on the generalization properties of learned bounds on

