Smaller, More Accurate Regression Forests
Using Tree Alternating Optimization

Arman Zharmagambetov 1 Miguel Á. Carreira-Perpiñán 1

Abstract
Regression forests, based on ensemble approaches such as bagging or boosting, have
long been recognized as the leading off-the-shelf
method for regression. However, forests rely on
a greedy top-down procedure such as CART to
learn each tree. We extend a recent algorithm
for learning classification trees, Tree Alternating Optimization (TAO), to the regression case,
and use it with bagging to construct regression
forests of oblique trees, having hyperplane splits
at the decision nodes. In a wide range of datasets,
we show that the resulting forests exceed the
accuracy of state-of-the-art algorithms such as
random forests, AdaBoost or gradient boosting,
often considerably, while yielding forests that
have usually fewer and shallower trees and hence
fewer parameters and faster inference overall.
This result has an immense practical impact and
advocates for the power of optimization in ensemble learning.

1. Introduction
We consider regression, the problem of learning a function
that predicts a continuous scalar or vector from an input
feature vector. Forests (ensembles of trees) are widely recognized as the leading off-the-shelf regression methods. In
many datasets, we can expect a forest to achieve close to
optimal performance compared to other methods with little
hyperparameter tuning. This has made them very widely
applied in data mining (Verikas et al., 2011), computer vision (Criminisi et al., 2012; Criminisi & Shotton, 2013; Viola & Jones, 2004) and other areas.
However, why forests work so well is not completely un1
Dept. of Computer Science & Engineering, University of
California, Merced, USA. Correspondence to: Arman Zharmagambetov <azharmagambetov@ucmerced.edu>, Miguel Á.
Carreira-Perpiñán <mcarreira-perpinan@ucmerced.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

derstood. They are constructed, at least in part, using
heuristic techniques, without directly optimizing an objective function—unlike most other machine learning models,
which define an objective over the model parameters and
optimize it, usually with gradient-based methods. In particular, forests need a way to train individual trees, and in the
most successful forests, such as random forests (Breiman,
2001) or gradient boosting (Friedman, 2001), this is done
using the CART algorithm (Breiman et al., 1984) or a variation of it such as C4.5 (Quinlan, 1993). In these algorithms,
one starts with a root node, splits it using a heuristic criterion and proceeds recursively with its children, top-down,
stopping at some point using a variety of criteria. The algorithm is greedy in that after each split the node’s decision
function is fixed. This and the fact that the algorithm does
not optimize an objective function directly over the tree parameters makes CART produce severely suboptimal trees
(Hastie et al., 2009).
Given this state of affairs, it is remarkable that CART and
C4.5 have remained the state-of-the-art for decades for
training both single trees and forests. The reason is that
tree optimization is a very difficult problem, NP-hard in
most formulations (Hyafil & Rivest, 1976; Hancock et al.,
1996), to which gradient methods do not apply. Thus, while
many other tree optimization algorithms have been proposed, none has been able to do significantly better. Also,
the vast majority of trees in practice, whether single or ensembled, are axis-aligned (where each split tests a single
feature rather than a combination of features) and each leaf
outputs a constant prediction.
We propose to improve regression forests by improving the
optimization of each regression tree, and by allowing the
use of more general types of trees. To do this, we build
on a recently proposed algorithm for learning classification trees, Tree Alternating Optimization (TAO) (CarreiraPerpiñán & Tavallali, 2018; Carreira-Perpiñán, 2020). TAO
optimizes a parametric tree of fixed structure, monotonically decreasing its 0/1 classification loss at each iteration. It applies to trees beyond axis-aligned splits (such as
oblique splits) and constant-predictor leaves (such as linear), is scalable, and produces far more accurate classification trees than CART. We adapt TAO to the regression case

