On the Global Convergence Rates of Softmax Policy Gradient Methods

Jincheng Mei 1 2 * Chenjun Xiao 1 Csaba Szepesvári 3 1 Dale Schuurmans 2 1

Abstract
We make three contributions toward better understanding policy gradient methods in the tabular
setting. First, we show that with the true gradient,
policy gradient with a softmax parametrization
converges at a O(1/t) rate, with constants depending on the problem and initialization. This
result significantly expands the recent asymptotic
convergence results. The analysis relies on two
findings: that the softmax policy gradient satisfies a Łojasiewicz inequality, and the minimum
probability of an optimal action during optimization can be bounded in terms of its initial value.
Second, we analyze entropy regularized policy
gradient and show that it enjoys a significantly
faster linear convergence rate O(e−t ) toward softmax optimal policy. This result resolves an open
question in the recent literature. Finally, combining the above two results and additional new
Ω(1/t) lower bound results, we explain how entropy regularization improves policy optimization,
even with the true gradient, from the perspective
of convergence rate. The separation of rates is
further explained using the notion of non-uniform
Łojasiewicz degree. These results provide a theoretical understanding of the impact of entropy and
corroborate existing empirical studies.

1. Introduction
The policy gradient is one of the most foundational concepts
in Reinforcement Learning (RL), lying at the core of policysearch and actor-critic methods. This paper is concerned
with the analysis of the convergence rate of policy gradient
methods (Sutton et al., 2000). As an approach to RL, the
appeal of policy gradient methods is that they are conceptually straightforward and under some regularity conditions
∗

Work done as an intern at Google Brain. 1 University of Alberta
Google Research, Brain Team 3 DeepMind. Correspondence to:
Jincheng Mei <jmei2@ualberta.ca>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

they guarantee monotonic improvement of the value. A secondary appeal is that policy gradient methods were shown
to achieve effective empirical performance (e.g., Schulman
et al., 2015; 2017).
Despite the prevalence and importance of policy optimization in RL, the theoretical understanding of policy gradient
method has, until recently, been severely limited. A key
barrier to understanding is the inherent non-convexity of the
value landscape with respect to standard policy parametrizations. As a result, little has been known about the global
convergence behavior of policy gradient method. Recently,
important new progress in understanding the convergence
behavior of policy gradient has been achieved. As in this
paper we will restrict ourselves to the tabular setting, we analyze the part of the literature that also deals with this setting.
While the tabular setting is clearly limiting, this is the setting
where so far the cleanest results have been achieved and understanding this setting is a necessary first step towards the
bigger problem of understanding RL algorithms. Returning
to the discussion of recent work, Bhandari & Russo (2019)
showed that, without parametrization, projected gradient
ascent on the simplex does not suffer from spurious local
optima. In concurrent work, Agarwal et al. (2019) showed
that (i) without parametrization,
projected gradient ascent
√
converges at rate O(1/ t) to a global optimum; and (ii)
with softmax parametrization, policy gradient converges
asymptotically. Agarwal et al. also analyze other variants of policy gradient, and show that policy gradient with
√
relative entropy regularization converges at rate O(1/ t),
natural policy gradient (mirror descent) converges at rate
O(1/t), and given a “compatible” function approximation
(thus, going beyond the√
tabular case) natural policy gradient
converges at rate O(1/
t). Shani et al. (2020) obtains the
√
slower rate O(1/ t) for mirror descent. They also proposed a variant that adds entropy regularization and prove a
rate of O(1/t) for this modified problem.
Despite these advances, many open questions remain in understanding the behavior of policy gradient methods, even in
the tabular setting and even when the true gradient is available in the updates. In this paper, we provide answers to
the following three questions left open by previous work in
this area: (i) What is the convergence rate of policy gradient
methods with softmax parametrization? The best previous
result, due to Agarwal et al. (2019), established asymptotic

