Neural Architecture Search in A Proxy Validation Loss Landscape

Yanxi Li 1 Minjing Dong 1 Yunhe Wang 2 Chang Xu 1

Abstract
This paper searches for the optimal neural architecture by minimizing a proxy of validation loss.
Existing neural architecture search (NAS) methods used to discover the optimal neural architecture that best fits the validation examples given
the up-to-date network weights. However, back
propagation with a number of validation examples could be time consuming, especially when it
needs to be repeated many times in NAS. Though
these intermediate validation results are invaluable, they would be wasted if we cannot use them
to predict the future from the past. In this paper,
we propose to approximate the validation loss
landscape by learning a mapping from neural architectures to their corresponding validate losses.
The optimal neural architecture thus can be easily
identified as the minimum of this proxy validation loss landscape. A novel sampling strategy
is further developed for an efficient approximation of the loss landscape. Theoretical analysis
indicates that the validation loss estimator learnt
with our sampling strategy can reach a lower error rate and a lower label complexity compared
with a uniform sampling. Experimental results
on benchmarks demonstrate that the architecture
searched by the proposed algorithm can achieve a
satisfactory accuracy with less time cost.

1. Introduction
Designing neural network architecture by neural architecture search (NAS) methods without human participation
has attracted the interest of researchers since decades ago
(Fahlman & Lebiere, 1990; Kitano, 1990). Recently, the explosive growth in hardware performance has boosted many
excellent studies in NAS (Cai et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2017;
Real et al., 2017; Zoph & Le, 2016; Zoph et al., 2018),
1
School of Computer Science, University of Sydney
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technoligies. Correspondence
to: Yanxi Li <yali0722@uni.sydney.edu.au>, Chang Xu
<c.xu@sydney.edu.au>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

which show a promising future of this field. Although hardware performance has improved, NAS is still computational
prohibitive and expensive for relatively small institutions,
organizations and companies due to its nature. Typically,
NAS involves solving a bi-level optimization problem with
model training as the lower optimization problem and architecture searching as the upper one. Previous study has
shown that such problems are computationally difficult to be
optimized, due to the fact that the solutions of optimizations
in both levels dynamically affect each other (Dempe, 2018).
To solve the bi-level optimization problem, extensive researches have been conducted for searching neural architectures by reinforcement learning (RL) (Baker et al., 2016;
Bello et al., 2017; Cai et al., 2017; Zoph & Le, 2016; Zoph
et al., 2018) or evolutionary algorithms (EA) (Liu et al.,
2017; Real et al., 2017; Miikkulainen et al., 2019). These
methods often need to evaluate numerous different architectures and therefore require thousands of GPU days to find
an architecture on CIFAR-10. Recent works represented by
DARTS (Liu et al., 2018b) have established a new family of
approaches using gradient-based method to optimize neural
architectures, which reduce the searching cost dramatically
from thousands of GPU days to several GPU hours. However, in NAS iterations, knowledge from prior steps are far
from fully explored and exploited to instruct the subsequent
searching by existing methods. Intermediate validation results are often discarded without a thorough investigation,
which causes a huge waste of computation resources.
In this paper, we propose to learn the proxy validation loss
landscape for an efficient neural architecture search. Instead
of discarding the historical validation losses in iterations
of NAS, we reuse them to train a validation loss estimator.
Based on the gradients of this validation loss estimator, we
can then derive neural architectures that correspond to the
smaller validation loss. The validation loss estimator can
be further upgraded with these discovered architectures and
their corresponding actual validation losses. We conduct
theoretical analysis on the convergence of the validation loss
estimator and suggest that it needs fewer labelling costs. Experimental results on benchmark datasets demonstrate that
searching in the proposed proxy validation loss landscape,
we can outperform comparison methods by achieving up to
2.70% test error rate on CIFAR-10 and 25.6% top-1 error
rate on ImageNet 2012 within 0.20 GPU days.

