Learning De-biased Representations with Biased Representations

Hyojin Bahng 1 Sanghyuk Chun 2 Sangdoo Yun 2 Jaegul Choo 3 Seong Joon Oh 2

Abstract
Many machine learning algorithms are trained and
evaluated by splitting data from a single source
into training and test sets. While such focus on
in-distribution learning scenarios has led to interesting advancement, it has not been able to tell
if models are relying on dataset biases as shortcuts for successful prediction (e.g., using snow
cues for recognising snowmobiles), resulting in
biased models that fail to generalise when the
bias shifts to a different class. The cross-bias
generalisation problem has been addressed by
de-biasing training data through augmentation or
re-sampling, which are often prohibitive due to
the data collection cost (e.g., collecting images
of a snowmobile on a desert) and the difficulty
of quantifying or expressing biases in the first
place. In this work, we propose a novel framework to train a de-biased representation by encouraging it to be different from a set of representations that are biased by design. This tactic
is feasible in many scenarios where it is much
easier to define a set of biased representations
than to define and quantify bias. We demonstrate
the efficacy of our method across a variety of
synthetic and real-world biases; our experiments
show that the method discourages models from
taking bias shortcuts, resulting in improved generalisation. Source code is available at https:
//github.com/clovaai/rebias.

1. Introduction
Most machine learning algorithms are trained and evaluated
by randomly splitting a single source of data into training
and test sets. Although this is a standard protocol, it is blind
to a critical problem: the reliance on dataset bias (Torralba
& Efros, 2011). For instance, many frog images are taken in
1

Korea University 2 Clova AI Research, NAVER Corp.
Graduate School of AI, KAIST. Correspondence to: Seong Joon
Oh <coallaoh@gmail.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

swamp scenes, but swamp itself is not a frog. Nonetheless, a
model will exploit this bias (i.e., take “shortcuts”) if it yields
correct predictions for the majority of training examples.
If the bias is sufficient to achieve high accuracy, there is
little motivation for models to learn the complexity of the intended task, despite its full capacity to do so. Consequently,
a model that relies on bias will achieve high in-distribution
accuracy, yet fail to generalise when the bias shifts.
We tackle this “cross-bias generalisation” problem where
a model does not exploit its full capacity due to the “sufficiency” of bias cues for prediction of the target label in
the training data. For example, language models make
predictions based on the presence of certain words (e.g.,
“not” for “contradiction”) (Gururangan et al., 2018) without
much reasoning on the actual meaning of sentences, even
if they are in principle capable of sophisticated reasoning.
Similarly, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) achieve
high accuracy on image classification by using local texture
cues as shortcut, as opposed to more reliable global shape
cues (Geirhos et al., 2019; Brendel & Bethge, 2019). 3D
CNNs achieve high accuracy on video action recognition
by relying on static cues as shortcut rather than capturing
temporal actions (Weinzaepfel & Rogez, 2019; Li et al.,
2018; Li & Vasconcelos, 2019).
Existing methods attempt to remove a model’s dependency
on bias by de-biasing the training data through augmentation (Geirhos et al., 2019) or introducing a pre-defined bias
that a model is trained to be independent of (Wang et al.,
2019a). Other approaches (Clark et al., 2019; Cadene et al.,
2019) learn a biased model given source of bias as input,
and de-bias through logit re-weighting or logit ensembling.
These prior studies assume that biases can be easily defined
or quantified (i.e., explicit bias label), but often real-world
biases do not (e.g., texture or static bias above).
To address this limitation, we propose a novel framework to
train a de-biased representation by encouraging it to be statistically independent from representations that are biased
by design. We use the Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion (Gretton et al., 2005) to formulate the independence.
Our insight is that there are certain types of bias that can be
easily captured by defining a bias-characterising model (e.g.,
CNNs of smaller receptive fields for texture bias; 2D CNNs
for static bias in videos). Experiments show that our method

