Differentially Private Set Union

Sivakanth Gopi 1 Pankaj Gulhane 1 Janardhan Kulkarni 1 Judy Hanwen Shen 1 2 Milad Shokouhi 1
Sergey Yekhanin 1

Abstract
We study the basic operation of set union in the
global model of differential privacy. In this problem, we are given a universe U of items, possibly of infinite size, and a database D of users.
Each user i contributes a subset Wi ⊆ U of items.
We want an (ε,δ)-differentially private Algorithm
which outputs a subset S ⊂ ∪i Wi such that the
size of S is as large as possible. The problem
arises in countless real world applications, and is
particularly ubiquitous in natural language processing (NLP) applications. For example, discovering words, sentences, n-grams etc., from private
text data belonging to users is an instance of the
set union problem. In this paper we design new
algorithms for this problem that significantly outperform the best known algorithms.

1. Introduction
Natural language models for applications such as suggested
replies for e-mails and dialog systems rely on the discovery of n-grams and sentences (Hu et al., 2014; Kannan
et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2019; Deb et al., 2019). Words and
phrases used for training come from individuals, who may
be left vulnerable if personal information is revealed. For
example, a model could generate a sentence which reveals
personal information of the users on which it was trained
(Carlini et al., 2019). Therefore, algorithms that allow the
public release of the words, n-grams, and sentences obtained from user text while preserving privacy are desirable.
Additional applications of this problem include the release
of search queries and keys in SQL queries (Korolova et al.,
2009; Wilson et al., 2020). While other privacy definitions
are common in practice, guaranteeing differential privacy,
1

Microsoft 2 Work done as part of the Microsoft AI
Residency Program.
Correspondence to:
Sivakanth
Gopi
<sigopi@microsoft.com>,
Janardhan
Kulkarni
<jakul@microsoft.com>,
Judy
Hanwen
Shen
<hashe@microsoft.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

introduced in the seminal work of Dwork et al. (2006), ensures users the strongest preservation of privacy. In this
paper we consider user level privacy.
Definition 1.1 (Differential Privacy (Dwork et al., 2006)).
A randomized algorithm A is (ε,δ)-differentially private if
for any two neighboring databases D and D0 , which differ
in exactly the data pertaining to a single user, and for all sets
S of possible outputs:
Pr[A(D) ∈ S] ≤ eε Pr[A(D0 ) ∈ S] + δ.
An algorithm satisfying differential privacy (DP) guarantees
that its output does not change by much if a single user is
either added or removed from the dataset. Moreover, the
guarantee holds regardless of how the output of the algorithm is used downstream. Therefore, items (e.g. n-grams)
produced using a DP algorithm can be used in other applications without any privacy concerns. Since its introduction
a decade ago (Dwork et al., 2006), differential privacy has
become the de facto notion of privacy in statistical analysis
and machine learning, with a vast body of research work
(see Dwork et al. (2014) and Vadhan (2017) for surveys)
and growing acceptance in industry. Differential privacy
is deployed in many industries, including Apple (Apple,
2017), Google (Erlingsson et al., 2014; Bittau et al., 2017),
Microsoft (Ding et al., 2017), Mozilla (Avent et al., 2017),
and the US Census Bureau (Abowd, 2016; Kuo et al., 2018).
The vocabulary extraction and n-gram discovery problems
mentioned above, as well as many commonly studied problems (Korolova et al., 2009; Wilson et al., 2020) can be
abstracted as a set union which leads to the following problem.
Problem 1.1 (Differentially Private Set Union (DPSU)).
Let U be some universe of items, possibly of unbounded
size. Suppose we are given a database D of users where each
user i has a subset Wi ⊆ U . We want an (ε,δ)-differentially
private Algorithm A which outputs a subset S ⊆ ∪i Wi such
that the size of S is as large as possible.
As the universe of items can be unbounded, as in our motivating examples, it is not clear how to apply the exponential
mechanism (McSherry & Talwar, 2007) to DPSU. Intuitively, when the universe is unbounded, an algorithm which

