ACFlow: Flow Models for Arbitrary Conditional Likelihoods
Yang Li 1 Shoaib Akbar 2 Junier B. Oliva 1

Abstract
Understanding the dependencies among features
of a dataset is at the core of most unsupervised
learning tasks. However, a majority of generative modeling approaches are focused solely
on the joint distribution p(x) and utilize models
where it is intractable to obtain the conditional
distribution of some arbitrary subset of features
xu given the rest of the observed covariates xo :
p(xu | xo ). Traditional conditional approaches
provide a model for a ﬁxed set of covariates conditioned on another ﬁxed set of observed covariates.
Instead, in this work we develop a model that is
capable of yielding all conditional distributions
p(xu | xo ) (for arbitrary xu ) via tractable conditional likelihoods. We propose a novel extension of (change of variables based) ﬂow generative models, arbitrary conditioning ﬂow models
(ACFlow). ACFlow can be conditioned on arbitrary subsets of observed covariates, which was
previously infeasible. We further extend ACFlow
to model the joint distributions p(x) and arbitrary marginal distributions p(xu ). We also apply
ACFlow to the imputation of features, and develop
a uniﬁed platform for both multiple and single imputation by introducing an auxiliary objective that
provides a principled single “best guess” for ﬂow
models. Extensive empirical evaluations show
that our model achieves state-of-the-art performance in modeling arbitrary conditional distributions in addition to both single and multiple
imputation in synthetic and real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
Spurred on by recent impressive results, there has been a
surge in interest for generative probabilistic modeling in ma1
Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC, USA 2 Department of Mathematics, North
Carolina State University, NC, USA. Correspondence to: Yang Li
<yangli95@cs.unc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

chine learning. These models learn an approximation of the
underlying data distribution and are capable of drawing realistic samples from it. Generative models have a multitude
of potential applications, including image restoration (Ledig
et al., 2017), agent planning (Houthooft et al., 2016), and
unsupervised representation learning (Chen et al., 2016).
Most generative approaches are solely focused on the joint
distribution of features, p(x), and are opaque in the conditional dependencies that are carried among subsets of
features. Existing conditional generative models are mostly
conditioned on a ﬁxed set of covariates, such as class labels (Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018) or other data points (Li
et al., 2019b). In this work, we propose a framework, arbitrary conditioning ﬂow models (ACFlow), to construct
generative models that yield tractable (analytically available)
conditional likelihoods p(xu | xo ) of an arbitrary subset of
covariates, xu , given the remaining observed covariates xo .
Although the complete data x comes from a certain distribution, all its conditional distributions p(xu | xo ) vary when
conditioned on different xo , which poses challenges for
modeling the highly multimodal distributions. Furthermore,
the dimensionality of xu and xo could be arbitrary.
Dealing with arbitrary dimensionality is a largely unexplored topic in current generative models. One might want
to explicitly learn a separate model for each different subset of observed covariates; however, this approach quickly
becomes infeasible as it requires an exponential number of
models with respect to the dimensionality of the input space.
In this work, we propose several conditional transformations
that handle arbitrary dimensionality in a principled manner
and further combine them with an autoregressive likelihood
approach for ﬂexible, tractable generative modeling.
In addition, ACFlow can handle the joint distribution p(x)
and arbitrary marginal distributions p(xu ) as special cases.
Joint distribution p(x) can be obtained by conditioning on
an empty set, i.e., p(x | ∅), while arbitrary marginal distribution p(xu ) can be obtained similarly as p(xu | ∅). In effect,
this allows for our model to perform arbitrary marginalization, which has previously been infeasible in ﬂow models
and autoregressive frameworks.
Besides computing likelihoods, we also explore the use of
ACFlow for imputation, where we infer possible values of
xu , given observed values xo both in general real-valued

