Causal Structure Discovery
from Distributions Arising from Mixtures of DAGs

Basil Saeed 1 Snigdha Panigrahi 2 Caroline Uhler 1 3

Abstract
We consider distributions arising from a mixture
of causal models, where each model is represented by a directed acyclic graph (DAG). We
provide a graphical representation of such mixture
distributions and prove that this representation encodes the conditional independence relations of
the mixture distribution. We then consider the
problem of structure learning based on samples
from such distributions. Since the mixing variable
is latent, we consider causal structure discovery
algorithms such as FCI that can deal with latent
variables. We show that such algorithms recover a
“union” of the component DAGs and can identify
variables whose conditional distribution across
the component DAGs vary. We demonstrate our
results on synthetic and real data showing that the
inferred graph identifies nodes that vary between
the different mixture components. As an immediate application, we demonstrate how retrieval
of this causal information can be used to cluster
samples according to each mixture component.

1. INTRODUCTION
Determining causal structure from data is a central task
in many applications. (Friedman et al., 2000; Heckerman
et al., 1995) Causal structure is often modeled using a directed acyclic graph (DAG), where the nodes represent the
variables of interest, and the directed edges represent the
direct causal effects between these variables (Pearl, 2009).
Assuming that the generating distribution of the data factors according to the DAG provides a way to relate the
conditional independence relations in the distribution to
1
Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems and Institute
for Data, Systems and Society, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 Department of Statistics, University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA 3 Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering, ETH Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence
to: Caroline Uhler <cuhler@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

separation statements in the DAG (known as d-separation)
through the Markov property (Lauritzen, 1996). When not
all variables of interest can be measured, DAGs are not
sufficient to represent the observed distribution, since latent variables may introduce confounding effects between
the observed variables. Instead, a family of mixed graphs
known as maximal ancestral graphs (MAGs) can be used
to model the observed variables by depicting the presence
of latent confounders between pairs of variables through
bidirected edges (Richardson and Spirtes, 2002).
With respect to learning the causal graph from data, the
most ubiquitous methods infer d-separation relations by estimating conditional independence relations from the data;
examples are the PC and GSP algorithms in the fully observed setting, and the FCI algorithm in the presence of latent variables (Spirtes et al., 2000; Solus et al., 2017; Zhang,
2008). These algorithms are consistent under the faithfulness assumption, which asserts that every conditional independence relation in the distribution corresponds to a dseparation relation in the graph. Note that even under faithfulness, the causal graph is in general not fully identifiable
from observational data; it can in general only be identified
up to its Markov equivalence class (Spirtes et al., 2000).
In various applications, data used for causal structure discovery is heterogeneous in that it stems from different causal
models on the same set of variables (Gates and Molenaar,
2012; Chu et al., 2003; Ramsey et al., 2011). This is relevant
for example in biomedical applications, where the goal is
to learn a gene regulatory network based on gene expression data from a disease that consists of multiple not well
characterized subtypes (as is the case for many neurological diseases). In such scenarios, the samples stem from a
mixture of different causal models on the same set of variables, and the causal effects of the mixture distribution can
in general not be faithfully represented by a single DAG.
Furthermore, a single DAG inferred from such samples cannot identify differences between the component DAGs in the
mixture, which may be critical for personalized biomedical
interventions, and may lead to flawed conclusions downstream.
In this work, we consider distributions arising as mixtures

