SIGUA: Forgetting May Make Learning with Noisy Labels More Robust

Bo Han 1 2 Gang Niu 2 Xingrui Yu 3 Quanming Yao 4 Miao Xu 2 5 Ivor W. Tsang 3 Masashi Sugiyama 2 6

Abstract
Given data with noisy labels, over-parameterized
deep networks can gradually memorize the data,
and fit everything in the end. Although equipped
with corrections for noisy labels, many learning
methods in this area still suffer overfitting due to
undesired memorization. In this paper, to relieve
this issue, we propose stochastic integrated gradient underweighted ascent (SIGUA): in a minibatch, we adopt gradient descent on good data as
usual, and learning-rate-reduced gradient ascent
on bad data; the proposal is a versatile approach
where data goodness or badness is w.r.t. desired
or undesired memorization given a base learning
method. Technically, SIGUA pulls optimization
back for generalization when their goals conflict
with each other; philosophically, SIGUA shows
forgetting undesired memorization can reinforce
desired memorization. Experiments demonstrate
that SIGUA successfully robustifies two typical
base learning methods, so that their performance
is often significantly improved.

1. Introduction
Data labeling may be heavily noisy in practice where label
generation/corruption processes are usually agnostic (Xiao
et al., 2015; Jiang et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2019; Welinder
et al., 2010). As a result, learning with noisy labels seems
inevitable. On the other hand, more complex data requires
more expressive power, and then using over-parameterized
deep networks as our models seems also inevitable (Goodfellow et al., 2016). This combination of noisy labels and
deep networks is very pessimistic, since deep networks are
able to fit anything given for training even if the labels are
completely random (Zhang et al., 2017). Unfortunately, it
is non-trivial to apply general-purpose regularization such
1
Hong Kong Baptist University 2 RIKEN 3 AAII, University of
Technology Sydney 4 4Paradigm Inc. (Hong Kong) 5 University of
Queensland 6 The University of Tokyo. Correspondence to: Bo
Han <bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

as weight decay (Krogh & Hertz, 1991) and dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014) for controlling model complexities of
deep networks. General-purpose regularization would hurt
the capability of memorizing not only noisy labels but also
complex data, which is never our desideratum.
Fortunately, even though deep networks can fit everything
in the end, they learn patterns first (Arpit et al., 2017): this
suggests deep networks can gradually memorize the data,
moving from regular data to irregular data such as outliers
and mislabeled data. As a consequence, the memorization
events during training may be divided into two categories:
desired memorization that helps generalization, and undesired memorization that hurts generalization. Our desideratum is to keep the former and avoid the latter, which may
save generalization until the end of training hopefully.
However, it is hard to avoid undesired memorization from
the beginning of training, since two categories can be relative to each other and cannot be distinguished without sufficient training. Consider sample selection, a correction for
noisy labels where small-loss data are regarded as correct,
and deep networks are trained only on selected data (Jiang
et al., 2018; Han et al., 2018b; Yu et al., 2019). The losses
could be enough informative after enough epochs, but then
many mislabeled data have already been memorized many
times. Consider backward correction, where the surrogate
loss is corrected according to the label corruption process,
and deep networks are trained based on this corrected loss
(Natarajan et al., 2013; Patrini et al., 2017). The corrected
loss is not necessarily a non-negative loss, and it might go
fairly negative on a training data, which signifies this data
being memorized too much. Thus, these learning methods
equipped with corrections for noisy labels still suffer from
undesired memorization which in turn leads to overfitting.
To relieve this issue of overfitting due to undesired memorization, we propose stochastic integrated gradient underweighted ascent (SIGUA). Specifically, SIGUA belongs to
stochastic optimization and can be integrated into stochastic gradient descent (SGD) or its variants (e.g., Robbins &
Monro, 1951; Kingma & Ba, 2015). SIGUA works in each
mini-batch: it implements SGD on good data as usual, and
if there are any bad data, it implements stochastic gradient
ascent (SGA) on bad data with a reduced learning rate. It
is a versatile approach, where data goodness or badness is

