FR-Train: A Mutual Information-Based Approach to Fair and Robust Training

Yuji Roh 1 Kangwook Lee 2 Steven Euijong Whang 1 Changho Suh 1

Abstract
Trustworthy AI is a critical issue in machine learning where, in addition to training a model that is
accurate, one must consider both fair and robust
training in the presence of data bias and poisoning.
However, the existing model fairness techniques
mistakenly view poisoned data as an additional
bias to be fixed, resulting in severe performance
degradation. To address this problem, we propose FR-Train, which holistically performs fair
and robust model training. We provide a mutual
information-based interpretation of an existing adversarial training-based fairness-only method, and
apply this idea to architect an additional discriminator that can identify poisoned data using a clean
validation set and reduce its influence. In our experiments, FR-Train shows almost no decrease in
fairness and accuracy in the presence of data poisoning by both mitigating the bias and defending
against poisoning. We also demonstrate how to
construct clean validation sets using crowdsourcing, and release new benchmark datasets1 .

1. Introduction
As machine learning becomes widespread in the Software
2.0 era (Karpathy, 2017), trustworthy AI is becoming increasingly critical. In addition to simply training accurate
models, there is an urgent need to address multiple requirements including fairness, robustness, explainability, transparency, and accountability altogether (IBM, 2020). In
particular, we focus on fairness and robustness, which are
closely related issues that are affected by the same training
data. For sensitive applications like healthcare, finance, and
self-driving cars, a trained model must not discriminate cus1

School of Electrical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of
Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, Korea 2 Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of WisconsinMadison, Madison, Wisconsin, USA. Correspondence to: Steven
Euijong Whang <swhang@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
1
https://github.com/yuji-roh/fr-train

tomers based on sensitive attributes including age, sex, or
religion. In addition, as applications often rely on external
datasets for their training data, the model training must be
resilient against noisy, subjective, or even adversarial data.
Traditionally, model fairness research (Venkatasubramanian,
2019; Chouldechova & Roth, 2018; Verma & Rubin, 2018)
has focused on developing metrics such as disparate impact (Feldman et al., 2015), equalized odds (Hardt et al.,
2016), and equal opportunity (Hardt et al., 2016), which capture various notions of discrimination. More recently, there
has been a surge in unfairness mitigation techniques (Bellamy et al., 2018b), which improve the model fairness by
either fixing the training data, training process, or trained
model. Unfairness mitigation usually involves some tradeoff
between the model’s accuracy and fairness. Most recently,
generative adversarial networks (GANs) are being adapted
to a fairness setting (Zhang et al., 2018a). The architecture
of GANs is suitable because accuracy and fairness are not
always aligned, and it makes sense to simultaneously train
two models: a classifier that predicts labels using input features and an adversary that predicts sensitive attributes using
the classifier’s predicted labels.
Robust model training is also important and needs to be
concurrently taken into consideration. As dataset publishing
is becoming mainstream as demonstrated by systems like
Kaggle and Google Dataset Search (Noy et al., 2019), it is
easy to publish data that is noisy, subjective, and even adversarial, which we hereafter refer to as poisoned data. As a
result, there has been a proliferation of algorithms that make
model training resilient to data poisoning as well (Natarajan et al., 2013; Biggio et al., 2011; Frénay & Verleysen,
2014). However, data poisoning attacks have become increasingly sophisticated, and defending against all of them
is difficult (Koh et al., 2018).
Solving model fairness without addressing data poisoning
may lead to a worse tradeoff between accuracy and fairness.
For example, consider a banking system that is giving out
loans where there are two sensitive groups: men and women.
Suppose we use disparate impact (Feldman et al., 2015) as
the fairness measure. If the model’s positive prediction rate
is M for men and W for women, the disparate impact is
M W
min{ W
, M } where a value of 1 is considered perfectly fair.
Figure 1 shows a toy example of five men and five women

