What Can Learned Intrinsic Rewards Capture?

Zeyu Zheng * † 1 Junhyuk Oh * 2 Matteo Hessel 2 Zhongwen Xu 2 Manuel Kroiss 2 Hado van Hasselt 2
David Silver 2 Satinder Singh 2

Abstract
The objective of a reinforcement learning agent
is to behave so as to maximise the sum of a suitable scalar function of state: the reward. These
rewards are typically given and immutable. In
this paper, we instead consider the proposition
that the reward function itself can be a good locus of learned knowledge. To investigate this, we
propose a scalable meta-gradient framework for
learning useful intrinsic reward functions across
multiple lifetimes of experience. Through several proof-of-concept experiments, we show that
it is feasible to learn and capture knowledge about
long-term exploration and exploitation into a reward function. Furthermore, we show that unlike
policy transfer methods that capture “how” the
agent should behave, the learned reward functions
can generalise to other kinds of agents and to
changes in the dynamics of the environment by
capturing “what” the agent should strive to do.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) agents can store knowledge
in their policies, value functions, state representations, and
models of the environment dynamics. These components
can be the loci of knowledge in the sense that they are structures in which knowledge, either learned from experience by
the agent’s algorithm or given by the agent-designer, can be
deposited and reused. The objective of the agent is defined
by a reward function, and the goal is to learn to act so as to
maximise cumulative rewards. In this paper we consider the
proposition that the reward function itself is a good locus
of knowledge. This is unusual (but not novel) in that most
prior work treats the reward as given and immutable, at
*
Equal contribution † Work done during an internship at
DeepMind. 1 University of Michigan 2 DeepMind. Correspondence to: Zeyu Zheng <zeyu@umich.edu>, Junhyuk Oh <junhyuk@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

least as far as the learning algorithm is concerned. In fact,
agent designers often do find it convenient to modify the
reward function given to the agent to facilitate learning. It is
therefore useful to distinguish between two kinds of reward
functions (Singh et al., 2010): extrinsic rewards define the
task and capture the designer’s preferences over agent behaviour, whereas intrinsic rewards serve as helpful signals
to improve the learning dynamics of the agent.
Most existing work on intrinsic rewards falls into two broad
categories: task-dependent and task-independent. Both are
typically designed by hand. Hand-designing task-dependent
rewards can be fraught with difficulty as even minor misalignment between the actual reward and the intended bias/goals can lead to unintended and sometimes catastrophic
consequences (Clark & Amodei, 2016). Task-independent
intrinsic rewards are also typically hand-designed, often
based on an intuitive understanding of animal/human behaviour or on heuristics on desired exploratory behaviour.
It can, however, be hard to match such task-independent
intrinsic rewards to the specific learning dynamics induced
by the interaction between agent and environment. In this
paper, we are interested in the comparatively under-explored
possibility of learned (not hand-designed) task-dependent
intrinsic rewards. Although there have been a few attempts
to learn useful intrinsic rewards from experience (Singh
et al., 2009; Zheng et al., 2018), how to capture complex
knowledge such as exploration across episodes into a reward
function remains an open question.
We emphasise that it is not our objective to show that rewards are a better locus of learned knowledge than others;
the best locus likely depends on the kind of knowledge
that is most useful in a given task. In particular, knowledge captured in rewards provides guidance on “what” the
agent should strive to do while knowledge captured in policies provides guidance on “how” an agent should behave.
Knowledge about “what” captured in rewards is indirect
and thus slower to make an impact on behaviour because it
takes effect through learning, while knowledge about “how”
can directly have an immediate impact on behaviour. At the
same time, because of its indirectness the former can generalise better to changes in dynamics and different learning
agents, as we empirically show in this paper.

